
      
         
            
            
            A PLAINE
REFVTATION
OF M. G. GIFFARDES
reprochful booke, intituled
a short treatise against the Donatists
of England. Wherein is discouered the forgery of the whole Ministrie, the confusion,
false worship, and antichristian disorder of these Parish
assemblies, called the Church of England.
            Here also is prefixed a summe of the causes of our seperation,
and of our purposes in practise, which M. GIFFARD hath
twise sought to confute, and hath now twise
receiued answere, by HENRIE
BARROVVE.
            Here is furder annexed a briefe refutation of M. Giff. supposed
consimilituda betwixt the Donatists and vs. Wherein is
shewed how his Arguments haue bene & may be
by the Papists more iustly retorted against
himself & the present estate of
their Church, by
I. GREN.
            Here are also inserted a fewe obseruations of M. Giff. his
cauils about read prayer & deuised
Leitourgies.
            1591.
         
         
            
            
            To the right honorable Pere and graue
Counselor Sr. WILIAM CECILL, Knight of the most noble order,
Baron of Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England, &c.
grace & wisdome be multiplied from God our
Father & from our Lord IESVS
CHRIST.
            
               Pro. 18. 17.
               Iustus qui primus in lite su
                     •
                  , donec aduenit proximus eius & peruestiget illum.
            
            HItherto (Right Honorable) haue our malignant aduersaries
had their full scope against vs with the lavve in
their ovvne handes, and haue made no spare or conscience
to accuse, blaspheame, condempne & punish vs, yea to pronounce
& publish vs as damnable heretikes, schismatikes, sectaries,
seditious, disobedient to Princes, deniers & abridgers of
their sacred povver &c, to the eares & eies of all men openly in
their pulpits, and in their printed bookes, published by the consent
& approbation of their Church. No triall all this while
vpon anie sute or complaint graunted vs: Either ciuile, that we
might knovv for what cause & by what lavve we thus suffer,
which yet is not denied the most horrible malefactors & offendors:
Or ecclesiasticall by the word of God, where place & freedome
might be giuen vs to declare & pleade our ovvne cause in
sobrietie & order: that so the meanes appoincted of God for our
recouerie might be vsed, and we (wherein we should be found
to erre or transgresse) might be cōuinced to our faces by the scriptures,
and left inexcuseable. But in stead of this christian
course, they haue shut vs vp novv more then three yeares in miserable
& close prisons from the aire, from all exercise, from all
companie or conuersation with anie person, from all meanes so
much as to write, yncke & paper being taken & kept from vs,

and a diligent watch both by our keapers held ouer vs, and also
continuall searches vpon one pretence or other made, where we
were rifled from time to time of all our papers and writinges
they could find. And being thus streightly kept & watched from
speaking or writing, their conscience yet giuing them no rest in
all their prosperitie and pleasures, whilest we the Lords poore
witnesses against their sinnes breathed (Not to speake of their
secret & indirect meanes wherby they sought to take avvay our
lyues) they suborned (amongest sondrie others) tvvo special instruments,
M. Some & M. Giffard to accuse & blaspheme vs publiquelie
to the viewe of the world, etch of them in tvvo bookes,
the one labouring to proue vs Anabaptists, the other Donatists in
the same. Which Bookes they haue preferred especiallie to your
Honor, as the chiefe obstacle that hindered them from their
violent and bloudie course, of the same intent (no doubt) that
their predicessors the chiefe Priestes and Pharasies accused our
Sauiour vnto Pilat, and the Apostle Paule vnto the Romane gouernours.
Yet euen all this, we hope, the Lord hath disposed to
the furder manifestation of his truth, by directing our aduersaries
to bring our criminations before your Honor. Of whose
wisdome & equitie we haue so great experience & assurance,
as we can not frō henceforth doubt to be condempned vnheard,
or to find therein worse vsage, then our Sauiour & the Apostles
found at those heathē Rulers. Wherfore we addressed our selues
(by such meanes as the Lord administred, and as the incomomodities
of the place, and the infirmities of our decaied bodies &
memories would permit) to our defence, or rather to the defence
of that truth, wherof God hath made & set vs his vnvvorthie
witnesses, though as signes to be spokē against, and as monstrous
persons in this sinfull generation▪ And haue herevnto vndertaken
Mr. Giffards two reprochfull blasphemous Bookes: Shevving
the true causes of our seperation from the parish assemblies,
confirming & approuing the same to be both true and sufficient

by sondrie weightie reasons & expresse scriptures: Refelling by
the like all the friuolous cauills and iniurious sclanders which
M. G. hath there brought to hide their sinnes, deface the truth,
and to defame vs. As also shevving such apparant dissimilitude
betvvixt the Donatists and vs, both in the causes of our &
their seperation, and in the maner of our & their proceedings,
and in sondrie errors they held, as no man of anie knovvledge or
iudgmēt before attempted, or shall hereafter be able (with anie
truth or conscience) to compare vs vnto them herein, or to excuse
M. G. for this his vnchristian dealing with vs. All whose
vnsanctified reproches whervvith his bookes through euerie
sentence are seasoned in stead of better grace, herevpon fall to
the ground, and remaine vpon his ovvne, and not vpon our accompt.
This defence when whe had through the mercifull hand
of our God finished, though not with anie shevv of humane
wisdome or arte, so much as in simplicitie of the truth & innocencie
of our heartes, we held it our dutie to present in like maner
in alreuerence & humilitie vnto your honorable vievv &
graue cōsideratiō. That both sides being heard according to equitie,
and our ansvveres as well as their criminatiōs duly expended,
your sentence, or at the lest approbation, might proceede according
to the truth. Crauing herein no furder fauour, then according
to the equitie of our cause & innocencie of our doings:
Nor yet shunning any furder triall of the one or the other, that
your Honor shall appoinct or thinck meet; whether with these
our aduersaries, or anie other that shall be contrarie minded,
whosoeuer. Beseaching your Honors perdō for this our bould presumption,
the rather because such necessitie was layed vpō vs by
the hand of God, through the importunate chalenges & insolent
prouocatiōs of these our accusors: whose mouthes must either be
stopped, or else through our defalt ye holy truth of God, which we
beleeue & professe, yea & our innocēcie be betraied to the perpetual
infamie of these our reprochfull aduersaries, to our ovvne

perill and future iudgment, to the scandall of all that professe
the same truth with vs, but chiefly to the offence and torning
backe of manie, euen of the whole land, from the streight waies
of the Lord, euen the waies of life and peace. All which mischiefes
(we trust) shalbe preuented by these our simple indeuours,
the Lord giuing testimonie and blessing to his ovvne
word: The truth wherof shall shine forth in our simplicitie,
the povver therof be made manifest in our weakenes, to the
discouerie & reformation of these publique enormities in the
false worship, open sacrilege, antichristian ministerie & heinous
disorder exercised and soffred in this land, and to the discipation
of all the delusions & vaine promises and persvvasions
of these false Prophetts, whervvith they haue a long time (for
their ovvne fleshlie pompe and filthie lucre) seduced the whole
land, dravven them into, and held them in the wrath & heauie
iudgments of God. That so the mightie hand of God working in
the heart of our Souereigne Prince & Nobles, especiallie through
your Honors faithfull counsell and furtherance; and also in the
heartes of all the Commons, when the truth of these things shall
be shevved vnto them, a general and sincere conuersion to the
Lord may be made, euen from all things that novv are, or hereafter
shall be found contrarie to his holie will, whither in the
publique estate of all, or in the priuate estate of anie. For sure,
as euerie perticular person goeth forvvard from faith to faith
as knovvledge is increaced, euerie day teaching other vnto eternal
life: So in the publique estate of the Church no change that is
made according vnto the truth, as the publique error is espied,
ought to be held strange or dangerous. But most heauenlie is
that harmonie, where all the members kint together in the same
faith, both in general and perticular, with one accord goe forward
in their callings and duties, still amending what is found
amisse, and daylie indeuouring to doo better. Then should

there not be found anie such vnchristian contention abought
the truth, pleading and spurning against the truth, or persecution
for the truth. Then should the Lords dreadful iudgments,
which novv hang ouer the whole land for these sinnes, be
auoided, and his blessings in stead therof be multiplied. But
sure in the meane time vntil these sinnes be remoued out of
Gods sight and redressed, there is no peace to be looked for or
asked of the Lord, there is no pleading with or against him,
hovvsoeuer the false Prophet may goe abought to heale the hurte
of this people as a light euill, saijng peace peace when there is no
peace, and to repaire the breaches that are as the sea, with vntempered
stuffe and vaine visions tending vnto abdication.
Wherfore, to the torning avvay of so great euills, and the procuring
of so great and inestimable benefites to our Souereign
Queene and Contrie, as we haue not with-holden our vtmost
indeuours to the discouerie of the publique enormities & sinnes
of these times, in all truth and freedome, being readie yet furder
to witnesse and approue the same, if such neade be, to the
face of our greatest aduersaries and gainsayers, by the euidence
of Gods word: So novv it remaineth that we instantly beseach
your Honor, euen in the name of God, before whome we shall
all of vs shortly appeare to our accompt & iudgment, by whome
this chardge is layed vpon you (the cause being novv brought,
and by both sides, asvvell our aduersaries as vs, layed open before
your Honor) that you would novv be a meanes to her
right excellent Maiestie that these weightie and dangerous
matters may be no longer wrapped vp or put off in securitie
and silence (lest these our soffrings and testimonies rise in iudgment
with this generation) but may rather be furder inquired
and discussed, and order and redresse taken according to the will
of God. Which shall no doubt torne to the high glorie & most
acceptable seruice of God and of your Prince, to the vnspeakable

benefite of this whole land, and to the happie discharge of your
dutie and conscience to your eternall praise in this life and in
the life to come.
            
               Your Lordships most humble & addict in
the Lord.
HENRIE BARROVVE & IOHN GRENVVOOD
for the testimonie of the gospel in close prison.
               
            
         
         
            
            Wisdome to the Reader from the Father
of lightes, to disce
                  •
               ne of these times, and to iudge of themselues
what is right.
            SEing the scripture speaketh euidently of the generall defection
& apostasie vnder Antichrist,Math, 2 4. and of the abhominable desolation
& hauock yt he should make in these dangerous & latter times:Mar. 13. Psa. 74. Dan. 7. 9. & 11
where ye sunne should be made blacke as a sack-cloth of haire,
the Moone be made as blood,Cap. 2 Thes. 2. 2 Tim. 3. the Starres cast to the earth, the Heauen
departe away as a booke wrapped vp, euery moūtaine & Isle be moued
out of their place.Reuel. 6. And all these things are most perticularly & most
liuely described in the booke of the Reuelation: Of Antichristes beginning,Reuel. 8.
increace, exaltation, abolishing. How a great part of the trees &
all greene grasse should be blasted, a great parte of the sea become
blood, and of the creatures that lyued therin dye, and a greate parte of
the shippes therof be destroied; the third parte of the riuers & of the
fountaines of waters be torned into worm wood, and manie men die of
the bitternes therof.Reuel. 9. How that fallē apostatat Starre should open the
bottomles pitte, the sunne & air
                  •
                be darkened with the smoke therof,
the earth pestered with the swarme of poisoned stinging Scorpions, &
crowned armed Locustes that came out of the smoke of the pitte: and
of those innumerable warriours vpō those strange horses that destroied
such multitudes of men. How the Beast should get vnto him manie
heades & mo hornes,Reuel. 13. and vpō his hornes Crownes: how he should
be inthronised, receiue the Dragō his large power & high Cōmission:
how he should warre with the Sainctes, and open his mouth into blasphemie
against God: how he should erect his Image, and gyue his
marke: how he should kill as manie as will not worship his image, and
suffer none to buye or sell, but such as receiue his marcke. How that
greate harlot that sate vpō manie waters, so gorgiously araied & adorned,
the mother of all the whoredomes & abhominatiōs of the earth,
with that goulden cuppe full of abhominations & filthines of her fornication
in her hand,Reuel. 17. wherwith she made dronckē all the inhabitantes
of the earth, should sit vpon the Beast, and be made dronckē with the
blood of the Sainctes and Martyres of IESVS. And yet furder: How the
vials of Gods wrathfull iudgments should by his faithfull messengers
& witnesses be powred forth vpon the earth, vpon the sea, vpon the riuers
and fountaines of waters,Reuel. 16. vpon the Sunne, vpon the throne of the
Beast, vpon the greate riuer Euphrates, and into the aire with the peculiar & fearfull plagues denounsed & to be executed herevpon. As also
how the greate Babilon should be discouered,Reuel. 18. forsaken, pleaded against,
condempned, consumed, fire cast vpon her & all her wares, the greate
milstone vpon her & al her childrē & inhabitantes to presse her downe
to hell.Reuel. 19. To conclude: How Christ himself & his holye armie mounted
vpon the white horse of his word, should warre against the Beast, and

against the Kinges & nations that were gathered togither by the false
Prophet into battell against Christ & his armie, how he should smite the
heathē with the sharpe sword that issueth out of his mouth, rule them
with a rod of yron, and tread thē in the wine-presse of his fierce wrath:
how he should giue the flesh of all this people with their Kinges, Capitanes
and mightie men as a praye to the fowles the vncleane spirites:
and how he should take the Beast, and with him the false Prophet that
wrought signes before him, wherein he deceiued them that receiued
the Beastes marck and worshipped his Image, and cast these both aliue
into that lake of fire burning in brimstone. Who now (if not such to
whome the scriptures are hidden,
                  
                     ••
                  uel. 12. 14 and this Booke sealed) could in this
generall falling away from the gospel, this generall departure of the
true established Churches out of the inhabited, this vniuersall corruption
& confusion of all estates, degrees, persons, callings, actions, both
in the Church & commune welth, in this estate, in this defection, seeke
for or pleade for a true visible established Church, the true ministerie
of the gospel, true worship, ministration, sacraments, gouernment, order?
Or who (that were not droncke and had all their senses bound &
intoxicate with the whores cuppe) could affirme this cōfuse Babel, these
cages of vncleane birdes,Reuel. 18. these prisons of foule & hatefull spirits, to be
the Spouse of Christ, the cōgregatiōs of the Sainctes, the true established
and rightly ordered Churches of Christ? Is it likely that these men haue
as yet read the whores misterie written in her forehead, or as yet know
what belongeth to the true established Church, worship, administration,
sacraments, ordinances, gouernment of Christ? though they haue
in his Testament which is dayly read amongest them, an exact & absolute
parterne of al these things before their eies: And haue not in their
Churches anie one thing in their practise and proceedings, not one
pinne, naile, or hooke according to the true patterne: Yea, though they
heare the trompets of the Lord blowen against them, though they see
the viallz of the Lords wrath powred vpon them, and all their doings,
yet stop they their eares & wincke with their eies, lest they should see
with their eies, and heare with theire eares and vnderstand with their
heartes, and be conuerted & healed: And therfore are so farr from finding
place to repentance,Reuel. 16. 2. that they opē their mouthes into blasphemie
and railings; especially these men that haue the marcke of the Beaste,
vpon whome that euill & malignant sore is fallen, as you dayly see and
heare in their bookes & pulpets. And how well these gouernours, mariners,
merchantmen, and all that trafique on this sea can endure the
borning of these their pleasant gainefull wares, how they waile, howle,
and crye out when this heauenly fire is cast out into their shippes: Let
the behauiour of these Bishopps their hierarchie and Priestes towards
the seruants of God, that speak against their Antichristiā proceadings,
shew, and how they bestir them to quench the burning of the harlot,
smiting & rending Christs poore witnesses with tongue, tooth, and naile,
casting out of their mouthes a flood of raylings,Reuel. 12. 15 reproches, sclanders,

criminations against thē of poysoned bitters waters, corrupt doctrines,
blasphemous opinions, vnsufferable peruerting & abusing the scriptures
to hide tollerat or defend the antichristian forgeries, abhominations,
disorder & enormities of their Church & ministrie, that are discouered
& condempned by the word of God in the mouthes of vs his
simple witnesses.
            Of this sort (amongst manie other such like) are two bookes notoriously
infamous, lately published by one George, Giffard, a Priest of their
orders, against certeine christians, whome he calleth Brownists, Donatiste.
In the one of these Bookes he laboureth to defend & cleare the parish
assemblies of the Church of England, of such heinous crimes as the
said christians obiect against them, and forsake them for, witnessing &
suffring in bandes & persecution against the same vnder the handes
of those popish Prelats & Romish Priestes. In the other Booke he indeuoreth
to recouer the blame he iustly suffred in the first for reproching,
sclandering, blaspheming, accusing these faithfull and innocent
christians, applijng himself to proue them Donatists by comparing together
them from poinct to poinct. Both which Bookes are here answered,
and now at length published to the pervsing & iudgment of al
men. Where they shal see how well he hath delyuered and acquitted
their Church, in the first: As also how iustly he hath proued his charges,
accusations, and blasphemies in the first & second.
            The 
                  •
               ower principall transgressions wherwith we charge, and for
which we forsake these parish assemblies: Namely, the prophanenes,
wickednes, confusion of the people which are here receiued, reteined
& nourished as members. The vnlawfullnes of their whole ministrie
which is imposed vpon them, reteined & mainteined by them. The
superstition & idolatrie of their publique worship in that deuised Leitourgie
which is imposed vpon them. And the forgerie of their antichristian
ecclesiasticall gouernment, to which al their Churches stand
subiect, are such and so apparant, as not only proue these parish assemblies
not to be true established Churches of Christ: But if it were admitted
(which can neuer be proued) that they somtimes had bene true
established Churches; yet these transgressions obstinatly stood in and
defended, are sufficient causes of our seperation from them in this degenerate
estate. For where such prophane cōfuse multit
                  •
               des without
anie exception, seperatiō, or choice, were all of them immediatly from
publique idolatrie at one instant receiued, or rather compelled to be
members of this Church in some Parish or other, where they inhabited,
without anie due calling to the faith by the preaching of the gospel
going before, or orderly ioyning togither in the faith, there being
no voluntarie or perticular confession of their owne faith and duties
made or required of anie; and last of all, no holy walking in the faith
found amongst them. Who can say that these Churches, consisting of
this people, were euer rightly gathered or built according to the rules
of Christs Testament? Or who can say that this people in this estate are

the communion of Sainctes? Or who (without sacrilege) in this estate
can administer the holy things of God vnto, or in the same communicate
with this people? Likewise, where these parishes haue a false & antichristian
ministerie imposed vpō them, who can say that they are the
true established Churches of Christ? to the building & ministerie wherof
Christ hath ordeined, instituted, and prescribed a certaine ministrie
vnto the worldes end: Or who (without sacrilege) may ioyne vnto, or
communicate with a false & antichristian ministrie? Christ also hath gyuen
vnto his Church perpetuall and alsufficient rules in his holy word
for the whole administratiō & gouernmēt of his established churches,
to which they are bound, wherby they ought to buyld, proceede and
walke. Those Churches then that receiue an other Leitourgie, an
other foundation, other rules for their administration & gouernment,
cannot be said the right and true established Churches of Christ. Neither
may anie faithfull man ioyne vnto them in this administration &
gouernment, without heynous impietie and denying the faith. The
more perticular proofe aswell of these Arguments as of these transgressions,
insue hereafter in this treatise. These reasons all men may
see proue directly these Parish assemblies not to be the true established
Churches of Christ to which anie faithfull christian may ioyne himself
in this estate; especially, when all reformation vnto the rules of Christs
Testament is not only denied, but resisted, blasphemed, persecuted.
            How then are M. Giffardes eies bound and couered with the spirit of
slumber, that still dreameth of a true Church, ministrie, sacraments,
worship, gouernment in this estate; and will not be wakened by these
reasons, or anie thing that can be said or aledged against their vngodly
doings; though he can neither approue these his strong cōceiued imaginations
by the rules of Gods word, nor disproue these euident charges
in the fower principall transgressiōs by vs aledged against their parish
assemblies. Which yet he indeuoreth to put away & shift off by
shameles sclanders & opē vntruthes; gyuing out: That we condempne
a Church, for that wicked men come with the godly to the publique
exercises of religion: For that there are some vngodly men of the
church: For that there are some wantes in the calling of the Ministers,
and in the outward discipline: As also, some imperfections or corruptions
in the worship, which are not fundamentall. The vntruth wherof,
our verie Propositions (though we should no furder answere) sheweth
to his face: Where we charge, and the word of God condempneth
their assemblies, for that they consist of prophane multitudes neuer
orderly gathered vnto, or walking in the faith. There shall whilest the
Church consisteth of mortall men alwayes be wicked in the Church.
But Christ hath his fanne in his hand to make cleane his barne flore:
And hath gyuen power & commandement to his Church to cast out
the wicked from amongest them. We acknowledge that the Prince
ought to compell al her subiects to the hearing Gods word in the publique
exercises of the Church: yet cannot the Prince compell anie to

be a member of the Church, or the Church to receiue anie without
assurance by the publique profession of their owne faith, or to retaine
anie longer, then they continue & walke orderly in the faith. Againe,
we condempne not their assemblies for some faltes in the calling of the
ministrie; but for hauing & reteining a false & antichristian ministrie
imposed vpon them: Such we here proue their whole ministrie to be
in Office, Entrance, & Administration. In like maner, we forsake not their assemblies
for some faltes in their gouernment or Discipline; but for standing
subiect to a popish and antichristian gouernment. And such we
here proue theirs to be in the officers, Courtes, proceadings. Neither
refreigne we their worship for some light imperfections (as he saith)
but because their worship is superstitious, deuised by men, idolatrous,
according to that patched popish portesse their seruice booke; according
vnto which their sacraments and whole administration is performed,
& not by the rules of Christs Testament. Such we here proue their
booke, worship and ministration to be?
            We also before set downe vnto him sondry popish, idolatrous, & blasphemous
abuses in their worship & ministration: As their Idoll Lent,
Ember & Eaue Fastes; their Idoll Feastes, popish & Iewish Easter, Pentecost,
Christmasse  their Idoll Ladie dayes, Sainctes dayes, Innocentes
dayes, Angells dayes, Soule dayes: Their false maner of administ
                  •
               ing
their Sacramentes with such idolatrous & Popish ceremonies
& trinckets, the Font, signe of the Crosse, Gossips &c: Their midwiues
baptisme, Confirmatiō: Their hous
                  •
               ing the sick with the other sacramēt: Their Iuish & Popish ceremonies, vestures &c: Their Purificatiō,
Offertories, Crismes &c: Their marijng, burijng, limiting or coniuring
the fieldes, made a parte of the publique worship, and of ye Pastors office
&c. These abhominatiōs M. Giff. will at no hād haue called popish,
idolatrous or blasphemous: We impudently lye, & vnsufferably sclander
in so faijng. He therfore indeuoreth to pourge them of all popish
& superstitious opinions & abuses, shewing how cleare the Church of
England is of the same. Yet will not M. Giff. be thought to plead for or
iustifie anie publique abuse of the Church, but only to plead against
the Brownists that speake worse of these things then they are: For these
are no fundamental errors, such as polute the worship, but only light
imperfections &c. Well, we will refer the discussing of the nature of
them how heinous they are, vnto their due place. Only here we would
know of M. Giff. what foundation these things themselues haue in the
word of God, and what warrant he can there shew for them. If he can
iustifie them by the word of God, then verely our offences are no lesse
then he hath said, that blame them to be idolatrous, popish, blasphemous.
But if these trumperies haue no foundation or commandemēt
in Gods word, but are the deuises of men; then we would know whither,
God requireth or accepteth such worship at their hādes? And whither,
being made the publique worship of God and administration of
their Church, they be not idolatrie? And then how they may offer, or

the faithfull be constrayned to such idolatrie, to such worship, as God
neither requireth non accepteth. And with what conscience he can,
or how he dare stand a minister of that Leitourgie and worship, which
the cannot approue by the word of God, and which he would not be
thought to allowe of, the abuses therof being so manifest & odious in
his owne eies. Especially now with what conscience he can thus blaspheme
& condempne vs for refreining that worship which he cannot
approue, and doth not alowe: Or how he can so earnes
                  •
               ly inueigh
against those most forward and zealous hearers, who though they will
heare their sermons, yet withdraw from the booke seruice, for the errors
and euills they see therin. This M. Giff. in the Epistle to his second
booke, saith, is a more grieuous sinne then they suppose. In deed, if
the poore soules knew what they did or ought to doo in refreining the
publique false worship of the Church, they would and could haue no
spirituall communion with those ministers or people that still exercise
and will not be withdrawen from the same false worship, which they
condempne & forsake; nor yet would or might they heare their learned
sermons that are ioyned & conformed to the same idolatries and
abuses. But to the matter; vntill M. Giff. can proue by the word of God
this publique worship and administration according to their seruice
booke in those poinctes wherin we blame them, there is no cause he
should exercise it himself, allure others thervnto, or condempne vs for
refreigning the same as we are commanded of God in as manie places
as true worship is inioyned, and false worship forbidden. In all this
then he but bewraieth his owne shame & hipocrisie in condempning
& blaspheming vs for doing the will of God, in aluring others to false
worship & idolatrie; and in doing that himself for filthie lucre & feare
of the world, which he for shame of the world dare not alow, neither
can iustifie. Yea, & whatsoeuer he colourably pretendeth & aledgeth
in his second Booke to couer & excuse the shame & infamie of his former;
yet is he become an earnest pleader for all the corruptions and
abuses of his Church, not granting vnto vs anie one of the abuses we
reproue to be vnlawfull & vngodly, lest we should thervpon vrge him
to haue ye same left & refreined (though not publiquely put downe &
reformed as he accuseth) by the faithfull: and so they should be condempned
for the practise, and we iustified for the refreining these
things. Therfore he is driuen to plead for, mitigat, excuse, to tollerate
with his vttermost shiftes & cauills all these abhominatiōs whatsoeuer.
Which yet are so heinous and of so high a nature, as no pretexts of the
Princes or churches power, of ceremonies of things indifferent, no distinctions
of substance & forme, of fundamental and not fundamental
errors & corruptions &c: can hide, but the are found heinous transgressions
of the law of God, detestable abuses of the worship of God.
And he in practising and pleading for them is found but as the Dogge
reto
                  •
               ned to his owne vomit; as ye false Prophet that teacheth ye Prince
to set a scandall before the people, and that seduc
                  •
               th the people to eate
their Idolothites.
            
               
Yea, he is yet furder driuen, openly to iustifie the ministrie and regiment
of these Arch & Lord Bishops and their hierarchie to be of Christ
against which he erewhile also amongest the rest of that faction was an
earnest 
                  •
               utor to the Parliamēt to haue them vtterly remoued out of the
Church and abolished, their Offices, Ministrie, Courtes, Gouernment,
which could not be done without most heinous impietie, open barbaritie
& violence to the Church and vnto Christ himself, if they had bene
of Christ, as he now pretendeth. Againe if they were not of Christ but of
Antichrist (as they all of that sect then vpon certeine knowledge and
assurance affirmed) how, and with what conscience could the Reformists
themselues submit vnto their decrees, power & gouernment, receiue
their ministrie of them, exercise their ministrie vnder them, sweare &
performe their canonical obedience vnto them? Let M. Giff. with all his
cōning reconcile this in truth & good conscience; howsoeuer he hath
reconciled himself to that apostatical throne, from which he was reuolted:
And in testimonie of his vnfeined fidelitie and in hope of some
promotion, hath written these blasphemous bookes in 
                  •
               his gracious
Lords defence, against the Brownists; yea and rebuked in the Epistle to
his second Booke al such as speake against the Bishopps &c. which yet
shall neuer be able to hide or excuse his open cōtrarietie, perfidie, apostasie,
yea that which yet is more fearefull, his open restreint, blasphemie,
and despight of that truth which he sometimes gladly acknowledged
& professed. Vnto all which he is driuen, by opposing himself
against these Brow
                     •
                  ists in the defence of their worship, Leitourgie & ministrie,
which al should fal to be the ground with their Lords the Bishops
throne. For if they fall out to be antichristian & no true ministers according
to the rules of Christs Testament, thē must that ministrie which
is made by them, standeth subiect vnto them &c: need
                  •
                be antichristiā
also: Then haue they & their ministrie not to intermedle with the gouernment
& administratiō of Christs church; much lesse to make them
lawes a Leitourgie & worship.
            Neither staieth M. Giff. himself here in the defence of this present worship,
Leitourgie, Hierarchie, Courtes & their procedings, ministrie, and
their administration, but yet is dryuen for the defence of all these, to
iustifie the Church of Rome (euen in their greatest & deepest aposta
                  •
               ie)
to be the true visible established Church of Christ, to haue the true seale
of the Couenant &c. And in deed this it standeth him vpon to proue,
seing their whole ministrie were immediatly deriued & receiued from
their mother of Rome, as also their whole gouernment, Courtes &c: and
no smal parte of their worship & ministration togither with the whole
people, Parishes & Synagogs as they now stand. He wanteth not learned
proues to bring this abought: As that the Apostasie should arise, and
Antichrist sit in the Church of God. Yea he proueth both the Church
of Rome & of England at once by the schisme of Israell, the apostasie of Iuda
&c: which yet in those estates were pronounced Churches by the Prophetts.
He proueth them within the Couenant by the second Commandement,

where the promise is made to the thousand generation.
As also by the greatest corruptions and faltes that he can anie where
reade, of the primatiue Churches. These miserable reasons & examples
are the maine pillers & ground-worckes of al their buildings, and
his writings; which being pulled downe, their whole frame falleth to
the ground at once, and is irreparable. For this I refer the Reader to
their due place in the second Transgression, where they are largely refuted
& answered.
            An other pitifull reason he bringe
                  •
               h in his Proeme to the Reader, of
an humane bodie cōsisting of maimed or deformed members: Which
yet so long as life remaineth in it, is said an humane bodie. So the
Church, though it cōsist of mained & deformed members, yet whilest
it hath the life, viz. true faith in CHRIST in it, yt is to be held a true
Church. I will not here stand to shew how vntowardly he hath drawē
this comparison beyond the Apostles scope & proportion Rom. 12. Nor
yet how manie errors & inconveniences would insue of such racking
of Allegories. Only to his reason we answere; that if in his first Proposition
he meane by deformed members, such as haue not their right &
true shape yt God hath appoincted to humane members, but a strange
& diuerse forme;Reuel. 13. as the feet of a Beare, the mouth & teeth of a Lion,
though it haue the face of a man,Reuel. 9. the haire o
                  •
                a woman &c: then hold
we it not a naturall,Reuel. 17. but a monstrous bodie. So we say, that to the heauenly
body of Christ may no monstrous deformed strange members be
ioyned, but only such members vnto the publique ministrie as are described
Rom. 12. Neither may that heauenly edifice be built of any other
the lyuing, holy, precious stones 1 Pet. 2. or be built in anie other forme,
then that Christ hath prescribed, and the maister builders left vnto vs in
his Testament 1 Cor. 3. They that misbuild the Temple of God, destroy
yt: And they that destroy the Temple of God, them shall God destroy.
Now then to his inference of instance. We denie this body of their
Church to consist of these true members spoken of Rom. 12. Neither of
those liuing precious stones 1 Peter. 2. Neither to be built according to
the true Apostolike patterne 1 Cor. 3. But to consist of those monstrous
members Reuel. 9. & Reuel. 13. and of those prophane multitudes Reuel. 17.
18. Remayning in confusion & disorder Reuel. 18. 2. And therfore not
to be held the heauenly body of Christ, but that monstrous body of that
Beast: Not that holy Spouse of Christ, but that adulterous harlot: Not
that compact Citie, that heauenly Ierusalem, but that confuse Babilō. Furder,
to that faith & life of the Church he speaketh of; we confesse indeed,
to the stopping of his sclanderous mouth that so vntruly chargeth
vs, that no sinne or sinnes in anie Church or Christian can disanull
the Couenant, where this true faith is found. But this we say, that
true faith may not be s
                  •
               uered from true repentance, euen of all things

                  •
               hey see to be contrary to Gods word.Rom. 2. True faith may neuer be seuered
from true obedience of whatsoeuer is shewed to be the will of God in
his word:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. Faith without workes is dead. Now then to the faith of the

Church of England, we finde yt without workes, we find yt without
repentance.Tit. 1. 16. In their worckes (as the Apostle saith) they denye God,
howsoeuer in words they confesse him;2 Tim. 3. 5. in their deeds they are abhominable
& vnperswaded to euerie good worke; howsoeuer they make
a shew of godlynes, they denye the power therof. Yea so far are they
from suffring their workes to burne,1 Cor. 3. being shewed and reproued vnto
them by the word of God, as they smite, persecute and blaspheme with
all hostilitie and reproch those that but shew and reproue their sinnes.
How then should they be thought to haue this true faith, this true life
in them? But the faith of their Church remaineth to be furder examined
& discussed in this Booke, whither I refer for furder triall.
            And now if this verbal faith & confession of iustification by CHRIST,
only make a Church & a Christian (though they erre & transgresse in
manie, yea in anie other thing) as the life doth make a man &c, how
may we, that professe this faith & make this confession, be by M. Giffard
accused, pronounced, cōdemned, divulged as damnable Heretikes, Brownists,
Se
                     •
                  ismaticks &c? Shall this faith giue life vnto them, and not vnto vs?
Or will he slay them that Christ gyueth life vnto? And that before anie
due conviction of anie one error or transgression deseruing these hard
censures & sentences. May he not euill accuse vs of rash, furious, disorderly
dealing, that thus vncharitably accuseth, condempneth, smiteth,
before anie triall? Yea, that thus presumptuously runneth before,
and forestalleth the iudgment of their owne Church, pronouncing
& divulging vs damnable heretikes & schismatickes, before their
Church had detected, convinced & reiected vs for anie one errot. As
to the heresies he accuseth vs of, Namely, to hould an 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                perfectiō
in this life & immunitie frō sinne & from the superior powers yt
God hath set ouer vs. When he shall be able to shew by anie one sentence
in our writings, or but necessarily to infer from the same, that we
hould these heresies: Let vs then be held such, and M. Gi
                     ••
                  ard no accuser
and sclanderer. But if the contrarie appeare in all our writings and
doings, then is it euident that he hath most maliciouslie sclandered
vs, to bring vs in hatred with our souereigne Queene & the whole Land.
We may euill be accused to hould the error of perfectiō, for blaming
their Church for such heynous transgressions. Or of Anabaptisticall
freedō, for not being subiect to their antichristian yoake. Or for vsing
the 4 & 5 Chap. of the Epistle to the Ga
                     ••
                  at. against their burdenous and
vngodly traditions. These causes & scriptures wil not beare vp M. G.
his malicious suspicions & chardges. Neither if we held these detestable
heresies, could our sinns or errors either excuse or lessen these trāsgressions
of theirs. It is a bad foundation to build his credit vpon the
ruines of other mens; especially by such detraction & sclander.
            The Schisme he chargeth vs with, hath as litle ground or colour of
truth. We willed him long since to proue these Parish Assemblies in
this estate true & established Churches, and then we would shew him
how free we are of schisme. We depart not from anie part of the truth,

or from anie that will walke holily & orderly in the same. The cause
                  •
               
of our seperation from these Parish assemblies we haue shewed to be
such as proue them no true established Churches of Christ, or such
where the faithfull may abide with anie promise or comfort. In seperating
from them then we haue not rent our selues from the Church
or body of Christ, but rather seperated the Church from them: and
obeyed the commandement of God that calleth vs out from emongst
them. Againe whilest M. GIFF. standeth so much vpon the name of a
Church, and giueth the same to the Romish Sy
                     ••
                  gog in their deepest apostasie,
how will he escape himselfe, or cleare the Church of England
from the blot of Schisme, for seperating and withdrawing from the
Church of Rome? Anie excuse that he can make or deuise, wil cleare vs
as wel as theselues. Let him looke therfore to ye measure he meateth,
lest it be measured vnto him againe with the same, not ōly in this matter
of Schisine, but euen in that especial poinct of Donatis
                     •
                  rie, which he of
a singular iudgment aboue all others of this time hath espied out, and
taken no small paines to compare and liken vs vnto them from poinct
to poinct. Forgetting in this heate of zeale and acu
                  ••
               inat pregnacie of
his, how the Papistes haue cōtinually battred them with the 
                  •
               ame ordinance,
with much greater aduantage then he hath vs: In asmuch as
he confesseth the Church of Rome the true established Church of Christ,
with the true ministri and true seale of the Couenant &c: And in that
they still reteine the same ministrie, Gouernment, Courtes, Officers,
Canons, Orders, Parishes People, Synagogs &c, that the Papi
                  •
               tes vsed
& left in this Land, as the Douatists, did. Wheras we on the contrarie do
not seperate for the same causes, neither doo iustifie or reteine the same
ministrie, worship, Leitourgie, Officers, Ordinances, Gouernment, Parishes,
Synagogs, that they vse &c, as the Donatists did. Neither do we
hold such errors concerning the Magistrates or ministrie &c, as the Donatists
did, as is here more perticularly shewed in a peculiar treatise, whither
I refer. Only here obseruing, how the malicious man still (by the
iust iudgment of God) falleth into the same pitte, which he digged for
the innocent.
            For whilest he would accuse vs to derogate from the Princes authoritie,
in not allowing her to make lawes for the Church: And greatly to
blemish her 
                  •
               ame & diminish her loue emongest her subiects, whilest
we denie these Parishes to be true established Churches of Christ: He
himself layeth vpō her al these popish trumperies, idolatrous reliques,
antichristian enormities & abuses of their church; and distaineth her
name and honor therwith (for the reformation wherof, this hipocrit
somtimes stood a zealous sutor to the Parliamēt:) Yea, he now maketh
his Prince an opposite aduersarie vnto Christ, one that will not be admonished,
or be obedient to Gods word. If these abuses he then complained
of were iust or tollerable, how could he sue to haue them abolished;
and that by a positiue lawe? If they be contrarie to the word
of God, how then can he now obey them, or blame vs for refusing to

obey them? The Lord deliuer our Souereign Que
                     •
                  ne from such Sycophants,
such impostors as these false Prophers are, that are faithful neither
to God nor her, but most dangerouslie seduce & highly abuse her
gracious disposition, which hath euer bene inclinable to anie truth of
God that hath bene sincerely shewed vnto her. It is no shame, neither
anie new thing, but a most high honor and praise for godly Princes to
redresse things that are amisse, when they are shewed by Gods word:
Neither it is anie iniurie to the Prince, whē the faithful witnesse against
and refreigne anie thing that is contrarie to Gods word: Or dishonor
to the Prince to amend the same, how long soeuer the abuse hath continued
as this Accuser and Flatterer suggesteth. The rest of whose criminations & accusations against vs, our indeuours and proceadings, I
deferr to answere vntill we come to the Articles. Yet now, that the
groundworke and true causes of all his bitter invectiues and grieuous
charges against vs may appeare to all men; we haue here set downe in
print the originall and whole former passage betwixt vs and him concerning
these poinctes in cōtrouersie: That the Reader may the better
discerne and iudge of these our present writings: And also see what
cause ther was giuen him thus to accuse, reproch, and blaspheme vs as
heretickes, Schismatickes, disobedient and iniurious to Princes, Anabap
                     •
                  ists,
Don
                     ••
                  ists, Brownists, with infinite vile and reprochfull obiectiues,
wherwith his treasurie is stored. If in those writings appeare no such
matter, thē we protest, that (to our knowledg) we neuer gaue him cause
thus to accuse and blaspheme vs, he being a man altogether vnknowē
by person vnto vs, and neuer so much as seene, spoken vnto, or medled
with by vs the writers of these things, otherwise, then by those writings
here insuing; whervnto also we were prouoked by himself, who would
needs take vpon him this quarrell. Which how christianly and soberly
he hath handled and performed, let him of his owne mouth be iudged,
euen by euerie sentence of his Bookes, which are referced with
most grieuous and inaudible raylings; not so much as speaking of
vs in anie place therof without some hard, cruell, and dispightfull
words and bitter reuilings and cursings. All which in our innocencie,
as the sparow and swallow by flying, we shal escape: And hauing therby
discouered his spirit, easely passe ouer without regarding or answering
the same: Turning also from his person as much as may be, as
from a most vnreasonable and vnhonest man, with whome we would
be loath to haue furder to doo: Fixing our eies wholye vpon the matter
set before vs: Indeuoring to make proofe and euident demonstration
of these charges, for which we forsake their assemblies, and haue
all this time suffred vnder their tyrannous handes: As also, to cleare
our profession and proceadings herein of such calumniations and reproches,
as this our malignant aduersarie defameth them with. And
this in all breuitie, truth, and good conscience, as so variable and infinite
a matter wil permit. Wherin if in anie poinct we deale obs
                  •
               urely
& insufficiently (for as the man is such is his strength) we desire that the

truth may not suffer preiudice therby: But that the learned and wise
Reader wil rather confirme & repaire our weake or loose reasons: yea,
by our insufficiencie be prouoked euen in zeale & loue of the truth to
handle it more exactly: Wherin we shall gladly gyue place, and much
reioyce. But if in anie thing we be found to depart from the truth, we
desire to be louingly reduced, yet condingly reproued and censured,
vowing (through Gods grace) neuer to resist anie truth that shal at any
time be shewed vs, neither to resfuse to be reformed. The lesse faltes,
as the errors in the writing or print, we shall desire the Reader charitably
to construe & correct. And if ther be found or rather abound anie
imperfect or redundant sentences, let those be imputed chiefly to the
want of better skill in the writers, and partly to their decayed memories,
to the inconveniencie of the place, the continual tossings & turmoiles,
searches & riflings, and no peace or meanes giuen vs either to
write, or reuise that we had written. To conclude, we beseach and admonish
the Reader, not to be withdrawen from the truth by anie foreconceived
opinion either of our tenuitie of giftes and base estate, or of
the excellencie and multitude of our aduersaries, for that were dangerous
to themselues: But rather diligently to ponder their owne wayes
& the issues therof, and where they finde themselues to erre, speedely
to retorne to the truth without cunctation or excuse; that so they may
finde peace and assurance to their owne soules. Which grace we
euen wish to our greatest enimies, and shall not cease
to pray, that God may thus blesse
our indeuoures.
         
      
      
         
            
            A BRIEF SVMME OF
the causes of our seperation, and of our
purposes in practise, withstood by G. G. defended by
H. B. as followeth.
            WE seeke aboue all thinges the peace and protection of the
most high, and the kingdome of CHRIST IESVS our Lord.
2 WE seeke and fully purpose to worship God aright,
according as he hath commaded in his most holy word.
3 WE seeke the fellowship of his faithfull & obedient seruants, and together
with them to enter Couenant with the Lord, and by the direction
of his holy Spirit, to proceed to a godly, free, and right choise of
Ministers and other Officers by him ordeyned to the seruice of his
Church. 4 WE seeke to establish and obey the ordinances & lawes of
our Sauiour Christ left by his last will & Testament to the gouerning &
guyding of his Church, without altering, changing, innouating, wresting,
or leauing out anie of them that the Lord shall gyue vs sight of.
5 WE purpose (by the assistance of the holy Ghost) in this faith & order
to leade our lyues, and for this faith & order to leaue our lyues, if such
be the good will of our heauenly Father, to whom be honor & glorye
Amen.
            6 AND now that our forsaking & vtter abandoning of these
disordered assemblies as they generally stand in England,
may not seeme strange nor offensiue to anie man that will
iudge or be iudged by the word of God, we alledge & affirme
them heinously guiltie in these 4 principall Transgressions.
            
               1 THEY worship the true God after a false maner, their worship
being made of the invention of man, euen of that man
of sinne, erronious & imposed vpon them.
               2 FOR that the prophane vngodly multitudes, without exception
anie one person, are with them receiued into, and
reteined in the bozome of the Church.
               
                  
3 FOR that they haue a false & Antichristian Ministerie imposed
vpon them, reteined with them, and maintained by
them.
               4 FOR that these Churches are ruled by, and remaine in subiection
vnto an Antichristian and vngodly gouernment,
cleane contrarie to the institutiō of our Sauiour CHRIST.
            
            VVhen these things stand thus, let him that readeth consider.
            THE first Article is that which all Christians doo seek in dead;G. G. to the fi
                     •
                  st Article. but
the kingdome of CHRIST, or the kingdome of God (as CHRIST
saith) is within men: Yt consisteth in righteousnes & peace & ioye in
the holy Ghost. For the preseruation of this, CHRIST hath ordeined a
Church gouernmēt. They sinne against God which do not couet, and
according to their calling labour to haue so great a help. But to transport
the name of Christs kingdome which is spirituall, which is in the
heart, vnto this which is but a part, and as though the kingdome of
God could not be in anie vnlesse they haue this (so they do not wilfully
despise yt) I say is false, and the contrarie to be proued by the Scriptures.
            OVR Article being by you confessed to be the bounden dutie of al
true Christians,
                  
                     •
                  . B. his replie. we see not with what equitie you can in this maner
cauil at our wordes, or with what conscience you can misconstrue
and constreine them as you doo; seeking therby to retract by sleight,
what you cannot gainesay in truth. And taking occasion to contend
about wordes: Namely [the kingdome of CHRIST] You make yt only
inward, and vse CHRIST as one of the Phisitians planitarie signes, assigning
to him in hipoctisie your heart & soule to rule, whilst in ye meane
time you yeild your bodies and whole assemblies to the obedience and
rule of Antichrist; making no cōscience to obey his lawes openly, and
to transgresse Christs; thinking belyke Christs kingdome so inward and
spirituall, as that he requireth no bodily or outward obedience; or, because
yt consisteth of righteousnes, and peace, and ioye of the holy
Ghost,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that ther may be peace without righteousnes, or ioye without
peace,They have no 
                     〈◊〉
                   to excuse themselues, but to accuse the estate, which 
                     〈…〉
                   they obey 
                     〈…〉
                  . A kin
                     •
                  ome no
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   against 
                     〈…〉
                  . or inward righteousnes where is such outward disobedience and
wilfull transgression. But al this is couered and cured at once [if so be
you couet & labour in your calling to haue CHRISTS outward gouernment,
&c.] To discusse here how far euerie Christians dutie & calling
extendeth herein, vvere to dismisse all your answers at once, and to
pluck away the mantle of shame wherwith you couer your nakednes,

your negligence, and all your abhominations. In this place therfore
we will only ask you these 2 questions. First; whither anie which haue
their calling of Antichrist, or be his marked Ministers, or waged seruants,
can truly and vprightly couet & labour for the sincere gouernment
of CHRIST, which is his whipp wherwith he 
                  •
               kourgeth out all
thieues, intruders and idle-bellies out of his house. The next question
is: Whither to remaine wittingly and seruilely in the bondage and
yoake of Antichrist 29 yeares, be to seek & labour for the gouernment
of Christ faithfully in your callings, or to vphold and vndershore the
kingdome of Antichrist rather?
            But to transport the name of Christs kingdome which is chiefly spirituall
and in the heart, vnto that which is but a part &c.
            How diuerslie the kingdome of God is read in the Scriptures, we
will not contend with you (although it were not hard to shew either
your ignorance or forgetfulnes herein) Only this we say; our words
can carie no such construction, muchlesse such an erronious opinion,
as you (abounding in your owne sense) haue not only collect, but confuted.
In the first our words being, That we seeke the kingdome of
Christ Iesus our Lord, cannot be thus restreined to Christs outward orders
and gouernment in his Church; especially, if you had pondered that
which followed, where in the 
                  •
                Article (after your diuision) we haue
expressed this point in perticular. Neither (if we should admit you y
                  •
               
interpretation) could you collect from thence [that the kingdome of
God could not be in anie, vnlesse they haue this] But as we vsually
reade in the olde and new Testament Christs kingdome to be taken for
his true visible Church here in earth; so we acknowledg his vniuersall
Church & kingdome to extend to all such as by a true faith apprehend
& confesse Christ, howsoeuer they be scattered, or whersoeuer dispersed
vpon the face of the earth: Yet both with this interim, without true faith
& obedience can be no true Church, no true Christian.
            THE 2 Article ought all men that will please God to approue.G. G. to the 2 Article.
            
            THIS Article you say [ought al that wil please God to approue] How
then seek you to please God,H. B. his replie. vvhich continue in Idolatrie & are a
Minister therof, vvhich prophecie in Baall & plead for Baall? Or how approue
you yt, when you condempne vs of schisme and heresie because
we forsake your false & antichristiā worship, and seek to worship Christ
according to his word?
            THE 3 Article if it be taken in this sense,G. G. to the 3 Article. that yee dare set vp a societie
seperated from all others vvithin this land vvhich make

publique profession; then I see not, when you haue gon by your selues
& set vp your Officers, how you will cleare your selues from Donatisme.
If theirs were a damnable fact which God did accurse, then take heed
to yours; for if it can be shewed that their heresies are not holden, I
will chang my minde.
            THE words of our Article being [That we seek the fellowship and
communion of Christs faithfull & obedient seruants] cleare vs of all
schisme & heresie:H. B. his replie, So that if you would convince vs of these crimes, it
had bene expedient you had first proued your assemblies, as they generally
stand, by the euidence of Gods word, to be true churches of Christ,
rightly entred & keeping couenant with the Lord, continuing in the
order and obedience of his word &c, and that we preposterously haue
departed from you, and vncharitably haue forsaken your fellowship.
But as soone as you shall shew vs such a church emōg you, by the grace
of God we wil shew you how free we are of schisme: As likewise, when
you shall lay open our errors vnto vs, how farr we wil be frō heresie. In
the meane time we will not cease to pray vnto God for you, that he will
not lay these sinnes vnto your charge, which in your ignorant zeale
you commyt, but in mercy shew you the feareful estate you stād in, and
giue you an heart vnfeinedly to repent, & speedely to turne vnto him.
            THE 4 Article ought all men to practise so far forth as the limitts
of their calling doo extend.G. G. to the 4. Art. But let it be shewed that euer priuat
men did take vpon them to reforme when things were amisse in the
Church; or that anie of the Prophetts did wil them to take the matter
in hand; or shew your warrant that you be not priuat men.
            THIS Article you first alowe,H. B. his replie. and after restreyne to we wot not what
limits of calling: But if you grant it the dutie of euerie true Christian
to seek to establish & obey the ordinances & lawes of Christ, left in
his Testament to the gouerning of his Church, without altering &c:
it is as much as we indeuour: or purpose. Otherwise we allowe not
that, which the law of God condempneth, either intrusion without
lawfull calling, either transgression in calling, or presumption aboue
calling. Our purpose is not to medle with the reformation of the state,
otherwise then by our prayers vnto God, and refreining from al things
that are cōtrarie to Gods lawe.Sodom & Babilon 
                     〈◊〉
                   by 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Neither indeuour we to reforme your
Babilonish deformities, or to repaire the ruines of Hierico, or dawbe the
wall of A
                  •
               tichrist with you. This trash we know to be deuote to execratiō
by the Lords owne irreuocable sentence; and therfore we leaue
the reformation of them to the Lords visitation in iudgment:The best way to 
                     〈◊〉
                   others is 
                     〈◊〉
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   our selues. holding
it our dutie without al delay to obey the voice of God which calleth vs

out of all places where he is not truly worshipped according to his
word, where his lawes are wilfully broken & Antichrists lawes obeyed:
And this to be the commandement of God in the law by his Prophets,
Christ himself and his Apostles, is euerie where in the scripture manifest
(without exception of person or restreint of calling) euen vnto euerie
one that wilbe saued. In the rest (whatsoeuer you surmise of vs) we arrogat
no swelling titles, we are as we professe to be, simple hearted
Christians, which seek to worship and obey Christ as our only King,
Priest, and Prophet: And to our Prince we are humble & obediēt subiects
in all things which are not repugnant to Gods lawes.
            IF a man hath the truth,G. G. to the 5 Article. it is good to stand vnto yt to the death rather
then denie yt; as our Church in the same estate it is in now,
yeilded many blessed cōstant Martirs. But if a man hath not the truth,
it is a great obstinacie to die for yt; as sondrie Anabaptists and other hereticks
haue shewed. Euerie true Christian will rather die then denie
the discipline which Christ hath left: But you must shew that God commandeth
priuat men to set yt vp.
            THE word of God & your owne mouth hauing approued our desires
in these Articles,H. B. his replie. we cannot be moued with Satans olde tentation,
to doubt of the Lords vndoubted truth, or call his commandements
into question, with [if it be true &c.] Neither can we be remoued
by that olde popish reason which you bring, of certeine blessed
Martires that died in this estate your Church is now in. This is not to
approue the estate of your Church by Christs Testament: Which vntill
you doo, though all the men in the world should die both in yt & for
yt, yet could they not iustifie that God condempneth. But in deed the
holy Martirs you speak of, neither died in yt, nor for yt. Not in yt, being
by Gods great mercy depriued and discharged by their enimies:
Not for yt, but for the truth of CHRIST they most constantly gaue their
lyues. Neither can it be shewed where euer they resisted the truth, being
shewed them; or denied to heare yt at ye most simple mās mouth;
or euer yeilded to anie corruption or yoake that God gaue them sight
of, contrarie to their owne cōsciences, as you doo in these dayes. Therfore
so far are they from iustifi
                  •
               ng you in this your general apostasie, as
that they being found faithfull in that litle in the twilight, shall rise in
iudgmēt with this generation in this great light with al the giftes they
boast of.
            Euerie true Christian (you say) will die rather then denie the discipline
that Christ hath left. With what conscience then can you esteeme
emong the wicked Anabaptists and condempned & dampned hereticks
that suffer in their obstinacie, vs, that cast off the yoak of Antichrist, &
seek & suffer for the true worship & holy gouernmēt of Christ? Or how

can you flatter your selues in the fearful estate you stand in, drawing so
euen by long custome in Antichrists yoake, not only in deed and practise
denijng the gouernment of CHRIST, but (to your vtmost indeuour)
by contumelious reproches, vniust sclanders, and open persecution,
seek to resist and suppresse yt. But we must shew [that God commandeth
priuat men to set yt vp]. First God commandeth in his law
euerie one to seek the place where he putteth his name: CHRIST in
the Gospel, to seek the kingdome of God, to take his yoake vpō them,
&c. Againe, CHRIST hath left but one forme of gouernment in his
last Will and Testament vnto his Church, which he hath fealed with
his blood; and therfore not left yt arbitrable at ye pleasures of Princes,
or pollicies of tymes to be done or vndon, but made yt by a double
right inuiolable,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . both by his word and his Testament; so that the
Church of God cā neither be gouerned by anie other lawes or gouernment,
neither ought yt to be without this; for God holdeth them all in
the estate of enimies, which haue not his Sonne to reigne ouer them.
Now then the faithfull are cōmanded to gather togither in CHRIST
his name, with promise of direction & protection, and with authoritie
not only to establish his lawes & ordinances emongst them, but faithfully
to gouerne his Church therby. For the kingdome of God consisteth
not in word but in power. Now this assemblie of the faithfull
before they be planted & established in this order, consisteth hitherto
but of perticular priuat persons, none as yet being called to office or
function. Therfore we may well conclude, that God cōmandeth his
faithfull seruants, being as yet priuat mē, togither to build his church,
according to the true patterne of Christs Testament (without altering,
changing, innouating &c.) And for this we haue the example of the
primatiue Churches for our patterns and warrant, which sued not to
Courtes & Parliaments, nor wayted vpon Princes pleasures, when the
stones were in a redines, but presently hauing receiued ye faith of Christ,
receiued likewise the ordinances of Christ, and continued in the same.
Againe, if they should tarie Princes leisuers, where were the persecution
you speake of? Princes neuer punish them that obey their hestes.
And thus because you cānot endure the fierie triall of persecution, you
vtterly (by your perfidous tolleration) abrogate at once the crosse of
Christ. And (that you might enioy this worldly peace & fleshly pleasure
for a season) you care not to make Christ attend vpon Princes, and to be
subiect to their lawes and gouernment. But (alas) it were fitter with a
loude voice to call you out of Babilon, thē thus to sing you hebrue songes
in Babilon.
            
            THIS Article mentioneth 4 principall Transgressions,G. G. to the 6 Article. wherin the
assemblies in England are iudged and affirmed to be heinouslie
faultie, and wilfully obstinate. Elias did see outward idolatrie practised,
and did see none that did mislike, and therfore complained of all, yt

was but an error. But wheras Gods word is imbraced, and multitudes
abhorr idolatrie, and labour with sorowfull teares to be purged from
their sinnes, it is intollerable pride & presumption of men to set themselues
in Gods iudgment seate, and to condempne all of wilfulnes and
obsti
                  •
               acie. Let it be shewed that anie (led by Gods Spirit) haue dealt
in this sort, and especially in chardging them whom they condempne
most falslie, as shall appeare.
            HERE you verie vehemently chardge vs with intollerable pride,H. B. his replie.
presumption, intrusion into Gods iudgment seate, to be voide
of Gods Spirit, to chardge and condempne you most falslie, as you say
shall appeare. How iustly you chardge vs with these crimes, and dischardge
your self and these assemblies of these present transgressions,
vpon the scanne of your answere shall appeare. In the meane time the
holy Ghost sheweth vs what spirit you are led by at the writing therof;
and hath foretold how vvell you shall endure and reforme at the
manifestation of your sinnes, and at the powring out of the cuppe of
the Lords indignation, where he saith: They shall drinke, and be moued, and
be madd, because of the sword that sha
                     •
                  l come vpon them. And in another place:
And the fift Angel powred forth his viall vpon the Throne of the Beast, and his kingdome
waxed darke, and they gnawed their tongues for sorowe and blasphemed the God of
heauen for their paines and their sores, but repented them not of their workes. It suffised
you not to cauill and spurne against the manifest truth of our former
Articles; but you must in this not only leaue out our words at your
pleasure, but abuse them that remaine after your owne lust. Our Article
speaketh of the assemblies as they generally stand in England:
You retort our words to Gods secret election, which we acknowledg
and daily see, and praise Gods name for it: Yet no multitudes, but a
litle poore remnant, as the beries of a beaten Oliue tree, the grapes after
the grape-gathering, one of a Citie, two of a Tribe in respect. And
it is to be doubted, those multitudes you speake of will shrink when
they come to his ass
                  •
               ye whose furnace is in Sion, and fire in Hierusalem.
But if it should be so as you say, the heauie wrath of God hāgeth ouer
your heades, that haue a people so redie and fit for the kingdome of
CHRIST, and suffer them to continue in this confusion, false worship,
antichristian bondage, euen the snare of the Deuil; and not only not
leade them out of it, but not suffer thē that would to depart, and thus
slay them that should not dye. Yea you smite the Phisitiā that seeketh
to heale you, and are enimies to them that shew you your trāsgressiōs,
iudging them voide of the spirit of God. But if you had but considered
that Prophets zeale, as you remembred his error, you should
haue found him zealous & 
                  •
               eruent against Baalls Priests in Gods quarrell.
It were long to recite the number of Gods faithfull seruāts which
are euerie where cōmended in the scriptures for their zeale & diligēce

herein: Or againe the Lords iudgments not onlie vpon perticular
men, but whole Contries & nations for the contempt & neglect therof.
So then, if it fall out that the lawe and word of God condempne
you of these transgressions, what are we that we should iustifie you in
your iniquities; nay rather proude, hawtie, and scornfull is his name
that worketh in his arrogancie wrath &c.
            To blazon your transgressions as they deserue, requireth rather a
quire then a shead of paper: And (to say the truth) it is an yrksomnes
vnto anie godly conscience, either to heare or recite them. Yet because
ther is no cause so bad which shal not finde as bad a patrone, we will
only examine your answeres, and brieflie shew their insufficiencie.
            THE first fault is;G. GIF. his answere to the first principall Transgression. That we worship the Lord after a false maner,
because our worship is said to be made of the invention of man,
yea of the man of sinne, erronious & imposed vpon vs. I answere, that
our worship is the imbracing of the holy Bible; by the doctrine therof
we seeke to belieue in God, to call vpon him, and to doo all good
workes. Manie Ministers ther be in England which haue not approued
the booke of common praier further, then they are perswaded
it is consonant to Gods word, hor vsed anie thing therin which they
iudge corrupt. But you say all read prayer is idolatrie: But you must
bring better stuffe to proue yt then your spirituall fantasies so directly
ouerthrowne by the holy scriptures, howsoeuer they may be cauilled
against with fond distinctions, as the hereticks haue done in other
matters.
            THE first Transgression we chardge your assemblies with,H. BAR, his replie. is: That
you worship God after a false maner, your worship being made of
the invention of man, euen of the man of sinne, erronious, and imposed
vppon you. You answere, your worship is the imbracing the holy
Bible: Thus begging the question, you neither proue your worship by
the Bible, nor answere one of these 4 apparant reasons which we bring
in our Articles, whie yt is false & contrarie to the Bible. For the furder
manifestation of your worship in perticular, let that great Idoll, the
booke of your cōmon prayer (which is so full of errors, blasphemies,
and abhominations) be examined by the word of God. See if you can
finde in the new Testament your Romish Fastes, your Ember dayes,
Sainctes Eaues, Lent, or your Idoll Feastes, your Alhallowes, Candlemasse,
your seuerall Lady dayes, Saincts dayes, the dedicating of your
Churches to Saincts, your Comminations, Rogations, Purifications,
Tithe
                  •
               , Offrings, Mortuaries, your maner of visiting the sick & housling
them with the Sacrament, your Absolution, your blasphemous
Diriges and funerall sermons ouer and for the dead, your corrupt maner

of administring the Sacraments, your Font, crossing in baptisme,
your Baptising by women, Gossippings, the blasphemous Collects you
vse in this Sacrament, your Bishoppings, with all your hereticall Collects
in that Booke, which is a wearines to vs to repeate, though not in
you to vse,The Church-vvardēs svv
                     ••
                  ue to see the booke vsed. tollerate, and defend. But all this geare must be swallowed
vp: This candle may not be lighted, lest the people looke into the abhominable
ingredients which you their antichristian Ministers giue
them, or rather sell them in the whore of Babilons Cupp to the destruction
of their soules. But you know some Ministers in the land, which
neither vse nor approue the Booke further, then they are perswaded
in conscience it is consonaut to Gods word. But you know none that
vse not the Booke: You know neuer a Minister in this land which either
is authorized by the state, or standeth in puplique place, which
standeth nor vnder this Idoll, or that hath throwne yt out by the power
of the word, or withdrawne the people from yt with al their preaching
these 29 yeares; but ioyne their Gospel to yt,The Gospel of Christ cannot be ioyned to this stuffe. minister to that people
that vse yt, &c. Neither can the conningest of you make the best parte
of yt other, then a piece of swynes flesh, an abhomination to the Lord.
Nei
                  •
               her can the perswasion of your cōscience either iustifie your worship,
cleare you, or satisfie others; especiallie when we see your confciences
to tollerat and submit vnto the whole; to vse part in respect
of your homage, and to refuse part for shame of the world. Hitherto
appeareth no sclander in our Article, your vvorship being altogither as
yll, and worse then we speake of; and such indeed as you neither can
nor dare abide by: And therfore to get ridd of this Article which presseth
you so 
                  •
               ore, you chardge vs with matter which you finde not in
our Article: That we say all read prayer is idolatrie, terming it our
stuffe, spirituall fantasies directly ouerthrowne by the holy scriptures,
howsoeuer vve may cauil with fond distinctions, as the hereticks haue
done in other matters. From what spirit procedeth al this? found you
this in our Article? If not, all these blasphemous reproches must returne
to you againe with shame: You want a couert when you flie into
this bush to hide you. When you shall be better instructed of the holy
Ghost, and haue learned what prayer is, you vvill not call spirituall
prayers spirituall fantasies, neither thrust your Apochripha prayers to
be read in the church of God, where only Gods word ought to be read.
But this being beside our Article, in nothing disprouing it, not iustifying
your idolatrous worship vsed in your assemblies, we leaue the further
clearing of this to him, to vvhome it more perticularly (belongeth.
And we, for euerie thing you haue as yet brought) must remaine
cleared of all the sclanders and reproches you haue cast out
against vs; your assemblies still charged and obstinatly guyltie of a
popish, erronious, and idolatrous worship thrust vppon them according
to our Article; and you not a Minister, but a defendor of this
trumperie, resisting the truth, and blaspheming vs for defending the
truth.
            
               
THE 2 fault is:G. G. his answere to the 2 principall Tra
                     •
                  sgressiō. That all the prophane multitude (without exception
of anie person) are admitted & reteined into the bozome of
the Church. The most Churches in England want godly Pasoors, and
there all are admitted, it may be he that admitteth is the worst in the
companie. But ther be manie greater & smaler Congregations where
the Pastor doth keepe back some for ignorance, and some for spotted
life, vntil they amēd; as I my 
                  •
               elf haue knowne 
                  〈…〉
                repelled from
the Sacrament in one stocke, and not admitted at all. But you will say;
by what right doth the 
                  〈◊〉
                this? I say, that the Book of common
prayer doth expreslie command, that all such as lyue vngodly shal not
be admitted. But then you will say, they be admitted to come vnto
prayers with the rest. Not, if they be excōmunicated iustly, as sondrie
are. Againe, this will hardly be reteined of all that know the truth, that
the prayer or worship of the faithfull is poluted if ther be prophane
men in companie, especially we that cānot remedie the matter. There
were but a few true worshippers frequented the Temple emong multitudes
of prophane & vngodly men. But what can you aledge more
th̄ the Anabaptists did at the first, whie they seperated themselues? would
you haue priuate men reforme the Temple, or not come there?
            HERE you confesse that the most Churches in England want
godly Pastors;H. B. his replie. and that there all are admitted; and that he that
admitteth them is the worst of the companie.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪
                Thus you make the most
Churches in England in a verie bad estate, and so far forth you affirme
our Article. But yet you know some Churches, where the Pastor hath
repelled for ignorance & spotted life to the number of 20. or 30. from
the Sacrament &c. This verie rare thing being graunted you, what insueth
therof? Doth this disproue, that euē there, and in the best of your
Churches, the prophane multitudes are not receiued into & reteined
in the bozome & bodie of your Churches? Were there no more prophane

                  •
               ow yee but these 20. or 30. you speake of in Ye Parish? or were
not they elsewhere receiued to the Sacrament? But to take a more direct
course with you, and to proue our Article at once. Know you anie
in those Parishes you speake of, or in the Realme of England vnbaptised?
And is not Baptisme a Sacramēt belonging to the church, wherby
all the faithful & their 
                  •
               eede enter into yt? Then all being baptised,
it followeth, that all are receiued into the bodie of your Church. Now
being once receiued in, they can no way be cast out, but by excommunication.
And it is manifest that the Parson with al his Parish haue not
the powre which Christ hath left vnto his Church to excommunicate
anie offendor, be he neuer so obstinate or notorious; no nor to redresse
anie enormitie that is laide vpon them by the times. And thus the other
part of our Article is confirmed; That all are reteined in the bozome
of your Church. And now to your suspension or prohibition
from the Sacrament: You wil haue vs aske you by what right the Minister

doth this. In deed this would be knowne; for if it be in the nature
of excōmunication, it were no small presumption in the Minister
to arrogate such absolute authoritie to himself. But all this your answere
cleareth. The Booke of cōmon prayer (you say) doth command
&c. Here may not be let passe that euen your owne mouth confesseth;
that euē the best of your Churches & Ministers stand vnder, obserue &
vphold this Idoll. Whie, is ye Book
                  •
                of cōmon prayer Christs new Testament,
that you must fetch your war
                  •
               ant & directiō from that Idoll? In
deed yt is a fitt Portesse for such a Priest; and the suspension you vaunt
of, a fitt toole for such workmen, euen the instrument of that foolish
Sheepheard. If the iudgment of God were not vpon your right eie &
your right arme, you might see how your Lordes the Bishopps dresse
you; and perceiue how this weapon they allow you, wanteth both edge
& poinct; yt is so rebuted by them, that neuer a one in the Parish setteth
a flie by yt. Againe, one word of M. Cōmissaries mouth can heale
the greatest wound you cā make with yt. The next thing that you wil
haue vs to say, is [That they be admitted to come to prayer with the
rest]. For this you haue a cunning solution redie: Not (you say) if they
be iustly excōm
                  •
               nicat▪ as sondrie are. See how God ensnareth you in
your owne words, and how hard a bad cause is to defend, though you
make both our Questions & your owne Answers as it pleaseth you.
            First here is to be obserued, That you subscribe not in secret, but
openly iustifie the Comissaries excōmunicatiō, for other meanes haue
your Sinagogs none, the Parson, Church-wardens, Side-men, Quest-men being
sworne seruants, and the whole Parish standing in subiectiō to his Antichristian
Court.
            The is to be obserued, what good Sheepherds you be, that yield your
sheepe to this rauening wolfe to make hauock of them, and excōmunicate
at his pleasure. But al theis transgressions and enormities whatsoeuer,
you thinke to heale, or hide (at the least) with these 2 drye wythered
fig-leaues: The one; That you cannot remedie the matter: Thother;
Priuate mē may not reforme. In the first you cōfesse your selues
depriued of that powre which Christ vnto the worlds end hath left vnto
his Church to reforme & redresse things amisse. In tho'ther, depriued
of al christia libertie & will, so much as to saue your owne soule, and to
come forth of this Babilonish bondage you stand in,Priuate men may refraine 
                     •
                  dolatrie though they cannot reform
                     •
                  
                still dreaming of
the reformatiō of your idolatrous Sinagogs, and seeking to heale the
wounde of the Beast, comparing them to the Temple of God, and still
begging the question, frame your Arguments as though your people
were faithful, and your prayer holie. Alas, it were better you toke example
by the fearefull iudgmēts of God vpon ye Temples, and learned
of the faithfull seruants of God which in the idolatrous dayes of Achas,

                     〈…〉
                   &c▪
                ref
                  •
               eined from that they could not amend; rather
then in this 
                  •
               rantick maner to blaspheme the name of Christ whervpon
we are called, by comparing vs to Anabaptists & Heretiks for obeying
the voice of God that calleth vs from emong you, and for telling you
the truth.
            
               
THE 3 fault is;G. G. his answere to the 3 principal Transgressiō
                A false & Antichristian ministrie imposed & mainteined.
Here is no reason rendred whie it is a false & Antichristian
ministerie which is imposed. Yf yee be Prophetts raised vp of God we
must belieue that which you say; but they did not lye in anie matter:
but euerie man may see, that you haue in the former Article lied. We
may not therfore giue credit to your imaginations. We haue more to
proue that ther be manie faithfull Ministers of Christ in the land, then
that anie shalbe able to ouerthrow. This I would wi
                  •
               h, that simple men
would haue thus much wisdome, as to suspend their iudgment if they
be in doubt, and so enquire if ther be anie churches of Christ vnder heauen,
what they do iudge of the Minist
                  •
               rie & churches of England. For
if ther be no Church of Christ nor ministerie, and all the famous men in
all the Churches say we be (knowing our estate as they doo right well)
then be they all guyltie, then where shall we finde the Church? Shall
we seek yt emongst a few vncharitable men, which cannot shew anie
Church which agreeth vvith them so nerely as the Anabaptists & Donatists?
Let it be set downe vvhat maketh a true Minister of Christ, and then
if that be not found in manie Ministers in England, let them be condemned
Antichristian. It is the part of euerie godly & christian man
to haue the matter throughly tried, before he pronounce sentence; if
it were but against one man, he should sinne grieuouslie to doo otherwise,
much more when the sentence is against the whole Church.
            HERE you say is no reason rendred by vs vvhie yt is a false and
Antichristian Ministrie which is imposed.H. B his replie. But if you had better
vveighed these two former Transgressions vvherwith we charge
you; or dulie considered of your owne answere before you had put
penne to paper, you might haue gayned this labour you haue taken, &
the shame you are like to suffer by theis your friuolous & indirect answers.
Or if you had consulted with your learned bretheren vpon the
matter (to whome this promise which you haue intercepted,They promise
                     •
                   vs before the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the e Articles to ans
                     ••
                  ere or 
                     〈◊〉
                  . more
nerely by many rightes apperteined) they would haue coūselled you to
haue vsed your discretion rather in the pulpit as they doo, where you
may say what you list without controlement, thē thus bewray your follie
in writing, which lyeth subiect to the censure of all men in all ages.
They consider that an euill and corrupt matter ought rather to be couered
then raked in, lest yt become more odious.
            
                Now we were perswaded by the word of God that the true Minister
of Christ could not be a Minister of idolatrous & false worship. Such in
our first cause of our comming out from emong you, we proued the
 worship in your assemblies to be. Then we were perswaded by ye word
of God, that a true Pastor could not stand a heard to the Lords goates,
and swyne, blessing them with the blessing of the faithfull, and deliuering
them the holy things of God, as the Sacraments &c. Such in our
second cause we proued both you and your people, as they generally

stand in your Parishes, to be. And now in this third cause your self, by
but repeating part of our words, doo giue a strong & sufficient reason.
Namely; that your Ministrie is thrust & imposed vpō your Churches,
& not freely chosen by the Lords faithful people according to Christ his
ordinance in his Testamēt. You know our Sauiour Christ his iudgmēt
of such as come into the shepefolde by in
                  •
               rusion, or ascend vp anie
other way. So then wee seeke not that you should credit vs, or hold vs
for Prophetts: But if this wee speake be that vvhich God by them hath
vttered, then you deride not vs so much as them, nor them so much
as the Spirit of God that spake in them. [But the Prophetts of God
lied not in anie thing; but euerie man may see that wee haue in the
former Article lied.] The Deuill is the author of lies, sclaunders, false
accusations against the Saincts &c, and therof hath his name: All that
make or loue lies are his childrē, and shalbe shut off the Citie of God.
This chardge wee haue repelled in the 2. Transgression; where wee
proued all receiued into your Church by Baptisme, and are reteined in
your Churches, because you haue not the powre of Christ to excommunicat
anie. Thus still you fall into the pitte you make for vs, by Gods
iust iudgmēts, and shall by the same receiue the reward of a liar, a false
vvitnesse, a false Prophet, if God giue you not grace to repent, which
wee shall more ioye in then in your confusion.
            Of the great store of reasons you haue to proue your Ministrie to be
of Christ, & your selues faithfull, you might haue bestowed one of your
store, either for pitie or for loue vpon vs, who you see are fully perswaded,
that ther is not one such Minister among you all; at least for sauing
your self from the blame you layde vpon vs, one reason vvould
haue done vvel: But chiefly for confirming your Ministerie to be of
Christ, one (at the least) had bene more then necessarie: For otherwise
wee may not belieue your bare affirmation before Christs negatiue: In
whose Testament wee finde neither the names you carie, the Offices
you beare, the maner of your entrance, of your administration, neither
of your support & maintenance.The same 
                     •
                  easons that o
                     •
                  erthrov
                     •
                   the Pope ouerthrovv their 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Your discent and pedegree is within
few degrees deriued from the Pope, you being the children of your
Antichristian Bishops which are the creatures of the Pope, who is the
eldest sonne of Sathan, and his Vicar gennerall in earth, whose image,
marke, powre and life you 
                  •
               eare, and together with him grow, liue,
reigne, stand and fall, as the brāches with the tree. Now wee knowing
the plant cannot easilye be deceiued in the grafts, especiallie knowing
them from their cradles, nourished with the milke of superstition, instructed
in the schole of heathen vanitie, brought vp in the Colledges
of more then monkish idlenes and disorder, exercised in vaine and
curious artes, whose diuinitie is by tradition, and according to their
progresse & degrees therin commēded to the Ordinarie, who making
probation of them accordingly, doth either initiate or trayne them in
this idolatrons office, or els giue them their full orders, with his paper
licence & popish seale therat. Thus are they either presented to a Benifice,

instituted, inducted, where they ringe their bells, pay the first
fruictes, taxes, proxes, and are sworne to their canonicall obedience, to
his Scenes, Courtes, Synods &c: Or els (as they terme them) they are
become Preachers,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . either waged Chaplens, mercenarie Curats, or
hireling teachers, gaping for promotion: Which being obteined, they
change, remoue, e
                  •
               terchange, according to their best aduantage. In
this maner being entred by intrusion, they cannot but lyue by theft,
spoile and rapine, as their popish tithes, the goods of the poore, and
offrings of the prophane indifferently; and gouerne by tyrannie and
perfidie: Tyrannie, in exe
                  •
               uting the popish Iniunctions, euen the statutes
of Omry: Perfidie, in betraijng all into the hands of their Lords the
Bishops. Thus fulfil they scriptures, by which who so examineth their
infinite transgressions in perticular, can want no store of Argument
                  •
               
against this Ministrie; our purpose being here rather to shew some, thē
to set downe all, or to confute anie of their odious enormities: Which
are so grosse, that as sone as they are but manifested by the light, they
are reproued. And it could not be (if the Lord had not layd a vaile
ouer their hearts) that where the scriptures are read, these deformities
could be hid, tollerated, or defended.
            But in stead of an Argument to vs, you turne your speach to the
simple people, and giue them counsell if they doubt of your Ministerie
[to supend their iudgments, and to inquire if ther be anie Churches
of God vnder heauen, and what they do iudge of the Ministerie,
and Church of England] &c. Is this the best counsell you can giue
them? vse you thus to appeaze vnquiet cōsciences, and to resolue their
doubtes? With what conscience can they which remaine doubtfull of
the truth, and lawfulnes of your ministerie, frequent your prayers and
preaching in the meane time vntil they may send ouer sea and be resolued
from thence; You know that what is not of faith, is sinne. But
with what conscience can you vse poore soules thus that inquire the
truth at your mouth, to send them ouer sea you wot not whether to be
resolued of your Ministerie & Churches? Is your Church built vpon
the words of men, or vpon the worde of God? Is this to proue your
Church & Ministerie by the word of God? Or to vse the old worne Arguments
of your mother Church of Rome, who was wont to defend her
self by vniuersalitie & consent? What if all the Churches & learned
mē in the world should say you are a Church (which wee must tel you
by the way they all neuer did, neither caanie which knoweth the word
of God and your estate aright) but if they should, could they, or all the
world iustifie, that God condempneth? Should not a people inquire at
their God from the liuing to the dead? Remember yee not that it is
written To the law
                     •
                   & the testimonies if they speake not, it is because there is no light in
them.
But yee are gone out of the way, yee haue caused manie to fall by
the Lawe, yee haue broken the Couenant of Le
                     •
                  ie saith the Lord of hostes,
therfore haue I made you also to be despised and vile before all the
people, because you kept not my Wayes but haue bene partiall in the

Lawe. Yea the iudgments of God are alredie fallen vpon you; you all
(as he speaketh by his Prophe
                  •
               ) being couered with a spirit of slumber,If the light 
                     〈◊〉
                   is in you be darkne
                     •
                  , o hovv great is that darknes.
euen strickē with the blindnes of Elimas, groping the way in the noone
light, because you haue peruerted the straight waies of the Lord; and
being thus miserable and blinde out of the way, not only perceiue it
not, but loue darknes more then light, refusing the light when yt is
brought you, yea despising yt, because of the fewenes and basenes of
them that bring yt you. And in this Pharisaicall pride procede, after
your accustomed maner of blaspheming, terming vs fewe, vncharitable,
Anabaptists, Donatists &c. Thus fulfill you the measure of your
forefathers; thus dealt they with all Gods faithfull seruants that were
sent vnto them, yea euen with CHRIST himself, refusing him for his
simplicitie, reputing him emong thieues, deceiuers, &c: We looke for
no better vsage at your hands; the seruant is neither greater nor better
then his Maister; if they haue done thus to the greene tree, what shall
not you doo to the drie? Yet so far are we from all danger or harme
by theis curses,God 
                     〈◊〉
                   your bless
                     ••
                  gs: therfore he blesseth your cu
                     •
                  
                  sings. that God turneth them forthwith vnto vs as a blessing,
and to a comfortable assurance both of the fellowship of the faith,
and of the suffrings of CHRIST: Blessed are you when men reuile you, and say all
maner of euil against you for my names sake &c. Againe, through the mercies of
our God, all the ini
                  •
               ries you can offer vnto vs cannot ouercome our
charitie, or breake our patience. In the one we possesse our soules; in
the other we will not cease to praie for you, euen as for our selues, and
be redie to doo you anie good we can. Now to those poore soules
whome you like miserable phisitians thus cure, we giue this aduise;
(yet not we, but the Load) That they beware of Wolues in sheepes
clothing: That thei 
                  •
               ollow not blind guides too far: That thei marke
diligentlie and auoide such as transgresse and abide not in the doctrine
of CHRIST, not walke after the rule of the Gospel: That thei turne
away from such as make a shew of godlines, but denie the power and
practize therof, deceiuing with faire wordes the hearts of the simple,
talking of CHRIST but denijng him in deedes. Further we send them
not to mans worde, nor ouer sea, but to Gods worde, which is neere
them, euen in their mouthes and in their hearts: Let them therby trie
the spirits before thei belieue them: Let them therby measure their
Temple, their Altar and their Worshippers, and especiallie their owne
hearts; that thei may be wise to that which is good, and simple concerning
euil. If the latter part of your answere had bene put in the beginning,
(to haue 
                  〈◊〉
                downe what maketh a true Minister of Christ) & you
approued your Ministrie accordinglie, we had suffered lesse iniurie,
and you lesse blame, Notwithstāding, because it is neuer to late to repēt, if this your offer be according to your heart, we most willinglie &
gladlie accept of it, and wil refuse no indifferent & godlie conference,
which we yet this time expected, and to that end wrote (at certeine of
your chief Ministers requests) these Articles, which you haue takē vpō
you to answere. In the rest though you haue most rashlie & most vnchariblie

reproched & condempned vs alredie, contrarie to all truth,
order or equitie, euen for telling you the truth; Yet if hereafter you
can beware of rash iudgment, we shall reioice. Likewise, if you can escape
Gods iudgments for these your heinous transgressions; or make
anie better plea for them then as yet we haue heard or can perceiue, we
shall not be sorie, but much glad, if you would preuent the wrath that
hangeth ouer your heads for them by vnfeigned repentance & spedie
amendement.
            THE 4 fault is in the subiectiō to Antichristian gouernment.G. G. his answere to the 4 principal Transgressiō
                Let
it be admitted that ther is some yoake of Antichristian gouernment,
vnder which the poore Church doth grone, (as it is her lot to be
oppressed with outward bondage, to be made to keepe the vineyeard
which is not her owne, to be beaten of the watchmen, to haue her vaile
taken from her) is she therfore no longer the Spouse of Christ?
            
            BVT o how far are you from this; which winke with your eies,H. B. his replie.
stop your eares, hardē your hearts; which cānot endure so much
as to heare of your feareful esta
                  •
               e which you see not, no nor suffer your
sores which you see, to be touched; but seeke rather to cloake & hide
them both frō God & men; yea to mitigate, tollerate & iustifie them.
Seeke you not here to mitigate that heauie apparant Antichristiā yoak
your Churches stand vnder, wherof heretofore you haue complained
in Parliaments? tearming yt [some yoake], being now peraduenture
through long custome growen lighter vnto you, and more easie then
Christs yoake, at the least, thē 
               Christs Crosse. And yet this [some yoake]
is yeilded but by waie of admition, to be retracted at your pleasure, if
either aduantage arise to vs, or danger grow to you therby. Further,
you haue added to this your hipocrisie, Blasphemie; tearming the
yoake of Antichrist the lott of the Church, which she must beare by
the will of God; wherof in due place. Now to shew this [some yoake]
you speake of according to the indignitie therof in euerie perticular,
would make a volume: Yea onlie to recite ye seuerall enormities therof,
would require a discourse; which is neither our purpose at this
time, neither haue we skill or experience therin. Only this we see and
testifie, that your churches stād whollie vnder the yoake of Antichrist,
you still reteining his Worship, his Lawes, his Ordinances, his Officers,
his Courtes, euen the whole gouernment that the Pope somtime committed
to his faithfull seruants your Bishops, which now haue takē his
power into their owne hands. What a sort of stagelike Antichristian
Courtes haue you? As first, that great Court of your high Cōmission▪
the Court (ex officio) in euerie Bishops house; the Court of Arches; the
Court of Delegates; the Court of Faculties: Not to speak of your inferiour

Courtes in the Contrie; as your Commissaries and Officialls
Courtes; your Scenes, & such like. What a rabble of Officers & attendants
are vnto the
                  •
               e belonging? Aduocates, Doctors, Proctors, Registers,
Scribes, Pursiuants. Who can number all their Antichristiā Cannons,
Lawes, Rites, Ceremonies, Priuileges, Dispensations, Licences of
all sortes, Probations, Inhibitions &c? which require but the whole age
of a man to reade. But now who can recount the perticular mischiefs
& enormities that ensue & flow from them, euen ouer the whole land?
Or who yeildeth not to this Antichristian iurisdiction? Doo not you
& your whole Parishes, without exception of one, bowe downe to this
Beast, and take the marke of his subiection, or the print of his lawes
vpon you, euē in your foreheads & in your handes? What libertie haue
you to refreine frō these abhominations, without present persecution?
Or what powre haue you to execute and practize Christs lawes? Call you
this but some yoake?The true Church neuer vvithout christia
                     •
                   libertie and christiā povver. Christ diuideth not vvith A
                     •
                  
                  tichrist. The holie Ghost hath taught vs to call you his

                  •
               eruants to whome you obey: So we finding you vnder the obedience
of Antichrist, cannot compt you the seruants of Christ; vnlesse you can
proue that you can serue two cōtrarie Maisters faithfullie at once. Christ
& Antichrist are at perpetual war, ther is no cōmunion betwene them:
So that it is impossible that the Church of Christ can carie the yoake of
Antichrist, without breach of wedlock, euen of the Couenant, as appeareth
plentifullie in all the Prophets, Christs loue being not bound to
her anie longer, then shee keepeth faith to him. Againe, ther is continuall
war betwene the true Church, and Antichrist; which were at an
end, if she should yeild vnto him, or carie his yoake, as you suppose.
But if you had learned to put difference betwene persecution and bondage,
you could not in this matter haue runne into this blasphemous
error, as to say [it is the lot of the Church to be oppressed with outward
bōdage, and to be made to keepe the vineyeard which is not her owne]
Persecution in deed is the lott of the Church here is this world; as he
that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the
Spirit. But bondage is the badge of Antichrist, the marke of the Beast,
wherby his souldiours are discerned frō the souldiors of Christ; and the
children of mount Sina from the childrē of Hierusalem which is aboue &
free, euē the mother of vs all, for whome our Capitaine Christ hath purchased
a full & a perfect libertie at a deare & precious price; which libertie
once lost, ther remaineth no more ransoms to make vs free. It
behooueth therfore all the children of the free woman to stand fast in
the libertie wherwith Christ hath made thē free, and not to be intangled
againe with the yoake of bondage.
            Neither can these places of the Songe (which you haue falsified & peruerted)
anie way carie this doct
                  •
               ine you would build vpon them, or cō
               struction
you make.Songe. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                In the first place though the Church confesseth
her owne vnworthines & deformitie, borne in originall sinne, which
conceiued and brought out in her manie actuall sinnes, which being
kinled in her & against her, oftē enticed her & prouoked her to keepe

their vines, wherby she neglected to dresse and keepe her owne vine:
Yet from hence it followeth not,The Church da
                     •
                  ly praieth 
                     〈◊〉
                   forgiuenes of 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that because she was sinfull & negligent,
that therfore she was obstinate & incortigible (the contrarie appeareth,
in that she thus humblie & modestlie confesseth her faultes):
Or because she kept not her owne vine, as she ought to doo, that therfore
she kept Antichrists vine, which shee ought not to doo. What a
bolde falsifijng of this place is this, to all edge, y• the Church was made
to keepe the vineyeard which is not her owne, in stead of this, that she
kept not her owne vine? If you had looked vpon the two next verses
following, you could neuer thus groslie haue mistaken the matter. In
ye 6 
                  
                     •
                  erse the Church prayeth vnto Christ that he would shew her where
he feedeth, and where he lieth at noone; For (saith she) whie should I be
as she that turneth aside to the flockes of thie companions. This is not to grone
vnder Antichrists yoake, nor to remaine with the flockes of these presumptuous
Sheepheards which wilbe Christs cōpanions, which set their
owne lawes ouer the Church, reigne in mens consciences, imposing
their heapes of burdenous traditions &c. But here all the faithful are
taught to flie vnto Christ by feruent and faithfull praier, and not to cease
vntill he shew them the place where he feedeth his flocke, and where
he resteth at noone: There shall thei finde a comfortable shadowe in
the greatest heate of persecutiō, and a safe refuge in the greatest storme
& tempest that Satan can raise. Againe, If you had considered Christs
answere in the 7 verse, where he instructeth her, yea & cōmandeth her
and all his faithfull seruants with her to come forth, not to stay in the
stepps of that flock, but to feede her kyddes aboue the tentes of other
shepherds; you would neuer haue vsed this place to proue that it is the
lott of the Church to be oppressed with outward bondage, and to be
made to keep the vineyeard which is not her owne, Christ here as you
see cōmanding the expresse contrarie. Neither haue you applied that
other place of the 5 of the So
                     •
                  ge with better successe: For if it be duelie
weighed & trulie applied, yt will to the life shew forth what Church
you are, and your behauiours & dealings with the Church of God.
            First therfore emong diuerse & sondrie notes set downe here by the
holie Ghost wherby to discerne the true Church from the false, we obserue
especiallie these.Notes of the true Church. The true Church though she dailie fall into
sondrie sinnes, yet lieth not she still in them, nor despiseth the voice &
calling of Christ: But (as you see here) awaketh, repēteth & ariseth, openeth,
soroweth, seeketh, giueth not ouer for griuous woundes, persecutions
and blasphemies, neither by them is turned backe to the easie
bed of wordlie peace and fleshlie quiet from whence she arose &c, but
cōtinueth sorowing & seeking vntill she haue found the daughters of
Hierusalem, the children of the free woman, to whome she communicateth
her sorowes & her desires; to them she preacheth & praiseth Christ;
to them she recōmendeth her estate, chardging them to shew it her beloued
by praiers &c.The false Ch
                     •
                  rc
                     •
                  . On the contrarie, we find here the malignant
Church fast asleepe in worldlie peace and fleshlie ease, frozen in the

dreggs of their sinnes; such as wil not be wakened,One bed cannot hold Christ and An
                     ••
                  christ. and so far f
                  •
               ō opening
the doores vnto Christ▪
                that they barre the doores against him, yea
persecute him from their doores, cast him out of their Citie, yea out of
the world if thei could, and with him all such as seeke to serue him
with an vpright heart according to his word, and will not cōtinue with
them in their sinnes & securitie. Now let your Church be examined
by these workes without partialitie, and it shall easelie appeare of what
sort it is (though we saie nothing) whither yt be the Church persecuting,
or the Church persecuted, and so in the rest.
            Likewise if you & your learned Brethren be founde in all poinctes
like these wretched. Watchmē by the description of the holie Ghost in
this place, we doubt not but the most simple by the euidence therof
shalbe taught both to discerne & iudge you: And the greatest Clearke
emong you be taught hereafter, how to abuse the Scripture for a cloke
to couer your sinnes. First therfore these Watchmen were appointed 
& approued of the secure & wicked Citie. Then thei were in al things 
cōformable to these corrupt times, and ministring to those times. Thē
               
thei stood Pastors & Watchmen to the whole Citie hand ouer hand as
thei dwelt in the Parishes therof (being called the Watchmen of the
Citie). Then these Watchmen held the people in diepe peace and securitie 
(as appeareth by the generall sleep). Then thei held the people 
in ignorāce & blindnes (as appeareth both by the night & their sleep).
Then these Watchmen gat all the powre into their owne hands (as appeareth 
by the generall sleep of all others, their watching and persecuting).
Then these Watchmen not onlie sought not Christ themselues,
but suffred not others that would. Then these Watchmen not onlie 
shewed not the waye to such as sought Christ, but sought with one consent
to turne thē backe againe &c, by persecution. Whilest the church 
continued in the bed of securititie and wordlie ease with the rest, and
looked not for these heauenlie things, but trusted the Watchmen with
all such matters, euen with her saluation, she was at good peace with
them,The Watchmē punished not sinne vvhich before the
                     •
                   suffred in the Church, but Christ vvhom they cannot suffer▪
                and we reade of no violence or force offred vnto her. But after
she was called & awaked by Christ: After she had risen, opened, sought
& called him, but found him not: After she perceiued that he was departed
thence, and had fullie resolued to giue her self no rest, vntill she
had found him: Then these Watchmen thought it hie time to bestir
thē, and to stop this gap. And therfore what thei could not perswade,
thei sought by force, persecuted, wounded her, rent away her vaile by
railings & reproches, euen the name of Christ by which she is called &c.
Stands it not thus in all these poincts with our Watchmen? Let the
times declare whither thei agree not to them in their entrance & administratiō,
and in their persecutions & s
                  •
               landers exceed them. Our purpose
is not to make perticular applicatiō, the matter being so euident:
Onlie this litle is said, to redeeme the places from such violence and
corruption as is offred vnto them; and by the same places to giue a
glymse to such, as the Lord hath opened the eies of their vnderstanding,

to discouer and search out the false dealing of their Watchmen,
whom they too long & too far haue credited, and to warne al that tender
their owne saluation to open their eares and their hearts to Christs
voice in his word, that calleth them out of this sinfull easie couch,
wherin their Watchmen haue held them all too long; and that forsaking
the tentes of these presumptuous shepeherds, they seek Christ
whilst and where he may be found; and together with the Daughters
of Hierusalem, the children of the free woman, the heires of the promises,
seek, preach, and praise CHRIST. Then no doubt they shall
finde him, to their vnspeakable comfort: Then will he be as a Roe
from the mountaine of Bether, redie to help, succer and susteine them
with his Flagons: Then will he come to his Palme tree, and take holde
of her boughes: Then wil he come into his Garden, and blowe vpon
yt, and water yt, that the spices therof may flowe forth, and that he may
eate the pleasant fruictes therof: Then shall he descend into the Orchard
of sweete fruictes & Pomegranats, and see whither the Fig-tree
put forth, and the Vine florish & bud her small grapes: Then will he
prepare and make al things in a readines for that great solemne day of
the consummation of his mariage.
            The Lord grant we may likwise prepare & be in redines, trimmed
& prepared, that we may meete him with ioye to our euerlasting comfort,
Amen. And the Lord shorten that day, and hasten his
comming, Amen. Euen so come Lord IESVS, come
quicklie, Amen: So be it.
         
         
            
            A PLAINE REFVTATION
OF
Mr. Giffard his reprochful
Booke, intituled, a short treatise against
the Donatistes of Englande
&c.
            YOV were before shewed, that we iudged none otherwise &
no furder, thē th' expresse worde of God teacheth vs to iudge
of you. That is, to knowe the tree by the fruicte, and the
fruicte by Gods worde. You were there shewed, That we
iudged not of Gods secret election which he hath in al places amongst
all sortes of men, but of the apparant odious sinnes of your Congregations;
from which whilest you wil not be purged, we may haue no spiritual
fellowship or communion with you in this estate. We shewed
you, that notwithstanding all your wicked
                  •
               es, we neuer doubted, but
the foundatiō of God stood firme, the Lord hauing manie thowsandes
of his elect amongst you knowen to himself, though not apparant to
to our eies, whom he in his good time will call more neare vnto him.
And therfore we with extreame longing & loue towardes you, sought
& desired your conuertion, that we might see that seale of Gods grace
vpon your foreheades, wherwith all that name the name of Christ are
sealed,2 Tim. 2 
                     •
                  . 9. 
               vzt. To depart from iniquitie. To this end we did, and stil doe reproue
in the name of our Lord IESVS CHRIST these heinous transgressions in
your publique assemblies, lying in your miserable Prisons, the Lordes
witnesses against the same. To this end we exhort al mē by al meanes,
and admonished you of your present euil estate, as also blamed you for
your former vngodlie & false 
                  •
               urmises, collectiōs & chardges, wresting
& deprauing our wordes contrarie to al sense, equitie, and conscience.
We hoped that this thus far forth had sufficed, especiallie, seing you
rested in silence more then two yeares without anie replie or contradiction:
Vntil now at length vpō your submissiō made▪ and consultatiō
had with your Ordinarie, you disclosed this Coca
                     •
                  rice egge, which you
had so long sit vpon, and all to sprinckled vs with the viperous poyson
therof. Terming vs at the first dash Donatists, Brownists, Anabastites, Hereticks,

Schismaticks, with infinit reprochfull & horrible adiectiues ioyned to the
same,Math. 12. 34. 35. which you haue aboundantly drawen out of the euil treasurie of
your owne wicked heart, without cause giuen by vs, or shewed by you.
Continuing stil, and more & more abounding in the gall of bitternes,
still chardging vs with intollerable pride, presumption, intrusion into
Gods iudgement feate, in falselie chardging, accusing, condemning
your Christian assemblies, that professe the Gospel &c, notwitstanding
al we haue said to cleare our selues of those crimes, and to proue in perticular
the thinges we chardged you with; the truth wherof remaineth
now to be skanned. In which blasphemous vayne of wryting you but
fulfil the measure of your sinne, and those prophecies you were foretold
of. They shall drincke & be moued & be madd &c. They shal gnawe their tongues
for grief, and blaspheme the God of Heauen for their paines & for their soares, and not repent
of their worckes:
            
            FIRST then to this worde [Principal] wherat you so stomble, and from
which you draw such heretical conclusions: We giue you to vnderstand,
that we vsed yt onely to signifie and expresse vnto you the fowre
cheif heades, frō whence flowe, and whether may be reduced all these
seueral & infinite enormities & abuses, which aboūde in your church.
As to the nature & qualitie of these 4. how far they extend, let the word
of God iudge: Yea let anie by the same worde iudge. 1. Whether such
assemblies as were neuer dulie gath
                  •
               red vnto CHRIST, but all the prophane
and open wicked of the land receaued by constrainte into the
bodie of your Church as members of the same, immediatlie from opē
idolatrie and apostasie, without the preaching of the Gospel going before
to call them to the faith, or anie voluntarie profession made by
themselues in perticular of their owne faith; whether such Congregations
as these may in this confusion be held & esteamed the true &
rightly planted Churches of CHRIST. 2. Also, let anie by the worde
of God iudge, whether those Congregations which haue not that ministerie
of the Gospel that CHRIST hath in his Testament instituted
to his Church, but haue & retaine an other strange and Antichristian
ministerie, euen that the Pope vsed & left in the Land, may be held the
true and rightly planted Churches of CHRIST. 3. Moreouer, let anie
iudge, whether those Congregations which haue not those orders and
gouernement which our Sauiour CHRIST hath ordained and commaunded
vnto his Church vnto the worldes end, but (reiecting that)
haue & retaine an other strange Antichristian gouernment, euen that
Antichristian Hierarchie the Pope vsed and left in the Land, may be held
the true & rightly established Churches of Christ. 4. Finallie, let anie (in
whom is anie sparke of light) iudge, Whether those Congregations
that retaine & vse an other Leitourgie, that is, an other forme of publique
administration and worship then Christs Testament, especiallie such a
patched, erroneous, idolatrouse, blasphemouse thing as theirs is, and
will not be reformed or withdrawen from the same, may be esteamed

the true and rightly established Churches of Christ, such as Christes faithful
seruantes may haue communion & fellowship with in their administration
of prayers and Sacramen
                  •
               s. But now where all these faultes
concur, and haue not onelie obstinacie, but tyrannie and persecution
ioyned to the same, who can doubt of the matter? Whether also your
Churches can remaine in these transgressions, or you maintaine the
same, and not depart from the groundes and principles of Christian
religion and faith, (which you boast to keepe) let anie which is anie
thinge exercised in the worde of God, iudge. And thus by these few
wordes are not onelie your. 3. ineuitable dangers (into one of which
you would needes shoue vs) but euē your whole blasphemous Booke,
auoyded at once. For whie should we now ether maintaine this heresie.
1. That where the true faith is, ther can breake forth no great faultes, errors, and abuses.
Or this absurde maner of speache. 2. That all errors & deformities in Religion,
be heresies, blasphemies, and abhominations. Or ells confesse. 3. That with intollerable
pride, presumption, and intrusion into Gods iudgment seate, we haue taken vpon vs
to iudge and condemne whole assemblies which professe the faith of CHRIST sincearelie in
all fundamentall poinctes. For holding that yt cānot be held the true church
of CHRIST rightlie planted and established, where the people were receaued
into the bodie of the Church before they were dulie caled vnto
the faith, or had made profession therof: where they haue not the
true ministrie of CHRIST, but a strange antichristian ministrie imposed
vpon them: vvhere they haue not the gouernement of CHRIST, but of
Antichrist ouer them: where their administration & worship is not after
the Gospel of CHRIST, but after their popish idolatrous Leitourgie: Al this
may safely be defended, without falling into anie such inconvenience
as Mr. Giffard threatneth.
            AS to the heresie he speaketh of, we doubt not, nether euer thought,
but the best Church that consisteth of mortall men, may fall ether
of negligence or of ignorance, into greiuous offences, and dangerous
errors: Yea we doubt not but that some famous Churches & Christians
may fall into such errors, as he termeth fundamentall; the holding
wherof should vtterly subuert the faith.1 Cor. 15. As in the Church of Corinth,
Galatia, Asia there where that denied the resurrectiō;Gal. 3. and 4 Chap. That reuiued the
Ceremonial 
                  •
               awes;Reuel. 2. 14. 15. That held the doctrines of Balaam and Nicholas. But
this we hold withal, that no true Church or Christian will maintaine
anie sinne or error, whē yt is euidentlie shewed & cōvinced vnto them
by the worde of God, much lesse persecute such as reproue & admonished
them, as you doe. Or if they doe, whilest they remaine in that
estate, they are not of vs to be held the true Churches of CHRIST.
            TO your second chardge we answeare; That we haue learned to put
difference betwixt error & heresie. All good men (as is said) doo &
may erre, but no good man wil defend, or persist in his error, when yt is
shewed and conuinced vnto him. Obstinacie ioyned vnto error, after

yt is dulie convinced, maketh heresie. Furder we say, That anie error
being obstinatly holden and taught, after it is duelie convinced & reproued
vnto him,Titus 3. 10. 11. maketh an hereticke, and heresie in that partie or in
that Congregation that so holdeth and teacheth it, and doth separate
from the faith & communion of Christ.
               Ro
                     •
                  . 16. 17. Wherfore we can but wonder
at your ignorance,1 Tim 6. 3. &c. who stād for a Teacher in your church, and yet hold
some errors obstinatlie held & taught against the truth of God,Deut. 17. 12. not to
be heresies, or (at the least) not to be fundamental; though you see by expresse
rule euerie hereticke after one and the second admonition, to
be shunned. Yet say we not, that though euerie error thus obstinatlie
held, be heresie, and euerie transgressiō against the lawe, be sinne; that
therfore all sinnes are equal, or all errors of like indignitie. The lawe
and iudgments of God teach vs to put difference:
            NEther is ther cause whie you should chardge vs or we confesse our
selues guiltie of pride, presumption, intrusion into Godes iudgment
seat, for condemning those assemblies which the whole worde of
God condemneth in all their doings. Greater is your pride, presumption,
&c, that in this maner condemne and blaspheme the truth and
seruantes of God for reprouing your sinnes, that thus plead for and
coulor these filthie abhominations of your Church, which are most
odious to euerie good conscience. But this knowe for certaine, howsoeuer
the Shipmasters,Reue. 18. Maryners, and Marchantmen of these wares
howle and crye out; howsoeuer the false Prophet labour to gilde and
adorne the false Church with the iewells, ornamentes and titles that
belong to the true Church; how much soeuer the Harlot doe glorifie
her self, and say in her heart that she sitteth as a Queene, and is no widowe,
and shall see no sorrowe; Yet shal her plagues come in one daye,
death, and sorrowe, and famine, and she shalbe burnt with fire, because
the God that condemneth her is a strong Lorde:
            IN that you chardge vs with the breach of the rule Math. 18. vnto you,
this still proceedeth of your former vayne conceipt, arrogating vnto
your Churches such names, titles, prerogatiues, duties, as belong and
are only giuen to the true Churches of CHRIST. Not being able
no
                  •
                endeuouring to approue your Churches by the Testament of
Christ, although you were often required and vrged by vs so to doe▪
wherby all contention should soone haue ceased, you beene cleared &
iustified, we iustlie conuict and chardged. In the meane while we affirme
vnto you, That these golden rules onlie belong vnto the true
Chur
                  •
               h of CHRIST,Reue. 11. and that the Court without the Temple vvhich
is giuen to the Gentiles, is to be cast out, and not to be measured. The
Cannons of the POPE which your Church imbraceth, more fitly agree
vnto you, then the rules of Christs Gospel, which your Church reiecteth
and blasphemeth. But that we maie the sooner see our fault, shew vs

we pray you) how we might execute this rule vnto you, how we might
tel yt to your Church, how we might be heard and haue redresse. For
if by your Church you meane the Convocatiō house, you see how they
haue often openly reiected this sute: If you meane by your Church
the Bishops (whom you cal the cheif gouernours of your Church) you
see they blaspheme this truth, caling the order of Christs gouernmēt intollerable,
dāgerous to the subuertion of Prince & state  they hate,
persecute, imprison al that speake for, or seek the same. But if nowe
you meane by Churches your Parish Churches, alas you see they want
power; they can mend nothing, be yt neuer so heinous or hereticall;
they must receaue what their Lordes the Bisshops impose, and endure
til they redresse. How then, to whom, or to what end would you haue
vs complaine vnto your Church in this estate; Or with what equitie
and conscience can you thus reuile and cōdemne vs for breaking Christs
order towardes your Church, when you see your Church wil not be
subiect vnto Christes order; but persecuteth vs and al such as reproue
their faultes and seek to doo Christes will, because their worckes are euil
and wil not endure the light, when they are neuer so litle examined
therbye: As shal furder appeare but by a cursorie touching of these
principal transgressions following.
            
               THE FIRST PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION
VVHERVVITH YOVR CHVRCHES
ARE CHARDGED, IS.
               THAT they worship GOD after a false maner: Their worship
being made of the invention of man, euen of that
man of sinne, erroneous, and imposed vpon them:
               We leaue your first answeare vnto this Transgression, and our replie
vpon your said answeare, to be pervsed and compared by the indifferent
Reader, and now addresse our selues vnto this your second
defence:
               FIrst to make our a
                     •
                  cusatiō & his answere more cleare, Mr. GIF. trāslateth
our Propositiō into a Sylogisme, thus, VVhatsoeuer assemblies worship
the true GOD after a false maner, their vvorship being made of the invētion of mā, euen of the
mā of sinne &c, the same are not the true Churches of GOD. But th' assemblies as they generallie
stād in England doe vvorship the true GOD after a false maner, their vvorship being
made of the inventiō of man &c, Therfore the assemblies of Englād be not the true Churches of
GOD. We finde Mr. Giffard so ful of legier du main, that we had neede looke
narrowlie to his fingers, lest by his sophistrie & diepe schole learning
he beguile vs, as the Serpent by his craftines deceaued Euah, and turne

vs not onlie from the ture state of our controuersie, but from the simplicitie
that in CHRIST. M. Giffard as yt should seeme finding these
Propositions (as they were deliuered him) al to hard and heauie for him,
hath sought to lighten his burden by leauing out such matter & words
as pressed him most sore, and then would runne away with the rest as
you see. The words he hath left out & ought to haue ioyned to euerie
Transgression, are these: willfully obstinate, as appeareth in the verie next
words immediatly going before these 4. Propositions. Furder, in repeating
& vrdging the Transgression, he hath purposely left out these wordes, and
imposed vpon them, and in their places hath set &c. which serueth not the
tourne half so wel. These words we can at no hād spare him, and therfore
must entreate him to add them to both his first and second Proposition;
which if he doe, he shall then finde the fearful cōclusion to followe
faster, then he with al his logique cā auoide. For if they remaine
obstinate and incorrigible, yea incurable in their sinnes, disobedient to
the voyce of CHRIST, skorning his reprof, despising his grace, refusing
to repent, hauing nether wil nor power to amend, be their sinne as
smale in their owne eies as they can imagine, as litle as by their learned
distinctions of Fundamental &c. they can anie way make it; yet it being a
transgression of Gods most holie lawe,Hebru. 2. 2 bringeth death; and being holden
after this manner abouesaide,1 Sā. 15. 23 bringeth euerlasting death; and
doth in this estate separate them from the loue, fauour, and mercie of
God, so far as we can iudge. Ther can be no remission without repentance;
nether can anie be said to repent,Rom. 6. 23 whilest they obstinatlie persist
in wilful trāsgression;Ezech. 18 nor the Lord in that estate to accept anie offring
at their hands,Esai. 57. 21 be their offrings otherwise neuer so perfect and according
to the lawe,Prou. 21. 27 as the scriptures plentifullie witnesse. So then, if M.
Giffard had taken the matter with him, he should not thus haue altred
the whole state of our Propositiō, in steade of clearing it; nether should
haue had anie cause thus to chardge yt with heresie after his accustomed
maner, or to haue produced his scholastical or (as he vseth it) we
might more rightlie saye, papistical distinctions of fundamental errors and transgressiōs:
Wherbie what ells should he inferr, or doth he labour to proue,
if not, That some errors & sinns are (as the Papistes saye) mortal, others
not deadlie? Or ells that which is more grosse, That some error or
transgression might be built vpon the foundation. Because some errors
and sinnes are of higher nature and offence then other, or because that
the best men and Churches may fal into greiuous errors and sinnes
(which as we neuer denied, so we stil to the stopping of our aduersaries
vngodlie mouthes, affirme:) Yet hence it followeth not, that because
the best men and Churches that hold the foundation may erre and
sinne, therfore anie error or sinne is of the foundation, or is not a transgression
from the foundation.Ephe. 2. 20. The writtē worde of God, deliuered by
the Prophets and Apostels is the foundation,
                  1 Corin. 3. 11 CHRIST IESVS himself being
the cheif corner stone.
                     
                        •
                      Tim. 3. 16 Euerie part of the scripture is a like true, inspired
of God,2 Pet. 1. 19 giuen to our direction and instruction in all thinges. No

error or transgression can be ioyned vnto or built vpō this foundation,
no more then light & darkenes can be mingled. The least departure
from Godes worde is an error;Mat. 5. 19. the least transgression of Gods lawe is a
sinne;Iam. 2. 10 the rewarde of the least error or sinne is eternal death, if the
mercy of God and merites of CHRIST come not betwixt; which mercy
and merites belong not vnto the impenitent and obstinate.1 Ioh. 1. 6 Therfore
they that obstinatlie hold anie error or transgression, and wil not by repentance
be purged from the same, lose CHRIST, and so hold not the
foundation. Now then seing Mr. Giffard hath a special phantasie to drawe
this Transgression more then anie of the .3. Prinsipal Transgressions following,
into forme of argument (because in his bad conscience he did foresee
they would presse too sore) let the first Propositiō be drawē into forme
of Argument, thus.
               Whatsoeuer assemblies worship GOD & administer according
to an idolatrous Leitourgie imposed vpon thē,
and continue wilfullie obstinate in the said sinnes, are
not in that estate to be esteamed or cōmunicated with
as the true Churches of God.
               But your publique assemblies in Englād doo worship God
and administer according to such an idolatrous Leitourgie
imposed vpon them, and continue wilfullie
obstinate in the saide sinnes.
               Therfore the publique assemblies of England are not in
this estate to be held or cōmunicated with as the true
Churches of God.
               BVt let vs now retorne againe vnto that Argument which you haue
taken such paynes to drawe, and to confute in our names. The second
or minor Propositiō therof you denie. vzt. That the Church of England
doth worship God after a false maner, their worship 
                        •
                     eing made of  affirming your
worship to be the embracing of the holie Bible, and by the doctrine
therof &c. Wel let the holie Bible be iudge betwixt vs in al our controuersies;
and let your writing shewe how wel you haue approued
your worship in those perticular pointes which were recited & reproued
vnto you. But in our iudgmēt you flee from this issue before you
beginne, in that you make so lardge an exception of imperfections,
wātes, spots, blemishes, faultes, which destroy not the worship of God;
otherwise (you saye) your Church doth worship God aright without
heresie, blasphemie, or idolatrie. Nowe surelie this is the odd & onlie
exception that euer we heard of. Whie if al imperfections, wātes, spots,
blemishes & faultes were taken away, we durst ioyne in the rest of your

worship to you or the Pope either: The rest that remaineth must then
needes be free and pure from heresie, blasphemie, or idolatrie. It were
a wonderful apostasie or heresie, where were no truth, especially when
al corruption should be purged away. But if you meane that these
faultes thus reproued by vs, and holden by you, doe not corrupt Gods
worship amongst you; for the trial of this, let the nature and qualitye
of them be dulie examined by the word of God, and we doubt not but
a litle of such leauen shalbe fownd to make sowre the whole lumpe:Gal. 5. 9
Yea that these spots and bleamishes you speake of (being loked in that
pure glasse) wil appeare the olde runing issues,Ec
                        •
                     l. 10. 1 & incurable botches of
Egipt, which they haue deriued from their mother of Rome: Euen of
those malignant vlcers that are founde vpon the men which haue the
marcke of the Beast,Reue. 16. 2 and vpon them which worship his image, for anie
defence that you haue or can make for them.
               YEt vnto the 4. apparant reasons in our general positiō of this transgression
to proue your worship false and idolatrous, your peremptorie
answere is; That they but make apparāt our vanitie and Anabaptistical
error. Our vanitie, in that the 3. first 1. of the invention of man, 2. of that
man of sinne, 3. erroneous, are al but one. Our Anabaptistical error is in the 4. in
these wordes imposed; wherin we chalendge such a freedome to the
Church, as that nothing may be imposed vpon the flockes, that the
Church-gouernours shal decree by the worde. The 3. first of these
reasons whereby his worship was proued to be idolatrous, he quietlie
suffring to passe and carry their conclusion, laboureth to proue al but
one. Because saith he, whatsoeuer mā inventeth in the worship of GOD is erroneous;
And whatsoeuer is erroneous therin was invented by man; For al false worship is mans invention,
whether it be the invention of the man of sinne or anie other, it is al one before God, vvho
respecteth not persons, but the vvickednes of the sinne. Wel, howsoeuer we might
insist and shew difference betweene that mā of sinne that Antichrist, and
others that haue not such cursed marckes vpon them; howsoeuer also
we might shew differences betwixt the deuises of other more godlie
men (which deuises peraduenture in themselues conteine no errors,
vntil they be abused, set vp, enioyned and read in the church &c) and
the Popes Portesse, from which execrable plāt al these idolatrous graftes
are fetched: Yet wil we not stand vpon lighter matters with you contending
whether the reasons may be said three or one. It sufficeth vs,
and we content our selues to haue proued & obteined, That the worship
of your Church is erroneous, yt being made of the invention of
man: And your self hath confessed, That vvhatsoeuer man inventeth in the vvorship
of God, is erroneous. Nowe we may furder conclude from the second
Commandment, That whatsoeuer worship is deuised by man, and
whatsoeuer deuise of man is put into the worship of God, is idolatrie.
But a great part, if not the whole worship of your Church, is deuised
by man, euen by the man 
                     〈◊〉
                   &c. Therfore the worship of your
Church is idolatrie. Let y
                     ••
                  r Seruice-booke proue our 
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     or Proposition, or

your answers to the perticulars, disproue it. And we in the meane time
will procede vnto your answere vnto the .4. part of our Proposition imposed
vpon them. Wherin you chardge vs with this Anabaptisticall error, That
we should chalendg such a freedome, as nothing might be imposed
vpon the Church which the Church gouernours should decree by the
worde. It should seeme certeinly you knowe not what truth or error
meaneth: Or ells are so possessed with malice, as you make no consciēce what truth you cal heresie, or heresie you cal truth, as appeareth
by your vniust chardging of vs, and your vngodlie defending al the abhominations
of the tymes. Who but you could drawe this hereticall
collection from our wordes? we in the same sentence, and in the verie
next worde immediatlie going before, hauing protested your worship
to be erroneous? How maie it followe, that because we denie errors to
be imposed vpon the Church, Therfore we denie that such thinges as
the Elders shal determine of by ye worde of God, may be imposed vpō
the Church? Whie what the Elders decree by the worde of God, cannot
be said to be the invention or the commandement of man, but of
God, by whose direction they but pronounce and performe the will of
God. But no error can be said to be of the worde of God, and euerie
invention of man (by your owne confession) is erroneous; Therfore we
may stil & againe here conclude, that seing the worship of your church
of England is made of the invention of man, euen of the man of sinne,
erroneous, and imposed vpō them, yt is false & idolatrous, and such as
no true Elders may impose, or the true Church of Christ receaue. Furder
we say, that no true Elders of the Church, nor ye whole Church yt self
may decree or impose anie thing by way of lawe, which Christ hath not
decreed & imposed in his worde. And if you hold otherwise (as your
popish phrases Decree, impose vpon the flockes seeme to import) then we affirme,
that you both hold a Papistical & Anabaptistical error, and vtterlie not
onlie corrupt the worship & gouernment of Christ, but bring in a new
worship & gouernment by bringing in & setting vp your owne decrees
& deuises as the Papistes & Anabaptistes doe.
               NOw cōmeth their Leitourgie or Seruice-Booke which cōtaineth the publique
worship & administratiō of their Church, to be examined
by the word of God. The defence wherof Mr. GIFFARD though he be
a sworne Priest after & vnto the orders therof, yet he verie loathlie and
doubtfullie vndertaketh at the first entrance, as one that carieth a witnesse
and a iudge, that could tell an other tale in his owne conscience.
He confesseth that as no mans workes are per
                     •
                  ect, so there are manie
and great faultes in this Booke, though (as yt should seeme) none of
those perticulars which we recited vnto him (onlie the baptisme by weomen
excepted) seing the laboureth to defend all the rest. But we which for
some errors and spots hould it to be an idolatrous booke, and the worship
therof idolatrie, fal into that foule and detestable heresie of perfectiō?

And in that we affirme yt to be a pregnant Idoll, ful of errours, blasphemies,
and abhominations, vve doe falslie accuse, and impudentlie sclander.
These great wordes nether convince vs, nor cleare you; let them therfore
remaine vpon your accompt. The truth of our chardges, and the
qualitie of your transgressions, shall by and by appeare by the discussing
the perticulars. And for all your greate threates of heresie, we
still for the faultes we haue alleadged (though there were no more,
(as by your owne confession ther are both manie more and greater)
dare affirme your worship to be false, idolatrous, and abhominable.
The vvorde of God caleth him an heretick that obstinatelie holdeth
anie one error after due conviction, though be hold much truth besides.
There is no heretick that doth not hold some, yea much truth.
The word of God pronounceth them idolatours, that obstinately contynue
in anie idolatrous and false worship, though they doe manie other
things according to the rules of the worde; ells were not the Papistes
to be iudged Idolatours or Heretickes. Shall all they now that
iudge according to the worde of God, be guiltie of that detestable heresie
of perfection? What is this but to accuse God of heresie, whose
iudgments these are? Because we cannot be perfect here, therfore we
ought not to contend towards perfection, by leauing that which is
euill,Rom. 12. 9, as yt is shewed vnto vs, and endeuouring to do that which is
good? Might not the Masse-booke, and the most vile heresies be thus
defended and iustified; Because they are not perfect, therfore they
not euill? Because they cannot be perfect, therfore they will leaue
none euil? This is Mr. GIFFARDS best diuinitie he hath, to defend the
worship of his Church: But let vs nowe come to the perticular defaults
in their worship by vs obiected, and by him defended.
               Mr. GIFFARD being demanded vvhere he founde in the new Testamēt
the Romish Fastes of his Church, As their Embers, Sainctes Eaues, and
Lent; first confesseth, that in the whole Bible he can find no vvarrant
for anie Romish fastes. But afterwardes (lest he should be vnlike himself)
sayth, that vve iniuriouslie sclander and belye their Church in
matching them vvith the blasphemouse Synagogue of ROME: Seing
they place not in abstinence from meates ether the vvorship of God,
remission of sinnes, nor merite: Seing they condemne the doctrine of
Deuils &c. Whie should we by his rayling and subtile cauils be withdrawē
from our present question, which because he dare not answere,
and cannot approue his Embers, Sainctes Eaues, and Lent Fastes by scripture,
he seeketh to turne away, and to cauile about other doctrines, as the
putting holines, merit &c, in the abstinēce and the restraint of meates,
vvherwith he was not chardged by vs; yet wherof happelie (if he were
narrowlie sought and followed) he could not so wel cleare his Church,
as he supposeth. We onlie made question of thinges done, and of the
present practise of their Church▪ Namelie, how he could approue

their Embers, Sainctes Eaues, and Lents, which vve caled Romish fastes, by
the worde of God; At which wordes he picketh a quarrle, that he
might not be vrged to proue his Embers, Sainctes Eaues, Len
                        •
                      fastes by the
Scripture. But let him cauil as much as he list at this worde Romish;
Whersoeuer and whensoeuer they were invented, yt is certaine they
were brought into and left in the Church by the POPE, and are stil vsed
(though not altogether after so idolatrous a maner) at the same holie
tides as they were and are in the Romish Church; and therfore are still
to be caled vpon his, name, what Prince soeuer after commaund them,
or vvhat Church soeuer vse them. And euill prouide they for their
Princes honor, that make her the author of such abhominable idolatrous
stuffe, as these Romish fastes, your Embers, Sainctes Eaues, Lents are,
which he can no way colour or excuse by anie politicke lawes, or transfer
the blame from their Church therbie. No politick lawes can
make that lawfull, which the word of God condemneth. No politick
lawes can excuse the Church from breaking the Commandements
of God. Nether may these fastes be esteemed ciuill actions, because
the Princes lawe commandeth them: For so might all their vvorship
of God be held ciuill actions, because the Princes lawes in like maner
commandeth them. But these fastes are commanded and solemnly
proclaimed in their Church and that by the Priest, as he is directed by
his Rubrick, orderly as they arise in their Calendare. The people are
sommoned to the Sinagogue vnto publique prayer, al commanded to fast
&c: shall we call this a ciuile action? Nay sure yt must be as much and
as well ecclesiasticall as anie other part of the vvorship and administration
of your Church. Well, and besides that you haue receaued and
deriued these fastes from the Church of ROME, let your special Collects,
vpon your Sainctes Eaues, your bitter commination and special communion
vpon your Ash wednesday, with your Epistle out of Ioel 2. 12. Tourne
you vnto me with all your heartes, vvith fasting, vveeping, and mourning &c, your
Gospell out of Matthew 6. 16. VVhen you fast be not sad as the Hipocrites &c▪
                   Likewise
your Collect and Gospell vpon the first Sundaye of your Lent, making
mention of CHRISTS 40. dayes fast in the wildernes, desiring that
your 40. dayes fast may subdue the flesh &c. Let this your apish, or rather
popish counterfeighting. Let your special communions in your
Passion weeke, your Maundy Thurs-daye, your Good friday &c, shewe how
popishlie you keepe these your fastes. Furder, let your generall inhibition
of flesh and of mariage at these Pope-holie tides, and your Bisshops
speciall dispensation for both, by their licences for money, shew,
how popishlie your Church of England keepeth these idolatrous execrable
fastes; and whether herein your Church maintayneth not the
doctrines of Deuills. To conclude, let anie man by the Testament
of CHRIST iudge, whether these annuarie prescribed fastes by waye
of lawe vnto all Congregations from yeare to yeare, at set tymes
and ceasons, without anie present occasion so vrging, be anie thing

like those holie Christian fastes which the primatiue Churches vsed,
ether according to their general or perticular occasions:
               NExt ensue your idoll feastes, your Al-Hallowes, Candlemas, seueral Ladie
daies, Sainctes daies, and dedicating your Churches vnto Sainctes. Here you say we
thunder out terror, as if the Church of England did worship Idolles and
celebrate feastes in the honor of false Gods: and yet all is but a starck
lye, and a wicked sclaunder. Here your euill conscience fearing the
blowe before yt come, can prouide no warde but your accustomed rayling,
which is the way to make it more heauie & soare. If you had according
to our requestes approued your feastes & holie dayes of your
Church &c, by the Testament of Christ, vve had yeilded thervnto; or
howsoeuer, you had therby beene freed from these feares & iudgmēts
that pursue your euill conscience. Then had you not vpon this occasion
needed or vsed these vayne protestations, how you hold but one
only God, and one Mediator betweene God & man, the man Iesus Christ,
That God onely is to be worshipped through the mediation of Christ,
That Sainctes are not to be worshipped, no dayes to be celebrated in
their honor, nor Churches dedicated vnto them: How bitterlie then
do you sclāder? That you keep no such Feastes, dedicate Eaues, Daies,
and Churches in their name, you cā with no shame denie; for the present
practize of your church through euerie moneth in ye yeare, sheweth
this true. Onely nowe yt remayneth in question, whether these
Feastes &c, be consonant to Christes Testament, or idolatrous. And you
being requested, ought to haue prooued this keeping these Feastes,
these holie Cessations by way of lawe, this dedicating Eaues, Dayes and
Churches in Sainctes names, by the euident testimonie of Gods word,
before you had thus reuiled vs. But surelie as you are more thē loath
to be drawen to the triall & proofe of this stuffe, so take we no delight
to rake in this most noysome dounge of your solemne Feastes & vaine
worship,Math. 15. 8. which you (as sweete odoures) offer vp vnto God in the name
& mediation of his Sonne Christ Iesus. What wil you answeare vnto God
(though you wil vouchsalf vs none answeare) when he shall aske you
who hath required these thinges at your handes? What will you then
pleade for your Iewish feastes of E
                        •
                     ster & P
                        •
                     nticoste?
                  Gala. 4. 9. If you saye you keep
them not after the maner of the Iewes, yet can you not be said to keep
them according to Christes Testament; for there you haue no warrant
for such feastes. What wil you pleade for your popish feastes of Christmass,
Al-Hallowes, Candlemass, &c. For your diuiding and deuising Christs life
into a stage-playe, celebrating his birth vpō one daye, his Circumcision
vpon an other, his Epiphanie (as you cal yt) vpon an other &c, yea anie of
these vpon one special daye more then an other? But where haue you
learned to keepe them after your heathen and prophane maner, with
garnishing your earthlie houses, decking your bodies with gaye
clothes, great cheare in glottonie, excesse, ryot, idle games, dicing, daū
                  sing,
mumming, masking, wassaling; what president can you shew of

such worshipping and feasting, except it be that holie daye which the
Israelites kept before the Calf vnto the Lorde in the wildernes Exod. 32.
5. 6. where haue you thus learned CHRIST? Is this to keepe the feaste
with the vnleauened breade of sinceritie and truth? to crucifie the old
man? to be planted to the similitude of his death & of his resurrection
&c? What cā you there pleade for your superstitious deuotiōs towards
your Ladie, keeping a Daye, an Eaue, a Fast, a Feast, a cessation from al
labours, an especial worship to her Annunciation, an other to her Purification
yeerly in your Church? It were good you would consider of these
things what you can answeare: for certis we poore ignorant Christians
can see no other mystery in the matter, but that yt is detestable idolatrye,
euē that verie powring out your drinck offringes and burning incense
to the Queene of heauen.Iere. 44. Furder what wil you then say to your celebration
of deade Saincts, keeping one solemne daye vnto them al at once?
And againe seuerallie to Iohn Baptist, and to the Apostles as they are allotted
in their Pageant: George also your St. Patron must not be forgottē:
A daye also is kept to the martyre Stephen, an other daye to the Innocents,
with their daye, eaue, fast, feast, cessa
                     •
                  ion, special worship to euerie one
perticularlie. What warrant can you shew for this out of the Bible?
The Patriarcks, Prophets, godly Kings were neuer so celebrated
                     •
                   neither
haue you anie commandement or president in al the newe Testament
thus to celebrate them. Paule & Peter whilest they were aliue desired
to be remembred and prayed for of the Church, but neuer required
anie such dutie being deade. Furder, what wil you answeare for
your keping a daye, cessation &c to St. Michael & al Angells? how wil you
excuse your self of most high idolatrie,Collos. 2. 18. 19. advancing your self in thinges
you neuer sawe, rashlie puffed vp of your fleshlie minde, and not holding
the heade, depriuing others of their Crowne? It wil not then
stand, to saye, you worship the Lorde by these deuises; for so said your
Fathers in the wildernes.Exod. 32. 5▪
                   
                  To morrow the holy day of the Lorde. The Lorde he
wilbe worshipped according to his owne wil reuealed to vs in his
worde; and not by our deuises, how holie soeuer they seeme. If then
God be not worshipped with this kinde of worship, their Idolls are; or
(to speake rather as the Prophets and the Apostles doe) the deuil is
worshipped therbie. Leuit. 17. 7. De
                        •
                     t. 32. 17. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. 1 Corint. 10. 20.
And thus your owne conclusiō which you tooke so heynously, falleth
apace vpō you; and you haue not brought one reason to saue or cleare
your self. As to your doctrines by you verballie alleadged concerning
God and his worship, the idolatrous Israelites and Iewes in their greatest
schisme & diepest apostasy could haue alleadged manie true doctrines
also. But nothing is more sure then this; Christ is not a Priest for such
sacrifices as his Eather is not pleased with. Nether is he a Mediator of
anie other Testamēt then his owne. As to the Dedication of your Churches
vnto deade Sainctes, and the caling them by their owne names,
the first you say was the fault of the Papistes, but you in caling them after
the same names doe not sinne. Was it a fault in your predecessors so

to dedicate & cal them, and shall it be no fault in you so to cal them as
they had dedicated & left them vnto you? But you so cal them only to
distinguish them. Whie this excuse they also had. But they had furder
superstition in these places and Sainctes. And doe not you nourish the
same superstitiō in the weake, and animate the Papistes in their sinnes,
by ratifying these their doings and calling your Churches by the same
names they baptized them in? But might we aske you where you thus
learned to cal & distinguish christian Congregatiōs in the Scriptures?
your answeare & place is readie, Luke. Acts. 17. caleth a streate in Athens,
Mars streate, and aske vs if he therfore dedicated it to that heath
                     •
                   God.
We answere you, that if Luke should so giue the name & cal it speaking
in his owne person for himself, he should sinne & commit idolatrie, in
naming the Creature of God after an Idol, as you do in caling the Da
                        •
                     es
& your Churches after the names of such Sainctes.Psal. 16. 4. 
                  Dauid saith he wil not
take the names of their Idolls in his lippes. But Luke here recordeth
the historie of such thinges as came vnto PAVLE in Athens, and the vulgar
name of the place whether the Athenian Philosophers ledd Paule, naming
yt after their maner not that himself so caled yt willingly, or to
giue vs boldnes to do the like, but rather to manifest their fault & superstitious
feare they stoode in of their Idolls as Paule verse▪
                   22. sheweth,
by ye reproofe of their fault, teaching vs to auoyde the like. And cā you
collect yt because Luke writeth that they of Athens named a streate after
Mars, they of Alexandria signed a ship vnto Castor & Pollu
                        •
                     , that christians
may by those places name or cal anie thing in their possession after Idolls
or deade Sainctes? Is this the best doctrine you can drawe, & vse
you cā make of this Scripture? yet is it the only place of Scripture you
haue vsed to approue any part of your publique worship, which we had
blamed vnto you. We wil not stand to vrge the Poperie & superstition
of some of the Sainctes names of your Churches, how some of them
are caled after Christs sepulchre, others after al the rable of Sainctes both
men & weomen, Sainctes in the POPES Calendare; but proceade to the
rest of your tromperie.
               AS your Co
                        ••
                     inations, Rogations, Purifi
                        •
                     ations. Your Comminations you saye are
a part of Canonicall Scripture, which is to be read in the Church
Partes of Canonicall Scripture, indeed they are, by you miserably dismembred
& bownd vp together, and wickedly vsed and peruerted to
such superstition & idolatrie, being vsed in the place & vpon the daye
of popish shrift: Or rather (as your Portesse saith) in the place of the
Discipline of the church, and of the Penance, vsed in the beginning of Lent.
Thus in the best vse of it by your owne confession yt is an execrable Idoll,
in that it is brought into your Church, and supplieth the place of
Christes discipline in his Church, and is vsed in stead therof vntill Christes
discipline may be restored againe (vvhich you there say is much to be
wished) yt being nothing lesse then that which it standeth for by your
owne confessions in the preample before your Comminations:
                  
                     
                        •••
                     har. 11. Yt remayneth
then the instrument of those Idoll shepheardes to feede the

sheep of distructiō with the curse of God, being sealed vnto your whole
Church by your owne mouthes, All your Church being generallye
founde, and wilfullie remayning guiltie in som sinnes there condempned:
As these publique idolatries, others, and each one in sundrie perticulars:
as deceipt, wronge, whoredome &c. We wil not here stand
to discusse the follye & Poperie of this solemne peice of your worship
and administratiō. Penance & your Lent fast are grosse to euerie one,
in whom is anie light.
               YOur Rogations you say are but limiting the boundes of euerie Parish,
to auoyde contention. But we would then knowe of you how it
became an act of your Church, a part of your Pastors office, to be dōne
by the Parson and the parrish Clarcke with the rest of the parishners,
certaine Psalmes the Letanie & Collects being said ouer the Grasse, Corne,
and Cattayle, in place of the popish procession. Yea there are of your
Priestes that wil not faile to reade a Gospel when they come at a crosse
way orderly. This is somewhat more thē visiting the bowndes. Nether
euer thought we that such ciuile actions had belōged to the Church &
Ministrie.Luk. 12. 14 
                  Christ would not be made a diuider here on earth, there are
Ciuile iudgmēt seates appoincted therunto. And howsoeuer this publique
sollemne worship be commaunded by other iniunctions of your
Church, and not by your seruice-booke, yet according to that booke
is this solemne action performed.
               
                  PVrifications you say are ānexed to make vp our ryming figure: For nether
your Booke nor doctrine of your Church alloweth anie other
purification, then in the bloude of the Lambe &c. nether yet did the
Iewes (from whom the Pope (as yt should seeme) deriued this worship)
hold anie other purificatiō thē in the bloude of that Lambe, although
they figured that bloude by sundrie rites & ceremonies, of which sort
this maner of bringing weomē to the Priest in the Church after child-birth,
and a certaine nomber of dayes expired, was. Yet seeing you
wil at no hand be said to imitate the Iewes herein, you must then take
it from the Pope of necessitie, for other au
                     •
                  thor you can finde none for
yt, nether anie president or warrant in the Testamēt of Christ: The woemans
monethlie restraint and seperation from your Church, her comming
after that iust tyme wympeled, vealed, with her Gosips & Neighbours
following her, her kneeling downe before and offring vnto the
Priest, The Priestes Churching, praying ouer her, blessing her from
Sonne and Moone, deliuering her in the end to her former vocation, shewe
somewhat besides giuing of thākes. But if yt should be admitted only
a thanksgiuing, We would then knowe of Mr. Giffard or his Ordinarie,
how this perticular & ordinarie (though miraculous) matter, more thē
al other strange actes, wonderful and extraordinarie deliuerances both
by sea and by land, manie and great benefites of the Lord both to men
and woemen, should be made a publique action of the Church, an
especial part of the publique worship and administration therof;

And what warrant they haue in Christes Testament for this. But if they
there haue none, whie other perticular and priuate benefites may not
aswel be brought into the Church also, and be enioyned by lawe, as
this; and then what end would there be of these deuises, and what
place to the publique ministrie of Gods worde in the Church? Furder
we would knowe of them whie these woemen should by lawe be constrained
to defer their thanks-giuing vntil the moneth be expired, Or
if they haue giuē God thākes before priuatly, whie they should for his
priuate & peculiar benefite be compelled to giue thankes publiquely
againe for the same, or rather to hire the Priest to giue thanks for her
againe. Of these pointes touching this matter, we would craue Mr.
Giffards learned and direct answeare in his nextbooke.
               NExt come your Tithes, Offringes, Mortuaries. These you saye are but for
maintenance of your Ministrie, and not as a matter tyed of necessitie
vnto a Priesthode, as in the time of the lawe; and if they were, the
error were not fundamental. We neuer doubted but that they were
the maintenance of your Ministrie; but whether the Ministrie of Christ
nowe vnder the Gospell may be so maintayned, is the question. We
reade in the Testament, that the Ministrie of the Gospel ought to be
maintayned by the flockes vnto which they attēd,1 Cor. 9. and that by the free
& louing contribution of the faithful,Gal. 6. 6 according to the Ministers necessitie,
& the peoples habilitye from time to time.1 Tim. 6. 8 We reade not in
the Testament that this contribution ought to be imposed by waye of
1. lawe,Mat. 10. or 2. bargaine vpon the people;2 Cor. 11. 20 As by paying tenthes, thirdes,
40. or 50. pownds a yeare.1 Thes. 2. 5 We finde not in the Testamēt that the Ministers
of CHRIST ought to sel their administration,2 Pet. 2. 15 as the Sacraments
&c.
                     
                        ••
                     d. 11. 12. 13 Nowe let the Tithes, Offrings, set vvages of your Ministrie (we meane
the inferior common ministrie of Parsons, Vickars, roving Curates, or
hireling Preachers, and not of the Lordlie sort which liue as Princes in
Pallaces, nor of your Collegiate Priests in their dennes) be examined
by these rules, and tryed, whether they haue anie foundation in the
worde of God or no. As to their accursed couetousnes & odious portsale
not onlie of their owne tougues, but of that Gospel & ministration
(which they pretend) of your Sacraments, Baptisme, Supper, Ch
                        •
                     rching, Marrijng,
Burijng &c. and that to the most prophane and vngodlie for their tithes,
offrings, wage &c, Mr. Giffard shal neuer be able to hide from God, or
excuse before men. It would require a lardge discourse to set downe
how these their tithes accord in euerie perticular vnto the Leuitical decimations;
                  N
                        •
                     m. 18
And how dangerous nowe it were to reviue, and vnpossible to
ioyne these lawes vnto CHRISTES Ministrie and Gospel. If that priesthode
be remoued,Hebr. 7. 12 there must be of necessitie a removing of the lawe.
They that reviue anie part of the Ceremonial lawe,Gal. 5. 3. 4 are bownde to the
whole lawe,Phil. 3. 2 and abolished from CHRIST. Let Mr. Giffard then looke
whether this error be fundamental as he caleth yt, being obstinatelie held.
The Princes commandement wil no more change the nature of this

lawe, then the commandement of Ezekia and other godlie Kings did
before tyme, For so might al the lawes of God which Princes should
cōmande be transferred from God to men. If it be said they vse these
Tithes &c otherwise, so also might the Galatians and Corinthians haue said
of such Seremonies as they would haue ioyned to the Gospel.
               NOwe are we to take a viewe of your maner of visiting the sicke & hous
                        •
                     ling
them with the Sacrament. Your Absolution, Dirges, and funeral Sermons ouer & for
the deade. You confesse a maner of visiting the sicke prescribed, but you
demande of vs where we haue seene it practized by, or vrged at their
handes which are able and diligent Pastors, by these that haue the gouernment
of your Church. Wee answeare, that it sufficeth to be commanded
and prescribed by your seruice-booke vnto all your Ministers
and Churches, to the diligent obseruation wherof all ful Priestes are
sworne. Furder your Church-Wardens & Sidemen are sworne to present
all defaultes therin at the Arch-Deacons or Cōmissaries Courtes.
So that no marueyle though this booke be founde in the handes of the
most diligent & able Priestes, reading yt ouer weomē at their Churching,
ouer the maried, ouer the sicke, ouer ye deade, and where not. And
for Mr. Giffards satisfying, we giue him to weite, that as learned Priestes
as he, haue vsed this booke to the visitation of the sicke. And nowe
we would knowe of him whie these able Priestes should haue more libertie
to pray by the the direction of the spirit for and with the sick, according
to their present estate, thē they are allowed by those that ha
                     •
                  e
the gouernment of your Church in the publique praiers of the whole
Church, according to the present estate therof. To conclude, we would
knowe of him by what warrant in Gods worde the Church can prescribe
& enioyne such a forme of visiting &c.
               
               As to their Absolution which Mr. Giffard so slilye would passe ouer without
speakinh anie worde therof, Let the Reader vnderstand that nothing
can be more popish or blasphemous then yt is: where a sacrilegious
Priest taketh vpon him by the authoritie committed vnto him,
to absolue the sicke from all his sinnes. Hath anie mortal man power
to forgiue sinnes? Or is it not the office of God alone? Hath the Priest
power to forgiue al sinnes, such as are not made vnto him? What horrible
blasphemie is this? To him that hath power to forgiue all sinnes,
to him we may make our prayers and supplications, him only may we
worship. Hath the greatest Minister of the Church any more power to
retaine or loose the sinne of the least member, then the said member
hath to bind or loose his sinne▪ Doth not this rule of our Sauiour aswel
extend vnto him as to the least in the Church,Luk. 17. 3. 
                  If thie brother sinne against thee
rebuke him, and if he repent forgiue him?
                  Rom. 16. 17. Hath not the Church power to reproue
and cast out their Pastor if he so deserue?1 Tim. 5. 20 Is not al this binding &
loosing donne by the worde of God,Psal. 149. and not by anie power or excellencye
of man? Hath not the worde of God the like power and effect
against sinne in the mouth of the least of Gods seruants, as in ye mouth
of the greatest? Let this Collect then (wherbie the Priest in their Leitourgie
                  
by the power committed vnto him absolueth the sick of al his sinnes)
remaine one witnesse (amongst manie other) of their Poperie, and vntil
more come, of most high blasphemie.
               Mr. GIFFARD taketh verie heinouslie at our handes this phrase of
hous
                        •
                     ing, with the Sacrament terming yt a false packing in vs, and goeth about
to purge his Church therof, by shewing how yt denieth al ye wicked
blasphemous corrupt doctrines of the Papists touching the Lordes
Supper: And also denieth, that a man is of necessitie to receaue yt at his
death. Thus euer with his impertinent matters he vvith-draweth and
shrinketh from the present question. We must therfore still call him
backe to the poynte, and demaund of him what warrant in CHRISTS
Testament their Church hath to institute a priuate Communion, or to administer
the Supper of the Lord in anie other place thē where ye church
is assembled. This if he can doe, then indeed we haue faulted in caling
yt an Housel.
                  1 Cor. 11. 20 But if he can shewe no warrant for this priuate domestical
Communion, then we must still blame this action as popish, superstitious,
and irregular, what doctrines soeuer they hold of the Lordes Supper
besides. Againe, though they exhort and perswade the sick person
that this Sacrament is not then of necessitie; Yet if he be so superstitious
to require it, the Priest then is bownde of necessitie to deliuer
yt him, though there be no more to receaue then they two. And what
is this but to nourish superstition, or to make the Sacrament so deliuered
of great value & proffit vnto them. Thus iugleth & toyeth your
Church with the holy things of God at her pleasure:
               THe Papistes you say that invented the Purgatorie, had also their blasphemous
diriges & prayers for the deade: But we are more then impudent
in lying, to terme the prayers which you vse at burials, such: seing
your Church denieth the Purga
                        •
                     orie, prayers for the dead &c. We will
not requite you with euil wordes, but let the proofe of these matters
declare who is a lyer and impudent. We would therfore first knowe of
you where you haue learned to make the burial of your deade an ecclesiasticall
action, part of the Pastors office, and to make it an especial
part of your worship, if not of the POPE? Then where you learned to
burie in your Hallowed Churches and Church-yardes (as though
you had not fieldes and grounde to bury in) with a special Dirige and
leitourgie, with praiers, Singers, Ringers, Mourners, Beades-mē &c, if not
of the POPE? It were too longe to shewe the originall and processe of
this superstition, with the great aduantage that cōmeth to the Priestes
therbie. It were needles also to shewe, howe this your Leitourgie, Dirige
and prayers, are fetched and peiced out of the POPES Portesse. It were
curious to relate the watching, preparing, arraying, crossing, dressing
the corps to the graue, also the array of the Mourners with all the superstition
of the Heraldes, the attyre of the Priestes aud Clarckes, with
their tymes and place when and vvhere to receaue, vvhen to rest, when
to singe, to reade, to praye, when and with what wordes to cast on the

first shouel of earth by the hand of the Priest, the graue being made
easte and west &c. Onely this in general we say, that all these deuises
(seing God no where commandeth them in his worde) are vayne, superstitious,
and fond, as whereby Gods name is highly taken in vayne,
prophaned, and abused; yea his holy spirit most impiouslie blasphemed
& despighted. For whilest the whole land is of their Church,
and they bury all that dye in their Church of their natural death after
this maner with this Leitourgie (but such as dye of any violent death, how
christianly soeuer, they vouchsalf not thus to burye) pronouncing in
the Collect they vse whilest earth is casting on, that God in his mercy
hath taken to himself the Soule of that their deare Brother or Sister
departed, they therbie iustifie the most wicked, gracelesse, impenitent
vvretches, Atheistes, blasphemers, Idolarours, Papists, Anabaptists, Heretickes,
Coniurers that dye in their sinnes, as though such could haue
anie benefite by the death of CHRIST, or the mercy of God belonged
vnto such as dye in their sinnes impenitent, except peraduenture the
Priestes prayers nowe, the holines of the grownd, and this christen buryal
&c, may helpe him; thus openl
                     •
                  e contradicting th'expresse word
of God, and hardening all the rest of your prophane Atheists, Idolators,
whore-masters, blasphemers in their sinnes. Likewise in an other
Collect, where they desire God, that they with that their departed brother
may haue a perfect consummation & blisse both in bodie & soule,
what do they but pray for the Soule of the deade, seing they burye all
with this Collect, and some must needes dye apparantly wicked, and impenitent.
Yea what doe they hereby but establish a Purgatory, or some
such meane place, for in▪ Hel there is no redemption. Thus whither
doth not man wander whilest he followeth his owne inventions, and
forsaketh the straight pathes of the Lorde.
               AS to their venal funerall Sermons, they haue as litle grownde or
vvarrant in the Scriptures, as their Dirige and funeral Collects haue.
Wel may they deriue them from the funeral Orations of the Heathen
Orators, but no president they haue of the godlie in anie age so to bury
their deade. We reade of no such matter at anie of the Patriarches,
Prophets, or godlie Kinges burial. No nor at the burial of our Sauiour
CHRIST, of the Martyre Stephen, of the Apostle Iames, or anie of the faithful
in those tymes; yet were there as godlie, religious, learned, and able
men to doe yt then aliue & remayning, as they that thinck the best of
themselues nowe, if the holy Ghost had seene it so needful.
               NExt fellowe your corrupt maner of administring the Sacraments,
the Font, the Crosse in baptisme, your Gossips, and blasphemous
Collects vsed to this Sacrament, your Baptisme by weomen, Bishoping,
with other heretical Collects of this booke  when we shew (you say)
whie the Fonte is an abhomination, you shal knowe what to say. How
idolatrously the Font was invēted, brought into ye church, hallowed, &

the POPE, is euident to all men. Whether they fetched this from the
Iewes Lauar, Sea, or Base, we will not here dispute. Sufficeth it vs that yt
ys an idolatrous, popish, enchaūted, hallowed relique, wherin they put
& kept their enchaunted hallowed water, and vsed yt to manie execrable
idolatries.Deut. 7. Therfore yt is an abhominatiō to the Lord, a detestable
Idoll that ought to be vtterly abolished by the lawe of God, and ought
not to be vsed in his Church and worship.2 king. 18. 4 Furder seing yt nourisheth
the Papists,
                  Rom. 14. the weake and ignorant in their fore-conceaued superstitiō,1 Cor. 8.
and is an offence vnto the godly, if yt were a thing in libertie, yet ought
is not to be thus vsed, much lesse thus enioyned & retayned by vertue
of lawe vpon all Congregations. And seing in the best imagination of
yt, it is not an instrument of anie more necessitie or vse v
                     •
                  to this Sacrament
then anie other cleane and decent vessel, seing also our Sauiour
CHRIST hath not separated anie vessel or water to this vse;1 Cor. 6. 12. We cannot
see how a fewe men may be thus bold to command this vessel vpon all
Churches by waye of lawe, and to forbid all other vnto this vse. For
what is this but to restraine that which God hath left in libertie, to cō
                  trole
God,Gal. 5. 1. and to make newe lawes for his Church. And whie might
they not by the same vsurped power bring in what vnnecessarie Ceremonies
they list, euē al their fore-Fathers ye 
                  Iewes & Popes infinite traditions,
aswel as these popish deuises & Iewish ordinances aboue-said; aswel
as these popish idolatrous reliques of Fonte, Bells, Organs, Musick,
Surplices, Coapes, Vestimentes, Habites, Hoodes, Cappes, Tippetts,
Tires &c.
               BVt if these least litle thinges, which they call matters indifferent,
wherein al men ought to obey, proue so heynous in Gods eyes, so
pernitious to the whole Church, what shal we thinck of their Simbolical
Ceremonies, tryflings, iocolings that they haue added to their Sacracraments? As vnto their Baptisme a Dialogue betwixt the Priest, the
Clarcke, the God-fathers, God-mothers, and the Infant; the signe of
the Crosse, the sanctifying or making holie their water &c. Their
fowre sortes of Baptismes. Namely, 1. Their publique Baptisme by the
Priest &c. 2. Their hastie Baptisme by weomen. 3. Their Baptisme by
supposition. N. if thou be not baptised I baptize thee &c. 4. And their Lorde the
Bishop his Baptisme, or Confirmation of CHRISTS baptisme. Likewise in
their Sacrament of the Supper their friuolous Leitourgie stinting the
Priest when and how to stand at the North end of the Table, what and
when to saye and praye, when to kneele, when to tourne, when to glory
God &c. Also the vayne Dialogue betwixt the Priest, Clarcke, and
People. Their altering the wordes of CHRISTS institution, and deliuering
yt after a popish maner. The bodie of our Lord IESVS CHRIST
vvhich vvas giuen for thee preserue thie Bodie and Soule vnto euerlasting Life &c,
and that kneeling, that they might adore the bread, or at least
retaine a taste of their former superstition in tyme of high poperie
&c. Of this Sacrament they haue also diuers kindes, with diuers

                  Leitourgies. As publique, or ordinarie; Sollemne, vpon certaine
of their Festiuals; And priuate, or domestical. Not here to speake
of their other half Sacraments, As their Penance or Commination vpon
Ash-wednesday, with their special Leitourgie therevnto. Their Sollemnization
of Mariage in the bodie of their Church vpon the Lordes daye or otherwise
by the Priest, with his booke and special Leitourgie, with a Ring (as
the element) to be laid▪ vpon the Seruice-booke, which doth hallowe
yt in steade of holie Water: with which ring the man must be taught
of the Priest to wedd his wief &c, And the marryed offer vnto the
Priest and Clarck.
               TOuching the Crosse, Mr. Giffard confesseth yt to be most blasphemously
and horribly abused in Poperye, they ascribing vnto yt
power to driue out deuils, and worshipping yt with deuine honor. We
looked that after his accustomed maner he should haue said, But our
Church doth not so thinck of or worship the Crosse, Therfore you
Brownists most impudent lye sclander &c. But in steade of this he saith
neuer a worde to the mattter in perticular: Saue vnto Symbolical ceremonies
in general he is of iudgment, That the antient Churches immediatlie
after th'apostles tyme did offend, in taking ouer much libertie
to ordeine ceremonies Symbolical: Yet he doubteth not, but verie reuerēd godlie learned men, ledd by th'example of those holye Fathers,
haue iudged it lawful for the Churches to ordeyne such Ceremonies.
We would first therfore knowe of those reuerend godlie learned, and
not of Mr. Giffard whie they (nowe that al are Christian and no heathen
amongst them) retaine & enioyne this superstitious signe of the crosse
in th'administration of their baptisme. Also whether they are not persuaded,
That our Sauiour Christes institution which the Apostles taught
and deliuered vnto the Churches touching th'administration of the
Sacraments, was perfect and fullie sufficient. Yf they so thincke of
yt, Whether they iudge it lawful for anie mortal men, or the whole
Church, willingly & wittingly to alter or add anie thing to, or plucke
anie thing from the said institution of our Sauiour in the Sacraments:
Or if they so add, Whether our Sauiour doth accept and blesse yt, as
his owne institution. And if God doe not accept or blesse such Sacraments,
where his institution is thus wilfullie violated and changed,
Howe such 
                     •
                  dulterate Sacraments may be said the true seales of Gods
Couenant; especiallie where such a blasphemous horrible, popish, idolatrous
ceremonie is vsed, as Mr. Giffard cōfesseth this signe of the crosse
to be, except yt be better with them then it was with the Papistes: Or
howe may the faithful in this estate ioyne vnto them. And nowe yt
would be knowen of Mr. Giffard (seing he in his owne iudgment condē
                  neth
these Symbolical Seremonies) howe he dare thus presumtuously
breake CHRISTES institution in deliuering them after the maner prescribed,
and ioyne vnto those men that enioyne those ceremonies,
against such of CHRISTES faithful seruants as reproue them, stand, and

suffer againgst them. Is not this most fearefully and presumptuously
to tempt God, to sinne against his owne cōscience? It is no excuse vnto
him to saye, the best reformed Churches doe vse witnesses (he meaneth
God-fathers, and God-mothers) in baptisme. For his owne conscience
knoweth and iudgeth, that the best Churches doe erre in so
doing.
               Furder, Baptisme being publique, to be deliuered openlie in th'assemblie
when the whole Churche is mett together, what neede more witnesses
of the matter then the whole Congregation. But howe wicked
and impious is that lawe of their Church, which forbiddeth the Parents
to answere and vndertake for the bringing vp their owne children
in the true faith and feare of God, and driueth them to bring
Popish Gossips or sureties, who must both vndertake, vowe, and answere
for their childe, That he doth forsake the Deuil & his workes &c. What can
be more vaine, folish, and ridiculous?
               TO the Baptisme by weomen you answeare,M. Giff. here confesseth both some members of their Church to be popish, superstitious, & ignorant; And also this baptisme of their Church to be such. That it is both cōdemned
by the cheif Gouernours of your Church, and is not practized, except
it be among the popish & superstitious ignorāt sort. First we must
oppose the publique lawe of your Church against those your gouernours,
who we suppose (as confidentlie as you speake) wil not proue in
the plural nomber, when the pointe cōmeth to scanning. Your lawe in
3. places of your Portesse doth not onlie allowe the baptisme by weomē,
but publiquelie iustifie it, and maketh a kinde of necessitie of such
priuat baptisme: Saijng, that if the child be in danger, they may baptise
yt at home without a Minister, and that in this case they haue donne
wel & according to due order, concerning the baptisinge of this childe,
which being borne in original sinne & in the wrath of God, is nowe by
the lauer of regeneration in baptisme receyued into the nomber of the
children of God, and heires of life euerlasting. Wherin, besides that
they most highlie breake & prophane th'institutiō and ordinances of
Christ cōcerning the publique seale of this holie Couenāt, in deliuering
yt without a lawful Minister priuatelie in a house, rashlie, and vnreuerently
without due order &c, they also consequētly maintaine & teach
these popish blasphemous errors therbye. That if the childe had dyed
vnbaptized, yt had bene damned; And that baptisme is of necessitie to
saluation: For ells what needed so great feare & haste, that they would
not staye to bring the childe to the publique Congregation, no no
                     •
                   so
much as for the Minister to baptise yt? Or how could there he so great
cause and so greate necessitie in the matter as their booke mentioneth,
if they thought that the saluation of the childe honge not vpon
the Baptisme? Wherbie is manifestly cōuinced, as also by their wordes
not secretlie implyed, That they hold Baptisme the cause, and not the
seale of saluation. For ells to the infant nowe dying what good could
baptisme doe? Or which waye could yt be a Laver of regeneration vnto yt,
or receiue yt into the nomber of Gods children? We had thought that
the saluation of the childe had onlie honge vpon th'eternal election

and predestination of God: And that the seale of the Couenant had
belonged ynto yt, by reason of the Parents faith, and is administred
not as anie helpe or present benefite to the newe borne infant, so
much as when yt commeth to ryper age to be a contynual comfort &
help vnto yt.
               BIsshopping Mr. Giffard saith is litle vsed or vrged in the Church of
Englād, being loath belike to make anie defence therof. Yet it is certaine
that the Priest is in his Portesse enioyned to commaund, That
the children be brought to the Bisshop to be confirmed, so soone as
they can saye in the vulgare tongue, the articles of their faith &c. Also
in an other place of their said seruice-booke there is an expresse lawe.
That none shalbe admitted to the holye Communion, vntil such time as he can say the Catechisme,
and be confirmed. Howe accorde these lawes to Mr. Giffards saying,
that yt is litle vsed? But what a monstrous matter is this confirmation
of their Church, where the Baptisme of CHRIST is to be confirmed of a
wretched man, if he were (as he is nothing lesse) a seruant of CHRISTE?
Yea that Christes faithful seruāts (whom CHRIST hath alredie publiquely
baptised, receyued, and engrafted vnto himselfe) should be kept from
the comfortable table of the Lorde, vntil they haue a popish Bisshop
his confirmation? Not here to mention the binding of the faith of
the whole Church to an Apocrypha Catechisme. Yet to make this their
confirmation either of greater estimation, or more execrable with all
men, they add in the second cause manie speciall vertues therof. Namely,
that by their imposition of handes and praier, such as are so confirmed by them,
maye receaue strength and defence against all temptations to sinne, and the assaultes of the
VVorlde and the Deuil. Surely if this be true, great is the Bisshops faulte to
neglect the practise the
                     •
                  of; but howe great then our sinne, to blame
and condemne such a wonderfull & excellent ordinance. But doubtles
this is either too good or too bad to be true. If al they vpon whom
these Bisshops shall laye their hādes & praye ouer, shal receaue strength
and defence against al temptations to sinne, and the assaults of the
worlde and the deuil, then shal al they that receaue this Confirmation be
vndoubtedlie saued. Yea if anie of them whome the Bisshop shal
thus confirme, shal receiue this strength and defence &c, then haue
the Bisshops greater power, and their prayers more vertue, then eue
                     •
                  
God g
                     •
                  ue to anie mortal man, yea then euer he gaue to our Sauiour
CHRIST himself; with whom though Iudas were contynuallie conuersant
his most Heauenly doctrines and holie prayers, yet the Deuil entred
into him and preuayled against him. Though Peter were a right
deare and faithful seruant of CHRIST, yet Sathan sifted him, and
he fell. Yea we had thought that our Sauiour onlie had receiued
this strength and defence against al temptations to sinne, assaults &c.
And that al mortal men had bene dailye subiect to sinne, temptation,
&c, that our reioycing might be of God, and not of our selues, and
Gods glorie be shewed and perfected through our weaknes. If these

vanuties of the Bissops were true, then might it indeed rightly be called
a Confirmation, for then such as had that were sure and sure, there then
to those should be no more vse of CHRISTES merites, suffrings, or mediation,
or of Gods mercye. But because al men are cōtinuallie prone
vnto, and euen enclosed and compassed about with sinne, whilest they
dwel in this mortal flesh, and haue continual neede of Gods mercy,
and vse of CHRISTS merites, suffrings, and mediation: Yea because we
see wel nigh al those whom the Bisshops haue thus confirmed, to be confirmed
in al sinne and wickednes, and euen the Bisshops themselues
the aucthors of this deuise (from whom al this vertue and holines
should flowe fourth vnto others) to be them-selues the verie synkes &
draynes of al abhomination, corruption, idolatrie, superstitiō, blasphemie,
and open transgression of al Gods lawes; We are confident in the
truth and power of our Lorde IES
                     •
                  S CHRIST to witnesse against these
abhominable ordinances of Antichrist and against the Church of England
for receiuing the same, and maintayning the most impious blasphemous
doctrines that ensue therof, as is aboue proued:
               TO the blasphemous Collects in your Sacraments & Booke you wishe we
were as weary in lying and sclandering, as we should be to seeke &
finde out one such. You haue in remem
                     •
                  rance the Collects wherin the
Priest by th'aucthoritie committed vnto him, doth absolue the sicke
of al his sinnes. You must not forget your two Cellects said ouer your
deade brother. The one wherin you praise God for receiuing to mercye
his soule, liued he or died he neuer so prophane, blasphemouse,
and impenitent a wretch. The other wherin you praye for him, that
you with him may haue a perfect consummatiō & blisse both in bodie
and soule. Nowe to helpe your memorie a little furder, we woulde
desire you to consider better of that glorious Antheame you singe or
saye in your publique Communion, wherin with Angells & Arch-Angells
and al the companie of heauen you laude & magnifie &c: Wherin we
wil not demaunde of you howe whilest you remaine in the flesh, you
can haue such familiar conversation with those heauenlie souldiours
and elect spirits of the faithful deceased, that you together with them
can praise & laude God. Nether wil we presse you with the papistical
and curious speculations in making digrees of Angells, Arch-Angells
&c. But we would here knowe of you howe manie Arch-Angells you
reade of & finde in the Scriptures, And whether you knowe anie more
heades of Angells then Christ himself. Exept peradvēture your Church
haue some especial prerogatiue frō the Apostatical Sea, to make Arch-Bisshops
and Arch-Angells. Your Collect also in baptisme of Sanctifijng
the floud Iordan and al other waters to the mistical washing away of sinne, some saye sauoreth
greatly of Poperye, and retayneth the people in a superstitious
opinion, That the water vsed in baptisme hath holines & some especial
vertue in yt ab
                     ••
                  e common water, especially whē yt is thus blessed
by the Priest, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   out of the hallowed Fonte &c. But we wil not
presse you herewit
                     •
                   nether yet stand to examine your Collect vpon your

                  St. Michael & all Angells-Day, how you make Michael a creature, and Canonize
him amonge the Popes Saincts, and worship him amongst & together
with all Angels: This shalbe no blasphemie, no Poperie in your Church
Nether will we stand to vnrip your popish patched Letanie, Or shew by
what POPE, and whie euery part therof was deuised and added, And
wherfore yt is good: As for the quick & the deade, For al that trauaile
by sea or by land, For all weomen labouring with childe, For all sicke
persons and younge children, all prisoners and captiues, For Bishops &
Curates, For lightnings and tempestes, For plague, pestilence, and famine,
For battaile and murder, and for sodeyne death &c. All which
things and what ells that you will request at his handes, CHRIST cannot
but graunt you, when you so beconiure him By the mysterie of his holie
incarnation, by his holie natiuitie and circumcision, by his baptisme, fasting, and temptation,
by his agonie and bloudie sweate, by his Crosse and passion, by his pretious death and buriall,
by his glorious resurrection and assention, and by the comming of the Holy Ghost. And
sweetlie you entreat him by them all seuerally and ioyntely to deliuer
you from the euils aboue-said, and also from fornication and al other
deadly sinnes. In which Sofrage we wil not obserue yt you hold some sinnes
deadlie, and others not deseruing death, because you peraduenture can
shift it off with learning, howsoeuer yt standeth in the Popes booke, or
they that made it thought of it. Onely we obserue that this your holy
Letanie is a most rare and especiall confection, soueraigne good for all
thinges at all times, but especially in the morning, and therfore it is so
oftē enioyned to be songe or said in your Church euerie weeke at their
mattens. Yet was there (by what aduenture we knowe not) an vnsauorie
& vnhappie Sofrage stollen into your Letanie in Kinge EDVVARDS
tyme Against the tyrannie of the Bisshop of Rome and all his detestable enormities. Which
Sofrage because it was nether so Canonical or holie, nether agreed vnto
the rest, & could not be songe with thē in tune; Or because it was ouer
rough doctrine for sondrie of their weake bretherē that then loued &
yet loue the POPE & anie thing that commeth from him, with all their
hearte; Or ells (that which is more likelie) ouer plaine doctrine to
make the people abhor all their Romish wares & marchantmen; The
worthy Bishops, most vigilant Pastors & Gouernours of your Church,
to auoide these inconveniences, of their pontificall aucthoritie dismissed
yt, thrust it quite out of their L
                        •
                     tanie, and vtterlie abrogated and
razed it out of their Authenticall Leitourgie. Wherin (nowe it hath bene by
these learned men corrected, and this perrilous Sofrage thrust out) it is
impossible to finde ether heresie or blasphemie. But cā there be more
horrible & execrable blasphemie then thus to coniure & exercise Christ
by his natiuity, circumcisiō, baptisme, fasting, by his agonie, his sweate,
his crosse, his death, his buryal &c: what Coniurers or Enchaunters
can exceede this? where haue they learned thus to praye? thus to dismember
& distort Christ, or thus idolatrouslie to applie and abuse these
outwarde thinges which he did or were donne vnto him in the fleshe?
Why might they not aswel beseech him by his growing in age, his walking,

fleeping, weeping &c, by his crowne of thornes, the spondge,
nayles, speare? No meruaile they fetched this geare from the POPES
Portesse. Againe, where haue they learned to pray for their fore-Fathers
offences, if not of the POPE? Where haue they learned to pray for
all that erre, for all that trauaile by land or water, for all that are sicke,
in captiuitie, tribulation &c, when there is a sinne for which we are forbidden
to praye, when there are many most vngodly and wicked persons
going about and suffring for much mischief thus traueyling, emprisoned
&c? Pray they not for Gods open enemies, for the breach of
all Gods lawes, for the ouerthrowe of all maiestracie, publique peace
& order, and for the destruction both of the Church & cōmon wealth
therby? Also where learned they to pray against lightning, tempest,
plague, famine, battle &c, when they haue no present neede, or haue no
present feare or danger therof? Is not this to trifle, to abuse Gods name?
Can this prayer be of faith to praye against lightning in the middest of
Wynter &c? Is not this to forbid God to vse his owne Creatures to his
owne will and glorie? Yea to forbid him to restraine his Creatures, or
to punish his enemies by dearth, plague, warre? Finally where learned
they to praye against sodeyne death, that God should not call anie of
this land, yea of the whole world, sodeynly? Is not this to appointe
God when and howe to call? Hath not God reserued these secret
thinges in his owne hande only, forbidden men to be curious or inquisitiue
after them, and commanded them continually to watch & be
readie, for in an howre that we thincke not, will our Master come as a
theife in the night &c:
               These are the publique prayers, doctrines, worship, and administration
of the Church of England, which it not only tollerateth, but with an
high hand commaundeth, maintayneth, enforceth vpon all men. Of
all these execrable wares standeth Mr. GIFFARD a marchantman, retayling
them to the miserale people, being with none more or so much
offended as with those who refuse and speake against this tromperie;
vvhom how he rewardeth or refuteth, let this his blasphemous popish
booke shewe. What defence he hath made for this worship and ministration,
Let the readers by this time iudge, and howe smoothly
he hath passed by and coulored, yea swallowed vp all these abhominations,
transferring all the blame and reproach vpon the poore seruants
of CHRIST, that condemne this trash, and admonish him. Euill signes
ether of a true Minister, or true christian. None speaking by the spirit
of God iustifieth error or blasphemeth the truth at any time. How far
he hath sought to iustifie these antichristian deuises & popish enormities,
and blasphemed vs for speaking the truth, Let his booke shewe.
Yet bringeth he against vs a certaine Secte in their Church which condemne
certayne thinges as corruptions & such as neede reformation,
and therfore would know how we could abandon al th'assemblies for
this Booke, seing manie disalowe manie thinges therin:
               
                  
TO this he saith we make a double answeare: First that vsing a part,
they doe homage to the whole. Then, that the best part of this
Booke is an abhomination to the Lorde &c. This dubblenes is of your
owne heart, who dissembling with God and your owne conscience to
auoyde opē shame, care not what wrong you doe others, or what iudgments
you heape vpon your self against the daye of wrath. Our answeare
was but one, and this. That you knewe neuer a Minister that
vseth not the Booke, that standeth not vnder this Idoll. Or that had
throwne it out by the power of Gods worde, or with-drawen the people
from yt with al their preaching these 29. yeares: But that they all administer
by yt, ioyne their gospell to yt, minister to that people that vse
yt &c. That the conningest of you that vse the best and leaue the rest,
connot make that best part you vse other then a piece of swynes-flesh,
an abhomination to the Lorde. And that the perswation of your
consciences could neither iustifie your worship, cleare your selues, or
satisfie others: Especially when we see your consciences to tollerate &
to submit vnto the whole, to vse part in respect of your homage, and to
refuse part for shame of the worlde. This you were ashamed to inserte,
because you were not able to answeare. Therfore in all this they
but counterfeite, and you cauil. What folly can you finde in this saying,
That in vsing part they doe homage for the whole? Stand not all
your Ministers bownd to this Booke, sworne in their canonicall obedience
to administer according to the order prescribed therin, and not
to preach against anie thing by publique authoritie established? Stand
not the Church-wardens and Sidem
                     •
                   bownde to present the defaults,
And the Arch-Deacon and Commissarie, to censure the same? How
then (seing all your Ministers stand in this subiection vnto yt) would
you haue vs thincke that the part they vse is not in respect of their homage
to the whole? Or howe woulde you haue vs thincke that they
condemne anie part therof, when they speake not against yt and cast yt
not out by the power of the worde, nether with-drawe themselues, nor
the people from yt, but ioyne in prayers & sacramentes with them that
vse yt? Is this to condemne yt, or to condemne thēselues rather in the
things they do? Cā you with your fleshly reason put this away? Might
they not by your reason stand sworne to ye Masse-Booke, ioyne to such
idolatrous priestes & people as vse yt, yet if in their owne conscience
or secretly they dislike some faultes therof, be as cleare as these Ministers
you speake of are of the corruptions they condemne? There are
some truthes & some good things in the Masse-Booke also. You vse
no good reason to persuade vs by your Schismes and diuisions in your
Church, vnto your Church. We know that Christ is not diuided, and yt
there is but one Spirit, one Baptisme. CHRIST is not yea & nay; yea in
one place, naye in an other. Though christiās may through ye ignorāce
& darcknes that is in them, dissent in some things, yet ar they to walke
by one rule, and not to teach diuers doctrines. Who so teach otherwise,
or causeth anie dissentiō or offences besides the doctrine with we haue

learned,Rom. 16. 17. is to be auoyded, to be cast out. If either of these factions you
speake of had bene of CHRIST,Gal. 1. 8. they would ye
                     •
                   this haue proceded according
to the rule of CHRIST against the offenders, and not haue remayned
in this contention & diuision:
               TO your next vehement exclamation of frensie, In that we terme the
best part of your Portesse but a piece of swynes-fleshe &c, wherin
you saye we strike at God and blaspheame that which is most holy, because
therin are sondrie portions of Scripture: As the Lordes prayer,
the tenne commandements, the articles of your faith &c. We beseech
you (when you shall be a litle come to your self) are not all these with
your Pist
                        •
                     es and Gospells in the Masse-Booke also? yet you wil hold no part
of that execrable Idoll, good. The Papistes hange the first wordes of
the Gospel after Iohn about their necke for manie purposes; shall we not
saye that this or their Agnus Dei are abhominable Idolls therfore? Coniurers
vse diuers Psalmes and scriptures in their magical incantations &
diuers Collects, with as litle euill as most of yours, shall we nowe allowe
anie part of their Coniurations? are they not altogether accursed? The
Scriptures then we see may be abused, yet no way iustifie anie part of
the wicked action or naughty thing to which they are applyed. The
Scriptures are holy & good of themselues, yet when they are thus violently
rent, dismembred, constrayned, peruerted, abused, ioyned to
these idolatries, they no way iustifie any part of the vvorship, but make
the whole more execrable. We can saye then that those Scriptures
vvhich you thus prophane and abuse to your idolatries aboue-said (as
your idoll feastes and all your idol vvorship and ministration) are in
their due place & true vse, holie, reuerend, gratious; But vvhen they
are abused, peruerted, and ioyned to patch vp this idolatrie, they make
the whole the more execrable. All the Scriptures then of God are holy
& pure, and all the whole Masse-Booke, and English seruice-Booke
and euerie part therof are detestable Idolls. All which Idoll and euery
part therof vve can condemne, and yet preserue the sacred maiestie
and aucthoritie of the Scriptures. All this your festered conscience
& blasphemous mouth could to your furder iudgment confesse in our
name, though Sathan that speaketh in you, by and by sought to quench
it, by deriding our holie suffrings. Our bādes vnto vs are comfortable,
glorious vnto God, and shal rise vp and be produced in iudgment with
this idolatrous murderous generatiō of your horned cleargy. But now
to the Scriptures be you alledged. If you were demaunded where you
learned to mumble ouer that Scripture (by you falsely caled the Lords
prayer) fiue tymes in your Morowe-Masse, and to vse yt at all assaies, to
to saye yt ouer the sick, ouer the deade, ouer the weomen in Churching,
ouer the marryed &c, should not your holie Father the POPE
be founde the aucthor of all this? Also if we should aske you where
you reade, and how you could proue that blasphemous Article of
your faith That CHRIST discended into Hel, what scripture could you shew
or alleadge for yt? Thus are euen those thinges wherof you glorie,

tourned to your shame, if so be that you could be ashamed of anie
thing. Yet howsoeuer you maye harden your heart and your face
against the manifest truth, by this sleight discussing of your worship,
doctrines and administration, euen by this litle which is alreadie said,
all men may discerne what kinde of ministers & blinde guides you be.
Also anie that had but once seene the Church of Rome, might easilie by
the 
                     ••
                  ea-spotts & freakes you speake of,Ezech. 16, 44 knowe her daughter of England
at the first blush. For as the Mother such the Daughter is in al her
limbes, features, and proportions:
               Hetherto we haue spoken of some odious fowle faultes and errors
in perticular founde in this their worship or Leitourgie: the furder examination
wherof and searche of the rest that remaine, we leaue to the
furder diligēce of others, And nowe touching this their seruice-booke
and Leitourgie in general, this we saye.
               1. IN that they presume to giue and enioyne their prescript
wordes in praier, they take the office of the Holie Ghost
awaie, quench the spirit of the ministrie, and of the whole
Church, stop and keepe out the graces of God, thrust their owne
idle deuises vpon the whole Church, yea vpon GOD himselfe
whether he wil or no:
               2. IN that bie their Leitourgie they prescribe what and how
much to reade, at Morne to their Mattens, at Eauen &c,
teachinge the Church and ministrie to pray by nomber, stint, and
proportion, it is not onely popish, but most friuolous and vayne,
disgracing and not instructing the Church and ministerie:
               3. IN that by this their Leitourgie they prescribe vnto the
Church what Scriptures publiquelie to reade and when to
reade them, as these Chapters and Psalmes at their mattens before
noone, those at after noone &c, On all the dayes that they
haue publique meetings and seruice through the yeere, and soe
from yeere to yeere. They therebie take from the Church the
holie and free vse both of the Scriptures and spirit of GOD.
They therbie conceale and shut out of the Church a great part of
GODS holie worde which they reade not. As also abuse without
order those scriptures they enioyne to be read:
               4. IN that they shread, rend, and dismember the Scriptures
from the holie Order and natural sense of their context,

to make them Epistles, Gospels, Lessons, select Psalmes, to their
festivals and Idol worship aboue-said, They most heinouslie
pervert and abuse the Scriptures to the high dishonor of GOD &
their owne feareful iudgment.
               5. IN that they bring in and commaunde the Apochrypha
writings to be publiquelie read in the Church: They both
mainetaine and publiquelie teach the dangerous errors therin
contayned, to the poysoning and subverting of the faith of the
Church. They thrust these deuises of men into the place of GODS
worde, causing the people therebie to reuerence and esteeme
them as the holie Oracles of GOD, of like aucthoritie, dignitie,
and truth, and to resorte vnto them to builde their faith thervpon,
and therbie they bring in an other foundation into the
Church: besides the high iniurie donne vnto GOD therbie:
               6. FInallie in that by this their Leitourgie they bring in,
erect, and enioyne a new & strange kinde of administration,
as is aboue proued in the perticulars: They make and erect
a new Gospel, and so must needes also erect vnto yt a new ministrie.
For the ministrie of Christ is only bounde vnto, and wil
onlie administer by Christes Testament wherein they haue a
most perfect Leitourgie for the whole administration of his
Church. Therfore this present Leitourgie and ministrie of
ENGLAND: are by al these reasons in general and perticular
founde and proued at once to be counterfeite, vngodlie, and Antichristian:
               His wide friuolous Parenthesis from the 17. page of his booke vnto
the 47. touching read prayer and prescript Leitourgies, we leaue to be discussed
and refuted by an other, to whose writinges we referr the Reader.
Leauing Mr. Giffard and the whole Church of ENGLAND touching
this first pointe of their worship, to be compassed about with the
sparckes, and to walke on in the light of the fire that they haue kindled:
Yet this to them of our hand,Esay. 50. 11 they shal lye in sorrowe.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND PRINCIPAL
TRANSGRESSION, IS THAT the prophane vngodlie multitudes without the
exception of anie one person, are with them receiued
into, and retayned in the bozome and bodie of their
Church:
               IN Mr. Giffard his former answere vnto this Transgression he then not
being past al shame confessed That the most Churches in England want godlie
Past
                        •
                     rs and there al are admitted, he that admitteth them being the worst in the companie.
These assemblies as openlie guiltie of this confusion, sacriledge, & wilful
prophanatiō of the holie things of God, he would not then defend.
But now vpon better aduise (the world being greatly changed with the
reforming Priests since that tyme, and no hope left for that sect to preuaile
aganst the Bisshops) he hath changed his copie quite, building
againe those Romish abhominatiōs he had before destroyed, as in the
Transgression aboue handled appeareth. And nowe in this Transgression, as
one greatly greiued that such large wordes had escaped him, he seeketh
to retract them in the best maner he may, and to salue al againe
by saying, That the Church of England doth neither approue such admission
of prophane men to the Sacrament, nor yet suffer it in practize
wholie, howsoeuer they are admitted through the negligence of the
Ministers &c. Where this high sacriledge is wittingly & wilfully committed
by the most of the Ministers, seene and suffred by al the Gouernours
of the Church who haue made, and doe maineteine such wicked
Ministers, where most of the people of the land consent & ioyne in
this sinne, where that lesser part of Ministers & people (he speaketh of)
that doe not the like haue made no separatiō frō these wicked Gouernours,
Ministers, and People, that thus wilfully contynue in this pres
                     •
                  mptuous
sinne & sacriledge, but ioyne vnto them in the communiō
of their prayers & Sacramens  Here we would knowe whether the
Church of England may not iustly be reproued for suffring & approuing
this sinne.1 Corinth. 5 Ells th'Apostle faulted for reprouing the whole Church of
Corinth for suffring & not casting out th'incestuous person, although no
doubt there were in the Church of Corinth that vtterly disliked & condemned
the offence. That all the Gouernours of your Church thus
approue & mainetaine these wicked Ministers whō they haue made,
is manifest, in that they doe not censure thē for their heinous offences.
That these Ministers cōmit this sacriledge, your self hath in your former
answere cōfessed, terming them vngodlie, and iudging them the worst
of the companie. Where by the waye (not to hinder the matter in hand) we
must advertise you that you haue highly broken the rules of christian

order and charitie towards these your bretheren & fellowe Ministers,
thus to publish and condemne them (and that to such as you hold hereticks
and schismaticks from your Church) before your Church had
censured them, or you for the Churches wilful default had forsaken
either the Church or thē. If they be to be esteamed the true Ministers
of CHRIST (which office they professe to beare in your Church) then
great is your sinne thus disorderlie to blaspheme, iudge, and publish
them. If they be not to be esteamed the true Ministers of CHRIST, thē
as great is your sinne in ioyning vnto them in communion of prayers
and Sacraments &c, and in not separating from them and from that
Church which thus presumptuouslie doth make, impose, and mainetaine
such an antichristian vngodly Ministerie. Thus your disorderlie
and vnchristian behauiour towardes your bretheren, yea the Ministers
of your Church, (wherof your self by profession standeth as yet a
Minister and member) might be greatly agrauate and more iustly
charged with those faults you lay vpon vs of accusing, condemning
whole assemblies of Christ, of rending and tearing vp the tender plants
in most desperate and sauage maner. And al this before the Church
of England hath censured these Ministers and assemblies. If we would
be so friuolous, we could throughly wound you with your owne weapons:
But we remitt you to the iudgment and vengeance of the Lord
for all your blasphemie and cursed speaking: stil witnessing against
the sinnes of your Church, prouing if God at anie tyme wil giue you
repentance.
               FVrder in your former answeare you affirmed, that you knewe manie
Congregations in England where the Pastor repelled th'vnworthie
from the Sacraments &c. We replyed, That euen in those special
Congregations all the prophane and their seede were at the first receyued,
as in all your other Congregations. And that this Suspention of the
Pastor wherbie he repelled, was popish and Antichristian, euen the instrument
of that idol shephearde, rebated, without edge or poynte, of
no value, or power &c, and therfore this could be no separation, seing
the suspended stil remayned of and in your Church. That al without
exception were receiued in these Congregations we proued, because
all without exception of anie were baptized. That none were or could
be there put out we proued, because the Parson and his whole flocke,
or al these special Pastors or flockes together, haue not that power
which our Lorde IESVS CHRIST hath giuen vnto his Church vnto the
worldes end, to caste out the wicked by excōmunicatiō; and the other
Congregations by his owne confession did not caste them out. All
this notwithstanding, Mr. Giffard (before he hath either proued the orderly
gathering & communiō of these Congregations at the restoring
from apostasy, or that they nowe had the power of Christ amongst them
to excommunicate the wicked) wil needes by this idol popish Suspension
iustifie these Congregations, and convince vs of falle accusation: And
thus euerie where he administreth weapons vnto vs to wound & beate

himself with his owne wordes,Prou. 14. 
                        •
                     . according to the prouerbe in the mouth of
the foole the staffe of pride.
               
               BVt at length to reconcile himself againe with those most part of Cō
                  gregations
& Ministers which he before cōdemned, he hath changed,
peruerted and subtilely sullected our reason which we brought against
those speciall assemblies which he endenoured to iustifie, and
turned yt against the whole Church of England, thus.
               Where all are receaued in by Baptisme, and no povver to cast
forth anie by excommunicatiō, there all the prophane multitudes
are without exception of anie one person receiued
into & retained in the bozome & bodie of the Church:
               But in the Church of ENGLAND all are receiued in by baptisme,
aud there is no povver to 
                     •
                  ast forth anie by excommunication:
               Therfore in the Church of ENGLAND all the prophane multitudes
without the exception of anie one person are receiued
into and reteined in the bozome and bodie of the
Church:
               THus after he hath manifestly falsified our wordes and changed our
whole reason, framing yt in his owne cōceipt as he might best deale
withall, he then procedeth with all might & mayne to refute this Argument,
and to convince vs. Which being donne, he followeth the
chace so whotely, spending & opening his mouth freely into all maner
blasphemie, as he driueth vs into sondrie heresies &c. But now if we
might be so bolde to awaken the man out of his cholerick dreame,
and to call him backe againe to our former reason after all this conflicte,
pursute, and triumph, he shalbe founde to haue skirmished all
this while but with his owne shadowe, and neuer to haue comen neare
our Argument, and so all his reproches and heresies must be fayne to
returne back againe into his owne heart, where they were forged and
whence they proceded. Our former Argument being reduced into
forme, was to this effect. Into what Congregations all are receiued as
members, and the said Congregations haue not the power of our Lord
IESVS CHRIST to caste out anie by excommunication, there al the prophane
multitudes without th'exceptiō of any one person, are receiued
into & retayned in the bozome and bodie of that Church, or of those
Churches. But in those special Congregations he spake of, where the
Pastor doth repell from the Sacrament, al are receiued as members, and
the Parson & whole parish, Or all those Pastors and their flock
                     •
                  s haue
not the power of our Lord IESVS CHRIST to cast forth anie by excommunication.

Therfore euen in those speciall parishes where the Priest
by their seruice-booke repelleth from their Sacrament, are all the prophane
multitudes without th'exceptiō of any one person receiued into
& reteined in the bozome & bodie &c. Here Mr. GIFFARD finding the
Maior or first Proposition irrefragable, The Minor thus proued vnto him,
because al in these parishes are baptized, and the Parsons suspention is not
CHRISTS excommunication, hath sought to escape by changing & falsifijng
our reason, which otherwise he was neuer able to answeare, He hath
quite chaunged yt by putting in a newe Minor Proposition. Namely, for
these peculiar Congregatiōs wherof he made instance, he hath put the
whole Church of England as they stād one bodie altogether. And is now
driuē to mingle these his select Cōgregations with the other Most parte
of Churches & Ministers whom erewhile he condemned & graunted guiltie
of this transgression, and also to praye in ayde & appeale vnto the popish
excommunication of that antichristian Hierarchie of their Church
Gouernours. And this by furder falsifijng our wordes in both his propositions;
vizt. Where we said haue not CHRISTES power to cast forth anie by excommunication,
he saith haue no power to cast forth anie by excommunication. We neuer
doubted but the Church of England, as also her mother of ROME hath a
false kinde of excommunication exercised in the power of the Dragon &
of the Beaste; but we stil denie that they haue that true Excōmunication
which is exercised in the name & power of CHRIST, which only belongeth
to the Church of CHRIST. Thus if the man had takē his worcke
before him, and proued as he had gonne, happely his triumphant conclusions
would not so sast haue followed; Then should he haue had
lesse to feare, and more to reioyce of his doings, wheras now his reckonyng
& iudgment are yet behinde. But if Mr. GIFFARD would vouchsalf
to take his aduersaries into the field with him before the fight, and
giue them leaue to bring and vse their owne vveapons, then (seing he
vvill needes haue the question now generall of the whole Church of
England, and our argument after a scholastical maner) let yt be thus touching
this Second Transgression:
               
               Where all the prophane and vngodly are receiued into and reteined
in the Church as members therof, there cannot be
said the true established Church of CHRIST.
               But in the Church of ENGLAND all the prophane multitudes
& vngodly of the land were receiued into & are reteined
in their Church as members therof.
               Therfore the Church of ENGLAND in this estate cannot be
saide the true established Church of CHRIST.
               THe first Proposition is cōfirmed through the whole Bible from the
beginning to the end;Exod. 2. 5. 6. The Church of God hauing alwaies consisted

of a select peculiar people,1 Pet. 2. 9. caled & separated from the prophane
of the worlde;Ioh. 15. 19. None entring into CHRISTS Church but by a voluntarie
profession of their true faith and obedience;Act 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   Or standing longer
there, then they keepe the same faith & obedience. The second Proposition
may be proued by way of argument thus. Where all were receyued
into the Church without any separation at the first gathering
therof, and they haue not the power of CHRIST to caste forth any by
orderly excōmunication, there all the prophane multitudes may iustly
be said to be receiued into and reteined in the bozome and bodie of
the Church. But in the Church of England al the prophane multitudes
of the land were together without difference or separation receiued into
the Church, neither haue they the power of CHRIST orderly to cast
forth any by true excommunication. Therfore al the prophane multitudes
are truly said to be receiued into, and to be reteined in the bozome
and bodie of their Church. This aucthor his two exceptions
to the first Proposition of the repelled from the Sacraments, and such is
depart of them-selues, no waye diminish the truth, or hynder the
course therof. For the suspended, they still remaine members of their
Church. For such Papists, Hereticks, & Schismaticks as depart of themselues,
though they ought also to be cast out by orderly Excommunication, yet are
they not nor can be in this their Church so cast out, howe infectious
and wicked soeuer they be, because they haue not the power and excommunication
of CHRIST amongst them. So that nowe all the controuersie
wil be about the second Proposition, whether the Church of
England haue receaued in al the prophane, & whether yt haue the power
of our Lord IESVS CHRIST to cast forth any by true excommunication.
Thus far forth it is manifest & cannot be denyed, That the whole land,
euē al the Queenes subiects at the beginning of ouer Queene ELISABETHES
reigne, were all at one instant receyued as members into this Church,
this Ministrie, Worship, Sacraments, Ordinance &c set ouer them indifferently.
Since, al their seede without exception of any, whether Papiste,
Heretick, Atheist, Witch, Coniurer &c, are baptized in this their
Church: What then should let vs to affirme and conclude, That all the
prophane of the lande are receyued into the bodie of bozome of this
Church, if so be that there then were at the beginning of her Maiesties
reigne, or now are, anie prophane in the land? Wherfore he must either
mainetayne that there haue not beene since this our Queenes reigne, and
now presently are not any prophane & open vngodly in the land; Or
ells cōfesse his Church guiltie of this Transgression, for receyuing in al the
wicked & propha
                     •
                  e into their Church. Neither wil all the Deuils sophistrie,
his ra
                     •
                  ling, accusing, blaspheming of Christs faithful seruantes
& witnesses of heresie, intrusion into Gods iudgmēt seate, sauadge and
desperate rending vp the Lordes tender plantes, yea of whole christian
assemblies help the matter, excuse him, or chardge vs.
               We hold al such prophane, as either are not yet come to the true faith
& obedience of Christ by outward profession, or are departed from the

true faith and obedience of CHRIST, remayning obstinate and hardned
in transgression or error. And this second sort although the Church
should neglect or refuse, to cast them out by excommunication. We hold,
that only such as voluntarily make a true profession of faith, and vowe
of their obedience,Math. 3. 6. and as in the same faith & obedience seeke the cō
                  munion
and fellowship of the faithfull,Acts. 2. 41. are to be receaued as members
into the Church: And that only the child
                     •
                  en of such by the one Parent
are to be baptized.1 Cor. 7. 14. We hold furder, that howsoeuer the dearest
children of God doe & may fal, yet are they still 
                     •
                  enued by repentance:
And that all such as continue obstinate in their sinne after due admonition,
are not by vs to be esteemed faithfull, but to be held wicked &
prophane, although the Church should refuse to cast them out. This
vve hope in anie christian or sober iudgment will not be founde, To
call all suche prophane and to condemne them as infidells which professe
the faith truly, and cōtinue outwardly obedient, although in some
weaknes and infirmities, as this malitious accuser falsly sclandereth
vs. Nether shall we be founde to intrude into Gods iudgment seate,
to rend and teare vp the weake plantes in desperate and sauadge maner,
vvhilest we affirme those rowtes and multitudes of Atheistes; Papists,
Idolatros,1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. heretickes, blasphemers, extortioners, wronge-doers,
couetous, proude, vayne, and light persons, glottons, dronckardes, adulterers,
bawdes, whores, and whoremasters, theiues, murderers, and
other such like flagitious vngodly persons, which were receiued into
and are retayned in their Church as members, to be esteamed amongst
the wicked and prophane of the world, and not as the right plants &
true members of the Church in this estate. We are taught to knowe
and iudge the tree by the fruictes, and easily can discerne these Vines
of SODOME from the Lordes Vines, these stincking weedes, these nettles,
thornes, thistles, from the Lordes pleasant plantes, the sweet incense
trees,Cant. 4. 13. 14. oliue, pome-granate, figge trees of the Lordes walled Orcharde
of his Church:E
                        •
                     ay. 60. 21. We cannot mistake the mountaines of these
Leopardes and Wolues, for CHRISTES sheepfold; the cages of these
vncleane and hatefull birdes,Cant. 4. 8. for the holie assemblie of Sainctes: Neither
may vve nowe flatter and dissemble contrarie to the evident
truth of God,Reuel. 18. 2. and our owne conscience, to iu
                     •
                  tifie and blesse the wicked,
to call the churle liberall, to saye to the wicked they are righteous,Esay. 32. 5.
and to them that despise the Lorde they shall haue peace, as this
vvretched man doth for his bellye.Prou. 24. 24. Who being in league with his
Ordinarie, and in couenante with Hell, is not ashamed to stand a
Priest of all these abhominations to the most abhominable,Ezech. 13. 18. seeking
to pleade for and iustifie both;Ierem. 18. terming these rowtes of all sortes of
wicked vngodly persons, the Sainctes; the assemblies of them, the
Church and sheep-fold of CHRIST; calling the most hateful and horrible
sinnes they daylie commit, but their infirmities and weaknes; the
most execrable blasphemies and idolatries, but the spotts & bleamishes
of their Church. What then shall we iudge of their sinners and

sinnes if these be their Saincts, infirmities, bleamishes? But there are
none so bad as we that speake against these holie assemblies of these
Sainctes, and that for these their bleamishes, infirmities &c. Al that
feare God may tremble at our intollerable wickednes (Mr. Giffard saith)
That teare vp these weake plātes, yea whole assemblies that vnfeinedly
sorrowe and mourne for their sinnes, and studie to please God. We are
they that take vpon vs to plucke vp al the darnel, though we be commaunded
the contrarie, lest we plucke vp the wheate Math. 13. What
spirit leadeth vs, and possesseth him and his Church, as also how they
sorrowe and mourne for their sinnes, Let th'ocasions of these controuersies
betwixt vs, their tyrannie, our sufferings, and this his present
writing declare. Wee blame, and witnesse against manie most heynous
& horrible sinnes. So far are they from acknowledging the same, that
they wil not be confessed amongst the bleamishes of his Church. Yea
insteade of repētance they persecute, he blasphemeth, and in euerie sentence
of his booke casteth at vs in his furie these his fire-brandes, poysoned
arrowes, and deadly dartes, wherwith his whole Booke is seasoned
insteade of better grace, and al for shewing & admonishing them
of their sinnes. Vnto this place. Mat. 13. which he bringeth against vs
for plucking vp the tares, he must acknowledge these his weake plātes
euen al the prophane multitudes & deluge of people, to be those tares,
or ells he cannot vse yt against vs, or blame vs for plucking them vp.
This if he confesse, then can they not be held in this estate the children
of the kingdome, that tender wheate, that blossomed and made fruite.
Then hath he granted vs as much cōcerning this poynte as we require,
yea and iudged them as far as we iudge; which is not concerning their
future, but their present estate. Their election or reprobation we leaue
to that great hous-holder the maker and iudge of all, conteyning our
selues within the rules of his reuealed worde, whose iudgmēts we cannot
lighten, or pronownce the wicked innocent; against whose iudgmēts who so spurne or resist, but stomble at that rocke which wil grind
them to powder. If Mr. Giffard vnderstand the field in this place to be
the Church, he choseth rather to insist in the errour of others, then in
th'exposition of our Sauiour himself; who saith, verse. 38. That the field is
the worlde, the good seede are those Children of the kingdome, but the tares are the Children of
the wicked one If yt should be vnderstoode of the planted Church, then
were al the rules, ordinances, censures, and gouernment of the Church
vtterly abolished. Thē might al be receiued in, and none at anie tyme
for anie offence cast out of the Church &c. Then also could not the
ciuile Maiestrate put anie offendor to death, for that were to roote out
the Tares. Neither can these Tares be vnderstoode of those hypocrites
whose sinnes appeare not; for then could not the Disciples discerne,
iudge, and seeke to roote them vp. Or being so vnderstoode, be compared
to those multitudes of prophane, whose heynous sinnes are manifest.
Let the Tares then be the children of the wicked one, and not the
Sainctes of CHRIST: Let the tares be in the worlde, and not in the

Church, seing our Sauiour himself so pronounceth them, and instructeth
his disciples so to thinck of them. Yet let not his disciples in anie
inordinate zeale seeke to roote them vp, seing they haue nothing to
doe to iudge them that are without.1. Cor. 5. 12. 13. But let them rather by al meanes
seeke their ingrafting, in instructing them inal gentlenes, if so be that
God at anie tyme wil giue them repentance to the acknowledging of2. Tim. 2▪ 25
the truth, that they also may be partakers of the like mercie and grace
with them.
               WHat then hath Mr. Giffard gayned by this place? That the opē prophane
& such as neuer made true voluntarie profession of their
owne faith (other then that prescript verbal confession which is enioyned
to them al in their Seruice-booke, which a childe of 4. yeeres olde may
say after the Priest as wel as they) may be receaued into the Church.
Or that al sortes of open wicked grosse impenitent offendors may be
reteyned in the Church as members. This he must proue, or ells all
that he saith is nothing to the purpose, seing we chardge their Church
as heynously guilty of, and wilfully obstinate in these transgressions.
But insteade of prouing, he slilie seeketh to chāge the question, by turning
yt from these open prophane and wicked, to Hypocrites & wicked
persons which remaine in the Church, whose children he saith
ought to be baptized. Wherin, besides 
                     •
                  hat he beggeth the question,
assuming in a stronge imagination that which he shal neuer be able to
proue, That these parish assemblies are the true plāted and established
Churches of CHRIST, and these vngodly multitudes
true members therof, he furder so doubleth and windeth betwixt
these two starting holes, the hypocrites, and the prophane, as one cannot
knowe whereto find him, or wherof he affirmeth. It being graunted
that the children of hypocrites ought to be baptized, he wil 
                     •
                  hervpon
conclude, that the childrē of the prophane also. Which if yt be denied,
then he wil make no conscience to giue out, that we denie baptisme to
the seede of Hypocrites in the Church. Thus standing vpon no
grownde, he flitcheth & fleeteth vp and downe, seeking in an euil consciēce
to shifte off the truth wherwith he is pressed. First presupposing
that al these multitudes of prophane & wicked are within the Church:
Then endevouring to proue that al the children of such prophane and
wicked as he termeth within the Church and to professe Christ, ought
to be baptized. Wherin, before we come to the consideration of his
reasons, we must note vnto the reader in his Proposition expresse contrarietie,
error, and sacriledge: Contrariety, in that he with the same
mouth in the same sentēce pronounceth them as prophane & wicked,
and also as faithful and members of the Churh, such to whom the Covenante
and the seales therof belonge. Error, in that he thus iudgeth
and blasphemeth them, if they be faithful & members of the Church:
As on the contrarie if they be prophane & wicked, to iustifie their profession
whilest they are obstinate in such sinnes; Yea furder to harden
them therin, to giue the seale of the Couenante vnto their children in

respect of their profession, which cānot be donne without open & wilful
sacriledge; for if they be to be iudged prophane & wicked, then are
their children also (vntil they make profession of their owne faith) to
be held of vs as prophane; the deuised writtē professiō of their Church
cannot sanctifie or iustifie either the one or the other vnto vs. Moreouer,
the Church cannot denie to receaue those Parents or that Parent
vnto the communion of the Supper, whose infantes they baptize
in that estate. And thus by Mr. Giffards diuinitie may the bodie and
bloude of Christ be prostitute to the open prophane and wicked, whom
he thus proueth within the Couenant.
               THe interest of Gods Couenant (saith he) doth not depend vpō their
next Parents, but vpon the antient christiās their fore-Fathers. For
when God saith, I wilbe thie God and the God of thie seede, the promise
is made to a thousand generations. Exod. 20▪
                   So Leui paied tithes
vnto Melchi-sedec because he was the loynes of Abraham: Yea al the whole
nation of the Iewes were in the loynes of Abraham, and therfore holie &
within the Couenant: For if the first fruictes be holy, so is the lumpe;
if the roote be holy, so are the boughes Rom. 11. Yea though manie of
them were wicked, idolatros, reprobates, yet euen in the worst tymes
were they Circumcised, and yt was not disalowed. But the Lorde caleth
the children of those wicked idolators his children. Thou hast taken
thie Sonnes & thie Daughters which thou broughtest fourth vnto me▪ and sacrificed vnto them
to be consumed: thou hast slaine my Sonnes and giuen them, by causing them to passe through
vnto them. Ezech. 16. 21.
               BEhold into how manie errors, mischieues, and blasphemies they fal,
which in this maner spurne & striue against the truth, euerie worde
becomming a snare vnto them to hold & drawe them vnto their greater
iudgments. If th'interest in Gods Couenant (as being the seed of
the faithful vnto the sight of the Church) depend not vpon the faith
of the next parents, but vpon the antient christians their fore-Fathers
within a thow
                     •
                  and generations &c, Then ought al to be receaued, and
none to be kept or caste out of the Church; Then is the whole world
within the Couenant, of the Church, holie▪ al being 
                     •
                  pronge within
far lesse then a thowsand generations of manie faithful, and lineallie
come from the Patriarck Noah, Then ought by this rule the Israelites
vnder the lawe to haue circumcised all their captiue Can
                        ••
                     nites and
heathen that came into their power, Then ought the Church nowe
also to baptize all the seede euen of the most wicked and vngodlie,
whether Turcks, Papists, Idolators &c, because they are all 
                     •
                  pronge of
faithful Parents within lesse then a thousand generations. But because
we reade in the Scriptures that Gods Couenant only belongeth
vnto the faithful, and the seales of his couenant are nowe only committed
to his true established Church; Seinglawes & rules are giuē by
God vnto the Church, to whom, and how to administer the faid seales;
Seing none can enter into this Church, but by this true outward profession
of faith & obedience, neither anie remaine lōger there, thē they

keepe the said faith and obedience outwardly; Seing baptisme only
belongeth and is giuen to the members of this Church and vnto their

                     •
                  eede, and can to none other be giuē without heynouse sinne and sacriledge,
We doubt not to pronownce and reiect these doctrines of this
false Prophet, as most blasphemous and diuelish. As 
                     •
                  ending to the
open breach of al Gods lawes and ordinances, to th'vtter abolishing of
the truth and feare of Gods iudgments, to the taking away of al faith
and godlines out of the earth, to the bringing in of al Atheisme & confusion,
to the prostituting and prophaning of the holie things of God.
And therfore al true Christians by the commandment of God are to
auoide and hold accursed the aucthor and bringer of such doctrines,Gal. 1. 8
and so much the rather,
                     
                        •
                      Ihon. 10 in that he so wretchedly and bouldly falsifieth,
dismembreth, peruerteth, and abuseth the holie Scriptures
thervnto.
               AS to proue that the Couenant dependeth not vpon the outward
faith of the parents, but vpon the faith of their godlie ancestors, he
voucheth. Exod. 20. I wil be thy God and the God of thy Seede, the promise is made
(saith he) to a thousand generations: But he wittingly suppresseth the
next wordes of the sentence [of them that lo
                        •
                     e me and Keepe mie Commandements]
which shewe to whom this Couenant is made and belongeth, and the
conditiō on our part. As the former part of this sentēce verse. 5. sheweth
howe we may forfeite this Couenant, Namelie, by breaking and
cōtemning the lawe of God, in whose loue we cannot remaine, except
we remaine in his obedience. Iohn. 14. 21. & 15. 10. So that the Lorde
most plainely in this Exod, 20. 5. & 6. verses declareth who & whose seede
are within his Couenant of loue and protection. Namely, the faithful
& their ofspring to the thousand generation, so long as they contynue
in his faith and obedience. But if they breake his lawe and wil not be
reduced to his obedience, then are they and their children caste out of
his fauour, then as a iealous God wil he visit their sinnes vpō their children
vpon the thirdes & fourthes &c. How boldly & presumptuously
then hath this wicked man without al conscience & feare, falsified this
Scripture in suppressing what parts therof he list, dismembring & rending
what he alleadgeth from the natural cōtext, peruerting and abusing
these wordes [to a thousand generations] quite against th'expresse sense
of God himselfe, receiuing the children of the open wicked and vngodly
(which the Lord reiecteth together with their rebellious Parents)
into the outward Couenant of his grace, and deliuering the seale
therof vnto them by vertue of this place, because some of their fore-Fathers
haue bene faithful, and the Couenant is made to a thousand
generations. As though the Lord plighteth his loue to vs, and requireth
not agayne our faith and obedience vnto him in the same Couenant.
Let Mr. Giffard shewe one place of Scripture through the whole
Bible where the Lorde his Couenāt is made vnto vs without this condition,
and then peradventure he may cleare himself & his Ordinarie
for the publishing of this wicked and diuelish heresie, so directly contrarie

to the vvhole Scriptures in more then a thousand places. For to
vvhat end should the Lorde haue giuen vnto vs his holy vvord, if he
had not required of vs our heartie obedience vnto the same? But because
the Lorde is neuer founde contrarie vnto himself, neither anie
contradiction in his worde, we may by the direct warrant hereof hold
Mr. GIFFARD and his Ordinarie most heynouse falsifiers and corrupters
of the whole lawe and worde of God, most blasphemous and pernitious
false Prophets, That receiue into the couenant and iustifie all
sortes of prophane, wicked, and vngodly persons: And so open the
doores to all Atheisme and impietie. His starting hole and subterfuge
of vndiscouered hypocrites will not hide or help him herein, seing we
complayne That the open prophane and all sortes of the most wicked and their seede
vvithout exception of anie are receiued amongct them as members of their Church, And
seing he endeuoureth to approue the same by manie other Scriptures.
               AL Israel (saith he) was in the loynes of Abraham, all in the Couenant,
and holy with him as the boughes with the roote, all within the
Church by outward profession, and esteemed members therof, because
the seedes of Abraham. Yea though multitudes of them were infidells
and idolators, yet euen of them sprang the right holie seed, And
therfore, as also because of their outwarde profession, were all of them
held members, al holie; And all their children (in the tymes when idolatrie
was openly mainetayned) were circumcised, and that was not
disalowed &c.
               WE doubt not, speaking of al Israel in generall without anie perticular
reference vnto this or that tyme or estate, but that Nation
was a peculiar, chosen,Exod. 19. 5. 6. adopted people aboue all other Nations vnto
the Lorde,Rom. 9. that they might be an holie Nation vnto him, a kingdome
of Priestes &c, of whom the adoption, the glorie, the Couenantes, the
giuing of the lawe, the seruice, and the promises. We ackowledge also
that the Israel of God according to th'election of grace are all of them
holy with their fore-Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, as the lumpe with
the first fruictes, the boughes with the roote. But yet we acknowledge
not all to be that Israel which are of Israel, neither all the children of
the Couenant which are the seede of Abraham.
                  Iohn. 8. But they are the children
of Abraham and of his couenant which doe the worckes,Rom. 4. and remayne
in the faith of Abraham.
                  Rom. 2. 25. Otherwise their circumcision is made
vnto them vncircumcision; neither doe their literall titles and prerogatiues
any whit auaile them, but rather agrauate their iudgments
whilest they are founde transgressers of the lawe. The Couenant
doubtles was not otherwise made vnto them then it was vnto their Father
Abraham. To whom yt was said be thou vpright and vvalke streight before
me.
                  Genes. 17. How often doth the Lord at the giuing of his lawe, and the entring
couenant with the whole people stipulate and require their faith and
obedience, when he promiseth to be their God and the God of

their seede? How oft doth he pronownce the Couenant broken and
disanulled on their partes, when they transgresse & reiect his lawe, and
denownce of his part all plagues and feareful iudgments for the same
euerie where through the lawe & Prophets, but most plentifully in the
booke of Deutronomie?
                  Deut. 29. 19 Protesting plagues against such as when they
heare the wordes of this oath, blesse themselues in their heart saying
they shal haue peace, although they walke according to the stobbornnes
of their owne heart. How then should these friuolous reasons of
this ignorant cauiller stand? That because the Lorde speaking generally
and indefinitely of his first chosing and receiuing that people,
sometimes caleth all Israel his people, a holy Nation &c, Therfore all
Israel in all tymes and estates of that kingdome should alwaies be his
true visible Church, within the Couenant &c. This we see were directly
contrary to the whole lawe and Prophetts. Should it followe
that because the Lorde reserueth in and draweth out of the loynes of
the wicked his right holy seede, that therfore the Parents are within
God his Couenant? Thus might the Turckes, Iewes, and most wicked
of the world be iustified, because the Lorde his secret electiō is not
restreyned towardes them. Should it followe that because all the Israelites
were alwaies circumcised, that therfore they were within the
Couenant, or were not blamed, or did not amisse in prophaning God
his holy ordinance? So might the Is
                        ••
                     elites, Ammoni
                        •
                     es, Edomites, and Moabites
be said within the Couenant, because their ancestours and they
were circumcised. We see outward circumcision auaileth not, when
the condicion of the couenant is broken. And how could this bolde
blinde guide saye, that it was not disalowed when all their children
were circumcised in the tymes when idolatrie was generally and publiquely
maineteyned? Are such idolators within the Couenant of the
Lord, or doth the seale of his couenant belonge to them? Are not the
children of the wicked excepted and reiected out of the couenant by
the commandement of God Exod. 20. 5. as the seede of the faithfull are
receiued into the couenante? Then must it needes be high presumption
& sacriledge thus to abuse circumcisiō, and therfore yt could not
be allowed in those times to such persons. Moreouer, when these wicked
are forbidden so much as to name the name of God,Psal. 
                        •
                     0. 16. to bring any
offrings or worship vnto him,Esay. 1. and 66. or to meddle with anie of his holy Ordinances,
are they not forbidden circumcision?
               Should we also collect and conclude, because the Lorde Ezech. 16. 20.
21. caleth the children of those Idolators whom they offred to M
                        •
                     lech,
his Sonnes and Daughters, That therfore the kingdomes of Israel &
Iuda whilest they remayned in these horrible sinnes, were outwardly
in that estate the true Church of God? Or is this great Prophet so inconversant
in the Scripture, that he yet vnderstandeth not this vsuall
kinde of phrase and maner of speaking, where the Lord in sondrie
places caleth them his sonnes, daughters, and people in respect of their
first caling, whom in regard of their present euill life he pronownceth

not to be his. As Deutronomie. 32. the 19. and 5 verse. Micha. 2. 7. 8, 9. Amos. 8. 2.
and no where more plainely then in this Ezech. 16. as were easie to demonstrate
by the least touching of the argument of that chapter; The
Lorde there setting before their face by sondry Allegories their estate,
euen from their original vnto that present time. Of what parents the
                     •
                  
by nature sprange, in what plight he founde them at the first, all embrued
in their mothers and their owne guiltines, their navel vncut, vnwashed,
vnsalted, vnswaded, caste out into the open field, no hand to
help, no eye to pitie, vnable to help themselues vntill the Lord shewed
mercye, tooke them vp, chearished, nourished them, entred into couenant
and sware vnto them, so that they grewe vp into riper yeeres,
then he spredd his garment ouer them, washed and anoynted them,
clothed them with broydred garmentes, fyne lynnen, silck, skarlet,
adorned them with gold, siluer, pretious stones▪ fed them with meale,
wyne, oyle, set a beautifull Crowne vpon their heade, and maried
them openly vnto himself, and spredd their name amongest the heathen.
But nowe Israel waxed proude of her owne beautie, plaid the
Harlot, built high places, and decked them with her garments, and
plaid the whoore vpon them, made images of th'instruments and of
the Lordes gold and siluer which he gaue them, and committed fornication
with them, offring the Lordes meate, flower, oyle vnto them
as a sweet sauour, yea sacrificed their owne Sonnes and Daughters vnto
them, committed fornication with the Egiptians, Assi
                        •
                     ians, Caldeans, and
that in most shamefull sorte, and vilely hyring them with the Lordes
gold & siluer of his Temple &c. Wherfore the Lord doth pronownce
and repudiate them as an Harlot, as a most filthie, poysonous, monstruous
whore,Genes. 9. and denownceth iudgments against them as against
murtherers and adulterers,Deut. 22. 22 and these iudgments to be executed by
these their louers, who should breake downe their Cities and high
places, and slay them with the sworde, the Lorde not only comparing
them, but shewinge them to excede SODOME and SAMARIA in sinne
& iniquitie &c. Who then but this perverse fellowe could thus stomble
and cauill at these wordes My Sonnes and my Daughters, and vvrest them
not onely against the whole scope of that Chapter, but euen of the
whole Bible? Whether these wordes be to be vnderstoode of all their
seede which were at the first together with them receiued into the
Lordes Couenant▪ or of their first borne only, which by a peculiar right
& lawe were reserued vnto the Lorde Exod. 13. 2. (which first borne they
are blamed in the 20. Chapter of the same prophecie verse. the 26. and
31. to haue offred vnto Idols) may be some question. Yet with no
sense or truth they may be vnderstood as of the Lordes elect and adopted
childeren, or pronownced that holie seede, being the children
of such rebellious obstinate idolators. How often doth the Lord
call them by his Prophets rebellious children, an adulterous Nation? should
vve therefore conclude, that they vvere the Lordes children, the
Lordes spouse? Or rather pronownce from the iust lawes of the

Lorde, That rebellious children, and th'adulterous wife ought to be
produced, repudiat, and put to death. Deut. 21. 18. Leu. 20. 10. Furder we
reade the Lorde to denownce extraordinarie & speedie iudgments not
only against them that offer of their 
                     •
                  eede vnto Moleth, but against that
whole Nation that dissembleth or suffreth that sinne amongst them.
Leuit. 20. How then could this ignorant Priest collect & cōclude from
these wordes My Sonnes & my Daughters (which were spoken but to convince
& agrauate their sinne and iudgment, to stimulate and wounde
their conscience) that these children of these idolators, thus offred to
Molech, were of vs to be iudged the holy seede of the Lord within his couenant,
Or these idolators in this estate to be iudged the true Church
of God? Can they together serue God and Idols? together breake and
keepe the Couenant? If Mr. GIFFARD can by his learning proue this
true, then peradvēture we shal beliue him that y• kingdome of Israel in
their schisme & defection hauing erected new Temples, Priests, Altars,
Lawes, were defyled with all the abhominations of the heathen, despised
& persequ
                     •
                  ted the Lorde his Prophets which were sent to them
&c, were to be held of vs the true Church of God. Then peraduenture
he might persuade vs that the kingdome of Iud
                        •
                     
                   in this apostasye, hauing
as this Prophet Ezech. sheweth in his 8. Chapter brought al maner
abhomination into the Temple & defiled the whole land as we reade
in the rest of his prophecie, was also by vs to be esteemed the true
Church of God. Is it a good reason for Mr. Giffard to say, because the
whole land was so throughly defiled, that it could neither by ecclesiasticall
censures, nor by ciuile iudgmentes be purged, that therfore yt remayned
still the Church in that estate? Is not this to say they had not
thus sinned, because their sinnes were incuriable? That they had not
committed adulterie, murder, idolatrie, because they were not presently
stoned, slayne by the sworde, burned? But howsoeuer they & their
false Prophets blessed themselues in these sinns boasting of vaine titles
of The Temple and People of the Lord 
                  Ier. 9. 13. 14. 15. yet the Lorde for those sinnes did in
his due tymes execute these iudgmentes vpon the whole Land;Ier. 7. 4. and in
the meane tyme his lawe & Prophetes spake plainely,Ier. 28. 8. 9 That these iudgmentes
were due vnto them in this estate. And as wel might this false
Prophet iustifie the Iewes nowe to be the true Church of God in this
time of their Apostasy (wherof he speaketh) because the Lorde nowe amongst
and in the loynes of these wicked ones reserueth to himself an
holy seede, a remnant. It wil not help him to say That the vyrie-yarde
was not then vtterly take from the Iewes, as it is now. For though the
Lordes time to abolish that material Ierusalem that he might bring in
& erect the Spirituall, was not as then accomplished, Though y• Lord
in his wisedome, mercy, and patience, and for causes knowen to himself,
doe oft deferr his iudgmentes; yet may not we therby flatter our
selues, or iustifie our estate whilest we remaine vnder the condemnation
of his written lawe, and in open wilfull breach of his Couenant.
Yea howsoeuer the Lorde nowe hath vtterly broken off the

Iewes for their sinnes & infidelitie,Rom. 11. that the Gentiles might be gathered
and grafted in by faith, Yet is the Lord in his greatest wrath alwaies
mindeful of his mercy, and hath set a tyme whē to cal & ingraff againe
the Iewes, that al Israel might be saued, and brought into one shepefold,
as yt is written. But in the meane tyme it is no reason to say, That
because the Lorde euen in the worst tymes alwaies reserueth a remnāt
in his mercy, Therfore these wicked people in those euil tymes are
his visible Church. Or because the Lorde in the Loynes af the most
wicked hath a holie seede according to his secret election, That therfore
these wicked parents are in the visible Church, or their ofspring
vnder the outward couenant. Yet are these Mr. Giffards best Argumēts
to proue Israel in their open schisme & idolatrye, and Iuda in their open
Apostasy and idolatrie to be the true outward Church, whervnto the
Seales of the outward couenant belonged and were giuen euen to the
seede of the greatest Idolator. Yea the schisme, apostasy, idolatry, prophanation
of the holie things of God amongst these Iewes & Israelites,
are the best and onlie groundes he hath, or bringeth to approue & iustifie
the corrupt estate of the Church of ENGLAND, and that the
seed of their prophane Idolators ought to be baptized:
               Saue that at lēgth he hath founde out a merueylous knot in a rush,
and of the same made such a share for his Br
                        •
                     wnistes, as they must needes
either confesse the baptisme of their Church to be a signe of the couenant,
And so they all from their ancestors and their whole Church are
within the couenant, Or ells if they denie it, fal into the heresie of the
Catabaptistes, and make themselues also without the couenant, or
ells to haue a couenant without seales. But now if he wil giue vs leaue
to vnlose this knot, we must desire him to learne to put a difference betwixt
false Sacraments and true Sacraments, and againe betwixt false
Sacraments and no Sacramēts. The false Church hath her hyd bread
and stollen waters her false Sacramēts.Prou. 9. The Israelites in their schisme,
and the Iewes in their apostasie stil had and vsed Circumci
                        •
                     ion. This Circumcision
was no true Sacrament vnto them, neither sealed the Lordes
couenant vnto them in that estate. Yet was this circumcision true circumcision
concerning the outward cutting, and was vpon their repentance
and retourne neither defaced nor reiterat, but they were restored
againe to the Temple and receiued to the Passouer,2 Cr
                        ••
                     . 30 As wee reade in
Ezechias and Iosiahs tymes, as also after the retourne out of Babilon. In
like maner in this general apostasie and defection from the Gospel (so
much fore-told in CHRISTES Testament) the baptisme contynued and
vsed in these Apostatical and false Churches cannot in this estate thus
administered &c be said a true Sacrament, or seale of Gods couenant
vnto them: Yet concerning the outward washing yt is true baptisme,
and vpon their repentance and restoring to the Church the outward
actiō need not & ought not to be againe repeated after th'abuse therof
in the false Church is purged away by true repentance. Yet iustifie we
not hereby anie thing donne in the false Church, but cal all men by all

meanes from the same, willing their whole worship to be repented of
& left, and forbidding al men vpon incurring the Lords heauie indignation
to offer & bring their children vnto the false Church to be baptized,
exhorting them rather patiently to expect, and diligently to seeke
out & repaire vnto the true Church of CHRIST, where at the handes of
Christes true Ministers they may receiue the true seales of his couenant
vnto their comfortes. Yea assuring them, that whilest they refreyne
from that which they knowe to be euil, and with true heartes sprinckled
from an euil conscience, diligently seeke to doe the wil of God
as he offreth meanes, they & their seede are within the couenant of
God,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 5, although through the iniquitie of the tymes they be stil restreyned
for a ceason from hauing outward baptisme, so that they neither
neglect or contemne, much lesse abuse and prophane of heauenly an
ordinance.
               THus this learned Diuine hauing (as you haue heard) bestowed all
his labour and long studie to proue the kingdomes of Israel and of
Iuda in their schisme and apostasy to be the true Church, yet to make
the matter more clea
                     •
                  e and the more easie for the Church of England,
he wil also proue her mother of Rome to be the true Church of CHRIST,
Because the Brownis
                        •
                     es hold that this land in the tyme of Poperie was
not the true Church of CHRIST▪ and that nowe they are but confuse
multitudes not rightly 
                     •
                  ntred into couenant with God. This that
he may doe, he holdeth it not enough to affirme with other learned
Diuines, That the invisible Church of GOD is in the Papacye, as
in all other places of the world; because God hath his elect there and
in al other places: But he (to be singular) inverteth the Proposition
and saith, That the Papacy with the whole apostasie, and all their
abhominations, and al that receiue the Beastes marcke and worship
his image, are in the Church, because Antichrist doth sit in the Temple
of God. Thus whilest he without al vnderstanding or feare (after his
accustomed presumption) peruerteth and wresteth the Scriptures
from their holie sense according to his owne lust, no merueile though
GOD giue him vp into a reprobate sense, and suffer him to drawe
these heretical doctrines and damnable conclusions from the same,
to the destruction of himself and of as manie as receiue his doctrines,
If Antichrist may be said to sitt, reigne, and remaine in the Church of
God,Hebr. 1. Then CHRIST is not made heire and Lorde of all, and set as
Kinge vpon Mounte Sion.
                     Psal. 2. Then CHRIST is either cast out of his
house,1. Cor. 6. 15 or made subiect vnto ANTICHRIST, or diuideth with him.
Then the Church of CHRIST maie remaine subiect vnto, and be
gouerned by Antichrist. Then the Church of Christ may stand vnder &
be subiect vnto two heades,Eph. 1. 21 CHRIST and Antichrist. Then CHRIST is not
the onlie head of the Church. If Antichrists Ministers & marcked seruants
maie be brought into & set ouer the Church of God,Eph. 4. then is not
CHRISTS Ministrie which he hath instituted to his Gospel and hisRom. 12.
Church,Hebr. 12. 28 permanent vnto the worldes end, but variable at the wil of

man. Then may the Church of God caste out Christes Ministrie, and receiue
Antichrists. If Antichristes doctrines & lawes may be brought, set vp,
& remaine in the Church,Deut. 18. Thē 
                  Christ is not the onlie Prophet & Lawegiuer,Eph. 2. 20
Then may the Church be builte vpon an other foundatiō then
vpon Gods worde. If al Antichristes abhominations, heresies, idolatries
may be brought into & remaine in the Church of God, Then no blasphemie,
heresie,Esa. 57. 21 apostasie or anie thing that man cā commit or deuise,
cā breake the couenant,1 Cor. 10. 20 Thē may the Church of God & Idols be placed
together.Reu. 14. 9 10. If they that worship the Beast & his Image may be said
to be in the Church of God, and their seede outwardly within the couenant,
Thē the most abhominable and execrable may be said in thisReue. 21. 8
estate members of Christ,
                  Reu. 22. 15 washed & purged with Christ his bloude, sanctified
and led by his Sprit in assurance of saluation.Rom. 8. For none can be
said to be within the Church, but the members of the Church. And
whomsoeuer we may affirme to be within the Church, those (so longe
as they contynue in that estate) we are also to iudge assuredly saued, for
anie thing to vs reuealed or knowen to the contrarie. But if al these be
most diuelish heresies directly contrarie to the whole truth of God, if
they be most execrable blasphemies, such as christians abhor but to
heare, Thē let the aucthors and spreaders of these doctrines tremble,
for feareful iudgments remayne them.
               HIs slie distinctiō or euasion rather wherby he diuideth the Church
of Rome into two parts, the Pope and his adherents, And the nations
vnder the tyrannie of the Pope, doth rather bewray the thick darcknes
of his heart (wherin he is held with chaynes vnto iudgment) and his
giddye amazednes, then anie way clea
                     •
                  e him of these heresies and blasphemies
aforesaid. His first vnderstāding of the Church of Rome is the
Pope, his lawes, his worship which hath bene deuised by himself, his
adherents and al that worship him or receiue his marcke. These (he
saith) are the Apostasie seduced to damnation, and not the Church of
CHRIST, otherwise then thus, that the Pope, the Cardinals, and al that
worship the Bea
                     •
                  t be false christiās by profession, bredd in the Church
and contynuing in yt, their seede not excluded from the Couenant.
What a delphick Orakle is this? What strange repugnancie & contradiction
is here betwixt euerie worde of this his cleare Proposition? How
can the Pope and his adherēts be said to be that Apostasy seduced to damnation,
not the Church of CHRIST, and yet by the same mouth in the
same sentence at one and the same instant be pronownced to contynue
in the Church, and their seede not be excluded from the outward couenant?
Can they be said to be vtterly departed from the faith, from
Christ, from his Church (which is meant by this word Apostasy) and yet to
remaine in the Church? How hangs this together? May they be pronounced
seduced to damnation, and not the Church of Christ, and yet
both they remayne in the Church, and their seede not to be excluded
from the seale of the couenant? There ought none to remayne in the
Church, but such as are by outward profession and obediēce members

of the Church.1 Cor. 7. 14 Neither ought the childrē of anie be baptized in their
infancie, except one of their Parents be a member of the Church. The
Pope then, his Cardinals and adherents remayning in the Church, their
seede thus baptized as members, seing none ells may either remayne in
the Church or be baptized, How may they thus be pronounced seduced
to damnation and not to be the Church, seing they are confessed to
be outward members of the Church?
               THe second vnderstanding of the Church of Rome, is, of al those compaines
of people ouer whom the tyrānie of the Pope hath hertofore
extended, and doth at this daye: Or those things which were giuen by
CHRIST which remaine in the same; this (he saith) is not the Church
of Rome but the Church of God. If by the people and tyrannie he here
meane such persons, as though their bodies were vnder the cruel hādes
of the Pope, his Bishops, or Prelates, yet they kept their bodies & soules
vndefiled with their idolatries and abhominations, and free from their
antichristian yoke, counterfeite Ministrie, and ministration, and haue
on the other side faithfully kept & practized the things which are giuē
by our Sauiour CHRIST in his Testament, these people indeed can
at no hand be said the Church of Rome, these are the true Church and
seruants of Christ, witnessing & fighting through the faith of the Gospel
against the Pope, the Church of Rome and al their antichristian cleargie
and religion. But what is this to proue the kingedome of ENGLAND,
or other nations which haue beene and are defiled with the idolatries
and abhominations of the Church of Rome, in that estate to be the true
Church of God, but rather the quite co
                     •
                  trarie; seing these faithful
witnesse against them, and haue no fellowship or communion with
them. The Church of Rome we reade Reuel. 17. to be caled that great
whore that sitteth vpon manie waters: That great Babylon the mother
of whoredomes & abhominations of the earth, with whom the Kings
of the earth haue committed fornication, and th'inhabitants of the
earth haue bene droncke with the wyne of her fornications mingled
vnto them in her golden cup.Reu. 13. We reade there, verse. 15. that the waters
where the whore sitteth are people & multitudes & natiōs & tongues.
We reade also that the Beast & the false Prophet shal deceaue ye people
of the earth, and cause thē to set vp & worship the image of the Beast,
and to slaye al that wil not so doe; And cause al both smale and great,
riche & poore, free & bonde, to receaue a marcke in their right hādes
or in their fore-heades; And that no mā might buy or sel, saue he that
had the marcke of the Beast. Wee reade furder more That all that receaue
the Beastes marcke that worship him or his image,Reu. 14 shal drincke
of the wyne of the wrath of God. With what shame then cā this marcked
Priest goe about to proue the Church of Rome to be y• true Church
of God? Or those nations which haue cōmitted fornication with her,
receaued her Ministrie, wares, abhominations, that haue receaued the
marcke and erected the image of the Beast, and worshipped the Beast
and his image, in this time of their poperi
                     •
                  , to be esteemed the true

Church of CHRIST. His 3 stowte reasons wil not al proue this poynte.
Though they held many poyntes of true and sounde doctrine, yet the
many heresies they held, & those (as this man himself in an other place
of his booke confesseth) Fundamental, doe poyson and leauen the whole
lumpe. There is no heretick that holdeth not some truth. As to their
holy Sacrament of Baptisme, yt being deliuered by a false ministrie,
after a false maner, with new adulterate elements of salt, oyle, chreame
&c, with their magical incantations & signes &c, and that to opē idolators,
can no waye giue them christendome, as this Popish Priest supposeth.
Or if this Baptisme in the Popish Church be an holy Sacrament
& true seale of the couenant, then would we knowe of Mr. GIFFARD
or his learned abettors, whie their other Sacrament of the Supper
or Altare should not also be held in the same accompt? Or how the
Church may be said to haue one true, holy, and auaileable Sacrament
to be receaued, an other so blasphemous and execrable as is to be abhorred,
at the same instant? Or what kinde of Couenant this is that
hath one true authenticke seale, an other forged and adulterate annexed
vnto yt? Furder also we would knowe, if the baptisme of the
Church of ROME be a true and holy Sacrament, whie they should inhibit
any from fetching the same there, and how they dare schisme
from that Church that hath the Couenant sealed and confirmed vnto
them. His second reason of some in al kingdomes that hold the faith,
is aboue shewed not to iustifie, but to condemne the Church of ROME:
But all those that had any communion with them in their worship &c
in the tyme of Poperie, cannot in this estate be said to hold the true
faith, or to be members of the Church of CHRIST. His third reason
concerning the infantes is yet as false & fonde as the rest: For neither
are the infants of these idolators by vs to be iudged holy, or to receaue
baptisme, as he himself Pag. 49. confesseth; Neither can these infantes
anie waie iustifie their wicked Parents, or the open idolatries &c of the
Romish Church.
               Againe, although it be most true that the truth was before error and
apostasie, yet herevpon it followeth not that error & apostasie are of in
the truth, as this man would conclude of Antichrist; That because he is
said to rise in the Church of God, and to sit in the Tēple of God, Therfore
the place where he now raigneth & rageth is the Church of God.
But by all these rules of the word of God we finde the Sinagogues that
Antichrist hath erected to be of the false & malignant Church, and the
Church of ROME pronownced by God himself to be that great Whore.
Howsoeuer then Antichrist might haue his original and worcke in his2 Thes. 2. 7.
mysterie in the visible Church, yet as soone as his wickednes brake out
and was apparant,Reuel. 9. 1. he forfeited his place & was to be caste fourth, as the
Angells that sinned were precipitate out of heauen,Reu. 12. 10. 11. 12. and cast headlong
into Hel. Yea those Churches that neglected thus to doe, and spared
him, in the iust iudgmēt of God lost their happie estate, became guiltie
of his sinne,Reuel. 12. 4. and partakers of his iudgment, and fel away with him.

So then this phrase of Antichrist his sitting in The Temple of God might be
much better vnderstoode, then thus grosly to affirme thervpon that
A
                        •
                     tichrist now sitteth in the Church of God. Whether we vnderstand
this his sitting in the Temple of God, as in regarde of his original before
he was reueled; Or in that he should sit where sometimes the true
Churches of CHRIST had bene,Reuel. 18. 7. which he should so destroy & waste, as
there should be no shape or steppes of any of them left vpon the earth,
as it was foretold Math. 24. 29. Reuel. 6▪
                   14. Or ells of those counterfeight
names and titles of the Temple & Church of God which the false Church
should arrogate and take vnto her self; Howsoeuer, nothing is more
sure then that all these abhominations cannot remaine in the Church
of God. And in that it is in the same verse said that Antichrist shalbe lifted
vp aboue all caled God or that hath veneration, This cannot be
donne by any Minister in the Church, seing euerie soule must be subiect.
Furder also that he should shewe himself that he is God.Rom. 13. If this
also should be lite
                     •
                  ally vnderstoode, what blasphemie will not ensue.
And aswel might it from the same verse be enforced, that Antichrist is
God, as that the place where he raigneth is the Temple of God:
               THus hauing finished his
                     •
                   cardinal reasons of Israel in their schisme,
Iuda in their apostasie, and this vniuersall falling away and corruption
in the time of Poperie, to prooue the Church of England aswell as
these the true Church of God, he at length addeth a conclusion in this
authenticall assertion of his owne. The Church of England in the tyme
of Poperie was a member of the vniuersall Church, and had not the
being of a Church of CHRIST from ROME, nor tooke not her beginning
of being a Church by separating herself from the Romish Sinagogue
&c. If he here meane that the Lord had his secret ones chosen
and knowen vnto himself in England in the tyme of Poperie which were
members of the vniuersall Church, vve graunt vvel. But what were
this to approue the generall estate of England in the tyme of Poperie
when they were throughly infected with the apostasie and idolatrie of
the Church of ROME, to be a visible member of the vniuersal church?
So that albeit they had not their being a Church from ROME, yet they
had their not being a Church from ROME, when they were defiled
with their apostasie and idolatrie. Wherfore to haue this conclusion
passe, yt had beene needfull that Mr. GIFFARD had approued & made
euident demonstratiō by the Scriptures that the Church of ENGLAND
was rightly gathered vnto and established in that holy faith and order
which CHRIST hath left vnto his Church in vniuersall and perticular
according to the rules and examples in his Testament: Then, that in
tyme of Poperie they fel not away from this holy faith and order: And
that nowe they contynue and faithfully walke in the same faith and
order. This if he had donne, then had he proued that which
now he beggeth and assumeth. Then had he powerfully convinced

and stopped the mouthes of al Schismaticks and gaynesayers for euer.
But with al his learning and labour he hath not enterprised, neither
euer is able to proue this by Christes Testament. The tyme past & estate
present of their Church of England witnesse the contrarie vnto his face,
and shew vnto all men how dieplie yt hath bene and still is infected
with the Romish idolatries & apostasie from the Testament of Christ
and in what sort they haue at this daye caste forth the tyrannie & yoak
of Antichrist with his abhominations, idolatries, heresies, false Worship,
false Ministerie, and false gouernement &c. He therfore in steade of
approuing his Church by the rules of Christs Testament, striueth to
proue yt a true Church though yt consist of prophane multitudes neuer
as yet rightly gathered vnto, or established in the fait
                     •
                   and order of
Christ, though yt haue not Christs Ministrie and Officers which he hath
appoynted vnto the Church, but that false and ant
                     •
                  christian M
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  strie
which the POPE erected, vsed, and left, Though yt be gouerned not
by the rules of Christes Testament, but by the POPES Courtes, Cannons
&c, and such lawes as these Romish Bishopps doe deuise, Though yt
worship God after a Popish and most idolatrous maner, though yt reiect
the truth of God and persecute all such as call them vnto or stand
for the same. And this most barbarous and diuelish assertion he striueth
to confirme by the schisme of Israel, the apostasie of Iuda, and the
vniuersall defection and corruption of Poperie. Vnto which our finall
answere is, that if anie of these 3. be iustified and finde mercie before
the Lorde, then hath their Churche of England also occasion to
reioyce. But if the Prophets euerie where haue denownced the fearefull
iudgments of God against them, then will not their false Prophets
vntempered plaisters, and lying diuinations of peace, help them in
that daye.
               BVt nowe Mr. GIFFARD procedeth to the second part of th'assumption
which he first forged, and now refuteth in our name. Wherin
he wil needs make vs to say (though it neuer entred into our thought)
That their Church of England hath no power to caste forth anie by excommunication:
and herein he saith we speake verie falslie: For the
Church of England hath some power to excommunicate. We haue alreadie
shewed how he hath chaunged and falsified our reason, leauing
out & altering what he liste, and taking no more of yt then he thought
himself able to deale withal. But if he had made his answere to our
wordes as he receaued them, then he should haue proued that the
Church of England (especially those select congregations whose Pastors
vsed to repel the vnworthy from the Sacraments) had the power of our
Lord Iesus Christ to caste forth by true excommunication, before he had
chardged vs with lyes or absurdities:
               FOr vs we neuer doubted or denied that their Church of England had
power to excōmunicate, euē that power, throne, and great authority

which the Dragon gaue the Beast.Reuel. 13. 2. We take their excommunication to
be the self same which was vsualy exercised in this land in the tyme of
Poperie, dōne by the same Officers & Courtes as the Bishop, the Arch-Deacon,
or Commissarie, In latine in maner of a write, in the Bishops
sole name, and that not for anie offence, transgression of Gods lawe, or
heresie, how pernitious, damnable, and detestable soeuer; but only for
contumacye or contempt of their Courts: As for not appearing, or not
paying such mulctes and exactions as those Birdes with 
                     •
                  ingers enioyne
& exact. Vnto al this busines is neither the parish-Priest, Questmen,
Sidemē, or anie of the parish caled, yt nothing concerneth them.
The Priest he must of force pronownce yt, and the parish allowe of yt
how vniust soeuer yt be or disorderly donne. This is the only excommunication
of the Church of England, other then this they haue not.
               THis Popish thunderbolt canot be defended or mistakē for that holie
reuerend Excommunication giuen by God vnto and vsed in the Church
of CHRIST against euerie obstinate offender vnpartially & orderly, according
to the rules thervnto prescribed, the whole Church with one
consent in the name & power of our Lord IESVS CHRIST giuing vp such
a one vnto SATHAN for the destructiō of the flesh,1 Cor. 5. that the spirit might
be saued in ye daye of the Lord; and this publiquely in the opē church
when the whole Congregatiō is gathered together. Neither may such
excommunicat be receaued againe but of the whole Congregation
vpon his publique repentance in the assemblie.
               IT were needles to demonstrate the mōstrous abuses of this their popish
excōmunication in perticular, and how contrarie yt is in euery pointe
vnto the ordinance of CHRIST, seing this may readily be donne of the
reader by comparing their descriptions together: especially seing this
aduersarie himself dare not vndertake the defence therof. But saith,
that though their excommunication doth not binde in heauen, yet yt
is of force to remoue from the societie of their assemblies: which proueth
our accusation false, because we reason about this outward remouinge.
Verie good, but may this outward remouing or casting out of
the Church be without the power of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, or by
any other power? Or are not such as are caste out by the power of
CHRIST, bownde in heauen? Can any other power in heauen or in hel
separate any of God his childeren from the loue of CHRIST, and cut
off any of CHRISTS members from his bodie? Or may the Church be
subiect touching these spirituall iudgmentes aud censures to anie other
power or voyce, then vnto the power and voyce of CHRIST, execute
or confirme anie other iudgments then th
                     •
                   indgmentes of Christ?
Or may any mortal man thus presume into the verie throne and office
of CHRIST? Doe not al the Elders in the Church of God caste downe
their crownes before the throne of the Lambe?Reuel. 4. 10 Do not all the Sainctes
execute & ratifie all the iudgments of God that are written?Psal. 149. How then
dare these Lucifers, these POPES rather then popish Bishopps, thus

presume to bring in this popish excommunication in place of Christes,
and thereby in their owne romish courtes, name, and power, without
due order or cause, without the consent or priuity of the Congregation
or anie of the Congregation, to cut off and caste out of the Church at
their pleasure? Or how dare these wicked priestes pronownce these
accursed antichristian excommunications, and expel from their publique
exercises, prayers, and sacraments such excommunicate? Or the
parrish thus receaue and ratifie this diuelish proceding? Is it to be
thought that that man which either taketh this for Christs or christian
excommunication, knoweth what christian excommunication is? and
what it is to cut off anie member of Christ? Or thincketh he to hide the
horrible tyrannie and blasphemie of the Bishops, or his owne fellowe
Priests perfid
                     •
                  e and treason, in yeilding his flocke vnto these greiuous
wolues, or the miserable seruitude & spiritual bondage of their whole
Church, that thus are held & wittingly stand vnder Antichrists yoke, by
caling yt an outward remouing? Is it not all the exommunicatiō their
Church hath? Doth it not remoue from the publique exercises, prayers,
& Sacramēts of their Church &c? And would he make vs belieue
that this is but an outwarde remouing? hath the Church of Christ anie
other or furder power thē outwardly to remoue from their fellow
                     •
                  hip
and communion? Or may their Church outwardly remoue anie by
publique censure from their prayers, sacraments &c, and yet the partie
excommunicate be in this estate esteemed a member of Christ, or they
haue anie communion with him? Then, this excommunication of
theirs being founde a meere popish forgerie, and presumptuous blasphemie,
directlie contrarie in euerie poynte to the rules and institution
of Christ, cannot be saide to binde in heauen, because God ratifieth nothing
there, whether it be donne by mā or Angel, but what he here cō
                  maundeth,
and we doe according to the rules of his worde. This then
being so contrarie to the worde of God, cannot be ratified in heauen,
and so it is apparant not to be donne in the power of our Lorde IESVS
CHRIST, but in the power of Antichrist & Sathan. Their Church therfore
hauing none other excommunication then this, cannot be said to
haue the power of Christ to caste out anie by true & orderly excommunication.
And seing they do exercise this popish blasphemous excommunication,
which is not donne in the power of Christ, we may iustlie
conclude, that their Church doth caste forth Sathan in the power of Sathan,
to which power their whole Ministerie and people stand and contynue
in subiection.
               ANd now this aucthor not being able to iustifie the publique excommunicatiō
of their Church of England, seketh to withdrawe vs from
the present question, by mouing two newe questions: And from those
(after his accustomed maner) laboureth to confute vs. Because the
Assumption euen as he himself with longe studie had changed, contriued,
and framed yt, could not yet serue his tourne, His first questiō is this.
If the Bishop with sondrie other Ministers of the Gospel do dulie excō
                  municate

an obstinate wicked man, is he not excommunicate before
God? We first answeare, That the Bishop or the Church of Englād doth
not excommunicat for anie wickednes or crime whatsoeuer, be yt neuer
so heynous, though obstinacie be ioyned thervnto, as for Adulterie,
murder, witchcraft &c, but only for contempt of their Courtes, for
not appearing, or not paying their exactiōs. The we answeare, that the
Bishop neuer caleth anie other Ministers to this actiō of excōmunication.
Furder we answeare, that this Lorde Bishop is no Minister of the
Gospel or Church of Christ, and therfore he hath nothing to do with
th' excommunication of anie member of the visible Church; Neither
may or wil anie true Ministers of the Gospel ioyne vnto the Bishop in
this busines. But if they should, we say that such excommunication is
not allowed before God, because it is founde contrary vnto his worde.
Yet this we say,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 9. 31 that the obstinate wicked are bounde and excommunicate
before God,Esa. 57. 21 whilest they continue in yt estate, albeit the Church
here should neglect or refuse to cast them out.Deut. 29. 19▪ 20. 21. For the iudgments of
God do neither take effect by man, neither depend vpon man, or stay
of man,Esa. 34. 16 but the iudgments decreed are accomplished,Rom. 1. 18 and the wrath of
God is reueled from heauen against al impietie and vnrighteousnes of
men that are contentious & disobey the truth.Rom. 2. 8. 9
               
               Finally, though it were admitted (which can neuer be proued) that
the Bishop and these Priestes were true Ministers of the Gospel, yet wee
say, that this excommunication donne by them in their priuate assemblie
or consistorie (as they cal yt) is contrarie to the rules of Christs Testament,
and vnlawful. For there we finde this power committed & giuē
vnto the whole Church by our Sauiour Christ, who sendeth al mē to tel
the Church Math. 18. 17. There we finde the execution and publishing
of this, performed in & by the Church 1 Cor. 5. We find also the remitting
& receauing in againe of such excommunicate to belong & to be
referred vnto the whole Church 2 Cor. 2. 6. 7. 8. Furder we there finde
the iudgmēts of God denownced against ye whole Church, and euerie
member of that Church, where this censure of excommunicating the
wicked is neglected & reiected 1 Cor. 5. 2. 6. To these if we add the peculiar
interest that euerie member hath in the worde, doctrine, and faith
of Christ,
                  1 Thes. 5. 14 and in al the publique actions of the Church, As also the perticular
dueties that euerie member oweth vnto the whole Church,Mar. 13. 34 37. together
with the sondrie charges & exhortatiōs euerie where in the Scriptures
giuen them to watch,Hebr. 10. 24. 25. to admonish, to exhorte, and that not onlie
the priuate members, but euē the greatest officers of the Church; To
marcke them diligently that cause diuisions & offences cōtrarie to the
doctrine that they haue learned,
                     
                        •
                      Pet. 4. 10 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and to auoide them. Rom. 16. 17. 2 Iohn. 10
To take heed what and whom they heare. To hold such accursed (be
they men or Angels) that preach vnto thē besides that they haue receaued.
Gal. 1. 9. To admonish Archippus. Col 4. 17. To withdrawe themselues
from euerie brother that walketh inordinately, and not according to
the tradition they haue receaued. 2. Thess. 3. 6. To note such as abey not

the worde, and not to be cōmingled with them that they may be ashamed.
2 Thess. 3. 14. Yf their brethren sinne, to rebuke them; if they repent,
to forgiue them; if not, to retaine their sinne. Luke. 17. 3. 4. And to
procede according to the rule Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. These perticular dueties
& chardges dulie considered, there can be no doubte but euerie
christiā is a King
                     •
                   & Priest vnto God to spie out,Reu 1. 6. censure, & cut downe
sinne as yt ariseth,Psal. 149
                        •
                     
                   with that two edged sworde that proceedeth out of
Christs mouth. As also that th'excommunication of anie member belongeth
to the whole Congregation, the whole bodie together, seing
al the members haue like interest each in other &c, Albeit the Church
thus assembled be to vse the help or Ministerie of the most fit member
for the pronowncing of this excommunication &c.
               HEre then fal to the grounde those 4. false interpretations of Math. 18. 17. Tel the Church. 1. Some vnderstanding by the Church the Pope, who
they say is Christes Vicare general and supreame head of the Church. 2.
Others would vnderstand it of the Lord Arch-Bishops grace, or of the
Lord Bishops, who apart may excommunicate & absolue for the whole
church. 3. Some others there are that vnderstād by this word [Church]
the companie of Elders aparte, from, and without the people, which
companie they cal the Consistorie, and this ought to excommunicate
&c. 4. The last sorte are in a quite cōtrarie extremitie, and these would
haue the people without the Elders to excommunicate, elect &c, and
that by pluralitie of voyces.
               THe two first sortes depend of one lyne, and builde their preheminēce vpō the promise made to the Apostle Peter. Mat. 16. 18. 19. where
the keyes of the kingdō of Heauen are giuē him. And vpon the Apostle
Paule his example, who deliuered Himeneus & Alexander vnto Sathan.
1 Ti
                        •
                     oth. 1. 20. They bring also the commaundement of Paule vnto Timo
                     
                        •
                     hy,
To rebuke the Elders that sinne opēly 1. Tim. 5. 
                     •
                  0. and the commā
                  demēt
vnto Titus to reiect an hereticke Titus 3. 10. Touching the power
of the keyes, we haue aboue in the handling of the Priestes absolution
shewed yt, not to depēd vpō the dignitie of mēs persons or offices, but
vpō the vertue & truth of God his worde: from which whē 
                  Peter or the
Pope himself departeth, his worde not onlie bindeth not, but is lyable
vnto reprofe, & bownd by the worde: Which worde is giuē not to Peter
onlie, but to the whole Church that is builte vpon that rocke and to
euerie member therof, and hath like power to binde or to loose in the
mouth of the least, as in the mouth of the greatest: For it is impossible
that the word of God should be made of none effect. As to Paules exāple
we suppose they can euil shewe any such authenticke warrant for their
Apostolike aucthority ouer al Churches & persons, or such measure of
grace as Paule had: & therfore we thinck they ought quietly to remaine
within such lawes and limits in their calings as Paule hath left order.
For the commaundments giuē to Timothy & Titus, they can neither proue
that they executed them in such pōtifical maner as they do, or in their
owne names alone. The contrarie appeareth in the verie words of the

commandements. Neither if this were so, can they shewe themselues
to haue an E
                        •
                     angelistes office as they had.
               THe other two sortes, the one wherof giueth this power of excommunication
vnto the Consistorie of Elders without the people, the
other vnto the people by pluralitie of voyces without the Elders, fal
into these errors and confusion in that they knowe not, or at the least
doe not dulie consider what either the communion of Sainctes, or the
holie order of Christ is in his Church. For if they did they would neuer
thus vnnaturallie separate the members from the bodie, or diuide the
bodie into partes. The first sorte of these interpret these wordes Eipe
                     •
                  te

                     •
                  cclesia. Tel the Con
                        •
                     is
                        •
                     ory, building it vpon the Iewes San hedrin or Sunedrion
That as the Iewes in those tymes complayned vnto their Elders in this
councel, and the councel cast out of the Sy
                        ••
                     gogue such as they iudged
offenders, as Iohn. 9. 22. & 12. 42. So our Sauiour Math. 18. 17. sendeth to
this newe Cōsistory, who haue like power to caste out of the Church. We
may here as in a mir
                     •
                  our behold how far the wisest whilest they followe
their owne deuises, do erre from the truth. Is it likelie or possible
that our Sauiour Christ would fetch his patterne for the Elders of his
Church and th'excuting these high iudgments from that corrupt degenerat
Sunedrion of the Iewes, which by th'institutiō of God was merelie
civile, and not or deined for causes ecclesiastical, as appeareth Exod.
18▪ Numb 11. Deutr. 1. the Priestes bearing the chardge and hauing the deciding
of al ecclesiasticall causes Numb. 18. Deut. 17. But this councel of
theirs was now mixed of the Elders, of the People, and the Priestes, and
handled al causes both civile and ecclesiastical indifferently, Mat. 26. 3.
Actt. 4. 5. How vniustlie and vngodlie they dealt, may appeare by their
handling our Sauiour and his Apostles from tyme to tyme. Now as
there is no likenes to collect these surmises from that place, so is ther
no one circumstance in that scripture to leade thervnto, There being
taught how al Christians ought to reproue and prosecute offences one
towards an other, al being generallie comprised within this rule, to admonish
& be admonished, aswel Elders as others. There is no mentiō
of anie sending vnto such Consistory of Elders as they 
                     •
                  eigne vnto themselues,
& would erect. The Heathen & Publicane there spokē of haue
no reference vnto, neither giue anie occasion to speake of the Iewish
Sunedrion. The heathen al men knowe were not excōmunicate or caste
out, but kept out of the Temple: they might not enter Deut. 23. The
Publicanes though in ciuile conversation they were abhorred of the
precise Pharasies, yet were they not caste out of the Tēple being Iewes
or Proselites Luk. 18. 10. So that our Sauiour there rather teacheth his
Disciples by the present estate & estimation of the Heathen & the Publicane
how to walke towards th'excommunicate, by th'example of the
one to avoide al spiritual communion with them as with heathens, as
also by the example of the Publicane al civile conversation as much as
may be, thē anie way there sendeth to this Consistory, wherof through the
whole Testament of Christ they can shew no warrant. But directlie contrarie

it were to the order, power, and libertie of the whole Church, to
the duties of euerie member, and to the duties of these Elders in their
offices, That they should in this maner draw all the actions & affaires
of the whole Church into their priuate Consistory before thēselues only.
Elders were appointed for the preseruatiō of the order of the Church,1 Tim. 3.
and not for the subuertion therof:Tit. 1. 5. for the defence of the libertie of
the least,3 Ioh. 9. and not to plucke away the libertie of all. Elders were appointed
to instruct & to guide the Church in the worde and wayes of
God,2 Cor. 11. 20 and not to plucke the worde of God from them into their owne
handes only, and to debarre them from walking in the waies that God
hath prescribed and commanded. Though Elders be gouernours and
ouerseers of the Church,1 Pet. 5. 3. yet are they seruantes of the Church, and not
Lordes ouer Godes heretage.1 Cor. 12. 19 They are members of the whole bodie,
and not the whole body.Ephes. 4. 7. 16. If al were one or some fewe members, where
were the bodie? The bodie is not one member but manie, And as yt cō
                  sisteth
of manie mēbers so hath yt vse of al, and may be separate from
none. How vnnatural then are those members which thus separate &
seclude themselues from the whole, yea rather sequester & seclude the
whole from them, and arrogate & assume the publick duties & power
of the whole into their owne handes, as though God had giuē al giftes
vnto them, and they had no neede of others. And thus puffed vp with
preeminence of their owne place and excellencie of their owne giftes,
despise all the rest as base, ignorant, vnworthie to be in their Consistory,
to haue anie voyce of consent or dissent there, alleadging them to be
tumultuous, contentious, factious, vngouerned, ignorant, inclined to
the worst &c: thus abuse they their owne giftes and depraue others.
These are euill speaches and harde reportes to be gyuen out vpon the
people of God, the chosen of CHRIST, partakers of the same pretious
faith and glorious inheritance with themselues, members of the same
bodie even members of CHRIST with them, sanctified with the same
spirit and abhorring these euils wherwith they are chardged, humble
and easie to be ledd, ordered, and gouerned by the worde of God in all
thinges: Not presuming to speake beyonde the proportion of their
faith & knowledge,Rom. 12. 3. or without necessitie, or due order; which who so
transgresseth is publickly reproued; So that these fitlier agree to these
tumultuous assemblies where all the prophane are receaued as members,
then vnto the holie Churches of Christ where none but the faithfull
are admitted or remayne. Wherfore these accsuations which are
caste vpon the people are rather caste vpon the Church, yea vpon Christ
himself, who is the aucthor of this lawe & commandement; who sendeth
to the whole Church, and cōmandeth the whole Church & not
the Consistory to excommunicate:1 Cor. 14. 33 yet is not Christ the aucthor of disorder
but of peace,1 Cor. 11. 16. neither haue the Churches of God custome to be contentious.
For the auoyding of which disorder and contention are Elders
appointed of God to instruct and guide the Church in doing the
wil of God, And not to withdrawe those actions which God hath commaunded

to be donne in and by his Church publickely, into a priuate
Consistory, into the handes of a fewe: Wherin they make thēselues transgressours
of the wil of God, disturbers, and violaters of that holy order
which CHRIST hath established in his Church,1 Cor. 14. 24. 25. and of that heauenly
Sy
                        •
                     phony wherin CHRIST hath contempered the whole bodie together.
               And now as the fault and pride of these Elders is great and intollerable
of the one side, so were it againe a most monstruous confusion &
high rebellion on the other side, if the people should thus expulse and
shut out their gouernours and guides, those most fit members that
God hath giuen them to these actions, from amongst them, and then
decide and determine causes by pluralitye of voyces. What can be
deuised more barbarous and vnworthie the Church of CHRIST then
this? Were not this as if the bodie should offer violence vnto or
laye aside the eyes, and then diuide yt self into factions and partes
for the busines yt hath to doe? This balloting by suffrage or plurality
of voyces might well be a custome amongst the heathen in
their popular gouernmentes, but yt is vnhearde of and vnsufferable
in the Church of CHRIST, whatsoeuer some dreame vnto themselues
therof. There all from the highest to the lowest in all actions enquire
the will of God:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      8. 19. which being knowen, they all then walke by
the same rule,Phil. 3▪ 16. and with one consent doe the will of God accordingly.
There is no diuision in that bodie,Phil. 2. 2. 3. neither anie thing donne according
to the will of man, but according to the will of God only, all hauing
receiued of and being guided by one and the same spirit, euen
as God is one, and CH
                     •
                  IST not yea and naye. Now though all the
members haue receiued of this spirit of God, yet haue not all receiued
in like measure,
                     
                        •
                      C
                        •
                     rinth. 12 Though all the bodie be light, yet is not all
the bodie an eye.Rom. 1
                        •
                     . 4. 5. 6. But God that hath made the bodie to consist of diuers
members, hath distributed diuers giftes in diuers measure vnto
them. Some he hath giuen Pastors, some Teachers &c, for the helpe
and seruice of the whole, which members the whole bodie vseth according
to their gifts, office, and function. The whole bodie asketh
instruction of their Teachers, councel of their Elders &c. The people
are commanded to obey their leaders,1 Th
                        •
                     s. 5. 12. 1
                        •
                     . and to submit, to acknowledge,
to hono
                     •
                   them, and to haue them in super-aboundant loue. These are
of God set ouer the flocke,Hebr. 13. 17. to watche, to instruct, admonish, exhort,
rebuke &c:2 Tim. 
                        •
                     . 1. 2 yet not to plucke awaye the power & liberty of the whole
Church,Acts. 20. 28 or to translate and assume the publicke actions of the whole
Church into their owne handes alone,3 Iohn. 9. They are men and may erre:
They themselues euen for al their doctrines▪
                  Rom. 16. 17. and actions are subiect to
the censure of the Church,
                     
                        •
                     al. 1. 8. 9. or of the least members of the Church, if
in any thing they be founde to erre or transgresse.Col. 4. 17. Yea if they remaine
obstinate,Tit 3. 10. that Congregation wherof they remaine Ministers & members
is to procede against them & to excōmunicate them as any other2 Thes. 3. 14
member. For (as it hath bene said) the iudgments of the Church are
not the iudgments of men but of God, to which al the members of the

Church must alike be subiect. Which iudgmentes, as they are committed
to the whole Church with perfect rules for their maner of proceding
in euerie circumstance, so is the Church herevnto to vse such
members as God hath giuē & made most fit.1 Cor. 3. 22. 23. For Paule, Apollo, and Cephas
are theirs. And this doth no way diminish the power & interest of the
Church in this action, Or translate these publick affaires frō the whole
vnto these Elders, whose coūcel, directiō, and seruice the Church vseth
herein, no more then a Prince or State may be said not to doe those
thinges wherevnto they vse the aduise & seruice of their Councel.
               By the Church then here we vnderstand euerie perticular Congregation
subsisting of al the members. Euerie of which Congregations
hath equall interest in the worde, promises, iudgments, and power of
Christ. CHRIST hath giuē vnto al Churches the same testament, ministrie,
lawes, and ordinances, with like chardge & aucthoritie to obserue
the same. He hath giuen them the same order and communion in all
places, one and the same rule to walke by towardes them within the
faith, as also to auoide & cast out such as depart from the faith or walke
inordina
                     •
                  ly. Neither hath CHRIST giuen vnto anie one Church more
power or prerogatiue then vnto al other, Or set one Church aboue &
ouer an other, otherwise then to wish & seke the good each of other &
of al, to admonish, exhort, stirr vp each other as occasiō requireth. And
vnto this euerie member of Christ is also bounde in his caling, but not to
intrude & encroach vpon the publicke actions & duties of the whole
Church, or the perticular functions & offices of others. As to Pastors
& Elders,Acts. 20. 2
                        •
                     
                   their office extendeth but vnto those flockes wherof the holy
Ghost hath set thē Ouerseers,1 P
                        •
                     t. 5. 2. and not vnto all Churches in this maner,
to which their ministrie neither doth nor can extend. Agayne, Excōmunication
is no part of their ministrie. Neither hath God tyed it vnto the
office of any, but left it a publick dutie of the whole Congregation to
be donne of al with one cōsent. How presumptuous then is he yt vsurpeth
this power ouer, yea of other Congregatiōs to excōmunicate, absolue,
elect, depose &c for them, yea that thus plucketh frō them that
power & chardge which Christ hath giuen vnto them? But how monstruous
& intollerable were the pride of that Consistory which consisting
but of a few perticular members, shal assume the power & duties of so
many Churches into their owne handes? We are of minde that the
best and learnedst of them shall finde their owne perticular offices in
their owne perticular flockes as much as they can well performe
and dischardge, though they should not thus encroach vpon and assume
the publick duties of the whole Church, much lesse of m
                     •
                  nie
Churches. And sure if this Consistory should duely intend all the seueral
occasions, complaintes, and matters of offence that howrely arise in
so manie sondrie Congregations, especially where all the multitudes
are receiued in as members, they should doe nothing ells through
their whole life but sit in this Consistory, yea their whole liues would
not suffice to a litle part of this chardge, where al th'offences of these
multitudes both publick and priuate were duly admonished and

prosecuted according to the commandement of God. And so should
these Pastors & Elders neuer be able to exercise their owne ministri &
officers in those peculiar Congregatiōs where they are chosen to serue.
Againe, if euerie Congregation should be thus posted ouer and sent to
this Consistory for the censuring of euerie pe
                     •
                  ticular offence & offender
howe manifest soeuer &c, manifold inconveniences and mischieues
would thervpon ensue. As that they must be driuen oft-tymes to receaue
and ioyne vnto the most wicked & abhominable in their prayers
& sacraments; yea if the Pastor himself should fal into some sinne &
heresie, they must of force suffer him to administer vntill this Consistory
had caste him out. Many were the reasons & more the inconveniences
that might be alleadged against this presumptious irregular Consistory▪
                  
which hath no grownde in the worde of God, but vtterly subuerteth,
destroyeth, and corrupteth the whole order & cōmuniō of the Churches,
openeth a wide gap to al licentiousnes & prophanenes of maners
and conuersation, wherin if the thowsand part of the heynouse faultes
of these wicked multitudes, these Sodomitical christians of these tymes
should be noted, prosecuted, censured, they should then in one weeke
haue as few christians as now they haue many; but nowe by this reiecting
Gods ordinance & erecting their owne deuises, al sinne aboundeth
& ouer-floweth, and no sinne (though obstinatly held & persisted
an) is iudged to deserue this censure, Especially here in England where
they excommunicate for no sinne; but as the faultes aboue alleadged
are held but bleamishes in their worship, so the greatest sinnes & wickednes
are held but infirmities in their life by the Prophets of these
dayes. But vnto this their Consistory againe. They that thus shall erect
& advance one perticular Congregation as a Iudge & a Mother ouer
others their Sisters, must also erect in the same Congregation or Consistorie,
one perticular Pastor yt must be a Iudge & a Father ouer other
Pastors his bretheren. And then let them duly consider how far this
differeth from, Or at leaste how then they can cōdemne that Apostatical
Sea of ROME, and that vnholy Father y• sitteth therin. And let Mr. GIF.
that is so wel skilled in discipline & so derideth our ignorance, now at
length cōsider better of this reason, Seing euery perticular Congregation
of Christ hath the power of our Lord Iesus Christ against all sinne and
transgressiō to censure the sinne, and to excōmunicate the obstinate offenders
&c. And seing these Parishes haue not this power of Christ, neither
in themselues in perticular, nor yet in their Consistories as hath bene
proued, whether this conclusion which he termeth so absurde will not
followe, That they are not therfore the true churches of Christ. And let
him ye next time frame a better answere then the Geneua Consistory, which
though for the reasons abouesaid yt can yeild him no help, yet may it
not be compared with the popish courtes of these antichristiā Bishops:
               Neither will his other kindes of excommunication in their English
Romish Synodes proue better. Our answeare then vnto his second
question is, That the excommuncication of an hereticke after he

is dulie convinced & founde obstinate, belongeth not to anie Bishops
or Elders of other Churches, but vnto that Congregation wherof this
heretick stood a ioyned member. Although we graunt that for the discussing
of matters in doubt,Acts. 15. and the convincing of some notorious
subtile heretick, the ayde of other Churches is verie necessarie. But
the bloudie procedings of these popish Bishops that in their Consistory
not onlie convince the heretitke after their scholastical and vnchristiā
maner, but deliuer him to the secular powers to be burned with fire
(whether the qualitie of the heresie deserue death or no by the lawe of
God, wherbie they make the magistrates together with thēselues guiltie
of murder) declare vnto al men how vnlike their popish Consistories
are to the holie, free, wel ordered Synodes of christian Churches. But
blessed be God that hath somewhat restrayned their crueltie and hewē
their antichristian hornes by statute heere in t
                     •
                  is land that they cannot
in that maner procede vnto bloude: howsoeuer, their tongues are not
restrayned therbie frō pronowncing that truth of Christes Gospel (which
they cannot and dare not v
                     •
                  dertake to convince) heresie: and those
Christians which yeild not to their antichristian yoke and enormities,
Hereticks.
               Vnto the Convocation also of these Romish Priests and horned Cleargie,
we answeare, That it carieth no shew of a christian Synode or Councel;
and so their excommunication of as litle value as their Sire the Popes
is. Furder we answeare, That Synodes and Councels were not instituted
to plucke away the power or 
                     •
                  o execute the publicke dueties of the
Church, but to instructe, stir vp, and confirme them in their duties, to
help them to decide controversies, to shew them the rules of Gods
worde, and not to breake them or to make newe. Moreouer we saye,
That in a christian Synode no christian ought to be shut out,Acts. 15. but hath
equal power and freedome to speake in assent or dissent of anie thing
there handled, as occasion requireth. Yet ought euerie christiā to vse
this power and libertie aright, not disturbing the holie order of the
Church, presuming to speake before their auntients, or against anie
thing by them said, without shewing iust cause &c, alwaies keping thē
                  selues
within the compasse of faith and sobrietie: Who so doth otherwise
is reproued of al, and iudged of al as a disturber.
               NExt commeth the Suspension or half communication of the Church
of ENGLAND, namely, the Priestes repelling notorious offenders &
the open Wicked from the Sacrament. Mr. Siffard being demaunded
of vs simple christians what warrāt he could shew for this strange censure
in the Testament of CHRIST, and what aucthoritie the Priest there
hath to excommunitate anie member of the Church, if so be this Suspension
were in nature of excommunication, Answeareth; that it is in nature
of excommunication to such as haue bene before admitted, yet not to be
compared or anie thing neere so great as excommunication; And for the
Minister, that he is to take heed to himself that he giue not holie
things to doggs; To beware of that which may giue publick offence,

& bring the holie mysteries into cōtempt. Because these his answeres
doe no way shew or proue that we demaund, it is needful that we make
a litle 
                     •
                  urder search to seeke out the nature of this Suspension, and how
neere yt commeth to excommunication. We finde that such as before were
partakers of, are now openlie repelled from the Table of the Lord for
notorious sinne & wickednes by the Priest alone. Now touching this
Sacrament doth not the Apostle say The Cup of blessing which we blest, is yt not
the communion of the blood of CHRIST? The breade which we breake, is it not the Communiō
of the Bodie of CHRIST? Because we manie are one breade, one Bodie; for we all partake of
one breade 1 Cor. 10. 16. 17. We see here this Sacrament of the Supper to
denote that communion which all that partake therof haue with Christ
as his members: And againe that communion which they haue one
with an other in CHRIST as one an others members. This their suspensiō
                  
then being a publick 
                     •
                  emouing of notorious offenders from the communion
of Christ, and from al benefite of his death: From the communiō
of the Church, and frō al interest of the Saincts, We would knowe
of him what it lacketh of excommunication, and what excommunication is
more? If he say that the suspended are not repelled from the ministrie
of the worde, and prayers of the Church as th'excommunicate are; We
would then know of him where he hath learned to receiue such to the
communion of the ministrie or anie actions of the Church, that are repelled
from al communion and fellowship with Christ and his Church.
Or how dare he vndertake to offer vp their prayers in this estate vnto
God, whom for their notorious sinne and impenitencie he hath repelled
from the communion of Christes bodie and bloode? Thincketh he
that Christ cā be a Priest for anie at the golden Altare to offer or receiue
the ince
                     •
                  se and odoures of their prayers, vnto whom he refuseth to be
a sacrifice at the brazen Altare? Or hath he not some Popish conceipt
of more holines in the outward elements of the breade & wyne in this
Sacrament, then there is in the fellowship of the holie prayers and administration
of Gods worde in the Church? els whie should he more
repel for notorious sinne & wickednes from this Sacramēt, then from
the communion of the prayers and ministrie of the Church? Our Sauiour
Christ doth commaund that whē the sinne is publick & broughtMath 18. 17
vnto the Church,
                     
                        •
                      Cor. 5. thē if the offender heare not the Church but remain
impenitent,
                     
                        •
                      Timo. 5. 21 he should without delaye or partialitie be cut off and caste
out as a withered branche,Iohn. 15. 6. and be deliuered vnto Satha
                        •
                     
                   for the humbling
of his flesh, that the spirit might be saued in the daye of the Lord.
The parish Priest in the Church of England insteade of excommunicatiō
doth suspend such notorious wicked and impenitent from the Table
of the Lorde, yet admitteth he them stil to the prayers and ministrie of
the Church in this estate, and holdeth them stil mēbers as before. The
Lord saith that excommunication when the sinne is publicke and the
offender obstinate, is the only remedie that we can administer for the
salvation of the partie, and the preservation of the whole Church. The
Church of England saith that Excommunication is to rough and seuere to cut

him quite off, and caste him quite out at once, and therfore hath deuised
this temperate & middle course to cut him half off, and caste him
half out. Is not this to iudge their owne wayes equal and the Lords
wayes vnequal? Is it not to esteeme thēselues more merciful, iust, and
wise then the Lord himself? Ells would they not say that Excommunicatiō
                  
were to rough when the sinne is notorious, and the offender obstinate:
Ells would they not in place of excommunication bring in their owne
deuised Popish Suspension. Wherby, besides that they controle God and
breake his commandement in sparing,Leu 20. 4. 5 where they should smite & cut
off,Nomb. 35. 
                        •
                     3▪ 34. and in suffring, when they should caste out, they furder bring the
whole Church into the cōtagion of these sinnes, and into the iudgmēt
& wrath of God for the same;Ier. 3. 1 if so be it be true that is writtē, that a litle
of such leauen maketh sower the whole iumpe,1 Corin. 5. 6 or that the wrath of
God for such offences burneth-against the whole Church. Moreouer
it would be knowen of this discipliner this suspender, in what estate we
might esteeme & hold this notorious wicked person thus suspended,
whether as a brother, or as an heathen. If a brother, how may he then
be repelled from the communion with Christ and his Chu
                     •
                  ch? Whie
should he being a member, hauing made professiō of his faith, and not
yet excommunicate, be denied those heauenly comforts & helpers of
his faith? If he be not to be held a member, whie is he not then according
to the commandement of God publickely caste out, that al men
might know how to esteeme of him, and how to walke towards him?
For surely except it were the Popes purgatorie we neuer hearde of such a
middle meane estate as this▪ Neither euer in Christes Testament haue we
read of such a sensure as this idole suspe
                        •
                     sion they vse. Neither, for anie
thing by him alleadged, can we perceiue anie warrant that the Priest
may in this maner by his sole aucthoritie reiect anie from the communion
table. It followeth not, because he is to looke that he giue not
holie things to doggs, to beware of publick offence, and that he bring
not the holie mysteries into contempt, that therfore of his sole aucthoritie
he may repela
                     •
                  ie from the Sacrament, that hath before receiued
yt.1 Corin. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   The meanes for him to auoyde offences, to preserue his ministeri
                     •
                  
from contempt,Hebr. 3. 2 is to kepe the commandements of God. The Lorde
hath commanded that when anie, that is caled a b
                     •
                  other, faleth into
open sinne, and remaineth obstinate and hardened therin, so that he
refuseth to heare the Church, that such an offender in open Congregation
by the whole Church be caste out, deliuered to Sathan in the
name of our Lorde IESVS CHRIST. No where is there in all Christes
Testament anie commandement that the Minister of his sol
                     •
                   aucthoritie
should reiect anie from the communiō of Christ & of the Church,
especially in this conterfeite maner. The way then for the ministrie
to auoyde offence, to preserue the holy mysteries from contempt, is
to cause the Church according to the commandemēt of God to reiect
& caste out such offenders & wicked persons: so shal he be sure not to
deliuer the holy things of God vnto doggs. Yea if the Church should

refuse to caste them out, then ought he to staye his ministerie, and not
to communicate with other més sinnes, or in this estate to execute the
ministerie of Christ vnto them whilest they refuse to obey Christs voyce.
But instead hereof this sacrilegious Priest & his compaignions are not
afraide to prostitute & sel the bodie & bloude of Christ to the open prophane,
notoriously wicked, skorners, and contemners, for their wage,
offrings, tithes  thus trampling the Sōne of God vnder their feete,
and compting the bloode of the Testament a common thing. What
florish soeuer they may seeme to make with this their wooden dagger
of suspension (which rather manifesteth their follie and presumption, thē
anie waye cleareth them of this sacriledge) great is their presumption
in that they take vpon thē this absolute power ouer the whole Church
and ouer the Table of the Lord, to repel whom they liste of their owne
sole aucthoritie from the communion of CHRIST and of his Church,
wherof they are but Ministers and perticular members in the best accompt,
and not Lords & sole rulers. And yet greater is their presumption
in that they dare thrust out the holie ordinance of God (namelie
publick Excommunication) and in place therof set vp their owne deuised
idole suspension; which what kinde of censure it is, may appeare by that
which hath bene said. Yt hath no foundation or warrant in CHRISTS
Testament, but possesseth the place of that yt is not, namely, of ture excommunication,
therfore yt must needes be that idole instrument of
that foolish shephearde,
                     
                        •
                     ach. 11. which the Lorde setteth ouer those sheepe
with whom he hath disanulled the couenant.
               The aucthoritie of their Portesse their seruice-booke, wil no way
iustifie either them or yt. The abhominatiōs of that booke haue bene
a little touched, yet is not this wretched man ashamed to stand vnder
that monstruous idole, and to professe that all the Ministerie of England
vse that booke in the publick prayers, and administration of & prohibition
from the Sacraments. The vanitie and follie of this idole suspension
most plainely appeareth vnto al men by the litle good it doth in anie
of these Parrishes where al prophanenes and iniquitie stil aboundeth.
The Bishop, his Chauncelor, or Commissary may with one worde of
their mouth heale the greatest wounde the Parrish-Priest can make
with this Suspension, whatsoeuer Mr. Parson saye. They haue power to
absolue anie that he bindeth; and how cheape their absolutions are, is
not vnknowē to anie whore master in al the Parrish. The Bishop hath
power to make and to depose Ministers at his pleasure; he hath power
ouer the whole ministration; he prescribeth howe, whē, to whom they
shal administer. What truth then is in these wordes that the Bishop
cannot take away that power which their seruice-booke giueth them,
when he may absolue the partie, disanul the suspension, depose the Minister
&c. In that he saith the Bishop is but a Minister and no Lord ouer
their faith and conscience, The same will euerie Popish Priest say of
their soveraigne Lorde the POPE, to preserue the dignitie of their ministerie:
The POPE writeth himself but the seruant of the seruants

of God. What Lordlie authoritie the Bishop hath & exerciseth, and in
what seruile subiection the Priestes & all the Parishes stand vnto their
Courtes & iurisdiction, shal hereafter more appeare when we come to
the discussing of those poyntes. In the meane while we willingly assent
vnto Mr. GIFFARD, that the christian reader shall iudge whether their
seruice-booke be not a fit Portesse for such Priestes, and this suspension a
fit toole for such worckmen. Still affirming euen with wonder that if
the iudgmentes of God were not vpon their right eye and vpon their
right arme, they might perceaue how their Lordes the Bishops dresse
them, and how this weapon they allowe them wanteth both edge and
poynte &c.
               Thus hauing finished his answeare to our assumption, he procedeth
to a former answeare where he denied the Consequence. That
where wicked prophane men are receiued into & reteyned in the bozome
of the Church, there the couenant is disanulled with them, and
they are no longer Godes people, but a false antichristian Sinagogue.
To disproue this, he alleadged that there were but fewe true worshippers
that frequented the Temple amongst multitudes of prophane &
vngodly men. To this he now addeth the examples of the Church at
Corinth and of the seuen Churches in Asia &c. We before answeared &
stil answeare, that there is no comparison betwixt, or Argument to be
drawen from those Churches which were rightly gathered & established,
and these confused Bibilonish Synagogues of theirs. The Israelites
were a peculiar separated people vnto the Lorde from the worlde.
The people of these other Churches were wonne, caled, and gathered
vnto CHRIST by the preaching of the Gospel, euery one entred into the
Church by the voluntarie professiō of his owne faith. No vncircumcised
or Gentile might enter into the Temple to offer any gift there.
All, nor yet the greater part of the Citie of Corinth, nor of these other
parts of Asia were not receiued into the Church as members; But here
in their Church of England al the whole land is receiued in, and that immediatly
from open idolatrie without any voluntarie professiō of their
owne faith by the people in perticular, yea without the preaching of
the Gospel going before to call them vnto the faith. Therfore in these
reasons he but beggeth the questiō, and assumeth that which he ought
to proue, Namely, That these multitudes of all the prophane & al sorts
of wicked persons, were sometymes rightly gathered vnto and entred
couenant with the Lorde, hauing the true ministrie & gouernement of
CHRIST set ouer them, and nowe being fallen into some sinnes are not
cast out but stil retayned in their Church. This if he had donne, then
had there bene some cause y• he might haue brought against vs th'examples
of these Churches. Then should not we haue needed to haue
shewed him his follie twise. Yet this if he had donne (the contrarie
wherof is manifest to al that remember the beginning of her Maiesties
raigne, or but behold the present estate in the same, or rather in more
confusion, sinne being more encreased) Yet then we should easily haue

put difference betwixt those Churhes that amēded at the Apostles admonition,
and these which reiect all the rules & ordinances ecclesiastical
of CHRISTS Testament as pernitious and intollerable to th'estate of
this land, and persecute al such as admonish them of, and will not partake
with them in their idolatrie & sacriledge.
               WE also in our former writing shewed him how the faithfull seruants
of God in the idolatrous dayes of Kinge ACHAS, MENASSE,
AMON, IEHOIAKIM &c: refrayned from the Temple, being so polluted
and defiled, and mixed not themselues with the wicked in idolatrous
worship. This Mr. GIFFARD confesseth to be true, and
that it was theire duetie so to doe. But he saith we do not argue
whether the godly did ioyne with the wicked in idolatrie, but whether
the wicked were suffred and did ioyne with the godlie in true
worship. To the question we haue aboue spoken: Only this by the
waye we drawe from his owne confession, That if the godly in those
dayes did wel in separating from & not cōmunicating with the wicked
in those times of publick idolatrie, then cānot we be blamed which separate
& withdrawe our selues from these prophane assemblies, where
such abhominable idolatrie and sacriledge is publickly vsed and enforced,
as we haue aboue proued; and thus are we by him cleared and
iustified, Againe we convince him of his owne mouth thus, If the
faithfull did well in those tymes to withdraw▪ and separate themselues
from the wicked in their idolatrie which then was publickly set vp,
Then was not the publick estate of the Iewes in those tymes of vs to be
held the true Church of God. For the godly maie at no tyme separate
from the true Church of God, nor repayre vnto the false Church. And
thus by himself is an end put at once to all his cauils wherbie he hath
endeuored to prooue the Iewes in these most corrupt tymes to be the
true outwarde church of God, and to accuse vs of heresie that affirme,
where such heynous transgressions are obstinatly defended & persisted
in by the whole Church, there the Couenant (vnto the iudgmēt of the
faithful) is disanulled, there the faithful may not communicate. And
verie ignorant is Mr. Giffard if he thinck that the wicked and prophane
may either be receiued into the Church, or retayned in the Church as
members. The wicked & prophane which were neuer entred into the
Church, may & ought to be caled to heare the ministrie of the worde
of God in the Church, as the meanes wherbie they may be caled vnto
the faith, and so vpon their profession be receiued as members into the
fellowship & cōmunion of the Church. But vntil they make open &
voluntarie profession of their owne faith & obedience, they cannot be
receiued as members, or haue communion with the Church. Then
vntil Mr. Giffard proue that the prophane multitudes and open wicked
which neuer made anie voluntarie profession of their owne faith and
obedience, may be receiued as members into the Church, he cannot
iustifie these Parish assemblies of England, or convince vs. Furder we
graunt, that wicked men, such as fal away from their profession and

obedience, shal daylie arise in the church, ells there should be no cause
of Excommunication. But when their sinne is publicke, then ought the
Church to cēsure it, and if they be founde obstinate, to caste them out;
ells were there no vse of Excōmunication. We graunt also, that the Church
sometymes of negligence, delaying in due tyme to caste out such wicked,
is notwithstanding (if they amend vpon admonition) to be held
the true Church of God. And this our aduersarye himself Pag. 56.
acknowledgeth that we confesse, although now forgetting himself (his
heart being fraught with malice) he bursteth foorth in the gall therof,
accusing and sclandering vs to hold these heresies. That where any
wicked and open sinners worship together with the Church as
members of the Church / there the Couenant is disanulled with
the whole Church. Againe / that where corrupt maners breake
forth in those that professe the Gospell / they be not only vtterly
voyde of fayth which offende / but also all they that worship together
with them (though neuer so much grieued at their sinnes)
are fallen from the Couenant. Thirdlie that we make the stablenes
of Gods Couenant to depend vpon the worckes of men / 
and not of the free grace and mercie of God. How could this accuser
drawe these heresies from this assertion? It is the Church of CHRIST
vvhich hath the power to Excommunicate though it fault much by negligence in executing
the same. Doth not the expresse contrarie herein appeare? How can he
then reconcile these chardges of his vnto this proposition of ours? Or
can he produce any one sentence that euer we wrote or spake conteyning
such odious doctrines as these? Yf not, these heresies must stil retourne
to his owne throate, as to the sepulchre frō whence the sprange;
these chardges must remayne vpon his reckoning & not vpon ours.
               WE hold that the open prophane and wicked, such as were neuer
caled vnto the faith, cānot be receiued into the Church as members,
before they make open and voluntarie profession of their owne
faith and obedience. He that hath from the beginning distinguished
light from darcknes, hath alwaies made difference and separation betwixt
the world & the Church, caling the one the Sonnes of God, the
other the daughters of men; preseruing the one in his Arcke, drowning
the other in the floode: he chose and separated to himself out
of the whole world one peculiar Nation and people to be his visible
Church, to whom no prophane which made not professiō of the same
faith might be admitted or ioyned in their worship. The worde
Ecclesia, or Church, we knowe to be a companie caled forth from the
world, as were CHRISTS Disciples, and the faithfull in all places at the
first gathering of the Church. Againe we hold that such as are dulie
entred into the Church falling from their profession, and after
due admonition remaine obstinate and hardened in their sinne, ought
by the Church to be excommunicate: And if the Church being admonished
& stirred vp vnto their duetie refuse to obey & execute the
commandemēt of God, that then vnto the faithfull it ceaseth to be the

true Church of God, and ought to be auoyded vntil they repent. The
Church of CHRIST must euer be obedient vnto CHRISTS voyce, which
voyce when they openlie despise & wilfully resist, they are a companie
of rebells & not a companie of Sainctes. When they fal away from the
faith, they fal away from the Couenant of God; when they obstina
                     •
                  lie
persist in sinne & wilfully despise Gods voyce, they fal away from the
faith. Faith belieueth, reuerenceth, and obeyeth Gods worde so far as
yt is reueled vnto them, and neuer wilfully despiseth or reiecteth anie
anie part of the same. God can neuer be seuered from his worde; they
that despise & reiect Gods worde, despise & reiect God himself. Christ
ruleth and reigneth by the scepter of his owne worde, they that are not
subiect vnto, but wilfully disobey that word, are not subiect vnto Christ,
haue not him a Kinge, but a Iudge ouer them. Seuere lawes & iudgments
are set downe in God his worde against presumptuous sinne, yea
against al sinne wherof they denie to repent. God hath executed these
iudgments vpon the Angels that sinned, vpon the original world, vpon
the Nation of the Iewes: Neither wil anie vayne titles of Church, Couenant
&c. excuse or deliuer them (being founde in the like transgressions)
from the like iudgments. God is iust, & his iudgments are alike
pronounced & executed against al, as against one, being founde & wilfully
remayning in the transgression of his lawe. Nowe then vvhilest
vve conclude, that vvhere the people were neuer rightly caled vnto the
faith or gathered vnto CHRIST, and orderly ioyned together in Christ,
But multitudes of prophane & al sortes of vvicked persons, idolators,
Atheists &c, euen the whole land without any choice, any separation,
receiued into their Church as members, without any voluntarie profession
of their owne faith, that in this estate they cannot be esteemed
the true planted Churches of CHRIST, With what conscience or truth
can this vngodly man herevpō defame & divulge vs to hold this heresie,
that where corrupt maners breake forth in those that professe
the gospell / they be not only voyde of fayth which offend / but all
they also which worship together with them (though neuer so
much grieued at their sinnes) are falen from the Couenant. How
can he liken these rowtes of prophane Atheists and wicked persons of
the world to the faithful seruantes of CHRIST in his Church, or compare
their open wickednes (which they commit even with greedines)
to the faultes & eskapes of frailety or negligēce in ye Sainctes? Againe
whilest we affirme, That where open obstinacie is ioyned vnto publick
sinne, whether yt be in the whole Congregation or in any perticular
member, there that Congregation or that member cannot by vs be
iudged faithfull or within the outward Couenant vntill they repent,
with what feare of God or shame of men cā this mā publish vs to hold,
that where any open grosse sinne is committed by anie / and they
stil through ignorance or negligence are suffred in the Church / 
there the Couenant to be disanulled with the whole Church: And
so we to fall into this heresie. To make the stablenes of God his

Couenant not to depend vpon mercie and free grace promised and
bownde with an oathe / but vpon our worckes / yea vpon the
worckes of other whom we must iudge.
               
               THis heresie after he himself hath deuised in our name, he procedeth
to cōfute yt with manie wordes, shewing the stability of Gods
promises, the greatnes of Gods mercie, that remembreth his Couenant
in his greatest indignation & wrath, as also the smale beginnings and
daylie growth and proceadings of our sanctification in this life. As
though we euer doubt or denied that the Lord our God his couenant
was made, established, and preserued vnto vs in his CHRIST only without
any worckes or merite in vs, present or to come, to deserue or to retaine
his fauour the least minute. Alas our miserable & forlorne estate
even from our Mothers wombe before we knowe the Lorde, yea our
contynual transgressions & defections euer since we knewe the Lorde
(whē we behold our liues in that sparckling glasse of his lawe) do shew
vs that we are not saued be worckes, but by the free grace & mercie of
God through faith in CHRIST, and that not of our selues, but by the
gift of God whose worcke we are, created in CHRIST IESVS vnto good
worckes which God hath fore-ordayned yt we should walke in them.
But now whilest we acknowledge the whole worcke of our saluation
from the beginninge to the end, to be of God and not of our selues, to
procede from & to be established vpon his free grace, mere mercy, and
loue, and not from or vpō any goodnes in vs fore-seene or subsequent:
Yet make we not therby the grace of God and his holy spirit which he
hath giuē to al his elect, to be idle, vayne, or fruictlesse in any of them,
but to regenerate, chaunge, enlighten and sanctifie them, to bring all
their affections into, and to keepe them in the loue & obedience of the
truth. By the profession of which truth they are knowen & receiued
as members of the visible Church, made partakers of the commune
comfortes & couenant of the Saincts. From which profession when
they fall away, and will not be reduced by the voyce of the Church or
renued by repentāce, but remaine obstinate & hardned in their sinnes,
then are they by the commandement & power of CHRIST to be cut off
as withered branches, to be cast out from the fellowship of the saincts,
and all interest in CHRIST, to be deliuered vnto Sathan &c. The same
rules, faith, saluation, iudgments we haue aboue shewed to belong vnto
al and vnto euerie one, vnto al as vnto one being founde in the same
faith, or in the same transgressions. Now then whilest the whole Congregation
or anie member therof shall remaine hardened in sinne, deni
                     •
                  ng
to obey Christes voyce, refusing to repent, who can say that this
Church or man in this estate, can by vs (which iudge & see but according
to the rules of the worde) be affirmed & held the true Church of
Christ within the outward Couenant, when Christ himself commandeth
vs to deliuer them vp to Sathan in his name, to haue no fellowship with
them? This cānot be dōne of vs vnto any, whom we may affirme within
the outward couenant. God his secret electiō & councels wherin he

hath determined from before al worlds who shalbe saued, how far the
faithful shalbe tryed & fal, and when he wil raise them againe, belōge
not vnto vs to iudge of.Deu. 29. 29 Onley this is most sure, they yt thus fal away &
are hardened, are not of vs to be held & esteemed within the outwarde
Covenāt, or receiued, vntil they as publickly repēt. How thē can this
wicked sclāde
                     •
                  er drawe this gracelesse collection & damnable cōclusiō
from this holie doctrine, That where obstinacie is ioyned vnto publick
sinne, there the outward Covenant is brokē, no communiō to be held
vntil repentance, be made, Therfore we holde that the stablenes of
Gods Couenāt with his Church depēdeth vpon the worcked of
mē. Because we say that God sanctifieth al that he saueth, Therefore
we hold salvation by workes. Because we hold that faith which is
without fruictes to be deade & worthles, Therefore we hold salvatiō
by workes. Because God requireth obediēce of al his seruants that
enter into or remaine in his house, and commandeth them to haue no

                     •
                  ellowship with anie, lōger then they cōtynue in the same fayth & obediēce,
Therfore we make the stablenes of Godes Covenāt to depēde
vpon our workes, yea vpon the workes of others whom we
must iudge. What heretick or peruerted spirit could more highlie
abuse & deface the holy doctrines of Christ? Is Mr. Giffard a teacher of the
Church of England, and cannot yet put difference betwixt the worcke of
our salvatiō by Christ for vs, & the worke of Gods holy spirit, the fruicts
of Gods grace in vs? That cannot put difference betwixt obedience &
mercie, but that he wil make ye worck of Gods grace to abrogate Gods
grace? That cannot discerne betwixt the secret electiō of God & Christes
visible Church? betwixt the temporarie iudgments of Christes Church
according to the rule of Gods word, and the final doome of God in his
determinate councel? Thus not knowing what either Gods Covenant,
Christes Church, the communion, or excommuniō therof meaneth, this
impious man vpō these dotages seeketh to convince vs of his surmized
heresies, because we blame & forsake these Babilonish confuse assemblies,
where al sortes of prophane and wicked are gathered together
without faith or order, bownde, sed, and suffred together in al impietie,
mischief, and licentiousnes, without censure or controlement,
vnto whome he for the wage of Balaam is powred forth, and most sacrilegiously
selleth them his pretended Sacraments for their two pennie
shot or offring.
               HE laboureth to defend this sacriledge & confusion by th' examples
of other Churches vnder the Lawe & vnder the Gospel. He beginneth
with the estate of the Church vnder Moses, where the rebellious Israelites
whose carkases fel in the wildernes, of whom the Lorde sware
that they should not see his rest; yet were not cast out of th' assemblie
nor separated, so longe as they liued, nor their seed reiected. So that he
still beare in minde that he but beggeth the question so ofte as he compareth
these confuse prophane assemblies (that were neuer rightly gathered
vnto nor established in the faith) vnto true Churches, vnto this

place we answeare. That he moste ignorantlie & boldlie affirmeth an
vntruth. We reade Exod. 33. after the Israelites had made their Calf and
committed idolatrie, that Moses both did execution vpon the chief Idolators,
and with-drewe his tent, and separated from the rest vntil they
were reconciled vnto the Lorde. Furder we reade that vpon publick
notorious transgressions the Lorde executed publick iudgments sondrie
tymes, wherby the chief were taken away, the rest brought to repentance
Numb. 12. & 14. 39. and 25. and 21. 6. 7. We reade of separation
from those of Corathes conspiracie &c Numb. 16. 21. 24. 26. verses. We reade
also Numb. 12. that Miriam was separated out of the hoste vntill she was
healed. Likewise we reade of sondrie perticular iudgments for perticular
transgressions. As for breaking the Sabaoth, for blaspheming &c
Num. 15. Whereby his impudencie is convinced. But nowe if it were
graunted him (then which nothing can be more vntrue) that these
multitudes of prophane rebells were not separated out of the hoste, yet
except he can proue that they were receiued during these sinnes vnto
the Tabernacle of the Congregatiō (which he can neuer shew, because
it were so directlie against those lawes prescribed vnto and by Moses) yt
can help him nothing. The wicked may remaine in the common
wealth, which yet ought to be caste out of the Church. In that he alleadgeth
the seed of the wicked were not reiected; we first answeare,
that we find an outwarde repentance made by the offenders in the places
aboue recited. Furder we find that circumcision ceased al the tyme
they traveyled in the wildernes vntill they came to Gilgal. 40. yeeres.
Iosh. 5. Wherfore this example nothing helpeth their wilful sacriledge
in the Church of England. As to the other tymes when idolatrie was
publickly set vp by the kinges of Iuda; Ahas, Manasses, Amon, Iehoiachim, Zedechiab
we haue alreadie proued that they were not in that estate the true
visible Church of God,Isa. 59. and that those faithful amōgst whom the Lord
preserued his Church;Ezek. 8. neither might neither did communicate with
them in their publick worship and idolatrie:Ier. 7. Which those places of
Isay, Ieremias, & Ezechiel doe euidētly proue both in manifesting the sinnes
of those tymes, and taking awaye all vaine titles and pretextes; shewing
that the name of Temple, Couenant, Ierusalem &c could no more aualye
them, then the Arck at Shilo and the like titles did them in the tyme of
the Iudges. The Prophet Ieremiah in his lamentations doth no where
iustifie their publick estate so much as euerie where lament the desolation
of Sion, which name may much rather be vnderstoode of the
former prerogatiues and dignity of that natiō, place, and people which
were chosen and separated to the Lordes seruice and worship, then of
that most corrupt estate of that sinful generation. As to the tymes after
their returne out of captiuitie whē they mixed themselues with the
heathen and brake the Sabaoth, we reade they made notable repentance
when they were admonished Ezra. 10. Nohem. 9. and 13. So that these tymes
verie euil fit Mr. Giffard.
               
               
                  
Fvrder if vve come to the tyme that our Sauiour was exhibited in the
fleshe,
                     
                        •
                     uk. 1. 6. & 2. 25. vve reade at the tyme of his birth of sundrie iust & holie men
both Priestes and others, and how al thinges were performed by them
according to the lawe of the Lorde. But afterwardes when they would
not be instructed nor reformed by our Sauiour Christ, but with one consent
despised, blasphemed, reiected, and persecuted him, and all that
belieued on him; Then were they not the true Church of God, but the
persecuting & malignant Synagogue; Except Mr. GIFFARD hold not
our Sauiour Christ & his Disciples the true Church: Or that there may
be two true Churches one opposite vnto an other, ledd by two diuers
& contrary spirites: Or that God may be diuided from Christ: Or the
Church in Couenant with him without Christ. Also in that he affirmeth,
That our Sauiour Christ commanded his Disciples to worship together
with them in this estate, to heare the Scribes & Pharasies teach
& expounde the lawe, although they taught corruptly & leauened the
doctrines therof, though they were hypocrites, blinde guides, couetous,
and ambitious, and verie reprobates, yea though some of them
vvere not of the tribe of LEVI, only because they were Ministers & sate
in MOSES chayre. What execrable heresies and horrible blasphemies
doth this wretched man runne into, whilest he seeketh to iustifie their
heynous sacriledge, opē idolatrie, and confusion by our Sauiour Christes
example? Doth he not hereby make our Sauiour Christ guiltie of the
open breach of Gods lawes, and the destruction of al the people? Doth
not God in as manie places as he commandeth to heare true Prophets,
forbid to heare false Prophets, as he commandeth to obey his lawe and
commandements, forbid all humane deuises & traditions? Is there not
a prescript lawe Deut. 13. That they ought not to hearken to the wordes
of that Prophet that teacheth other doctrine and seeketh to seduce,
though he had the power to do miracles & worke wonders? Doth not
SALOMON by the holie Ghost cōmand all the children of the truth not
to hearken to th' instruction that causeth to erre from the wordes of
knowledge. Prou. 19. 27? And againe in the first Chap. of his Song, is not
the Church councelled by Christ himself not to staye in the steps of that
flocke, but to feede her kiddes aboue the tentes of those Shepheardes?
How plentifull are all the Prophets in this argument Ieremie 23. Ezech. 13.
zecha. 13. To which concorde all the Doctrines of the new Testament.
Math. 7. 15. and 15 14. and 16. 6. Iohn. 10. 5. Rom. 16. 17. Gal. 1. 8. 1 Tim. 6. 3. 2. Iohn.
10. 2 Peter. 2.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Was there not also expresse lawes that the Priestes which
drawe neare vnto the Lorde should be holie, and not such open reprobates
as he now acknowledgeth these to be? And also that the Lorde
had only separated & chosen to himself the tribe of Leui to serue & administer
before him in the Tabernacle of the Congregation,N
                        •
                     mb 3. & 18. and that
no stranger might presume into that office? yet is not this blinde guide
afraide to affirme, That the Pharasies not being of the tribe of Leui were
Ministers, and sate in the chaire of MOSES, and therfore our Sauiour
commandeth his Disciples to heare them, were they neuer so wicked

of life or corrupt teachers. Math. 23. In which place our Sauiour hauing
to deale with the persons of the corrupt teachers, first seketh to reserue
the dignitie of his Fathers lawe & ministrie; then sheweth these present
teachers to be degenerate from both, being fallen into all maner
of vice, pride, vayne-glorie, hypocricie, sectes, schismes, calling them
false teachers & corruptours of the lawe, blinde guides, such as shut
vp the kingdome of heauē before men, neither entring in themselues,
nor suffring them that would; deuowring widdowes houses, cunning
seducers, making their proselytes the children of Hel like themselues;
Killers and murderers of the seruants of God that are sent vnto them;
so that in conclusion he there leaueth sondrie woes, all the bloode of
the righteous, & euē the Maranatha vpon them. Now, is yt likely, or may
it without blasphemie be thought that our blessed Sauiour CHRIST
would cōmit his Fathers Lawe & Ministrie vnto these wretches, or the
soules of his deare Disciples to be instructed & kept by these murderous
blinde guides? yet these blasphemies doth this wicked man publish,
his Ordinarie & all the Cleargie of England allowe & suffer to passe
in print. Againe if the Disciples in that place be commanded to heare
the Ministerie of the Pharasies, then are they there commanded to obserue
all the humane deuises & traditions so contrarie to the lawe of
God, which they most zealouslie taught and enioyned, which our Sauiour
himself openly brake & reiected; and gaue often warning vnto
his Disciples or them and such like false Prophets, commanding them
to take heede of them, teaching them howe to knowe them by their
fruictes. Math. 7. 15. 16 willing them to let them alone as the blinde l
                     •
                  aders
of the blinde, vsing an argument of the ineuitable peril. If the blinde
leade the blinde both shall fal into the ditch. Math. 15. 12. 13. 14. chardging them to
beware of the leauen of the Pharasies Math. 16. 6. which leauen verse 12.
they found to be the doctrine of the Pharasies. To these if sondrie other
places of his conflictes with these Scribes & Pharasies be added, it
wil euidently appeare that he withdrewe his Disciples from their doctrines,
pronouncing euerie where woes & iudgmentes against them.
               That he made also a separation and especiall choise of his Disciples
from the wicked people of the Iewes, euidently appeareth by the office
and ministerie of Iohn the Baptist. vvhom he sent as an Heralde before
him to prepare his waye, to proclaime his kingdome, to call the
people to repentance, and to make readie a people to receiue him, lest
when he came he should smite the earth with cursing. Mightely did
Iohn refute all these vayne arguments & allagations that Giffard alleadgeth
of the seede of Abraham, the outward Couenant, Nation, Temple &c.
Shewing them that God was able of stones to raise vp children vnto
Abraham; calling those boasting Pharasies the generation of vipers,
shewing them that only those trees that bring forth good fruicte are
the plantes that shall stand and growe in the Lordes Orchard, that the
other shalbe hewen downe and caste into the fire, and that the Lordes
axe is nowe laide to the roote: Shewing them that the Messiah of

whom they boasted and whom they looked for, should come with his
fanne in his hand to clēse his barne floore, to preserue his wheat in his
granarie, and to burne the chaffe with vnquenchable fire, baptising
none but such as cōfessed their sinnes. The same course toke our Sauiour
CHRIST, sending forth his disciples to preach the gospel of the
kingdome, who receiued and baptized none but such as repented of
their euill life, and gaue obedience to their doctrine: these our Sauiour
acknowledged, receiued, taught, instructed, guided as his
owne peculiar flocke.zech. 11. But al the other (as the sheepe of distruction)
he gaue ouer to be spoyled and deuoured of their owne rulers, and
one of an other, to be guided by those wicked and idoll sheepheardes
vvhose soule abhorred him, and his soule loathed them. Yea how ful
a separation there was betwixt these sheepheardes and these flockes,
the hostilitie they shewed vnto our Sauiour and his Disciples by excommunicating,
persecuting, blaspheming him, and his rounde reprouing
them, euerie where in the historie of his life doth appeare.
Furder that he communicated not with them in their feastes,
offrings, and worship in this their sinne and obstinacie, appeareth as
plentifully. He a longe season when the Iewes laid wayte to kill him
refrayned Iudea and Ierusalem. At other tymes when he came thither,
it was not to keepe the feastes together with them, so much as to
take occasion vpon such concurse of people to instruct them, and
to call them vnto himself. He sometimes went not at all, sometimes
went at the mid-feast, And when he was there he kept not the Paschal
together with them before the Temple according to the lawe
Deutronomie. 12. 5. Leuit. 17. But he kept yt apart with his Disciples in
a priuate chamber: As when there was no publicke assemblies, as in
Egipt, or when the Temple was shut or polluted, and the vvorship corrupted
Exod. 12. 2 Chron. 35. yea he kept yt vpon an other daye, namely
vpon the 14. of the first moneth according to the lawe, and not
vpon that daye the Iewes kept theirs, which was a daye after, as appeareth
euidently by the historie. Math. 26. For the Iewes solemne
feast or cessation ought by the lawe to haue bene vpon the 15. daye, the
next day after the Paschal, vpon which daye they crucified our Sauiour,
and kept their feaste vpon the Sabaoth, deferring the Paschal by
their tradition one daye longer then the lawe commanded: Leuit. 2. 4.
5. 6. Numb. 28. 17. by all which reasons, circumstances, and places, it is
euident that our Sauiour and his Disciples did not communicate
with, but withdrewe from the Iewes and their worship in this their
sinne and obstinacie. By whose example this great Clearke Mr. GIFFARD
hath endeuoured to confute the Brownistes of heresie, and to
prooue that the open wicked and prophane may be kept in the
Church and communicated with, and yet neither the Church therefore
cease to be a true Church, nor the faithfull which together with
these prophane ioyne in the worship of God and the Sacraments, be
defiled therbie.
               
                  
Yet to make the matter more sure, he bringeth certaine Churches
planted by the Apostles, As the Church at Corinth, and the Churches
of Asia. In the Church of Corinth were factions and schismes, corruption
in the teachers, negligence in the Gouernours, th' incestuous person
suffred, contentions among the people and that vnder heathen
Iudges; They feasted in idoll temple, they prophaned the Supper of
the Lorde, they abused spirituall giftes, some denied the resurrection
of the deade; yet the holie Ghost vouchsaueth them the name of
the Church of God. Well, what of all this? Therfore the wicked
prophane multitudes which were neuer rightly gathered to the faith,
may be receiued as members into the Church. We see no such consequent.
The Church of Corinth was orderly gathered by the Apostle
vnto the faith, none receiued but such as belieued and made open profession
of their faith and obedience, Sainctes by calling. Agayne the
Church of Corinth was rightly established into that order, and had such
Ministers, Officers, and ordinances, as CHRIST in his Testament had
assigned and th' Appostle instituted: so hath not the Church of England,
but popish and antichristian, Therfore no comparison thus far foorth
betwixt the Church of Corinth and the Church of England. Neither can
these faults wherein he compareth the Church of England to the church
of Corinth, and wherein it is founde like vnto, or rather far without all
comparison to exceede them, make the Church of England the true
Church of God. What is yt then this learned man would conclude
from thence? That the open prophane and obstinate wicked may be
retained in and by the Church, wittingly and willingly after admonition,
and yet that Congregation not cease to be the true Church of
CHRIST. This he striueth to proue; And therfore where it is alleadged
that the Church of Corinth repented at the Apostle his admonition,
and is by the Apostle himself said to haue shewed them selues pure in
that busines. 2. Corinth. 7. he maketh vnto this a double answeare. One,
that they were Godes true Church before they repented; The other,
that all did not shewe repentance as appeareth. 2. Corinth. 12. 20. 21. To
the first we answeare and neuer denied, That they being rightly gathered
vnto the faith and orderly established in the faith (notwithstanding
that grieuous sinnes brake out amongst them) so long as they despised
not admonition and refused not to repent, were to be still held and esteemed
as the true Church of CHRIST, who if we confesse our sinnes
is faithfull and iust to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from all
iniquitie. But as we haue often said, this maketh against Mr. GIFFARD,
because the Church of ENGLAND was no such true Church before
that and wherein these faultes were and are committed. Vnto his
second allegation, that all shewed not repentance for the vncleannes,
fornication, and vvantonnes vvhich they had cōmitted; We acknowledge
it as the Apostle recordeth it to be a great fault in the whole
Church, That they did not more diligently search out the sinne, and
speedely caste out the sinners that remayned impenitent. Yet was this

in the Church but a fault of negligence, and not of anie obstinacye;
they neither contemnded admonition, neither spurned against their admoni
                     •
                  hers.
Yet euen this slacknes and negligence the Apostle thus
sharplie & seuerely reproueth, threatning (if they amend not) to come
with a rodde, and with the power of CHRIST against them. He neither
iustified nor flattered them in their sinnes, as this false Prophet doth,
who hath no better argumentes to pleade for o
                     •
                   iustifie this apostasie
and obstinacie of the Church of England, then the greatest sinnes and
odious faultes of other Churches. But to such a height & measure is
their wickednes encreased, as all the sinnes of all Churches in all ages
are too narrowe to couer the bedd of their fornicatiō  Neither can
those fearefull breaches & lamentable ruines in the Churches of Asia
heale the wounde of the Church of England. If God so threatned or
menaced those Churches to come and feight against them, to remoue
their candle-sticke &c, vvhat shalbe the iudgmentes of the Church of
England? what can she expect, whose sinnes so far exceede, which taketh
boldnes to contynue in sinne, and pleade for the same from these examples
which the Lord hath lefte as monumentes of terror to all posterities.
Yet in all these desolations of these Churches can there be no
comparison betwixt these barbarous confuse assemblies, and those
Churches which sometymes were rightly gathered and established
vnto the faith, and into the order of CHRIST: and so all Mr. GIFFARDS
labour and paynes herein is lost. Neither will this conclusion followe,
That because yt ceaseth not to be a Church by and by where the open
wicked are not separated (because the Church sometimes may fall into
such sinnes of ignorance or of negligence) Therefore the godly are
not defiled which communicate with these open wicked in prayers, sacramentes,
and other spirituall exercises. Might he not aswel conclude,
that because yt ceaseth not to be a Church herevpon, therfore
yt is no sinne. But if yt be a sinne in the whole Church, then is the
whole Church guiltie of & defiled with that sinne.
               NOwe as Mr. GIFFARD laboureth to drawe this conclusion, so striueth
he to proue this proposition, That the admission of the open
vvicked & impenitent to the table of the Lorde doth not defile either
the Sacrament or the faithfull receiuers. Herevnto he hath gathered
a fewe stale reasons. 1. As that the wickednes of the Minister doth not
difile the holy thinges of God: Iudas, Ely his Sonnes, the Scribes & Pharasies
were wicked mē, yet were the thinges they administered holie. 2. Then
that the godly communicant toucheth not the sinnes of others, but the
holie thinges of God; because there cannot be a separation from the
wicked in bodie or bodily thinges alwaies: but they which touche not
their sinnes obey the commandement Come out from amonge them, separate
your selues & touche none vncleane thing. That the blame of receiuing such wicked
resteth only vpon such as haue the power of the discipline in their
handes, and not vpon priuate members which mourne & lament to see
such fowle matters wincked at, which mourners are cleared Ezech. 9.
               
                  
TO discuse these pointes in perticular would make this discourse
ouer long, breiflie therfore this we say. To the first, that difference
must be put betwixt hypocrites (whose wickednes is onlie knowē vnto
the Lord) and such wicked, whose sinne is knowen vnto the Church.
The publicke ministrie of secret hypocrits that are rightly caled to a
lawful office, and execute their office without fault or blame, is holie,
blessed, and profitable to the whole Church (which can but looke vpon
and iudge the outwarde action and estate, and not the hearte and conscience
of anie) yet this their ministerie is vnavayleable to themselues,
and maketh to their owne greater condemnation. But where the Minister
is detected of, and remayneth obstinate in anie transgression, his
ministration is not acceptable to the Lord, neither ought to be suffered
or ioyned vnto of the Church. The Lord willbe sanctified of all that
come neere vnto him. Vnder the lawe he required an holie ministerie
to serue in the priestes office without outward mayne or bleamish, lest
he defiled the holie thinges of the Lorde; The offerings of anie other
were not acceptable to the Lorde. It is also written that the sacrifice of
the wicked is an abhomination to the Lord, as if they cut off a dogges
heade, or offred swynes bloode. They haue nought to doe to declare
the Lords ordinances that hate to be reformed, and caste his worde behinde
them. The Church ought not onlie to forbid such to administer,
but to cast them out of the fellowship, which if the Church neglect
and refuse to doe, them are they guiltie of the open or wilful breach of
Gods holie ordinances in suffring his holie name and ministerie to be
prophaned, yea in ioyning thervnto and reioycing therin. The examples
by him alleadged no waye help him. Iudas whilest he remayned
with our Sauiour was an hypocrite, his sinnes vndiscoured, yea vncommitted,
so longe in that estate his publicke ministerie was lawful,
holie, and acceptable vnto others. The ministerie of the Sonnes of Eli
(after their wickednes was publick) wea abhominable vnto God, to be
detested of all the faithful: yet was the sinne of the people verie great,
who vpon and for the sinnes of these wicked prestes abhorred the offringes
of the Lorde, which were euer to be esteemed most holie, being
lawfullie administred, otherwise they are not the offrings of the Lord.
The people then (as nowe) grewe into Atheisme and all impietie, abhorring
all Gods worship, and refusing to be at anie chardge, louing
the creatures better then the Creator by seing the great insolency and
inreverence of the prestes. Touching the Scribes and Pharasies we haue alreadie
said enoughe.
               TO his other allegations, that the faithful are not defiled by communicating
with the open and obstinate wicked in the Supper of the
Lorde and other spiritual exercises, because they touche not the sinne
of the wicked but the holy thinges of God &c Surelie this is verie odd
diuinitie, contrarie to al the groundes of scripture that we haue read
of. We had thought that all the communicantes at the Lordes Table
had bene ioyned & commingled together into one spiritual body euen

into CHRIST, as manie grapes are there bruzed into one cup, manie
graynes into one loafe. Furder we had thought yt no obstinate offender
whose sinne is publicklie knowen, might haue beene admitted
to that holie Table without wilful sacriledge and high prophanation
of those holie mysteries, both in all the Communicantes and in the
Minister.Leu. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 21. 22 Wee reade in the lawe plentifullie▪ That the leprous or
polluted person defiled whatsoeuer touched him, whether person, vessel,
holie or ciuile &c, and that such person on vessel &c remayned vnholie
therebie,Chapters. vntil they were clensed according to the lawe. The
Prophet Haggai confirmeth the same and saith,Hag. 2. 12. 13. 14. 15 vers. that whatsoeuer holie
thing, bread, wyne, or oyle, a polluted person toucheth, yt is made
therbie vncleane. The Apostle also sheweth in expresse wordes, That
as a litle leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe, so one open vnworthie
receiued to the supper of the Lorde maketh all the communicantes
                     
                        •
                     . Corinth. 5. 6. 7. 8.
guiltie, and their reioycing or feast not good before the Lord, likening
the whole Church to the lumpe, the wicked person and sinnes kept
amongst them to the leauen, their reioycing to the eating of the Paschal
&c: Which most direct place this ignorant sacrilegious Priest
would put away and falsifie by likening this reioycing here spoken of
to a glorying in the sinne of th' incestuous, as though the Church of
Corinth had euer bene so beastlie. And by endevouring to separate the
elements of the breade and wyne in this Sacrament from their mystical
sense, the communicantes that receiue the same together, from
their spirituall communion they haue one with an other, the whole
Church from the preparation and care they ought to haue both generally
and perticularly in administring and receiuing the Sacraments,
And hauing thus royled the pure fountaynes, he confowndeth the
sense and distinct doctrines of the Apostle, by bringing in certaine instances
where the wife, seruant, passenger, vpon some especial dueties
and necessities, may be occasion eate ordinarie bread with th' excommunicate.
Whervpon he concludeth, that the faithful also may vpon
necessitie (as if the Church wil not caste out the open wicked and impenitent) communicate with them in the supper of the Lorde. And
if so be these faithful mourne and are grieued for this wilful sacriledge
of the Minister and the rest of the Church, then they touche not their
sinne, but the holie thinges of God, and are cleare Ezechell. 9. because
the separation from the wicked cannot alwaies be in bodie, as in the
cases by him alleadged of eating common breade with them. But let
this cauiller knowe that there is no comparison, much-lesse anie consequence,
betwixt the eating common breade, and the eating of the
Supper of the Lorde with the open wicked and impenitent. There is
no such spiritual mysterie, communion, or commixture in the first, as
in the second. Common bread is not forbidden the wicked, but these
holie pledges vtterlie are, they ought not to be caste to hogges and
dogges. Neither are we forbidden al ciuile conversation so absolutelie
with them, as we are all spirituall communion. In the one vve see

prouision and exception made for duetie and necessitie. In the other
there is no such duetie or necessitie, neither anie such prouision and
exception mentioned in the Scripture, vntil these Priestes to defend
their port-sale and open sacriledge deuised these shiftes. The scripture
vtterlie forbiddeth and repulseth the open wicked & impenitent
from this holie banquet by more then the Cherubins shaking the edge of
a sworde. So far are the open wicked from being admitted to this
feaste, as they are to be caste out, to be deliuered vnto Sathan, so far are
they to bee kept from all communion with CHRIST and with his
Church. But none are to be admitted to this Sacrament, but such as
outwardly stand in the faith, and therby (vnto the iudgment of the
Church) haue fellowship with CHRIST and his members. The verie
action or Symbole yt self sheweth this communion vvith CHRIST, and
one vvith an other. 1. Corinth▪ 10. 16. and 12. 13. No sophistrie can disioyne
the mysterie or signification from the outward elements and action,
neither the communion from the participation in this action, so far
as vve may iudge.1. Cor. 11. As the vnworthie receiuers are guiltie of the bodie
and bloode of the Lorde, so the Church in admitting, administring
vnto, and communicating vvith them, is guiltie of most high
sacriledge and prophanation of the holie thinges of God, especially
they doing it wilfullie and wittinglie. Now then if they all communicate
in this action, and this action deliuered in this maner be sacriledge,
how should they not all be guiltie? Can anie man here say
that anie of the Communicantes in this case toucheth not the sinne,
but the holie thinges of God, vvhen first in this action they are all
spirituallie commingled and ioyned together, then the verie action
vvhich they all doe (as they doe it) is most highe sacriledge not a
touching but an open, (if not a vvilfull) prophanation of the holie
thinges of God? Can th' aucthoritie of the Church excuse them before
God? Or vvil it here excuse them to say they cannot doe vvith
it, because the power of the discipline is not in their handes? We
haue aboue shewed that euerie member hath interest in the power of
the Church▪ And that the power to receiue in and to caste out belongeth
to the vvhole Church, and not to the Presbiterie or anie perticular
member of the Church onlie: Neither yet these matters referred
to the wil or choise of the Church, but rules prescribed thē whom
and vvhen to receiue, whom and vvhen to caste out. As vpon publick
profession of faith and obedience with desire of ioyning, the Church
cannot refuse but must receiue, so vpon publicke sinne and obstinacie
ioyned to the same, the Church must then caste out, and cānot retaine
without sinne: Which sinne becommeth so much the more heynous
whē they doe it wittinglie & willinglie, but most of al whē obstinacie is
added, whē the Church wil not be admonished, neither amēd. Though
euerie private member cānot excommunicate or reforme the publicke
actions of the Church, which are donne contrarie to the worde, yet

euerie priuate member may & ought to refraine such publick actions,
as they see to be contrary to the worde, and to admonish the Church
&c. And in so doing they depart not from the Church, neither withdrawe
from the Communion, so much as preserue the Church & the
communion: Our fellowship must alwaies be in the faith, out of the
faith we maie haue no communion with man or Angel in knowen
sinne. They that depart from the faith depart from the Church, and
breake the cōmuniō. We may not followe a multitude or the mighty
in euil. It behoueth euerie christian that receiueth to knowe what the
action is he doeth, to knowe what he receiueth and howe he receiueth,
to knowe by whom and with whom he receiueth. We say not now (as
some in the idlenes of their conceipt coniecture) that we ought to examine
and iudge euerie one that communicateth: No it sufficeth vs if
they by outward profession stand stil members, and remaine not conuict
and impenitent in anie open sinne knowē to them and to the congr
                     •
                  gation.
They must knowe that the Minister that deliuereth is according
to the outwarde rules (so far as they maie iudge) a lawful Minister
of the Gospel, and that the communicantes by outward professiō
(so far as they can iudge) stand in the faith; Ells can they not discerne
what the communion of the Church or the action they doe, is. It wil
not suffice or excuse them to saye they mourne and are grieued for the
sinnes of the wicked with whom they communicate, and for the sinne
of them that should put them from the Sacrament, yea caste them out
of the Church, and deliuer them ouer vnto Sathan, for the humbling
their flesh, and the preservation of others from the contagion of their
sinne, yea of the whole Church from the wrath of God. How should
they be said to mourne for the sinne of these wicked, with whom they
feast and reioyce in this heauenly banquet? From whence al sorrowe,
and grief, and feare, & despaire or doubt are banished, al teares wiped
from their eyes, they being by this Symbole receiued to the communiō
of Christes bodie and of al the ioyes which he possesseth, hath prepared
& reserued for al those for whom he died &c, against whom layeth no
accusation, no condemnation, no imputation of sinne. Againe, the
mourners he speaketh of which were marcked by the Angel Ezech. 9.
did not onlie mourne but crye out against the sinne of the tyme, yea
they refrayned the publick worship & the Temple which was so wholy
polluted and prophaned, as is described in the 8. Chapter of the same
proph
                     •
                  cie, the fierce wrath of God powred forth vpon the whole Citie
and Sanctuarie Chap. 9. The glorie of God vtterlie departed from the
Temple and Citie Chap. 11. But how should these that communicate &
are commingled with these open wicked and vnworthie, and participate
and ioyne in the sinne and sacriledge of the ministrie which they
see and acknowledge, be said of those marcked mou
                     •
                  ners which refrayned
& cryed out against the abhominations of the tyme? Or how
should these e
                     •
                  kape the vengeance of the destroyer? The seale of God
wherwith al CHRISTES servants are marcked and knowen, is, That they

that name the name GOD depart from iniquitie. 2. Timoth. 2. 19. Reuel. 14. They may
not cōmunicate with the sinnes of others, nor be drawē into the transgression
of any of GODS commaundements by an Angel from heauen.
Gal. 1. No traditional writings of any man whosoeuer, can defend these
errors which tend to the open & wilful prophanatiō of the holy things
of God, to the most dangerous contagion and infection of the whole
Church, and to the high prouocation of Gods wrath against them all.
What then hath this great clarck gayned by this traditional diuinitie,
saue bewrayed his corrupt iudgment & great ignorance of the truth of
God, yea even of those principal actions wherof he professeth himself
a Minister? What hath he obtayned or endeuoured by al this discourse
to prooue, if not that all these prophane multitudes and rowtes of all
sortes of wicked may be receiued into and nourished in the Church
as members, even with the holie pledges of CHRISTES bodie & bloode
by this idolatrous and sacrilegious ministrie (for so hauing alreadie
proued them we may pronownce them) made by themselues, labouring
to iustifie & approue their Church, ministrie, and ministration in
this estate, and most seuerely to censure, blaspheme, and condemne all
such as by the word of God reproue them, and for their obstinacie forsake
them for the same, thus opening a wide doore to all Athe
                     •
                  sme,
wickednes, impietie, sacriledge, and bloodie persecution, as by his next
argument which he bringeth for a conclusion of this discourse appeareth;
Which before we come vnto, this for conclusion we insert & rest
vpō, That our Sauiour CHRIST hath instituted, that of necessitie there
must be at the celebration of his last Supper a lawful Minister of the gospel
according to the rules of CHRISTES Testament to deliuer, a faithful
people by outward professiō to receiue, the pure elementes cōmanded
vsed, and that forme of administration which he and his Apostles prescribed:
That except al these concur, there is not the sacrament rightly
deliuered, neither maie any christian cōmunicate where he seeth any
of these rules broken. So then if Mr. GIFFARD had thus approued his
Ministerie, people, ministration by the rules of CHRISTES Testament,
and by the euidence, of Gods worde, he should more haue persuaded
& convinced vs,Reu. 16. 13. then by al this opprobrie, blasphemie, and rage which
he breatheth forth out of the mouth of that DRAGON,Prou. 26. 2. al which nowe
add vnto his owne,Deut. 18. 22 and not vnto our iudgments that feare not the
curse causeles;Pro. 24. 24 neither yet the false Prophets threates▪ whose custome
it is to curse them that God blesseth, and to blesse them that God curseth,
to iustifie the wicked, and to condemne the iust, Therfore shall he
be an abhomination both to God an men, as the Lorde himself hath
spoken. As to his bloodie Argument drawen from th'executiō of certaine
of SAVL his progenie, because Kinge SAVL in his hypocritish and
bloodie zeale murdered the Gibeonites, which were yeilded and made
slaues vnto them,Iosh. 4. contrarie to the will and commandement of God.
Ihosh. 8. Deutronomie 20. 10.1 King. 9. 20. 21. Our innocencie shalbe our defence, and his
refutation. If we haue committed or when we shall commit or consent

vnto any such crime, we refuse not the like iudgment. In the
meane time let all men iudge with what equitie or conscience this Caini
                        •
                     e
could thus applie & enforce this example against vs; And for conclusion,
let anie man by the worde of God iudge, whether we that reprooue
these their confuse parish assemblies consisting of all sortes of
ignorant, prophane, vngodlie▪ people, worshipping God after an idolatrous
maner, and liuing in al disorder & vngodlines &c, Or this mercenarie
sacrilegious Priest, that standeth a Minister to all these wicked,
deliuering the sacraments vnto them and blessing them with the
peace of God &c doe destroy & murder their soules. The scripture is
plentiful in this poinct.
            
            
               THE THIRD PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION
OR CAVSE OF OVR SEPARATION FROM
their assemblies, is.
               FOR that they haue a false antichristian ministrie imposed
vpon them, retained with them, and maintained by
them.
               AS we haue already shewed yt the house of God which is his church,
cannot be built or consiste of any other then such chosen, pretious
liuing stones as God hath thervnto caled, separated, appointed, namely
such faithfull obedient willing people as come vnder CHRISTS conduct,
and willingly submit to his gouernment, and cannot consiste of
prophane, wicked, vngodly, headstrong, disobediēt multitudes, whereon
the Whore is said to sit as vpon manie waters: So in like maner can
this house,Hebr. 3. this church, this people of CHRIST be built into none other
order,Ephes. 4. receiue none other ministrie and ordinances, then CHRIST the
owner & builder of the house hath instituted & prescribed in his last
wil & testament. We may boldly affirme & cōclude that flocke which
consisteth of all sortes of wilde & vncleane beastes, not to be the flocke
or shepe-folde of CHRIST, in asmuch as these in this estate cannot of
vs be iudged to be the shepe of CHRIST. We may also by the same vndoubted
reason affirme, that they which stand hierdes to these wilde
and vncleane beastes, cannot be said the Lordes shepeherdes of his
shepe & lambes. Of what sortes of people these their parish assemblies
generally consiste, how they haue bene gathered, builte, stand, and
walke in the faith & order of CHRIST, by that which is aboue written
may partly appeare, but much more shall to euerie single eye & heart
(wherein is any light) vpon the furder examination of their present
estate & life. That this Aucthor and all the Priestes of the tyme stand
hierdes, administring the Sacraments &c, to these prophane multitudes
in this ignorance, confusion, and sinne, after that idolatrous superstitious
maner aboue-said for their hire or tithes, cannot be denied.

What defence this Champion hath made for their publique administration
& worship, and how by neuer a worde of God he hath iustified
any one of those manifold enormities & idolatries reckoned vp vnto
him; As also how he hath approued the gathering and present estate
of their Church, by the greatest apostasies, defectiōs & sinnes of other
Churches in other ages, and with what blasphemous doctrines tending
to all Atheisme and impietie, we are content to refer to the iudgment
of the godly readers. And now being come to the proofe & defence
of his owne Ministrie which he exerciseth, and of the whole Ministrie
of their Church, instead of CHRISTS Testament he bringeth vs
forth a fable out of ESOPE of the asse in the Lyons skinne, and at the
first entrance into this discourse in the first page within the space of 24
lynes he convinceth vs with these arguments. That we are prompt & plentiful
in false accusations & hereticall opinions which must be admitted for reasons against their
Church, vvorship, ministerie. That vve are desirous of glorie, presumptuous, bold, rash,
ignorant, not to be encountred vvith great learning: Sophisters, nay poore artificers and husbandmen
are the eauenest matches to dispute vvith vs: VVe haue put on the Lions skinne
and imagine that all learned men tremble at vs, but they haue espied our long cares. That
vve impudently sclander and belye the learned, vvho disdaine to deale vvith mad frensie:
That vve are vvithout all care vvhat vve speake. &c. Is yt likely that this
man hath either care or conscience what he saith, that through his
whole booke from the first to the laste worde thus rayleth, inver
                     •
                  th,
accuseth, blasphemeth? Are these the sweetest waters in his fountaine,
the best salt he can season vs with? Or do the Ministers of the Church
of England thus vse to improue, rebuke, exhort with al longe suffring &
doctrine? Is this Mr. GIFFARDS countrie diuinitie or vniuersitie learning,
or Courtly Chaplen-like behauioure? He hath a president what
a goodly viewe Mr. SOME makes in his colours. If he lighted into some
mens handes that would take pleasure to laye open his shame, Mr.
SOME & his paynter might giue place in al rayling and vituperie where
this man should appeare. But our purpose is not to meddle with his
raylinges so much as his reasons, leauing him to answeare for the one,
and endeuouring our selues to answeare the other. Yet this we saye,
that if this be the course of those great learned the speaketh of, we had
much rather be matched with such poore artificers and husbandmen
as feare God (whom he despiseth) their with these greate Clarkes.
Yea we had much rather that they should in disdaine of our ignorance
breake their promise in denijng and refusing to conferre with vs, then
in this maner grieue the spirite of God in vs by such hellish writinges
as this booke of GIFFARD, peruerting the Scriptures, pleading for,
defending, and iustifijng the throne of iniquitie, together with all the
enormities, idolatrie, and abhominations which flowe from the same,
railing, blaspheming, and accusing the truth, and the poore persecuted
professors therof, as he doth. Yet to satisfie the reader in this matter
which he so confidently denieth, and vrgeth vs so vehemently to make
some colourable shewe of, That if he had consulted with his learned

bretheren the forewarde Preachers, they would haue councelled him
rather to haue vsed his discretion in the pulpit (where he might feigne
what error he lifte, and then with the same breath confute yt in our
names) then by conference, but especially thus by writing to meddle
with the defense of these defaults and exceptions taken against their
Church, Ministrie, Worship, &c, knowing that the more they are discussed
and raued in, the more apparant & odious they wil appeare vnto
all men; especially when they are brought vnto & examined by the
light,These two were Mr. FLOVD & Mr. CHATTERTON. which will foorth-with shew of what sorte they are.These two were Mr. FENNE & Mr. EGERTON. That these
Preachers had takē this course amongst thēselues we knowe certainly
by a letter that two of the cheif of them sent vnto vs, deni
                     •
                  ng that conference
which they had before promised, because we denyed their
Church and Ministrie. After that, two of them being procured to our
prison denyed to deale with vs concerning those exceptions we made
against their Church & Ministrie, alleadging that they were forbidden
by their bretherē to deale with vs in those matters. To be shorte, what

                     •
                  lls can with any probalitie be coniectured to be the hindrance of the
first companie of Preachers that at the first sent vnto vs to knowe the
causes of our dislike, promising either to assent, or to shew vnto vs the
causes whie they could not, that they vpon the sight of that litle paper,
(wherin we set downe vnto them the causes of our separatiō from these
parish assemblies, as also what we purposed in our owne assemblies) neuer
as yet could be drawen to make any answeare in writing or conference,
if not that they perceiued that they were neither able to defend
their estate, neither yet had faith to leaue it for feare of persecution &
danger. And whatsoeuer this bold champion may pretend, we cānot
be persuaded that euer the forewarde sort of Preachers (that sometime
laboured reformation) euer gaue their consentes to this blasphemous
booke of his, except also together with the aucthor therof, they haue
made shipwracke of faith & good conscience, and be wholy apostatate
& fallen frō that smale measure of grace & light they sometimes made
shew of▪ Neither shal those pontifical Prelates his Lordes, their horned
Cleargie, or Romish associates the Ciuilianes and Canonistes to whom he is
yeilded & ioyned, giue him any thanckes in the end for all the paynes
he hath taken to defend their apostatical throne & procedings: which
these his writinges are so far from defending & iustifijng as they manifest
vnto al men that they cannot be defended or iustified:
               TO our present purpose in this 3. PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, yt remayneth
that we nowe prooue this Ministrie of the Church of England
to be false & antichristian. Which that it may the sooner be donne
we are to enquire what kinde of ministrie CHRIST hath instituted and
left vnto his Church? Of which sort if we finde not these, then may
we with assurance from Gods owne worde pronownce them false and
antichristian. For as there is but one God, one CHRIST, one Spirite,
so is there but one true Church, ministrie ministration. CHRIST being

ascended gaue vnto his Church Apostels, Prophets, Euangelistes, Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, De
                        •
                     cons, widdowes.
                  Eph. 4. The 3. first, Apostes, Prophets, Euangelistes, being instituted
but for a time,Rom. 12. hauing finished their ministerie, ceased. For the
foundation being now fullie laide, the worde perfectlie exhibited, the
gospel throughlie and sufficientlie confirmed and ratified,1 Corinth. 3 the whole
frame of the building set vp and erect,Hebr. 2. and now a most perfect and absolute
patterne left vnto all Churches,2 Pet. 1. to what purpose should there
nowe be Apostles to lay the foundation,2 Timoth. 3 to giue the worde againe, Prophets
to ratifie and cōfirme the same,Acts. 20. 33▪
                   
                  Euangelistes to deliuer and shew the Apostles
rules vnto the Church? Besides that, the Lord hath euidētly shewed
(by the ceasing of th'extraordinarie calings and giftes vnto these offices)
that they are nowe perimplished and ceased, as might also by sondrie
other testimonies and direct scriptures be proued, if yt were needful
in so plaine a poynte. Nowe then there remaine by a perpetual decree
these Offices to the ministrie, gouernement, and seruice of the
Church. Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Relieuers.
                  1 Corinth. 12 Vnto these distinct offices,Acts. 14. 23
are fit and distinct members dulie chosen and ordayned by each seueral
Congregation,1 Timoth. 3 vpon due proofe according to the manifestatiō of
the spirit in each member so elect,Tit. 3. according vnto the rules prescribed
in Christes Testament; in which offices is required of them that they diligently
and faithfully administer,1 Corin. 4. 2 which whilest they doe, they are honored,
obeyed,1 Thes. 5. 12. 13. prouided for of the flock with al reuerēce, care, & loue.
Nowe let the ministrie of the Church of England be compared vnto and
examined by these rules of Christes Testament,1 Timo. 5. 17 in their office, entrance,
administration, maintenance. In al which we before affirmed them to
varie from the Testament of Christ, and to haue no place or mention
there, requiring of this Aucthor some proofe of his ministrie in these
pointes by the worde of God. In steade wherof wee haue his bare affirmations
to approue their ministrie, and his most bitter raylings to
convince and perswade vs after his accustomed maner, which euil either
satisfie vs or approue themselues to all mens consciences such as
they would be thought to be. We had thought our demaunde herein
had bene so iust and reasonable, as no true Church or Minister could
or would haue denied. And wonder that in this flourishing estate of
their Church which ouer-floweth with so great learning, aboundeth
with so manie writers, that not one of them should vndertake to approue
the ministrie of their Church directlie, by the rules of Gods
word in their Office, Entrance, Administration, Maintenance. Wherbie they might
iustifie themselues of such crimes wherof they are chardged▪ convince
their aduersaries & al gaine-sayers, and put an end to these controversies
and debates after a most christian and peaceable maner, much better
beseeming the Gospel and the ministers therof, then prisons, iudgment
seates, sclaunders, accusations, blasphemie, which hitherto haue
bene theire only Arguments. But now howsoeuer they be loth & will
by no meanes be entreated or vrged to this sober course & direct proof
by writing, or vnto anie christian free conference where these matters

might be discussed and decided by the worde of God peaceably, Let vs
yet (seing occasion is here administred, and as our present purpose wil
permit) shew some causes of our dislike whie we iudge them not the
true Ministrie of the Gospel, by shewing such apparnt discrepance, as
may declare vnto all men that they were neuer cast in that moulde.
And this but by a cursorie & briefe examinatiō, leauing the more exact
discussing & perfect demonstration of the forgerie, abuses, and enormities
of this Antichristian ministrie, to the furder diligence of others
endued with greater measure of giftes and iudgment.
               WE finde the permanent offices which CHRIST hath instituted for
the ministrie of his Church few in number, easilie recited, diuided,
and distinguished. The offices (as hath bene said) are these, of
the Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacon, Relieuer. These are diuided into Ouerseers
(whom wee call Bishops Episcopoi) and into Deacons.
                  Phil. 1. 1 The Ouerseers are
againe diuided into teaching & gouerning Elders:
                  A
                        •
                     ts. 20. and into such Elders as only
by office attend vnto Gouernement.
                  R
                        •
                     m. 12. 8 Of the first sort are the Pastor and Teacher.
                  1 T
                        ••
                     o. 5. 17
Of the second such Elders as are elect to the ouersight & gouernment
of the Churche. These offices are distinguished one from an
other in their seueral functions by the Apostle Roma. 12. and in sondrie
other places of scripture. The Pastor to attend to exhortation. The
Teacher to doctrine.Act. 6. The Elder to gouernement. The Deacon to
collect and distribute the benevolence & contribution of the Saincts.
                     
                        •
                      Timoth. 5
The Relieuers to attend to the sicke, impotent &c. But the offices of
the Ministerie of the Church of England wee finde so manie & intricate,
as are harde to be recited, diuided, or distinguished, and require greater
skil then I haue therevnto. Yet (so my simple conceipt preiudize
not others of better iudgment) for memorie sake and to avoide prolixitie,
they may thus bee diuided and recited at once. First more generallie
into Reigning gouerning. 2. Collegiate or idle, and 3. Seruile or mercenary.
The Reigning or gouerning may be diuided into 1. Bishops their assistants
and substitutes. 2. Certaine Commissioners and certaine. 3. delegate Doctors &c.
These Bishops may be diuided in 1. Arch-Bishops. 2. Palatine Bishops, and. 3. ordinarie
Lord Bishops. Nowe the Arch-Bishops may be diuided againe into
the .1. Primate Metropolitane of al England, and the 2. Metropolitane of the North.
partes. The Raining ministerie thē of the Church of England as I suppose
vnder correction and better information, may be summed into these
offices of Arch-Bishops, Lord Bishops, Chauncelors, Commissaries, Arch-Deacons, High
Commissioners, Ciuile Doctors with their Courtes and attendants, Aduocates,
Proctors, Registers, Notaries, Purseuants, Somoners. The idle or Collegiat Ministrie
as I take it are partlie in the Colleges of the Vniversities As Masters of houses,
Presidents, Bowsers, Fellowes: Or more generallie according to their degrees
Doctors of diuinity, Bachelers of diuinity, Masters of Arte, Bachelers of arte, Clarkes. These
hitherto without certaine office, place, or chardge in the Church. And
partlie in their Cathedral Churches. As L. Bishop, Deane, Sub-deane, Prebendaries,
Cannons, Peticannons, Gospellers, Pistelers, Singing men, Singing boyes, Vergiers, Sextines.
The seruile Ministrie is diuided into these seueral offices. Of Parson,

Vicar
                        •
                     , Curai
                        •
                     , Deacon, or half-Priest, Church-warden, Sideemen, Quest-men, Parrish Clarck.
But now to distinguish or describe all these offices according to their
seueral orders and cannons, to shewe their original, processe, and contynuance
in their seueral tymes, occasions, and circumstances, were
not onlie a labor to me intricate and vnachiueable, but to the reader
tedious and vnprofitable, as withdrawing them from the certaine and
vnvariable rules of Gods worde, to the vncertaine and variable reportes
of mē. Sufficeth it therfore that we finde not in al the booke of
God anie such titles, names, dignities, offices, giuen or to be giuen to
the Ministrie of Christes Gospel:Reu. 13. 1. & 17. 3. but we finde them rather those names
of blasphemie written vpon those heades of the Beast. For if it be blasphemy
for anie mortal mā to receiue, assume, or chalēge those names,
titles, dignities, or offices which are peculier and proper to CHRISTES
sacred person alone, Then are these chief Ministers of the Church of
England, these Arch-Bishops, & Lord Bishops highlie guilty of blasphemie,
that chalēdge & assume vnto themselues, some one of them to be
the Prima
                     •
                  e of al the Bishops in England & Ireland, an other to be an Arch-Bishop,
a Metropolitane, others to be Lord Bishops, the leaste of these
Anakims to reigne ouer I knowe not how manie hundreth Churches &
Bishops. That Christ is the onlie Primate and Arch-chiefe Bishop and
Prince of Pastors the Apostle Peter giueth euidēt testimonie 1 Epist. 5. Cap.
4. vers
                        •
                     
                   as also the holie Ghost Hebr. 13. 20. That Christ is the onlie Lorde
Bishop euery where appeareth in the scriptures, and that al other christian
Bishops are but seruāts & fellowes, is fownd Iohn. 13. Luk. 22. Mat. 20.
Mar. 10. where Christ himself in expresse words with vehement chardges
forbiddeth euen his Apostles, I say not such blasphemous titles onlie,
but all other wordlie titles of honor, all ciuile iurisdiction and secular
power ouer others, and such arrogancie and presumption one ouer an
other as these pontificall Prelates and Lordlie Bishops vsurpe, most directly,
wittingly & willingly against the commandmēt of Christ. Which
they thincke to put away & abrogate by a second lawe of the Prince &
Parlamēt, who (they saye) haue cast these honors & titles vpon them,
and therfore neither cā they refuse, neither may others blame them for
this, except they shew thēselues disobediēt to her Matie. and enemies to
ye State. We wil answeare these their criminatiōs of state matters at anie
tyme before competēt iudges. In the meane while let them answere vs
in good conscience whether they iudge it lawful for Princes to giue, or
at anie hand for themselues to receiue such titles, dignities &c, as Christ
hath so expresly & often forbidden them. And whether their holy Father
the Pope might not so iustifie his exa
                     •
                  tation and supremacie by the
Emperors donatiō, ye confirmatiō of manie Natiōs, States & Councels
through manie ages. If it be here alleadged that these titles which we
so stand vpō, are but ciuile accomplemēts giuē them by the Prince, but
trifles, no matters of substance to preiudice their ministrie, they being
preachers of the worde; Yet must they acknowledge them inhibited
verie seuerely & oftē by Christes owne mouth. And therfore they by this

allegation laye the blame vpon Christ that forbad them, and not vpon vs
that hold thē vnlawful & intollerable in the ministrie. Furder, if they
be merely Civile, let them thē answere whie they are & how they may
be thus ioyned to ecclesiastical persons & offices. And if they be such
trifles, whie then these graue Fathers these holy men so violently contend
with, and bloodely persecute their bretheren for them. And this
also let them consider & acknowledge, that these triffles or titles they
vsurpe are prooued most execrable blasphemies, names vvritten vpon
the heades of the Beast, and not vpon the members or Minister of Christ.
And in their best allegatiō, that they are directly contrarie to the commaundement
of Christ, who prohibiteth his Ministers all such titles,
howsoeuer Mr. Giffard alleadge against al cōscience and truth that they
exercise no Lordship ouer the faith and consciences of men: the vntruth
wherof shal hereafter appeare; yet this Lordship they receiue &
exercise, euen in the best consideration, is expresly cōtrarie to the commandement
of Christ, and such as no true Minister of the Gospel, either
wil or may receiue, plead for, or iustifie.
               ANd now that we may come a litle nearer their Ministrie, it would be
knowen what office these Lordlie Prelates, these Primates, Metropalitanes,
Arch & Lord Bishops exercise in the Church of Christ. For
euerie Minister must be of necessitie in som perticular office. I speake
not nowe of the offices they beare in the commōwealth: as to be Peres
of the Realme, Lordes of the Parlament, Iudges of ciuile causes in
Courtes, Iustices of the peace &c, but of their ecclesiastical offices, as
being Bishops, whither they haue anie of the ord
                     •
                  narie and permanent
offices, as Pastors, Teachers, Elders. Or of those extraordinarie temporarie
offices which are nowe ceased of Apostles, Prophets, Euangelis
                        •
                     es. And sure
by their magnificent stile, glorious titles, extraordinarie power, irregular
aucthoritie, and inordinate rule, I should rather iudge thē of these
extraordinarie offices, saue that I finde those wholie nowe ceased, not
expedient or to be loked for, and also that th'estate, behauioure, and
doings of those Bishops accorde not to those offices. First Apostles these
Bishops are not in that they haue no immediate caling from God, or
confirmed by God vnto that office:Mat. 28. 19 Neither doe they execute yt as
Christs Apostles did,Acts. 1. they goe not from place to place, from countrie to
countrie,Iohn. 20. 21 22. to preach the Gospel, to call the people to the faith, to gather
& plant Churches; Neither haue they receiued such measure of grace,
or can ratifie and approue by such euidēt testimonie,Math. 10. power, and wonders
the doctrines,Acts. 4. 30 & 5. 12. rules, and ordinances which they deliuer vnto and
impose vpon their Churches, to be of God:1 Cor. 3. 11 Yet seing they lay a newe
and an other foundation then the Apostles haue laide,2 Cor. 11. 13. deliuer other
doctrines, rules, and ordinances as appeareth by the whole ministrie,
worship, ministration, ordinances and gouernement of their Church,
then the Apostles haue taught and left; seing also they vsurpe a greater
power and preeminence one ouer an other, One being a Primate, an
other an Arch-Bishope &c, then the Apostles did; Wee neuer reading of

anie Primate, Arch, or Lord Apostle: (Peters chayre now not standing in Englād)
They had neede to confirme their offices, calings, doings, power by no
les
                     •
                  e miracles & testimonies thē the Apostles did; if they wil haue their
ministrie & doings allowed & receiued:2 T
                        •
                     es. 2. 9. 10. which if they should doe and
draw fire from heauē, yet ought we to belieue & hold fast that perfect

                     •
                  oundation which CHRISTES Apostles haue layde,Reu. 13. 14. that authenticke alsufficient
worde which they haue left, as an absolute patterne for al actions
of the Church vnto the worlds end; and to hold them accursed,
men or Angels that teach any thing besides that, or to varie from the
same.Gal. 1. Neither what signes or miracles soeuer they shall doe, may we
hold them Prophe
                        •
                     s, seing they persuade yea enforce to idolatrie & apostasie,
as by their publick worship appeareth.Deut. 13. And as to Euangelistes that
office is too meane & base for these fellowes.1 Tim. 1. 2. The Euangelistes toke their
caling,Tit. 1. 4. sending, and whole directiō from the Apostles, neither swarued
from the same in any thing,1 Cor. 4. 17. but faithfully deliuered to the Churches
those rules they receiued, and assisted thē in the practize therof.Phil. 2. 22. These
men in that they haue no such caling to their office, neither doe so execute
yt, not caling the Church vnto or helping them in,2 Tim. 4. 5. but drawing
them from & vtterly forbidding them the practize of those rules & ordinances
the Apostles left; teaching, bringing in, setting vp, and inforcing
their owne or other humane deuises & ordinances vpō ye church
in stead therof; and that in such high & waightie matters as the bringing
in a new & strange Ministrie, Ministration, Worship, and Gouernement.
For all which causes & reasons & many other which might be
drawen from the rules of CHRISTS Testament, and their whole worke
and doings which in nothing accordeth to the true patterne, we must
hold them false Apostles and Prophets, counterfeite Euangelistes, deceiptful
worckmen & builders.
               Neither yet, if we but as fleightly examine them by & compare them
vnto the rules of Christes Testament, shall we finde them to execute
any of the ordinarie permanent offices of the Bishops belonging vnto
Christes Church, as the Pastors, Teachers, Elders office.Act. 14. 23 A true christian
Pastor ought to be chosen of some one peculiar flocke,Tit. 1. 5. where after due
proofe he is to be publickly ordeined & receiued.Acts. 20. 21 Vnto which peculiar
flocke he is bownde by couenāt to administer & attend. Neither doth
his Pastorall dutie, ministrie, and chardge extend to more flockes or
Churches at one tyme then that one, wherof he is chosen Pastor: Neither
may a true Pastor aduance himself either in titles or power aboue
or ouer other christian Pastors his fellowe bretheren; howsoeuer he
haue receiued a greater measure of giftes, by so much he ought to behaue
himself the more lowly, and to apply himself the more carefully
& diligently to serue the Lord with the same, according to his pleasure
& appoinctment within the limites of his caling; wherin if he behaue
himself faithfully he receiueth praise, if not, reproofe & censure of the
whole flock accordingly. But now these Arch and Lord Bishops neither
haue any certaine ministrie ouer or in any one peculiar flocke, neither

anie such 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   by or in any one Congregation, but are elected
either by the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      & Colledge of the Deane & Chapter, or ells by the
Prince, consecrate, invested, inthronised, or instawled, with I know not
how manie popish rites, trincketes, ceremonies belonging thervnto;
whose verie ordinarie attire is so popish, ridiculous, and f
                     •
                  nde, as they
passe not in the streates without the wonderment & skorne of young
and olde. Their ministerie also is not limited and tyed to one certaine
office, or to one certaine flocke, but as they exercise sondrie offices, so
doe they it ouer & in sondrie Churches, preaching, administring the
Sacraments, where and when they liste of their pontifical aucthoritie,
and ceasing againe from preaching &c. at their owne pleasures when
& how longe they list. Againe some of them exerciseth absolute aucthoritie
ouer al, no one of them but ouer many hindreth Churches &
Ministers, ouer all causes and doctrines, to cite, sommon, suspend, silence,
excommunicate, absolue, emprison, 
                     •
                  equester, con
                     •
                  iscate at their
pleasure whom and wherfore they liste without accompt or controlement,
no not by the Princes royall Writts and Courtes to which euery
soule ought to be subiect. They impose vpon all Churches and Ministers
their owne deuises for the publicke worship & administration,
stinting and limiting the Pastor what wordes to reade and say, what
scriptures to reade on this and that daye through the yeere. They
limite and restraine the doctrine of the Pastor from speaking against
anie thing by publick aucthoritie commanded. They determine and
dispose of all the doctrines and causes of all Churches at their owne
will, no man so hardie to gai
                     •
                  e say or to cal in question anie thing they
affirme, or to denie anie thing they commande or forbid. There is
nothing iudged error in the Church of ENGLAND, but what they iudge
to be error, be yt neuer so grosse, popish, blasphemouse, nor anie
thing compted truth which they pronounce error, be yt neuer so holy,
sounde, and warranted by Gods worde. The whole ministrie, doctrine,
publick administration, causes and censures of the Church of
ENGLAND, are wholie in their handes, to commande, restraine or execute
vpon al persons, and they themselues subiect to no reproofe, liable
to no censure. Now let any iudge that knoweth what belongeth to the
office, entrance, and administratiō of the Pastors office, whether these
Bishops possesse this office, be rightly caled and entered to the same,
and faithfully administer & execute the same. The teachers office for
the reasons aboue-said they cannot hold or chalendge, both in regarde
of the fastuous titles & inordinate power and aucthoritie which they
vsurpe & exercise ouer all the ministerie, euen such as they cal Pastors,
and ouer all Churches, causes, censures &c, which can at no hand be
ioyned or agree vnto the christiā Teachers office. As also for that they,
their ministrie, and office belongeth not to any one peculiar Congregation.
The like reasons maie be drawen from their Popish entrance
and administration, seing they take vpon them to deliuer the Sacraments,
and attend not vnto doctrine only or diligently, giuing ouer &

ceasing to preach whē they list, neither submit the doctrines they teach
to the cēsure & tryal of other Prophets by the Scriptures. For al which
reasons and sondrie other, they cannot be said to haue or exercise the
christian Teachers office. Last of al, the office of gouerning Elders
they haue not, for all the same reasons; In that they are not chosen of
& belong not vnto any perticular Congregation to which they should
be bownde by duetie to attend. Neither euer did we reade in al Christes
Testament of any Bishops or Ministers (setting aside those temporarie
offices of Apostles, Prophets, Euangelists that where chosen, did attend, or minister
vnto diuers or more then one Congregation or office at one
time. Certaine rules being there giuen for their election, ordination,
and administration of & in one Congregation, with manifold admonitions
& exhortatiōs to sture them vp vnto diligēce, labour, and watchfulnes
in that office & place they are caled vnto, as a worke enough for
him that thinketh himself most able to dischardge it. And sure most
monstruous & impossible it were for one man faithfully to attend diuers
Congregations, Except they can also shew that one sheepheard at
one & the same time can diligently feed & guide two or many flockes
far distant in place, Or that one candle may be put into two candlesticks,
and giue light vnto two seueral houses far distant asunder at one
& the same instant. If the one be impossible, so is the other. Yet stand
these men Bishops or Ouerseers not only to manie Churches each one
of them, But their Primate giueth, or rather selleth licēces to other inferior
Priestes, some one of them to stand a Minister to two, yea peraduenture
to three seueral flockes. This is an vsual matter and passeth by
way of sta
                     •
                  ute lawe amongst the Chapleins & Doctors of the Church
of England, who may haue & be Non Resident some of them from two, some
from three Congregations or benefices, especially all his Graceless Chaplaines,
by a singular prerogatiue. But to retourne againe to our purpose,
these Arch and Lord Bishops cannot be said to haue this office of
gouerning Elders, for that they professe to be Ministers of the worde &
Sacramentes, which duetie belongeth to the Pastors office. And because
they exercise absolute power ouer Pastors, Churches, and causes▪
to depose, excommunicate, absolue, and determine in their owne sole
name & power, which no true Elder Minister or mēber of Christ may do.
Reasons also might be drawen from their sitting, chandging, aspiring
to the richer & higher roomes. Frō their Princely Lordly flate, pompe,
trayne, reuenues, pallaces wherin they liue in all wordly excesse, pleasure,
idlenes, to which thinges whilest they attend, it is impossible they
should faithfully execute & dischardge any ministrie in the Church.
From ye apparāt & odious sinnes of their persons & liues, that appeare
and breake out in their conversatiō, which is most vnchristian, fleshly,
and vnholy. As coueteousnes, oppressiō, extortion, open wrong doing,
v
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ie, ambition, pride, idlenes, louers of pleasure, such as cannot gouerne
their wiues, children, and families in the feare of God, sobrietie,
or common honestie, but nourish and bring them vp in pride, vanitie,

idlenes, superfluitie, voluptuousnes, gaining, chambering, and w
                     •
                  ntonnes,
yea peraduēture vnchasti
                     •
                  g and that not vnknowen to the inselues,
who also themselues are not all of them of the most chaste and
temperate life,1 Tim. 3. some of them being giuen to wyne, strikers, 
                     •
                  orcerers,
blasphemers,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                   skorners, and deriders of the most holie exercise of the
preaching of Gods worde, causing their counterfeight and natural
fooles openly in their owne house at 
                     〈…〉
                  
feastes to make a 
                     •
                  ermon o
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   or fallie in the most high
despight of God, and of his blessed ordinance. Not here to perticulate
the sondrie heresies contrarie to the truth and blasphemies of the
truth holdē amōgst them; the least of which faultes publickly knowē,
are enough to di
                     •
                  able the best of them from exercising any publicke
ministrie to the Lorde in his Church, if we may belieue the Apostle.
To conclude,Math. 20. 25. 26. this one reason (if there were no more) might shew and
proue them to be no christian Bishopps, in that they exercise some ciuile
office or offices together with this their pretended ministrie.Luk. 12. 14.
Which is not only expresly forbidden & vtterly vnlawful by the worde
of God, but also impossible for any man to performe both, or either of
both faithfully whilest he keepeth both. God himself hath made two
distinct and seueral offices, and appoincted vnto them two distinct &
seueral persons for Ministers: It being no more lawfull for a Bishop
to execute the ciuile Magistrates office, then for the ciuile Magistrate
to administer the Sacraments. What mōstruous parsons then are they
which thus confounde & commingle in their owne persons these two
diuers and distinct offices and powers? Might not they that assume
both the swordes into their handes, carry them acrosse also in their
cote armour, aswel as their holie Father the POPE? What a monstrous
confusion and perturbation make they both in Church and common
wealth herebie? disturbing the holie order that God himself hath set
for the gouernement both of the Church and common wealth in this
worlde, remouing yea vtterly breaking downe therbie all the limites
and bowndes which God hath set and established for all estates, degrees,
offices, callinges, actions, so that no man by this meanes either
knoweth his duetie, or orderly walketh within the bowndes of his
calling, wherbie it is come to passe that the whole land ouer-floweth
with all impietie, violence, cruelitie and iniquitie, as in the dayes of
NOE,
               Thus by al these reasons haue we proued, and al that haue not vtterly
made shipwrack of faith & good cōscience, or that stand not vowed
bond seruantes to their apostaticall throne, must confesse, That these
Arch & Lord Bishops are no true christian Bishops according to the Gospel
of CHRIST, neither haue or exercise any lawful office or ministri of
or in the Church of CHRIST. If then they be not members of that body
belōging to that heade CHRIST IESVS, it must needes followe that they,
their offices, & ministrie are false & antichristiā, belonging to an other
head, an other bodie, euē Antichrist, and that whoore the false Church

his spouse. If their inordinate power and irregular ministrie be found
contrarie to al the rules and ordinances of Christes Testament, then can
yt not be of God, belong vnto, or vsed in Christes Church, or be blessed
to the gouernement or saluation of his people: Then must it needes be
the power and throne of Sathan giuen to the Beast, accursed, giuen to
seduce, and to drawe all the children of wrath to distruction. Neither
shal Mr. Giffard or all the false Prophets belonging to their throne, be
able to tourne away or withstand those iudgments and plagues which
are powred out of the Lordes viall vpon the throne of the Beaste, or
with their soft tongues to licke whole the woundes of the Beaste, that
are giuen with that two edged sword that procedeth out of CHRISTES
mouth. It shal not help them though they raile and blaspheme and
gnawe their tongues for grief. For their kingdom shal wax darke, and
Antichrist shal cōsume & be abolished as he is reueiled,2 Thes. 2. 8. euē by ye same
light: the Lord himself hath spoken yt. How weake nowe & sclender
are Mr. Giffards defences for these his Lordes the Bishops. That the Bishops
haue not their caling, consecration, or power from the Pope, but from their Church. That they
haue by oath renownced the Popes vsurped power and tyrannie. That they do not maintaine
or defend the religion and lawes of Antichrist, but professe and aduance the gospel of Christ,
and by the liuely word cut downe all idolaitre, heresies, abhominations. That they vsurpe not a
Lordship ouer the faith and consciences of men, but their peculiar power is onlie in the administration
of external discipline. Therfore we vvith manifest and vvicked sclander call the
Bishops Antichristian. If you demande the proofe of al this, wee refer you
to Mr. Giffards bare affirmation without anie one reason in his learned
answeare to the Brownistes, Page. 75. If he were himself sometime of an
other minde, you must thincke it was before he had so neere friendship
with, or was imployed in such trustie seruices by his Lord of Londō.
Who, as also his Lords grace, must not be driuen to proue euerie thing
they affirme, that were enough to put young diuines vnto, their pontifical
mouth is sufficient warrant to all the Churches in England. Yet I
would of their curtesie they would giue vs their Schismatiks that cannot
be so satisfied, leaue to doubt (though we wil not contēd) whether
their Caling, Consecration, and this their Power first came not from the Pope.
For albeit we haue heard that the offices of Prouincial Bishops, Arch Bishops,
Metropolitanes where almost when this general defection from the gospel
so much foretold of began to breake out and appeare, longe before the
Pope obtayned his Supremacie ouer al other Churches and Ministers: Yet
might it be that this maner of their caling, solemne consecration, and
lardge irregular power of his Lords Grace & Lord Bishops sprong from their
vnholie Father the Pope. Who when he was inthronized by Sathan, had
receiued the Dragons high commission, to be his Vicare general in earth,
could not of his fatherhoode but prouide for these his natural childrē,
and bestowe them in his garrison Cities, as his Tetrarches, Lieutenants & Tribunes,
with magnificent titles, priuiledges, power, and authoritie to rule
in his name and absence, euen as his owne engrauen image ouer all
Realmes, Countries, & Territories within their Fathers dominiōs. For

(as we haue also crediblie hearde) there was neuer a Lorde Arch-Bishop or
Lorde Bishop with such titles, priuiledges, power, hearde of before the
Pope created them. Notwithstanding because wee haue these thinges
but bie hearesay, and would be lothe to affirme of things so vnsure, we
wil content our selues to haue proued and shewed the Arch Lord Bisshops
to be no true Ministers of the gospel and Church of CHRIST,
and therfore of themselues antichristian, from whom or howsoeuer
they rise it skilleth vs not. Neither shall it auaile them though they
haue broken their faith and schismed from the Pope, cast off his yoke,
renownced his vsurped power and tyrannie, when they themselues are
rounde to vsurpe, retaine and exercise, if not the same, yet as antichristian
& enormous a power as the Pope, retayning the same Courts▪
Officers, Cannons, constitutions, priuileges ouer all Churches, Ministers,
causes, doctrines, censures, they themselues not being subiect to
the censure of anie Church, exercising their aucthoritie and commandementes
contrarie vnto and aboue all lawes both of God and of
their Prince; whose Royall Courts and writts are not of power to baile anie
one committed by the leaste of their hierarchie, assuming vnto themselues
both the swordes, exercising together and at once both ciuile
and ecclesiasticall offices &c. How well they aduance the Gospel of
CHRIST, that blaspheme the same, and pronounce the rules, ordinances,
and ministrie therof intollerable, and persecute all such as
either speake against them, or for yt, Let the tyrannous hauocke they
make in the common wealth of poore christians in the prisons of the
land, shewe. How wel by the liuelie worde they cut downe all idolatrie,
heresies, and popish abhominations, let the seruice-booke and
publick worship of their Churche, shewe. Which whilest with a
stronge hande they obtrude vpon euerie conscience, as also impose
vpon the Church, is not this to tyrannize and exercise a Lordship ouer
the faith and conscience? Or (to speake as he doth) is this nothing
but to execute the external discipline, to make and impose a newe Leitourgie
for the whole administration of the Church? Or is it likelie
that this marcked Minister of ANTICHRIST knewe what the outward
gouernment of CHRIST in his Church meaneth, that saith yt concerneth
not the conscience? Is there anie more dreadful or reuerend
action on earth amongst men, then the iudgmentes of CHRIST in
his Church, which are al most holie and true? Or doe not these concerne
the conscience? Doth not euerie action of which there are such
certaine lawes set by CHRIST himself, nearelie concerne the conscience
to doe it according to the same? when the least abuse, neglect,
or swaruing from the rule euen in the least circumstance that is enioyned
in the least censure doth so deface the action, is so offensiue & preiudicial,
do not those actions which are donne for the saluation of
soules,M
                        •
                     th. 18. that are said to binde in heauen, not concerne the conscience?
Or doe not those rules which are giuen for the direction and preseruation
of the publick communion of the whole Church,1. Corinth▪ 5. and priuate

conuersation of euerie member therof (without the obseruation of
which rules there can be no order, no dutie either publick or priuate,
no holie walking in anie caling kept) concerne the conscience? Except
Mr. Giffard can imagine such a Congregation and such members
therof, as either neuer sinne, and so need no watching ouer, admonition,
reproof, Or ells such a Church and members therof as make no
conscience of anie thing, as when they sinne will not amend, wil not
heare admonition, or suffer reproof, which is the meanes giuen of God
to bring them to amendement. Yet Mr. Giffard maketh this holie outward
gouernment of CHRIST ouer and in his Church not to concerne
the conscience; the myserable diuines of this age, not to be of necessitie
to the beeing and preseruation of a Church; the blasphemous Bisshops
of this land, not to be a thing tollerable, with manie other reprochfull
blasphemies of the same, which are not of anie christian
almost to be hearde or repeated, much lesse pronounced and defended.Math. 21.
These husbandmen are they that caste the Sonne and heyre out
of the vineyarde,Luk. 19. 14▪
                   that wil not haue him reigne ouer them, but take the
regiment into their owne hands, deuising and erecting a newe forme
of gouernement vnto the Church, as these their popish Courtes, Cannons,
Customes, Officers declare, and persecuting with al hostility and
tyranny all such as pleade for Christes gouernement, and wil not subiect
their bodies and soules vnto their antichristian yoke. But yet for all
this they exercise no Lordship ouer the faith and conscience, though
they vsurpe, exercise, and impose this strange ministrie, ministration,
and gouernement in and ouer the Church. All this saith Mr. Giffard
is but th'administration of exernall discipline, and concerneth not the
conscience, (especiallie if it be seared with a whote Iron as Mr. Giffard
is.) Wherfore we doe impudentlie and wickedlie sclander when wee
therfore conclude that the Bishops be antichristian, and whosoeuer is
ordayned by them, hath his ministrie from Antichrist and from the
Deuil. What kinde of ministrie your Lord Bishops exercise, and aucthoritie
they vsurpe, by that which is alreadie written the reader may
iudge, or at leaste hath a direct way shewed furder to examine: What
kinde of rule they keepe or (as you call it) discipline they execute, remaineth
to be tryed in the fourth principal transgression: Where if you make
not a better defence for it then you haue donne for their Ministrie and
ministration, they are all like to proue (as wee haue affirmed them)
strange, false, forged, antichristian, such as belong not vnto and
cannot be exercised in anie christian Church: and then let Mr. Giffard
see whether that grieuous conclusion will follow and fal vpon the men
vpon whom the marcke of the Beast is 
                     •
                  ownde, that ministrie which
is ordayned by, proceded from, and standeth vnder the throne of
these antichristian Bishops. In the meane while let vs in a verie few
wordes consider of the rest of the ministerie in the Church of England
in their order.
               
                  
WE would gladly learne of him what office in the Church of God,
Chancelors and Commissaries, may be said to exercise, for we confesse
that in Christes Testament we neuer read of their names or offices: they
are strangers there, and we in all the worlde knowe not from whence
they came or who brought them into the Church, if not their Father
the Pope, or durste there retaine them, but these his children & successors
the Bishopps. A lardge power they haue and exercise ouer all
parrish Churches their Ministers and Members, to keepe a iudiciall
Courte, to cite, cōuent, trie, punish by mu
                     •
                   ct, iudge, imprison absolue,
purge, not only for ecclesiastical causes as the neglect of their ceremonies
and trinckets, and for not duelie reading and obseruing their iniunctions
& seruice-booke, but also for ciuile causes, yea criminatory
and iudicial causes, such as by the lawe of God deserue death, and only
belong to the Princes royall aucthoritie, to whom therfore God hath
committed his sworde: Whose iudgment seate & aucthoritie for anie
priuate person to vsurpe, is iudged rebellion both by the lawe of God
and of this land. For all that take the sworde shall dye in the sworde
Math. 26. 52. Againe these Chauncelors and Commissaries are Ciuilians (laye men
as they cal them) & not Priestes, therfore we meruaile how they came
to exercise such an high ministrie ouer and in the Church.
               The same we say of their other delegate ciuile Doctors of their Courtes &
trayne of Aduocates, Proctors, Registers &c. We finde in the Testamēt of Christ
no mention, in the Church of Christ no vse of such Offices, Officers,
Courtes, to decide their cōtrouersies, to execute their censures & iudgments.
These handle both ecclesiastical and ciuile causes mixtlie, after
a most corrupt and litigious maner, amongst whom al things are venal
in their Courtes &c, wherof in due place: sufficeth it here to finde
them in name, office, and vse counterfeit, forged, false, without mention
or warrant in Gods worde, such as not Christ but Antichrist deuised &
brought in.
               As to the persons in their high commission they are of two sortes, chieflie
ecclesiastical, and partlie (for countenance and fashion sake) ciuile;
Of the ecclesiastical we haue aboue entreated. Neither finde wee that
anie ciuile person may exercise anie ecclesiastical office or function: as
to ouer-see so manie Churches, to decide and determine ecclesiastical
causes, or to execute the censures of the Church, as by way of office or
by vertue of anie humane commission, especially after that vngodlie
maner, which is in al things so contrarie to the order Christ hath instituted,
so contrary to the faith, power, and libertie of Christes Church, as
were not hard to shewe if we should examine their procedings by the
rules of Gods worde. And great ruth it is that so noble and honorable
personages should be so highly abused by these wicked Bishops. The
Lorde in mercie shew them their deceipts, the error and daunger of
their wayes.
               Yet of this gouerning ministrie remayneth the Arch head Deacon of the
Church of England to be considered of, who is no smale officer of this

Church, hauing and keeping his solemne iudiciall Court, Synode, and
procedings in such ecclesiastical causes as fal within his consideration,
with absolute power in his owne name also to cite, sommon, iudge,
and punish all such parish Churches with their Parsons and Ministers
as fal within his limites. To impose taskes vpon Pastors, what scriptures
to reade priuately euerie daye, what to conne by heart, and to
take accompt of them at his Synodes accordingly. This Arch-Deacon also
(if such be his learning that he can) may administer the worde and
Sacramentes, and haue a benefice or two for neede. Howsoeuer, he
may pleade and boaste of his antiquitie aswell as the Arch-Bishop, and of
the great cause of his erection and necessarie vse of his office &c. Yet
seing we finde no mention of his name, or vse of his office, in all the
Testament of CHRIST, seing we finde there no such Heade Arch-Deacons
with such stately Courtes and absolute iutisdiction, and that not ouer
many Deacons but manie of their Pastors, yea manie whole Churches, we
must, or rather the Lorde hath giuen the same sentence of them, that
is giuen of their fellowes aboue-said, That they are not the ordinance
or ministrie of CHRIST, but of Antichrist, euen the heades and limbes
of that Beaste, that wilbe held within no limites or boundes, in no order
or callings, but breake, corrupt, and confounde all lawes, boundes
order,Colloss. 18. 
                        •
                     
                   and offices as they luste. CHRIST himself is the only heade of
all his Ministers,1 Cor. 12. 27 whether Pastors, Teachers, Deacons &c, and they againe
his members of their part.Acts. 6. The christian Deacon is to attend to the faithful
collection and distribution of the ben
                     •
                  uolence of the Sainctes,Rom. 12. 8.
and not to such Court-keeping ouer the Church,1 Tim. 3. ministrie, and
Sainctes: He is to attend in his function to that peculiar flocke wherof
he is chosen a Deacon, and not in this maner to intrude and incroach
vpon manie Churches. A christian Deacon is to kepe himself within
the boundes of his owne office in sobrietie, and not to intermeddle
with the Pastors office also, with the ministration of the worde and
sacramentes: yea to exalt himself and vsurpe power and iurisdiction
ouer his superiors, not only ouer many Pastors, but ouer manie whole
Churches. Thus haue we taken a superficiall veiwe, or rather as yt
were a sodaine blush of the reigning Ministerie of the Church of England,
leauing the furder inuestigation and demonstration of the manifold
deformities therof to their furder diligence, to whom God hath giuen
greater knowledge and opportunitie, leauing place also vnto Mr. GIFFARD
or anie of that false hierarchie to make defence and iustification of
these poyntes wherin they are here chardged by the worde of God.
Which if they can doe, then let them be held excused, and vs iustly
chardged with impudent and wicked sclander. In the meane while I
haste to the second sort of their Ministrie.
               THe next sorte of the ministrie of the Church of England is the Collegiat
or idle Ministrie, which may be diuided, or rather distinguished (because
sometimes they are mixed & ioyned, one man being a master of

a College and a Deane, a fellowe of a house & a Prebend, and each of
them haue a Parsonage or two for a neede) into these two kindes, Academical
and Cathedral, The third sort, the Monastical, being by the hand of
God and the Magistrates sworde cut off & suppressed. These Academical
Diuines liue, haue their education & degrees in the Colleges, Halles, and Celles
of the two Vniuersities, The originall corrupt customes & vse of which
places, it is not mie purpose here to discourse; Neither indeed haue I
skill aright to discusse whither and how they sprange from the Heathens,
or from the Papistes. Only this I dare affirme, that from the
Booke of God they neuer diriued these their Colleges, Scholes, Hales,
Orders, Degrees, Vowes, Customes, Ceremonies, Attires, that I say
not their Artes, Aucthors, exercise, and vse of their learnings, disputations,
commencements &c. But as they haue receiued them ells
where, so haue they euer belonged to an other heade and kingdome,
and can by no meanes (in this estate they now stand & haue tyme out
of minde continued) be made to accorde to the Gospel and kingdome
of CHRIST, wherof these Vniuersitie Diuines haue euer bene the professed
and most bitter enemies, furnishing Antichrists hoste in all the roomes
and places, even from the POPES chayre, to the parish Priestes pulpit or
pue, with fresh seruitors continually, corrupting the pure fountaines,
and peruerting the text it self with their gloses, paraphrases,
notes, figures &c, fighting with their schole learning, vayne artes, philosophie,
rethoricke, and logique against the truth and seruantes of
God, striuing herebie to vphold Antichristes ruynous kingdome and abhominable
wares, which these marchantmen set to sale for gaines, as
we by present experience see (nowe their portion and idle monasticall
life, beginneth but euen a litle to be reproued by the light & power of
the Gospel) how these crastes-men these Vniuersitie Clarkes rage and take
on, and with their schole learning seeke to tourne away the euident
truth of God, to colour and plead for all the abhomination & sinne
of the tymes, to heale the wounde & vphold the throne of the Beaste,
to rend, reproch, and blaspheme such as speake and witnesse against it,
as their vituperious, vnchristian, and erroneous Bookes which they
daily publish, declare. Neither is their education and learning (if
they be dulie examined) such as is required in the holy Ministerie of
CHRIST. All of them (as is said) being nourished euen from their Cradles vvith the
milke of superstition, instructed in the Scholes of heathen vanitie, brought vp in the Colleges
of more the monkish idlenes, and disorder, exercised in vaine and curious artes, vvhose diuinitie
is by tradition &c. The truth of these things Mr. GIFFARD not being
able to gainesay, seeketh to shoffle off with a bold boasting chalendg
against men vnto himself vnknowen, vpon the dispence of bearing
the shame, if he finde not in the vniuersites many Bachelo
                        •
                     rs of Arte
far exceeding in the knowledge of the liberall artes, the 3. tongues
Hebreaw, Greeke & Latine, or in sounde iudgment of diuinitie euē the principall
Masters of Brownisme; which if it could in so fewe yeeres be obtayned
with more then monkish idlenes, then may the Brownistes in

some thing be belieued. First we giue him to weite that there are of
those he calleth Brownistes, sond
                     •
                  ie of greater contynuance, and that
haue as high degree in those scholes with as high commendation as
himself, although they boaste not of such thinges wherof they ought
to be ashamed. Then that there are as manie of his bretheren the
Monckes, that thinck themselues as skilfull as himself, or the greatest
Clarke in the vniuersitie. But nowe in all this what will our ignorance
help him, or their store of learning shewe, that they haue not
bene and are not thus imitiate and brought vp. In their grammer
scholes it cannot be denied, but they learned and learne the latine
tongue from the most heathenish and prophane aucthors, lasciuious
Poets &c, which are allowed with the priuiledge of the Church of
ENGLAND as most christian rudiments to be taught the youth in the
publicke scholes. When they haue passed all those formes, and can
both say much of those aucthors by heart and vse their phrase, then
are they sent to the Vniuersitie to learne the artes, and to be instructed
in philosophie &c▪ hitherto it cannot be denied but heathenisme and
such execrable idolatrie as is found in those aucthors, is wrytten & engrauen
vpō the tables of their hearre, and filed vpon their tongue euen
from their infancie. Wel, and when they are come to the Vniuersitie,
there are they first salted as they call it in their College, and matriculate
in the publick scholes, solemnely sworne vpon the Proctors booke
to keepe their mothers statutes and secretes, and not to reueile her
mysteries or teach her artes anie where but in the Vniuersitie. Then are
they instructed both publickly and priuately in Logique & Rethorick
in the Elenches and Topickes, in the tropes and figures of all kindes;
wherein they must be perfect, for these artes are of speciall vse vnto
them, and to serue at all assaies. Then procede they to philosophie, &
there Aristotele is Autos eipe amongst them, out of whose mouth and writinges
they fetch their positions & axio
                        •
                     es, definitions, aphorismes, distinctions &c.
out of his Ethickes, Econonickes, and pollitickes they feth the order & gouernement
of their maners, priuate estates, and cōmon wealth. He yet furder
instructeth them of the Soule & of the worlde in lardge & special bookes,
Of the heauen of natural & supernatural thinges, of Nature, Fortune, the
eternitie of the worlde, and perpetuitie of all the creatures in their
kinde in Specie, of the regions of the ayre and seuerall thinges in them
contayned, the Meteores  there learne they the causes of the rainebowe,
the making of the windes, cloudes, and of the whole skye, far
otherwise then is set downe in the Genesis. Yet leadeth he them higher
and sheweth them the celestial spheares, planets, starres, quintessences
even from the Mone to their Caelum crystallinum empiraeum and their Primum
Mobile, with their seuerall places, dimensurations, motions, and
Motors: yea yet learne they more secret thinges with their constellations,
radiations, influence & predominatiō according to their signes,
houses, oppositions, aspects, ecclipses &c. wherbie most strange and
wonderfull thinges are prognosticate and foretold concerning the

weather and ceasons of the yeere, the estate of kingdomes, the diseases
& dangers to come &c: concerning natiuities & tymes of death (commonly
caled fortunes) concerning things to come or things past, stollen,
lost, founde &c. These thinges it were frensie if not blasphemie
to call vayne and curious artes. Mr. GIFFARD would neuer beare it at
the handes of such blinde schismatickes (whose bane such deipe learning
is) seeing these sciences are vulgarely taught, studied, practized,
allowed, and maintained not only in the vniuersities but of the whole
Church of ENGLAND, as by their yeerely prognosticatiōs euerie where
to be sold, is to be seene. These studies & artes we may not call perierga
Curious, because Mr. GIFFARD saith Luke speaketh only of coniuration
Act. 19. But let him approue these lawfull by the scriptures, and surely I
wil gladly confesse mine ignorance & sinne in caling these studies and
artes prophane, curious, vnfit for a christian, much more for a Minister
of the Church. Otherwise let not any through mine vnskilfulnes
(who peraduenture repeate not aright or in due place the tearmes of
these artes, as hauing either forgotten them through longe discontynuance,
or may be, neuer learned them aright) take occasion either to
carpe at me therfore, or especially to thincke the better of these vaine
and curious, yea vnlawfull and vnchristian artes and studies, which
haue not only no warrant in Gods worde, but are directly contrarie
vnto and expresly forbidden in the same, as were not harde to shewe
and prooue, if the subiect were not to lardge, and should not make to
wide a Parenthesis in this treatise, and drawe it out to a greater length
then I would. I will not therfore stand here to discusse their philosophicall
probleames, paradoxes, axiomes, or seuerall sentences and
opinions, which are authenticall and currant amongst them, how euill
they agree to the worde of God: Or to shewe how far these curious
inquisitors, these starr-gazers, astrologians, calcars, wisardes, deuines
exceede the boundes of faith and sobrietie, and passe the limites
of Gods reueiled will: Or whether they maie wander by these heathenish
or diuelish opinions of the heauens, starres, and their reuolutions,
influence &c. Motors, Demones, or Spirits, and howe neare this
approcheth to coniuration: Or to shewe howe far they are suffred to
procede, yea professe and practise in these diuelish artes: Let the
bookes (that I chardge no persons) which are commonlie bought and
studied in the Vniuersities, and in all other partes of the realme without
controlement, shewe. Neither will I here proceede to repeate
their other vaine, curious, fonde, triffling and vile artes, and studies,
which were endlesse. Onlie in this place I must here add vnto those
publicke professed artes aboue recited, the studie of all heathen and
prophane histories, of all ages, nations, persons, wherein they must of
necessitie be prompt and expert; as from those fountaines to drawe
their examples and platformes of maners and the gouernement of
sta
                     •
                  es; as from whence to fetch the chiefe ornamentes of their stile,
orations, sermons, Bookes, to exemplifie, illustrate, prooue or

improue: yea as whereby to open and expounde the Scriptures both
of the old and newe Testament, chieflie the old Prophets, without
which they cannot be vnderstoode, but especialy Esai and Daniel. As to
Rethorcik and Logi
                        •
                     ue they are so necessarie, as without which it is impossible
to vnderstand or diuide anie part of the scripture aright; as without
which they cannot vnderstand or declare to the people by what
trope or figure, by what forme of argument or Syllogisme the holie Ghoste speaketh.
In these artes and studies are these Academical diuines or rather Peripateticke
Philosophers trayned and exercised. In these they must needs spend
7. of their first yeeres at the least, els should they be vnfit to take those
degrees of Bachelour and Mr. of Arte, or to make that publick professiō they
doe of the artes at their Commencements. In these artes and studies when
they are once a litle exercised and instructed that they beginne to perceiue
the groundes and methode therof, then are they trayned both
publicklie and priuatlie to defend or oppose against some of these axiomes
or positions, both by waye of oration & argumēt in their Sophismes
and disputations, and therin being approued (or at the least allowed)
they then take the first degree of the scholes, and commence Bachelours
of Arte, and haue as ensignes of their degree & knowledge, special
attire and furniture assigned them to be knowen from other common
schollers; as the square Cap, the tronke gowne, the hoode of one
shoulder, the habite &c, which they must weare. Afterward hauing
spent more then thee yeeres in studie on these artes, and hauing donne
their publicke actes progradu, thē they commēce Masters of the said Artes;
and are againe solemnly sworne and made Regents and Lectorers of their
scholes, and sit, reade, and dispute of the same artes publickly in a solemne
high seate, pulpit, or chaire for orations, as also reade priuate
lectures therof in their Colleges. Now I would here by the way know
of Mr. Giff. what tyme and leisure a Bachelour of arte that contynueth
in the Vniuersitie and procedeth in those orders and degrees can haue, to
studie Diui
                        •
                     itie, or to growe so prompt in the knowledge, iudgment, and
exercise therof, as he dare ingage his credite he shalbe fownde far to
passe therin such as in their Vniuersity haue bene allowed publickly to
preach, and of the Bishops bene made ful Ministers. But to our purpose;
when these clarkes are thus instituted and furnished with these liberal
sciences, and this ground wor
                     •
                  k throughly laid, thē maie they in good
tyme proceede to the studie of Diuinity (as they cal it) which is set out
vnto them in great volumes & infinite bookes of mens writinges both
old and newe, where they haue such varietie of Paraphrases, Commē
                  taries,
Common places, Catachises &c. (Not to trouble them at the
first with the primatiue histories, Doctors, Councels) as they may in
shorte space (if they studie harde) become pretie diuines, and be able
to shewe their aucthors iudgment, yea (through the helpe of rethoricke
and a good memorie) to make a Sermon an howre longe: Alwaies
carefully prouided that they vtter no more, then that they haue
read in some allowed aucthor, hauing the priuiledge of the Church of

                  England, and presume not either to vnderstand the text otherwise then
their aucthors interpret yt, or to add one note of their owne obseruation,
for that (how consonant soeuer to the truth) were great presumption
and rash
                     •
                  es. Neither may they ouer▪ far applie or inforce the
iudgment of their Aucthors against anie present enormitie established
by aucthoritie in the Church of England, for that were intollerable
against the peace of the Church, yea seditious against the Magistrates
aucthoritie &c. Thus whilest these Diuines are helde within these limites
of modestie and sobrietie, and contynue with their Mother the
Vniuersity, they ma
                     •
                  e in due time set vp their bills of chalenge vpon the
schole doores, that they meane to dispute vpon such and such questions
of Diuinity, and to doe their Actes progradu. Which being dispatched
either in taenebris or in Luce, then are they fit for the Commencement
to be made Bachelours of Diuinity. In like maner against that daye must
such of them as haue before passed all these degrees, and nowe are fit
to proceede Doctors of Diuinity do their actes in the publick scholes accordinglie
in these Diuinitie disputations s
                     •
                  rmons ad clarum &c. And against
this sollemne Commencement must especial choice be made of those
that are to commence Bachelours and Doctors of Diuinitie to keepe the publicke
actes that daie. And these for their furder credites o
                     •
                  ten tymes
wil vndertake to defend against all comme
                     •
                  s such Propositions as are
most 
                     •
                  dious to all men in whom is anie light, conscience, knowledge,
or feare of God. As that it is lawfull for one man to haue more benefices
and flockes to attend then one at one time. That it is lawfull to
be a non resident, to hue from his flocke wherof he taketh chardge. That
the vnpreaching Ministers are true and lawfull Pastors, and the Sacraments
by them deliuered true and holie Sacraments. That Christes
outwarde gouernment in his Church, practized and set downe by his
Apostles, is not of necessitie or perpetuall, but variable and arbitrable
at the wil of men, according to times, estates &c. These and suche
like, these Graduates publish and defende, the Vice-Chancelour and whole
senate of the Vniuersitie conclude and confirme, as catholicke orthodoxe
and most sounde, reiecting whatsoeuer Scriptures or reasons shall
by these comical disputers either Vniuersitie Doctors and Diuines, be brought
against them. Wel, vnto this famous Act are these Commencers solemnelie
brought in their seueral attyres and arrayes, in their skal
                     •
                  t gownes,
hoodes, habites, caps, tippitts &c, with the Bedells proclayminge and
carying staues and maces before them, with a greate troupe of Gradua
                        •
                     es
and Clarkes following them. And thus they martch thorowe
the streates to the place appoincted and prepared for these prizes,
where they haue their sticklers and moderators readie to rescue,
when they are in anie distresse, and where their aduersaries fight
boo
                     •
                  ie, beeing of their owne confederacie. Where it is not lawefull
for anie that will to oppose, or to speake for the truth of God.
Neither are these questions discussed in the english tongue before
those multitudes of people and strangers, but in the latine tongue

after their syllogistical and romish maner, lest the follie of these Prophets
should be laied open vnto all men, and these gamsters be hissed
off the Stage by the people. Thus, though with manie other triffling
ceremonies and circumstances then I either can, or care to recite, are
these academical diuines aduanced to their degrees. Which Degrees, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , ceremonies,
orders, oathes, vo
                        ••
                     s, maner of disputations &c, how consonant they are to
the ministrie of Christ by the Apostles rules, let Mr. Giffard or those learned
Diuines approue by Christes Testament, as it standeth them vpon, that
bring them in and exercise them in the Church. For our selues wee
protest we neuer there read or heard of anie such: and therfore cannot
but thincke them fond, strange, and antichristian, such as no waye belonge
to, or beseeme the Ministrie of CHRIST, neither are necessarie
or tollerable in Christes Churche. Thus euen by this verie brief and insufficient
recital of but some of their artes, studies, orders, deg
                     •
                  ees &c.
I hope this assertiō wil not proue so false or incredible. That the learned
ministrie of the Church of England is nourished euen from their
cradles with the milke of superstition, instructed in the s
                     •
                  holes of
heathen vanitie, brought vp in the colleges of more then monckish
idlenes and disorder.
               For of such kinde of societies and Colleges of Ministers & clarks, to
liue together after this monastical maner, wee neuer read in the whole
Booke of God. Howe like they are to the scholes of the Prophets at
Naioth, Rama, Iericho let their artes, studies, vowes, customes, orders, ceremonies,
degrees, disputations, exercises &c, declare. And as to the
holie exercise of prophecie spoken of in the new Testament; yt belonged
vnto and alwaies was exercised in some christian Congregation, in
a more holy, reuerent, and free maner, and not after those heathenish
popi
                     •
                  h customes abouesaid. Wee in CHRISTES Testament neuer read
of such a monacticall ministrie so withdrawen and sequestred from anie
perticular Congregation, office, chardge, and function, as these Vniuersitie
diuines and Ministers are in their Colleges, Halles, Ce
                     •
                  les: Where
they must needes liue in idlenes and disorder, that are thus licentiate
and dissolute, that wilbe held within no christian bondes or order.
Wee neuer read in CHRISTES Testament of anie such societies or
Ministers, that liued in no perticular Congregation, that were caled
to no perticular office, or flocke, that liue idlelie, professing to be Misters
and yet execute no certaine ministrie or function. When Mr. Giff.
shall directlie proue by the scriptures these thinges to be lawful, then
so farre foorth wee shall allowe of these Vniuersitie Diuines these Collegiat
Ministers: And the rather if he also approue by Gods worde their worship
in their Seruice-booke: And last of all (not to comber him with
their manifold other superstitious customes, Commemorations &c,) if he
can shewe it to be lawfull for anie Minister or christian to ioyne vnto
and liue in anie such College, societie, or fellowship, where Gods
holie ordinance of honest mariage is by expresse lawe forbidden all
the fellowes and schollers of these Colleges, they being no longer to

remaine in that societie thē they liue vnmaried, I say not now chastely:
For howe possible or likelie that is, for so manie younge men in
the flower of their youth and prime of their strength, especialy being
noseled in such heathen vanitie, prophannes, vaine-glorie, curiositie,
superstition, disorder, dissolutenes, and (as is said) contempt of Gods
ordinances, let anie iudge; yea let the scripture yt self iudge: where
God sheweth the reward of these sinnes, how he therfore giueth them
vp to the lustes of their owne heartes, vnto vncleannes, to shamefull
lustes contrarie to nature to worke filthines,Rom. 1. 24 and to dishonor their own
bodies amongst themselues &c. And so vntil some of them cā iustifie
this their life, orders, customes, vowes, and procedings of these Academical
diuines in their scholes and Colleges, wee must nomber & leaue them
with their bretheren and sisters the Monkes, Friars, Nunnes &c, vnder
Gods feareful iudgments, vtterly in this estate vnfit for the ministrie or
Church of Christ.
               
               Yet would I not here, that anie should deeme or suppose that wee
condemne anie lawful artes or necessarie sciences, anie holie exercises,
or scholes of institution: And so doe labour to bring in barbarisme, as
Mr. Giffard Mr. Some and others haue giuen out. No wee are so far from
it, as we blame these Vniuersities, Colleges, and Scholes for their heathen, prophane,
superstitious, vnchristian societies, disorders, customes, ceremonies,
for their vaine, curious, vnlawful artes & studies, and their maner
of teaching & exercising them &c. We desire with our whole hearts,
that the tongues and other godlie artes were taught, not in the Vniuersities
or a fewe places onlie, but in all places where an established Church
is, at the least in euerie Citie of the land. Yet this indeede wee hold,
That euerie christian man ought to haue his abiding & dwelling, and
to bring vp his children in some such place where a christian Congregation
is, and that all scholes of learning ought to be kept in such
places where both teachers and schollers may be vnder the holie gouernment
and censures of Christ in his Church, and may liue and be
kept in holie order. Then, that the artes and sciences which are thus
taught or studied, be not vayne, curious, or vnlawful, but necessarie &
godlie. Thirdlie, that they be not taught, exercised, or practized after
anie prophane, vaineglorious, or superstitious maner, but in al sobrietie,
modestie, and in the feare of God. To these fewe rules if their Vniuersities,
Colledges, Scholes were reformed, then should they not be as they
nowe are the seminaries of Antichrist, the bane of the Churche, the corruption
of all the youth in the lande: But then should they be (that
which they nowe pretend) the scholes of all godlie learning to garnish
the Church, to furnish the common wealth with fit and vertuous men
for euerie place, office, and estate.
               LEt vs nowe procede to the other sorte of this Collegia
                        •
                     e idle ministrie of
the Church of England, Which are these Cathedral Abbay lubbers,
These L. Bishops, Deanes, Subdeanes, Prebendes, Cannons &c, as in their cataloge:
who liue together like Monkes in their Cloisters & celles, adioyned

& annexed vnto some Cathedral Church, within which precincts they are

                     •
                  edd & stalled vp to intēd the diuine seruice of the said Cathedral, 
                  
                     •
                  at certaine
howers of the day limited, euerie one in his seuerall array, ministerial
vestures, surplices, copes, vestimentes, hoodes, tippets, cappes, rochets
&c, according to their seuerall office, place, and degree, some
singing, some piping, some reading, some praijng, some pisteling, some
gospeling, some preaching, some administring the sacramentes &c, Of
whose offices, ceremonies, rites orders, customes, seuerally to entreate,
is not mie purpose; It sufficeth me that I finde not any such Cathedrals,
Cloisters, Societies, Offices; Orders, Ceremonies, VVorship &c, in all the booke of
God, and therfore I dare pronounce them Antichristian, such as God
wil not be pleased or serued with in his Church.
               Let not Mr. Deane vnder the visarde of a christian name and office
thincke to escape, for when we bring him to the light, we finde him
but a counterfeight, hauing neither the office nor ministration of a
christian Deacon. The christian Deacons office is faithfully to collect and
distribute the almes and contribution of the Church. But these Cathedral
Deanes feede themselues & their troupes, I say not of the weekely
almes of their Church (for that they neither gather, neither would it
suffice the tenth part of their pompe) but of the Lordships, landes, and
fees of their Church; lying loytering in their stately pallaces, and not
distributing to the poore of that Congregation according to th'appointment
of the Elders and the Church. A christian Deacon keepeth himself
within the limites of the office he is called vnto, and doth not intermeddle
with th'execution of their offices which belong not vnto
him, as the administration of the worde and sacraments &c: But these
Cathedral Deacons take vpon them the ministrie of the worde and sacraments,
manie of them hauing personages beside their Deanerie; And
hauing bene Pastors before, yet for liuing and promotions sake, are
not ashamed to goe backe to the Deacons Office, or to retaine both offices.
Neither doth the christian Deacon vsurpe such place, preeminence, and
dignitie in the Church to sit in one of the chiefe roomes with his velvet
quishon, clo
                     •
                  h of estate, or be brought to his place with a siluer
mace before him. To conclude, these Cathedral Popish Deanes haue
nothing common or like to a christian Deacon, either in office, caling
to their office, administratiō of their office, or place where they administer.
Therfore what titles soeuer they carrie, or pretextes they make,
we may affirme them to be impes of Antichrist, to belong to his spouse
and throne, the false Church: And not to be those holy Ministers,
those christian Deacons, which CHP
                     •
                  IST hath instituted to his Church.
               Of Subdeanes or their office we reade not in CHRISTS Testament. And
as to those idle bellies those Prebendes, we knowe not what to make of
them: Ministers of this Church, yea ful Priestes they should be, in that
they are bownde to make. 4. sermons in the yeere in their Cathedral: yet
are some of them Ciuilians (as they terme them) lay Persons. But yt is no
noueltie in the Church of ENGLAND, For Ecclesiastical Ministers to exercise

ciuile offices, and likewise for ciuile persons to vsurpe & possesse
offices in the Church, both of gouernemēt, as in their Courtes abouesaid,
and of the ministrie of the worde & sacraments, as Prebe
                        •
                     des, Parsonages,
and those not impropriate &c. Of such Monkish secluding and gathering
the Ministers of their Church into these Colleges, Halles, Cloisters
we haue alreadie spoken. As also of their idolatrous and false worship
which they exercise: Of the seueral rites & ceremonies that these stalled
bulles vse therin, here to discourse, were long & tedious: Or to stād
to refute the vnlawfulnes of these Mother Cathedral Churches, where Sathans
throne is, wherin sit his lieutenants these Arch & Lord Bishops, wherin are
the Colleges of these idolatrous Priestes & loyterers, whose verie names
being but recited, & the light of the gospel being but brought to their
College & Cloister doores, is enough to discouer them of what stampe and
broode they are. Yea let this light of the Gospell be brought to the
tryal of their ministrie & ministratiō, though nothing be said to them,
but they only put to approue themselues by Gods worde, you shall see
them discouer themselues of what kingdome & spirit they are, defending
thēselues with their nayles & tongues, smiting al such as thus call
their doings into this question with the fist of wickednes, and with the
tongue of reproch, as by their prisons & bookes is to be seene; The one
being ful of poore persecuted christians in great distresse and miserie,
without any iudgment or help by lawe, without any equitie, mercie, or
compassiō shewed; The other being ful euen in euerie leafe, yea almost
in euerie line of wicked sclanders, accusations, suggestiōs, blasphemies
against these faithful seruantes of CHRIST their aduersaries. Not approuing
their ministrie, worship, and procedings directly by any one
place of scripture, though they be neuer so much vrged thervnto. But
if they haue no better defence, their kingdome shalbe left vnto them
desolate, as their bretherē the L. Abbots, Monckes, Fryars, and Nonnes
are. Al which might aswel (for any thing I can fee, or they can say) haue
bene reserued, reformed, and tyed to the saijng ouer this seruice book
as these, all being alike without warrant in Gods worde, and therfore
detestable & accursed.
               IT now remayneth that we take like sodaine viewe of the third sorte,
the seruile ministrie of the Church of England; namely these Parsons, Vicares,
Curates, Hirelings, Preachers, Deacons. These were blamed to Mr. Giffard to
carye strange & antichristiā 
                  Names & Offices, also to haue as strange & antichristian
an entrance vnto their office & administration in their office,
as also that their support & maintenance is not such, as belongeth
to the ministrie of the Gospell. In these poinctes we desired Mr. G. to
approoue the ministrie of Eng
                        •
                     and, or his owne ministrie by the rules of
CHRISTS Testament. This if he had donne, al controuersie had ceased,
and we yeilded. Al this by his owne bare worde of affirmatiō & neuer
a place of scripture, he proueth in lesse then one page of his booke.
He affirmeth their names to be Ministers of the Gospell, Pastors, and
Teachers. That the names of Parsons & Vicares are not to make any distinction

of the ministrie, but of the maintenance annexed to the same.
That the Offices they beare, are to teach & instruct their flockes by the
wholesome worde of God, to administer the sacramentes, and to make
publick prayers. These he is sure are prescribed in CHRISTES Testament,
and if our eye were not malignant we might espie them there.
               THAT these names & offices of Pastor & Teacher, with this administration
spoken of, are in CHRISTS Testament, we neuer doubted or
made question, but now whether these Parsons, Vicares, Cura
                        •
                     es, Hired Preachers,
carie, trulie haue, and execute the names, offfices, and functions
of these christian Pastors & Teachers, all the doubt is. And more then
Mr. GIFFARD his bare worde, we as yet haue not to assure vs therof: although
we haue even with importunitie begged and vrged him, or
any of his fellowes, either directly to approue their ministrie by the
rules of CHRISTS Testament in their Office Entrance and Administration: Or
ells to prooue vnto vs by the worde of God that such Offices, Entrance vnto
and Administration in their offices, is not now necessarie and of necessitie
in the Church of CHRIST: but that the Prince (whose honorable name
they ouer much abuse to the patronizing of all their abhominations)
or rather the POPE (to whose kingdome this antichristian ministrie serued)
hath power to erect a newe & other ministrie in office, entrance,
and administratiō vnto the Church, then that of Christes Testament. In
al which if this ministrie of England cannot by th'expresse rules of the
word be iustified, al the powers in earth or Hel cannot make them the
true Ministers of the Gospel. For other ministrie & offices of ye gospel
is not giuē or to be giuē vnto the Church, then those CHRIST hath instituted
in his Testamēt. Neither may any other Entrance or Administration
be ioyned to that Ministrie & those offices, then is in CHRISTS Testament
appoynted. If therfore we shew that these Ministers haue not those offices,
that entrance, or administratiō mentioned in Christes Testament, it
shal be enough to shew them conterfeite, strange, and antichristian.
               First then by Mr. Giff
                        •
                     
                   his leaue, we must a litle insiste euen vpon these
strange names of Parson & Vicare, which were giuē by their first founders
& creators at the erection of their ministrie & offices, and are not read
of in all the booke of God: Neither are any of those names which our
Sauiour Christ hath giuen & knyt vnto his ministrie, for ye distinguishing
& expressing of their seueral offices, and therfore cā at no hand belong
vnto the ministri of the Gospel. Neither may any mortal man be
so presumptions to giue other names & denominations vnto his reuerend
ministrie & holie offices, then the Lord of the house himself hath
giuen. Neither may or will the true Ministers of Christ carye any other
names or titles (as in regarde of their ministri or office) then Christ hath
giuen to their ministrie & office. But Mr. Giff. denieth these names to
make any distinctiō of their ministri, but only of ye state of maintenāce
annexed vnto the same. Let vs thē aske him one question; what difference
is there betwixt the Arch and Lord Bishops, and the parish Parsons and
Vicares of the Church of ENGLAND in respect of their ministrie, if these

names be not giuen to put difference betwixt, and distinction of the
                     •
                  
office & ministrie? I trust he will not say these Lord Bishops & Parsons
haue al one office & ministrie in their Church. I belieue his Ordinarie
wil hardly agree to him in this poynte. Let him finde therfore a newe
distinction to help this matter. Againe, we could say to M. Giffard, that
these names of Parsons and Vicares do not only distinguish their ministrie
from their Lord Bishops Arch-Deacons, Deanes &c, but yet maketh a
distinction euen amongst themselues, betwixt them & such of their other
rouing Ministers, which haue no certaine flocke or chardge, but
as sone as they are made Ministers vnto and of any one certaine flock,
then take they forthwith their denominatiō of that flocke or towne, as
the Bishops doe of the greate Cities, and are then & not before called
Parsons or Vicares of such a Towne. To conclude, these names of Parson
& Vicare being distinct names, and hauing distinct liuings appropriate
vnto them, belonging also to one & the same church or Towne,
and being giuen to two diuers men & so possessed at one and the same
tyme, cannot but belong to two diuers offices of their Church, Except
two mē may also haue & execute one & the same office at the same instant,
as wel as one man may execute two or moe diuers offices of their
Church at one instant. But sure these Paradoxes are so inaudible & incredible,
yea so impossible in the Church of CHRIST, as I see not how
all Mr. Giffard his logique and learning can reconcile them to the Testament
of CHRIST.
               But to come to the offices of these Parsons & Vicares, Mr. Giff▪
                   saith (if we
may belieue him) they are Pastors & Teachers, yet setteth vs not downe
who be the Pastors, & who be the Teachers of their Church. It should
seeme by his speach that these two, the Parson and Vicare, are one office,
namely, Pastors, and that such hireling Predicantes as himself are the
Teachers of this Church of England. Let vs first consider of their Pastors,
by comparing them to the Pastors office. The true christian Pastor is
placed of God in his house his church,Tit. 1. 7. as a Steward both to diuide the
portion,Math. 24. 45. and to ouersee, take chardge & looke to the order & gouernement
of that Church,Marc. 13. 34 wherof he is chosen & made a Minister, & of al
the publicke actions therof,1 Tim. 5. 17. togither with the other Elders. But these
Parsons by vertue of their office & ministrie,Heb. 13. 17. are not bounde to labour
in the worde, otherwi
                     •
                  e, then to preach. 4. sermons in the yeere, either
by himself or by his substitute, and that not by law, except his benefice
exceede a certaine annual somme in the Queenes booke. Otherwise they
are but bounde to reade the seruice pre
                     •
                  cribed in the common booke,
at such tymes and tides as is there inioyned, to weare the Priestes attire,
to reade iniunctions and homelies &c. Neither are they permitted,
or by vertue of their office may intermeddle, with the ouersight, order,
and gouernement of that flocke wherof they are Parsons. CHRIST
nowe in his Church hath instituted no ecclesiasticall office aboue the
Pastors office.Rom. 12. Neither may anie true christian Pastor stand, or exercise
his office vnder anie such false ecclesiasticall office,Gal. 2. 4. 5. as CHRIST hath

not instituted;Iohn. 10. 12 But there are sondrie offices in the Church of England
aboue the Parsons office.Acts. 20. 29 Vnto which superior offices al these Parsons
stand subiect,3 Iohn. 9. 10 hauinge sworne their Canonical obedience to their
Courtes, Cannons, commādements, to their sommance, censure, controlement,
for al their actions, ministrie, conversation, to be made Ministers,
deposed from their ministrie, silenced, sequestred, suspended by
them.2 Tim. 2. 4 The true christian Pastor (as by vertue of his office) intangleth
not himself,Acts. 6. 2 neither intermedleth with 
                     •
                  iuile actions and affayres, But
these parrish Parsons (especialie these of the Countrie) are busied,1 Pet. 4. 15 and
almost wholly entangled with renting,1 Tim. 3. 3 tithing, prowling their Parrishners,
whether faithfull or vnfaithfull,Ezek. 13. riche or poore, Widowes or O
                     •
                  
                  phanes,
they marrie,Mat. 23. 14. they burie &c, by vertue of their office, and are 
                     •
                  o
all outwarde seeming and iudgment rather Rieues and Bayliffes,Phil. 3. 18. 19. then
Ministers of the Gospel. Yea if it be true which some writers of no
smale accompt both olde and new haue written of them, these parrish
Parsons were at the first deuised and brought in to serue the Metropolitanes
in the offices of Rieues and Bayliffs to gather vp their rents, &c.
Againe the true christian Pastors office cannot be possessed by anie ciui
                     •
                  e
person. But the parrish Parsons office may be, and often is, bestowed
vpon Ci
                        •
                     ilians, Phis
                        ••
                     ons, who, if they weare the Priestes weedes inioyned.
It sufficeth. Not here meaning or speaking of impropriatio
                        •
                     s
which haue no office and chardge of anie Ministrie, yt being transferred
to a Vicare endo
                     •
                  ed: Moreouer the christian Pastors office cānot
be kept or executed by a man absent, or by anie other in that Congregation
wherof he is chosen, then by the elect of that Congregation.
But the Parrish Parsons office may be kept by a man absent, executed
by an Attourney or Curaeie. Finnaly,Acts. 20. euerie true christian Pastor is by
that his officie,1 Tim. 3. a Bishop. But no Parrish Parson is by vertue of that his
office a Bishop.T
                        •
                     t. 1. Therfore and for al these reasons abouesayd the parrish
Parsons office can in no iuste intendement be held the true christian
Pastors office.
               NOwe let vs procede to their entrance, this being first a position perpetual,H
                        •
                     b. 5. 4
That euerie true Minister of the Churche must not onlie
be caled to a true office,Iohn. 10 but must haue a true & right caling vnto that
his office:Nomb. 16. 5. 40. otherwise he is no true Minister, but an vsurper, an intruder,
a theife, a murderer. Euerie true Minister then, by the rules of the
worde ought to be thus caled. Euerie perticular Congregation being
a faithfull flocke, destitute of some Minister (for example of a Pastor)
ought to make choice of some one faithful christian, of whose vertues,
knowledge, iudgment,1 Tim. 3. fitnes, and conversation (according to the rules
in that behalf prescribed) they haue assured proofe and experience inTit. 1.
some christian Congregation or other,Acts. 14. where he hath liued. Such a
one, the whole Congregation being gathered together in the name of
God with fasting & prayer for the especial assistance of his holy spirite,
to be directed to that person whom the Lo
                     •
                  de hath made meete and

appointed vnto them for that high chardge and Ministrie. In which
Election euerie perticular member of the said Congregation hath his peculiar
interest of assent or dissent, shewing his reasons of dissent in reuerent
maner, not disturbing the holie and peaceable order of the
Church. Whose exceptions and reasons are to be considered of, and
compared to the rules of the worde, if they be founde peremptorie and
true. As the partie to be of no founde iudgment in the faith, of no sufficient
knowledge in the scriptures, a drunckarde, a smiter, coveteous,
one that ruleth not wel his owne house, wife, children  thē yeildeth
the whole Church to their reasons, or rather to the word of God. But
if their exceptions be vnsufficient or vntrue, then procedeth and stand
                     •
                  th
their Election, and the persons that take them are publicklie reprou
                     •
                  d,
according to their offence. This choice thus made, accepted, and
determined, the elect is to be publicklie ordayned and receiued in and
of the same Congregatiō, wherof and whervnto he is chosen. If there
be an Eldership in that Congregatiō, by them, as the most meete instruments,
with fasting, prayer, exhortations &c, if not, then by the help of
the Elders of some other faithful Congregation, one Churche being to
help and assist an other in these affaires. But if the defection and apostasie
be so generall as there be not anie where anie true Elders to be
founde, or conveniently to be had, yet then hath the Church that hath
power and commandemēt to chuse and to vse Ministers, yea that only
hath that most high and great spirituall power of our Lorde Iesus Christ
vpon earth committed vnto their handes, power also to ordaine their
Ministers by the most fit members and meanes they haue. For the Eldership
doth not add more power, but more helpe and seruice to the
Church in this action. Neither doth this action (which is but a publishing
of that former contract and agreement betwixt the whole
Church and these elect, the Church giuing & the elect receiuing these
offices as by the commandement of God with mutuall couenant and
vowe each to other in al dueties) belonge to the Elders onlie as separate
from the Church, but to the Elders as the most fit members and instruments
of the Churche, to doe yt for and in the Churche. Otherwise,
when the true ministrie ceased, as in the generall apostasie, they could
neuer againe be recouered in the Church: because they cannot haue
this ordination of true christian Elders, and so must the ministrie, sacraments,
and ordinances of Christes Testament cease for euer, and the true
established Churche neuer be seene againe vpon earth: Vnlesse with
the Papistes they 
                     •
                  il make a personal successiō of Ministers in some place
euer since the Apostles tyme. Or with Mr. Giffard make a true publick
ministrie, sacramēts &c, in the Church of Rome in the diepest apostasie.
Which yet of al other is the most absurd Propositiō that euer I suppose
was vttered by anie man, or published and allowed by anie Churche,
contrarie to al the rules of Gods worde, and euē to it self. For how can
there be by anie reasonable man immagined or seene publicke apostasie,
and publick faith in the same estate, at one and the same instant?

Likewise if of necessity the ordinatiō must always be donne by a christian
Presbutrie or Eldership, we woulde then knowe of them by what Elders
Mr. Luther, Mr. Ca
                        •
                     uine, or our Englishe Bishopps in K. EDVVARDES
daies were ordayned. Other Elders then of the Popish Churche there
were not then to be founde. Now these are sure groundes that cannot
be doubted of. The true ministrie of Christ doth not belonge vnto, and
may execute no ministrie in the false Churche. Neither yet hath the
execrable ministrie of the false Church anie thing to doe to ordaine
the true ministrie of CHRISTES Churche, neither is their Ordination
auaileable. If then the Churche of Rome and the ministrie therof were
false and antichristian, then cannot the ministrie of these men which
was then in that estate giuen and receiued, be esteamed the true ministrie
of CHRIST belonging to his Church. But now if they hold the
Church of Rome the true Churche, and her Elders true Ministers of Christ,
then is it vtterly vnlawfull to with-drawe, depart, or separate from the
true Church at anie tyme: And then were al these, and are al they in a
most deadlie schisme: Mr. Caluins distinction, that he separated from
the corruptions of the Churche of Rome, and not from the Churche of
Rome, wil not here stand. For therby they confesse the Churche of Rome
the true Church, and that they for the corruptions of the Church departe.
Which corruptions if they be not such and so incurable as to
make the Church of Rome no Churche, then is it not lawfull for anie
such corruptions to depart from, and to forsake the true Church, and
then are they all stil in schisme▪ by their owne doctrine, and so no true
Ministers. This I haue thus lardglie written of the true Election and
Ordination of Ministers, because I finde so great ignorance and error
amongst the Diuines of the Churche of ENGLAND therin. Some of
them (as the most reformed) that seeme to seeke CHRISTES Discipline
(as they cal yt) holde, that Elections and Ordinations ought to be donne
by the Presbutrie, at the least the ordination allwaies of necessitie. Others
of them, the more grosse of the common sorte, that holde with
the time, giue the Election to the Patrone, the Ordination to the Bishop
onlie.
               LEt vs now come to the election, probation, ordination of this parte
of the ministery of the Church of Englād, which exactly to set downe
in euerie perticularlie circumstance, I cannot, not hauing their booke
of Consecration. Election of their Ministrie (for anie thing that euer I could
heare) they haue none, only the Bi
                     •
                  hop appoynteth a certaine day and
place when he will giue (or rather sel) Orders. Thither then repaire
vnto him all such as want other meanes to geate their liuing, poore,
idle, inordinate walkers, to whom the ministrie is an vl
                        ••
                     um refugiam:
None here staying for the caling of God in his Church, but running
before they be sent: Hither to this market these hungrie foxes
flocke. There they are by certaine of the Bi
                     •
                  hopps substitutes, examined,
if so be that they be vnder the degree of Masters of their Artes,
                  
for al double graduates neede no probation, their hoodes of both shoulders
shewe that they haue learning & diuinitie enough: And as for proofe
of their honestie and vertue, that is not material, that is not required
or looked after in this busines, except they be so euill beloued as some
come to crye shame of them at that verie tyme: Which if they doe, yet
must the matters be too badd and broade, that wilbe receiued there.
And as to this probation that is there made, it is but to know whether
they haue the latine tongue, and how they can construe some sentence
of some aucthor. If they be not prompt they shall be holpen, or haue
more easie questions, or tyme giuē them, if so be they haue anie fauour
with Mr. Examiners, they are verie meane clarkes which are there refused
or sent away if they bring money in their purse, without which
there is no ministrie to be had in the Church of England. Such other as
yet cannot endure this seuere tryal, hauing only their mother tongue,
are to resorte to their Lord Bishop at his house more secretly; where if
they can make anie friēd vnto him, they shal not misse of their desire;
for the Bishop maie, or at least doth make Ministers, aswel privatlie in
his owne house, as publickly at this sollemne tyme & place. But these
approued, they are brought arayed in their white Ministeriall vesture,
vnto the Bishops chayre, where he solemnelie sitteth in his pontificalibus.
At whose feete these Ministers that woulde be, are caused to kneele
downe; where hauing certaine articles read vnto them, vnto which
they are sworne & subscribe, then are they by the Bishops owne mouth
made and pronounced Ministers, vzt. Deacons, certaine chapters of the
Bible enioyned them as a taske to reade euerie daye, as also certaine
bookes to studie diligētly: his orders also with the Bishops great seale
at them in a Boxe, are deliuered them; for which they must paye full
sweetlie. Thus is he made half Priest, to reade the booke and serue a
Cure, but not to enterprise to preach without the Bishops special licence
written, sealed, and wel paied for, thervnto: neither may he administer
the sacraments, vntil he haue his ful orders, and be made ful Priest.
Yet nowe is he a fit Curate for anie parish, a fit Clarke for anie benefice,
come by yt where he can, For here is he made Minister of the Church
of England in general, without certaine flock or chardge, and is sent into
the wide worlde with his licence to geat him a liuing where he may.
Wherbie sondrie of them (by reason of the multitudes that are dailie
made) are driuen to make verie harde shifte, to teach young children,
or to become house-Priests (I meane not nowe Chaplains, for they are
rufflers) for verie meane wage. Yet must I needes saye, the Bishop taketh
an especiall care to preuent this, for he hath certaine of their sufficient
friendes to be bounde I thincke, or ells to testifie, that they haue
5. poundes by yeere to liue vpon; lest indeede the Bishop himself shoulde
be after chardged to finde them, by an especiall Cannon made in the behalf
of poore Priestes and Ministers.
               Wel, being nowe stepped into the ministrie, it is not longe for the
most part (especiallie if anie benefice befal them) before they be made

full Priestes either by the Bishop priuately, or publickly at such day &
place aboue-said. Where they are againe examined how they haue
performed their taske enioyned, and how they haue profited in the
studie of diuinitie. Wherein being approued, they are in maner & attire
abouesaid, placed at the Bishops feete; who now layeth his handes
vpon them, deliuereth them the Bible, and breathing his vnholy spirit
vpon them giueth them the holy Ghost (as he blasphemously saith) and
sendeth them foorth vnto all people to preach and deliuer the sacraments,These men by this office ordination and sending should be Apostles. Mat
                        •
                     . 28. 18. 19. Io
                        •
                     . 20. 21. 22.
for as yet there is no certaine chardge of flocke mentioned.
Where these Priestes hauing sworne their Canonical obedience, and againe
Subscribed, paying for his Orders & al other fees, are now made ful Priestes
in any ground in England.
               
               This common sort thus Priestified, either serue Cures, or by some
meanes or other geat a benefice by Presentation or Resignation &c. And here
must the Patrone that oweth the Advowson present him to the Bishop,And what high office then exerciseth the Bishop that 
                        •
                     aketh & sendeth foorth Apostles & giueth them the Holie Ghost. as
his Clarke; To whom this Priest must yet againe subscribe, and then receiueth
the Bishopps institution in writing, with his seale thereat, which
must be well paied for also. This Priest thus instituted, cometh with
his letters and seales to his parish, and taketh possession of his parsonage:
where he must be inducted, an other Priest deliuering him the
keye of the Church doore, which he must open, and enter; where he
hath a bell-rope put into his hand, and must knole a Bell: After which
a peale is ronge, and he caried to some feaste-house or other, insteade
of fasting and prayer. And thus haue you hearde the maner of the
Election, Prob
                        •
                     tion, and Ordination of these Pastors & Teachers of the Church
of England. Which if it can by any learning or conning be prooued that
holie caling which is prescribed in CHRISTS Testament, and which
may not be seuered from the ministrie of the Gospell, then haue they
the more to reioyce, and we to repent, before the Lorde.
               And now whether we haue lyed (as Mr. GIF. verie boldly chardgeth
vs) in saying that their ministrie is imposed vpon these Churches, let
the indifferent reader iudge. Yea let him also consider, what kinde of
interest, freedome, and power these parishes haue to chuse & ordaine
their owne Ministers, The people neuer seeing or knowing their Minister,
vntil he come with his letters of institution, or hauing any thing
to doe at his ordination; he being made ful Priest, yea & their Priest,
and that whether they will or no, before he come at them. And let
Mr. GIFFARD himself looke what power any parish in England hath to
disanull the Patrones Presentation, the Bishops ordination and institution. The
Bishop he ordayneth them Ministers, though he or his examiners neuer
sawe or knewe the men before that present howre: He maketh
them Ministers to no certaine flocke or chardge, therfore can no peculiar
flocke haue interest in their election & ordination. The Patrone
whatsoeuer he be, whether Woman, childe, Foole, wicked Person, Papist,
(yea worse, if worse may be) he presenteth his Clarke to that benefice,
though he be an hundred miles off from the Bishop; and the

Bi
                     •
                  hop, though he knowe neither parish nor Minister, must admit, or
ells lyeth a Q
                        •
                     are impedit to compel him. The Priest thus instituted, he
cometh to the parish, taketh possession of the Parsonage, and theire
Minister he will be, whether the people will or not; they must receiue
him, and may not keep him out, how bad soeuer he be. And whereas
Mr. GIFF. bringeth instance to prooue that the ministrie is not imposed,
because that sondrie flockes haue those Pastors & Ministers of the
Gospel that they haue desired and made choice of by sute vnto the Patrones,
and to the parties whom they desire to haue. This yet more sheweth
their bondage, in that they are driuen to make sute vnto their Patrones,
and to receiue frō him their ministrie; which I belieue Mr. Giff.
shal neuer be able to shew that any christian Congregatiō did or might
doe. And to the choice he speaketh of, I weene they were Ministers,
yea Pastors, before they chose them; And being so, they then by the
rules of CHRISTS Testament ought to belonge vnto some certaine and
peculiar flockes; which if they do, how then may they chuse the Pastor
of an other flocke to make him their Pastor? what kinde of choice will
M. Giff. make his? whilest he goeth about to stop the gap, he maketh it
wider. But now to their chopping, chaunging, and leauing of their benefices
at their owne pleasures as more gaynful are offred, without the
peoples priuitie or consent (which is an vsual trade amongst them all,
not one amongst a thousand that doth not thus flitt vp & downe, and
Mr. Giff▪
                   none of those odd ones) for this he had not one excuse coyned,
we must stay vntil the minte go the third tyme. And then let him also
consider, how these parish Parsons may without the peoples consent or
liking be absent & liue away from the flock as longe as they liste, euen
al the dayes of their life if they will, finding them a Cura
                        •
                     e a iourney mā,
to reade them their seruice, marrie, burie &c, and 4. sermons in the
yeere, which they may also do by their attorney. These thinges if Mr.
GIFF. can shew that a christian Pastor may lawfully doe, then at length
shal he shew them like a christian Pastor in some thing.
               NOw to the Teachers office of their Church of ENGLAND; except they
make their Bishopps & Parsons to be both Pastors & Teachers, and to
execute both offices, we know not what he should meane; For we finde
no such office in their Church. Their Vniuersitie Doctors haue this title rather
in ostentation of their learning, then by vertue of any office ecclesiasticall.
This title is giuen aswell to other sciences, as Phisick, Ciuile lawe
&c, as to Diuinitie. Their Ciuile Doctors execute other offices of their
Church, as to be Iudges of Courtes, Commissaries, Chaunsclours, Commissioners,
neither are busied in teaching, therfore they cannot be said to haue a
Teachers office. Their Doctors of Diuinitie are either Bishops, Deanes, Arch-Deacons,
Parsons, Vicares, or ful Priestes, al which meddle with the administratiō
of the Sacraments, and are distinct offices from the Teachers
office, and therfore not the same. Neither may two distinct or diuers
offices of the Church be possessed or executed by one & the same person

at once, except they can proue it possible for one mēber to be both
an eye & an eare or hand,Rom. 12. 5. and to execute their functions at once. These
officers are caled members of CHRISTS bodie his Church,1 Cor. 12. these offices
are distinct & seueral: Men with seueral giftes & graces by the distribution
of God himself are appointed thervnto: whose holie order they
breake, besides all other inconveniences and impossibilities that insue
therof, which thus presume in their owne persons to execute sondrie
offices of the Church at one tyme. Furder, the churches of England haue
allowed them by lawe but one Priest each of them (which roome possessed,
they are said to be full) except some few which haue Parson and
Vicare, or two Parsons in a towne, both which meddle with th'administratiō
of their Sacraments, and therfore cannot be said to haue the
T
                        •
                     achers office. As to these Curates & stipendarie Preachers, they are either full
Priestes, or but half priestes or Deacons. The ful Priestes all of them by office
may administer the Sacraments. The half Priestes none of them by
office may preach or expoūde the word, without especial licēce, Therfore
neither the one or the other of these haue ye christiā 
                  Teachers office.
               And now to the stipendarie Preachers let vs for example insiste vpon
Mr. Giffardes owne ministrie; he writeth himself Minister of Gods holie worde in
MALDON. We would know of him in what office he doth administ
                     •
                  r
vnto this Church. We reade in CHRISTS Testament but of two Ministers
of the worde now belōging to his Church. The Pastor & the Teacher▪
                  
Pastor of that Church he is not; because they haue an other allowed
by lawe, which is also his Pastor, (and that to his furder shame a double
beneficed man.) Teacher there he is not; because that Church hath
no such office, and is full; as also because this man is ful Priest, and (as

                     •
                  haue heard) was sometime a Vicare (a Pastor he saith) from which his
ministrie & place he is nowe depriued, departed, and apostatate, as also
from all grace and feeling. Neither hath he in MALDON the credite or
roome so much as of a Curate, the Pastor there supplying his owne office,
but is brought in by such of the Parish as hauing itching eares,2 Tim. 4. 3.
geate vnto themselues an heape of newe fangled teachers after their
owne lustes, disliking & lothing the ministrie that is set ouer them, to
which not-withstanding in hypocrisie and for feare of the world they
ioyne in prayers & sacramentes, paye tythes & maintenance, as to their
proper Minister.
               To such people being riche and able to pay them well,Rom. 16. 18 these sectorie
precise Preachers runne for their hire and wages,Phil. 31. 19. but chiefly for vaineglorie
& wordlie estimation. And there teache and preach this people
for the most parte, vnder some dumbe or plurified Pastor: from whom
as from vnsufficient and blinde guides they withdraw not the people,
shewing them the will of God in that or in anie other poyncte,Acts. 20. 27 be it
neuer so odious and abhominable,Gal. 5. 11. that might bring perill. Yet for
their owne estimation,Gal. 4. 17. aduantage, and entertainement, they will by all
subtile meanes vnder hand seek to abalienate the heartes and mindes
of this forewarde and best inclyned people from these their Pastors,1 Thes. 
                        •
                     . 3. 4. 5. 6.
                  
and slily to drawe them vnto themselues.Ezek. 13. 18. Long it were to relate their
artes and engines,Ier. 23. 30. wherbie they hunte and entangle poore soules: their
coūterfeit shewes of holines,Math. 23. grauitie, austerenes of maners, precisenes
in triffles, lardge conscience in matters of greatest waight, especially
of any danger; strayning a gnat and swallowing a Camel; hatred and
thundring against some sinne, tollerating yea colouring some other in
some speciall persons; cunning insinuating into, and neuer offending
the riche, nor regarding the poore; holding and with-holding the
knowen truth of God in respect of tymes, places, and persons; dissembling,
hiding, with-holding yt in their publick ministrie and doctrines,
where yt may draw them into any trouble or tryall; yea balking,
if not peruerting, the euident scriptures as they arise against any publicke
enormitie of the tyme, vnder the coloure of peace, christian policie,
and wisdome. Wherebie these Scorpions so poyson & stinge euery
good conscience, so leauen them with hypocrisie, and teach them to
halt with the times, dissembling with God and their owne conscience,
that such proselytes as are wonne vnto them, become two-fold more
the children of Hel then they were before.
                     
                        •
                      Tim. 3. Yea so is their whole auditorie
entangled with their snares, as skarce any of them (without the
especial mercie of God) are euer recouered, brought to any soundnes,
stability, or vpright walking, to any conscience, true faith, or feare of
God. Herehence ariseth these schismes and sectes in the Church of
ENGLAND,1 Cor. 3. some holding with these Preachers, which make shewe as
though they sought a sinceare reformation of all thinges according to
the Gospell of CHRIST, and yet both execute a false ministrie themselues,
and they, together with all their hearers and followers, stand vnder
that throne of Antichrist,
                  G
                        •
                     l. 6. 12. the Bishops their Courtes, and accomplices,
and all those detestable enormities which they would haue vtterly
remoued & not reformed: And these are herevpon called Precitians,
or Purit
                        •
                     nes, and nowe lately Martinistes. The other opposite 
                     •
                  ide are the
Pontificales, that in al thinges hold & iumpe with the tyme, and are readie
to iustifie whatsoeuer is or shalbe by publick authoritie established.
And with these hold al the rabble of Atheists, dissembling Papistes, old
& luke-warme Protestantes, Libertines, dissolute and facinorous persons,
and such as haue no knowledge or feare of God. Euen that antient
sect of the Pharasies and Saduces. the one in precisenes, outward
shewe of holines, hypocrisie, vaine-glorie, coueteousnes, resembling or
rather exceading the Pharasies: the other in their whole religion, and
dissolute conuersation like vnto the Saduces, loking for no resurrection,
iudgment, or life to come, confessing God with their lippes, and
seruing him after their careles maner, but denying him in their
hearte, yea openly in their deedes, as their whole life and all their
worckes declare. Longe it were, and not my purpose in this place, to
shewe howe these Pharasie, Sectorie Teachers, these stipendarie rouing predicantes,
that haue no certaine office or place assigned them in their
Church,I
                        •
                     de 11. 13 verse. but like wandring starres remooue from place to place

for their greatest aduantage and best intertainement, in the error of Bala
                        •
                     m
powred out for wage, seduce and distracte the people of the lande,
drawing them from their owne Churches and Ministers, some to this,
some to that Preacher by heapes, each one as he standeth affected to
him that best fitteth his humore. Mie desire rather here is to shewe
the forgerie of this whole Ministrie of the Church of England in their
false office and entrance, aswel these precise esteemed Preachers, as the
parrish Parsons and Curates: which I hope by this which is said either is
or may be donne: Nowe yt remayneth that wee procede to their administration
and mainetenance.
               
               OF their Administratiō
                   we haue aboue in ye discouery of their publicke
worship more perticularlie intreated, finding yt wholly according
to that erroneous apochripha popish Leitourgie, that idolatrous abhominable
booke of their seruice, whervnto they are bounde, whereby they
are stinted & nourrered in al thinges, vpon what dayes, eaues & houres
through the yeere to come to Church, what garmentes to weare in the
Church, where and when to fit, stand, and kneele, what & howe much
to reade at this and that tyme, at this and that lesson, Pistle, Gospel.
When to reade, when to singe, when to praye, where to verse, when to
Collect: with all other circumstances, ceremonies, trinckets in their
Sacraments, Marriages, Purifications, Visitations, Burialls &c, as is in that parte of the
treatise (though sommarily, yet more playnely) declared, whervnto I
refer the reader. Here only affirming, that this their deuised, abhominable,
idolatrous worship, miserable abuse and high prophanation of
scriptures, open port-sale, and wilful sacrilege of their Ministerie and
Sacramens, to the most prophane and vngodly, doe sufficiently declare
what kinde of Ministerie they execute, and Ministers they are. Howe
possible yt is to ioyne or to make the holy Gospel and Ministrie of Christ
accorde vnto this people in this confusion, ignorance, and sinne, or to
these deuises & tromperiers,Iere. 23. 2
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   let anie in whom is anie light iudge, when
light and darcknes can be mingled togeather, or the stubble & strawe
remaine in the flambing-fire vnconsumed, then shal this be.
               Yet furder to manifest what kinde of Preachers of the Gospel they
are, and preaching of the Gospel they make, let their most heynous &
open professed perfidie in betraying their whole Ministrie, Gospel,
Church, Christ and al into the handes of their Lords these antichristian
Bishops, shewe, from whose apostatical Chaire they haue receiued their ministrie,
to whose orders and iniunctions they haue subscribed, to whose
Courtes & power they haue sworne their Canonical obedience: from whom
they haue receiued their licence and aucthority to preach,Gal. 1. 10. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   with condition
not to preach against any thing by publick aucthority established,
how vngodly and enormous soeuer they be: And also haue submitted
their whole doctrines & persons to these their Ordinances not to teach
anie truth, or against anie error that they inhibite, to preach, or cease to
preach, to administer or cease to administer, at their direction and inhibition:

And for their priuate estate, by them to be enioyned what kind
of apparel to weare whē they ride, walke abroade, or administer: Not
to marrie without their knowledge,Gal. 2. 4. 5 consent, or licence euen to this or
that perticular woman &c. Must not this needes be an excellent ministrie
and ministration of the Gospel that is thus mancipate to and by
these slaues, that is thus bought and solde, limited, prescribed, restrayned?
when they can proue that the Gospel may be in this maner vsed
in the true Churche of CHRIST, or preached by the true Ministrie
of Christ, we wil then yeild to their whole ministration, and acknowledg
them the true Ministers of Christ. But in the meane while because this
is impossible, and cannot without blasphemie be enterprised, without
sinne be thought; because also we finde vpon this present Ministrie of
theirs, euen al the markes of the false Prophet, that are written in the
booke, and al the markes of the Beast, we must hold them as they are,
except we wil with them condemne the truth of God, and call CHRIST
execrable.
               Neither yet is this their preaching (considered euen in yt self) set
apart from all the abuses and enormities aboue recited, such, as they
glorie of, abounding with such great learning, excellēt giftes, and rare
graces of the spirit, or answearable to that heauenly exercise of prophecie
in Christes Church. Of their education and learning euen from
the grammer schole to the pulpit, you haue alreadie hearde: as also
their Diuinity to be traditional, wholly deriued from other mens writinges
and books, both for the vnderstanding, diuiding, and interpretation
of al scriptures, as also for all doctrines, questions, and doubtes
that arise, and not springing from the fountaine of Gods spirit in thē
                  selues,
according to the measure of knowledge, faith, and grace giuen
them. So that these dumbe blinde guides and watchmen doe but see
with other mens eyes, but speake with other mens mouthes, and (as
one of their chief aucthors saith of them) without these bookes they
as are blinde as molles, as mute as fishes, not able of themselues to decide,
open, and interprete almost anie scripture, Or to discusse, iudge,
or decide anie doubt, or controversie with assurance. And therfore
when anie newe question vnwritten of before ariseth, they are either al
at a full poyncte not knowing what to saye to the matter, Or ells whē
they speake, so manie opinions and sentences, as speakers. Yea euen
in the thinges they reade and teache (there being so great diuersitie &
contrarietie amongst these Writers their aucthors) there also ensueth
great difference & contrarietie in their doctrines which they publicklie
deliuer, One teaching one thing in one place, an other the quite
contrarie in an other. And this not onlie in interpretation and vnderstanding
of sondrie, yea almost all places of scripture, but euen in most
waightie (and as they call them) fundamentall poynctes of doctrine. As
whether the Church of Rome be to be esteemed a true Churche or no▪
The Sacraments there deliuered, and the Ministrie there ordayned, be

                     •
                  o be held true sacraments, and a true Ministrie or no. Also if the ordinances,

order, and outward gouernment of Christes Church left in Christes
Testament be perpetual & of necessitie to be obserued &c. And al this
diuersitie & cōtrarietie of iudgmēt publickly taught in their Church,
must be coloured and passed ouer with this sweete sentence of Mr. Giff.
That they are but brotherly dissentiōs, they agree in al fundamentall doctrines.
A happie tourne it were, that those fundamental doctrines were
once agreed vpon and set downe, that wee might then knowe which
part of CHRISTES Testament is fundamentall and of necessitie, and which
is accidental and not necessarie, but variable and at mans wil. In the
meane while wee must stil belieue that CHRIST is not yea and naye,2 Cor. 1. 1
                        •
                     
                  
of one minde in one place, of an other ells where. Neither that the
spirite of God can rule in both places, where such contrarie doctrines
are taught and maintayned. We also are taught, that howsoeuer bretheren
through ignorance maie doubt and differ in iudgment for a
ceason, yet are they no there vpon to teach such thinges as they are not
assured of, lest they publish and sowe errors: Which who so doth, be
he man or Angel that teacheth any other thing or otherwise then Christ.
                  Gal▪ 1. 8
and his Apostles haue taught and deliuered,Rom. 16. 17. or causeth diuision & dissention
contrarie to their doctrine,1 Tim. 6. 3 or commeth not to the wholesom
wordes of our Lord Iesus Christ &c, wee are to hold them accursed, to
watch, and auoide them.
               Likewise,1 Corin. 14. 29. 30. 31. 32. the maner of their pulpit preaching nothing 
                     〈◊〉
                   to
the order of Christes Church, where the Prophets I meane such as are
knowen to haue the gift of interpretatiō of scriptures) haue al of them
libertie to speake,Rom. 12. 6 what God reueileth vnto them besides that which
hath bene deliuered,1 Pet. 4. 10. 11. so that they neither hinder, disturbe, or interrupte
the publick ministerie of the Churche, but vse their libertie opportunely
& holily to edification. They haue libertie also, yea their especial
dutie it is, to obserue and publickly to reproue anie false interpretation,
or false Doctrine deliuered publicklie in the Church, by whom
soeuer; Yea this power hath the least member of the Church in due
order and place, if the Prophets and Elders should ouersee, omit, neglect,
or refuse. The whole Church also, euen euerie peculiar Christian
Congregation, hath power in yt self to censure not onlie anie doctrine
deliuered, but the person of anie member or Minister of the same
congregation. But here in these Babilonish Synagogues one Priest climbeth
vp into their pulpits for orations, and possesseth the place alone, where
he declameth, deliuereth his studied tale to the howre-glasse, which
being runne out, he must make an end for troubling his auditory, and
leaue no place or tyme of addition, assent or dissent to anie other, al the
people hasting awaye. In his pulpit, after he hath read his text, he
may diuide, teache, or hadle yt, leaue or take yt, corrupt, falsifie,
wrest, or peruert yt at his pleasure. In that his priuileged tubbe he
may deliuer what doctrines he liste, be they neuer so currupt, false,
blasphemous. None of his auditore, whatsoeuer they be, hath power
to cal them into questiō, cerrect, or refute the same presently and publickly,

for that is by lawe forbidden: But the Church is driuē to their
Lord Ordinarie to cōplaine, and except or vntil he redresse, they must
hold & vse him stil as their Minister. In that priuileged tubbe he may
inve
                     •
                  ghe, accuse, sclander, deuounce against anie truth or person that
witnesseth against their kingedome, or against anie publicke sinne or
enormitie of the tyme, without censure or controlement. Nay these
men are praysed, incited, and commended for this, as the most faithful
and godly; which maketh both the sectes, as well Reformis
                        •
                     es as Po
                        ••
                     ificall
yearne praise by this vayne, and fight with one accorde for their kingdome
against Christes faithful seruāts, whom they cal Brownistes, as against
a common enimie; yea more bitterly then they doe against anie other
enimie, heretick, or wicked person. Onlie here in this tubbe if they
can keepe their tongues from speaking against their Lords the Bishops
& their procedings, or against anie publicke 
                     •
                  normitie in the Church
or common wealth, they maie then ease their stomackes against anie
meane person, or one Priest against an other, and rayle their fill. These
perticular Congregations haue neither power to reproue their doctrines,
or to censure their persons, be the one neuer so hereticall, the
other neuer so obstinate; and needes then must here be a cleane
Church I trowe.
               And now how sincerely and purely these learned Priestes & Diuines
al the rable of them preach Gods Lawe and Christes Gospel, to set downe
their seueral defaultes, ignorāces, corruptions, and vnfaithfulnes, were
infinite. Let the high opē wilful breach of al Gods laws by al degrees,
suffered, and vnreproued, declare and witnesse to their faces. Let their
execrable Idolls, and idolatries, their abhominable worship & innumerable
deuises, their taking the Lordes name in vayne, their common
swearing in euerie matter, and tryall for euerie cause and triffle, yea
without anie cause, their common & open blaspheming, and cursing,
yea transfiging the holy and dreadfull name of God in their anger and
mi
                     •
                  th; Their impietie, prophannes, pride, vanitie, glottonie, excesse,
idlenes, riote, playing, sporting, dauncing &c, on the Lordes day openly
seene, suffered, vnpunished, shew how well they keep and teach the
first Table of Gods lawe in the Church of England. And for the second,
let the euil nourture & bringing vp of their youth, their dissolutenesse,
irreuerence, head strong and incorrigible nature, yea their open disobedience
& contempt of parents and superiours, the inordinate walking
of all degrees helde within the compasse of no lawes, limites, callings,
in the feare and obedience of no person Magistrate, Parent, Master;
Let the common quarles, frayes, foodes, tumults, blood-shed,
murder, man-slaughter, the iarres, hatreds, contentions, debates,
wrath, anger, enuying, cursing, reuiling, nicknaming &c, Let the
common and open whoredoms, adulteries, fornications, chambering,
wantonnes, daliance, lightnes, delicacie and softnes of apparle, diet,
maners, to deck, prouoke, allure, their courting intertainement, open
and secret lust (otherwise caled loue) most rife as in Sodome; Let their

open robberies, their secret theftes, pickings, pilferinges, their open
oppression, violence, wronge, extortion, vsurie, their vsual deceipt and
couen in all bargayning, buying, selling; Let their common & customable
open and secret lving, blaspheming, sclandering, accusing, reproching,
defaming, bringing vp, carying, and receiuing euil reportes
one of an other, their false swearing in testimonie, their swearing and
foreswearing to deceiue euen in euerie triffle: And as for couering of
wife, virgine, seruant, house, land, cattle, goodes, insatiable coueteousnes
and greedines, heaping and hourding vp treasures, contynual purchasing
and adding field vnto field, yea towne vnto towne, till they
haue gotten whole countreyes into their possession, neuer satiate till
their mouth be full of moulde. these are the best and only esteemed
Christians of the Church of England; where coueteousnes is no sinne.
They that should speake against yt, pride, intemperance &c. should
iudge the heart, and enter into Gods iudgment seate; Let these capital
sinnes and transgressions against the lawe of God, which are cōmitted
without shame or feare, either not punished or wrongfully punished
(murder only excepted, which how also yt is wincked at or perdoned I
wil not stand vpon) let these I say stand vp to the faces of these Priestes
& Prophets, being thus cōmonly & openly cōmitted in their Church,
and witnesse how faithfully and sincerely they expounde & declare the
lawes & iudgmentes of God, how carefully they watch ouer the soules
of men, and gouerne the Church, that haue not against all or any one
of these sinnes, any spirituall weapons, or ecclesiasticall censure in a
readines; So that if the Magistrates sworde (which yet wanteth an
eye to guide it) did not represse some sinnes, there should be no humane
peace, as there now is no christian order in their Church. And
now if I should here stand to diriue the seueral and speciall kindes of
sinnes (which as riuers are diuided and flowe forth from all these generall
heades, and as a deluge couer the face of this whole land) yt were
infinite; but what then to diuide those riuers againe into their perticular
droppes? namely, such perticular persons as commit the same,
yea such and so many perticular tymes as they commit the same, who
then should nomber them? All these sinners and sinnes are in this
Church by these Leaches these Prophets healed with the plaister of
peace, with the bloode and merites of CHRIST, though there be neither
faith nor repentance, they are all good christians.
               Likewise if I should here stand to relate and recite the falshode, deceipt,
and hypocrisie of these Priestes (let me here be vnderstoode euen
of those best esteamed forewarde learned Preachers, commonly called
Good men) how conningly and craftily they teach the lawe, neuer touching
or offending their auditorie (at leaste the mightie or rich of them)
be their sinnes neuer so heynous and manifest; especially if they will
countenance, esteeme, feaste, and heare these Preachers, they are in
them but infirmities, and imperfections, be they neuer so deiplie set &
incurable. And againe how sharply they will inveigh against others

which thincke not so wel of them, especially if they be not of power to
doe them hur
                     •
                  e, nor of will to doe them good; howe they wil speake
against such sinnes of the second Table, as their rich auditorie are not
at al, or least addict vnto, and beate them downe as with thunder from
heauen, though they suffer as greate in them and their houses befor
                     •
                  
their face vncontrolled. Yea what fine shiftes, excuses, and veales they
will finde out to extenuate, excuse, or hide the sinnes of these greate
rich persons, in whose houses all excesse, glo
                     •
                  onie, ryot, pride, idlenes,
gaming, shalbe but good hospitalitie answearable to their estates, honest
recreation. And this veale of recreation must couer al their heathen
sportes within doores and without, though it be all the day yea al their
life longe, though they drawe neuer so many idle beholders, or idle assistantes
to keepe them companie, to followe their dogges, hawkes &c
as their only caling & profession. Yea go these Esawites, their wiues, and
children neuer so disguisedly in their strange prodigious shapes, newe
fangled a
                     •
                  tires, with their infinite deuises & curiosities, it is but according
to their degree, sexe, age, calling, with infinite such like. Also, if I
should stand to relate the sondrie shiftes of these Reformist Preachers, these
sighers for reformation, these conscience botchers, these Preachers of
the Gospell to winne and keepe credite with the world; How zealous
in some place, tyme, auditorie, where they may be wel backed they wil
seeme against some triffles, as though they were of most precise and
vnstayned conscience; And againe how luke-warme, colde, and backward
they wilbe in the same poyntes at an other tyme, place, and auditorie,
How strange to the poore that shal desire their iudgmēt of some
poynctes, especially of these, But cheiflie if any haue espied more light
then they would they should, and doe but make question of their ministrie,
worship, Church &c, with what exquisite sleights they will
seeke to drawe them backe, as rūning too farre & too fast before their
guides, with what poysoned cauills to quench their zeale and spirite,
to pleade for and defend their sinne and apostasie, These thinges to dicusse,
or but to shew in perticular, with their due circumstances, would
require a longe and lardge discourse, yea no booke were able to containe
all their diuelish deuises and delusions, which euen fill that flying
volume the Prophet speaketh of, Sathan hauing his fordge of all mischeife
continually going amongst them. Al which their dealings euidently
shew what kinde of ministers and preachers of the Gospel they
are, Which drawe the people vnto, and with their preaching keepe
them in, this defection & apostasie from the Gospell, which keep the
people from, and will not leade them to the sinceare practize of the
Gospell: but with their schole learning drawe a veale before CHRISTS
face, that the people might not see to the end of his ministrie, neither
discerne what CHRISTES will is for any action of the Church, or to examine
by the rules of CHRISTES Testament any thing by publick au
                     •
                  
                  thoritie
established. Yea we see and haue shewed, how they drawe the
people vnto, and themselues administer by an other Lei
                        •
                     ourgie then Christ
                        •
                     
                  
                  
Testament, which prescribeth an other kinde of administration both
to themselues and to the whole Church in all thinges, then CHRIST
hath prescribed. We see & haue shewed, how they hold all the people
vnder this more then Babilonish yoke of these antichristian Prelates,
their Courtes &c, and stand themselues the marcked Ministers, sworne
subiects, and bond seruantes of these their Lordes, haue fetched their
ministrie, licence to preach, and their whole administratiō from them,
how they are prescribed, stinted, limited, censured, silenced, deposed
by them, how they haue submitted and betrayed themselues, Church,
Gospell, Christ to these enemies: Also what merchandize they make
of their prayers, Gospel, preaching, sacramentes, selling all and themselues
to, for money: What trafique they make of their benefices, how
they come by them and part from them, how they haue in all thinges
gonne astray, forsaking the right waye, hauing followed the waye of
Balaam of B
                        •
                     sor that loued the hire of vnrighteousnes, and are in all
thinges so throughly corrupted, as they are the most bitter & pestilent
enemies of the kingdome of CHRIST, and of the sinceare practize of
the Gospel; Deuising to themselues & their miserable followers daily
new errors & bye pathes, as faste as the old (wherin they haue walked)
are discouered, as any that will take the paynes to examine by the rules
of the Scriptures their bookes of discipline and new formes of reformation,
or rather those antient primatiue defections which they seeke
againe to reuiue, shall perceiue. For mie part I am euen ir
                     •
                  ked to raue
in this bottomlesse abysme of their iniquities, which the more they are
looked into still offer more matter of reproofe, euen without end.
Wherfore I euē with wearines here cease furder to speake of their corrupt
administration, hoping that by this alreadie said, at the least vpon
due examination therof, it may appeare to al men, that this their whole
administration and preaching of the worde is altogether as corrupt,
and in all poynctes rightly fitteth vnto their antich
                     •
                  istian office & entrance.
It now remayneth that we hast to and ouer their maintenance.
               THE maintenance of the ministri of the Church of ENGLAND is of these
fower sortes 1. Either by lordly reuenues, with their royal rightes,
ciuill iurisdiction, Courtes baron, tenancies &c, belonging thervnto.
2. Or by fees and pollages taysed & rauened in their spiritual Courtes,
for iudging pleading, solliciting, writing, fetching vp, sommoning.
3. Or by gleabes and tithes. 4. Or ells by annual set stipendes.
               The first forte of these we haue alreadie shewed to belong to Princes,
to ciuile Lordes and persons, and to be vtterly vnlawful and forbidden
to the ministrie of CHRIST. Mr. G
                     •
                  F. his liberall maintenance, or the
ordinance of the Church, cannot mainteine them. Neither will that
worde Philoxenos, which they so lardgly stretch & interpreat, carrie half
this pompe.
               
                  
To the second sort we affirme these Courtes, Officers, Iudges, Aduocates,
Proctors, Registers, Purseuantes, Sommoners, together with all
their functions, the orders of their Courtes, maner of iurisdictiō, pleading
&c, where all thinges are pleadable if not vendible for money,
where al causes euen the most foule, finde their aduocates, colours, defence,
delayes for mony &c, Al these spiritual Courtes, officers, iudgments,
pleadings, customes, we finde diuelish & antichristian, and not
to appertaine to the Church & kingdome of CHRIST, but to belong to
the kingdome & throne of Antichrist, and of the Beaste. And therfore
may conclude that they are the reuenues of sinne, not to belong to the
ministrie of CHRIST.
               The third kinde, these tithes, we finde merely ceremoniall, to haue
bene ordayned for,Nomb. 18. and belonged vnto the Leuiticall ministerie vnder
the lawe. We finde them an inheritance of the Leuites: An offering of
the people: Therfore they cannot in this maner by lawe by tyed to the
ministrie of CHRIST, be made an inheritance vnto them, an offring of
the people vnto them. For if there be a chandge of the Priest-hoode,
the
                     •
                   of necessitie must there be a chandge of the Lawe.Heb. 7. 12. No part of the
ceremoniall lawe or of those shadowes can be ioyned vnto the Gospell
& ministrie of CHRIST,Gal. 4. & 5. Chapter. they or any part of them cānot now be reuiued
or retayned without the denial & losse of CHRIST.Collos. 2. 20 And how is the ceremoniall
lawe abrogate whilest these tithes are in this maner allotted
by lawe vnto the ministrie of the Gospell, as an inheritance to them, as
an oblation of the people, euē as in former tyme vnto the Leuites? The
Princes cōmandement, or the Churches decree cannot alter the nature
of these tithes, to make them either ciuile or lawfull. God was the
aucthor of this law, he made it ecclesiastical: Man can neither chandge
the propertie or ye end therof, to make that ciuile that God hath make
ecclesiastical.
                     
                        •
                      Chr
                        •
                     n. 31. Kinge EZECHIA cōmanded & reuiued this lawe; it became
not therbie ciuile. A godly Prince cōmandeth al the lawes of the
first Table, all the ordinances of Christs Testament, shall they therbie be
made ciuile, and no longer ecclesiastical or Gods lawes? The decree of
the Church also (alleadged by Mr. G.) sheweth it ecclesiastical, for the
Church maketh no ciuile decrees, yt medleth not with th'execution of
ciuile gouernemēt. Touching the power of the Church to make lawes
& decrees, we haue in the first parte of this booke spokē. The Church
is bounde to the lawes of God, and may make or receiue none other
lawes then God hath made. Christ is the only Law-giuer & Kinge of his
Church. Againe, this decree of the Church to ordaine y• the ministerie
of the Gospell should be maintayned by tithes, you see is directly cō
                  trarie
to the wil, yea to ye being of Christ, in receiuing that lawe & maintenance
which Christ hath abolished together with the Leuitical ministrie.
And aswel might they reuiue the Leuitical ministrie, or any other
Iewish ceremonie with as great pretext and warrant, as this; except
the Church of ENGLAND haue some speciall warrant from or together
with her Mother of ROME to reuiue and erect whatsoeuer

CHRIST hath abolished, be yt neuer so contrarie vnto him; yea and
to abrogate whatsoeuer Christ hath instituted, be it neuer so necessarie.
How bold the Church of England is in these thinges, in their tithes, offrings,
purification, suspensiō, their holy cimiteries, and cells, the shape
of their Church, with the porche, batlementes, i
                     •
                  les, Folding doores,
lightes, ministerial vessels, ministerial garmētes, dayes, feastes &c, As
on the other side to abrogate Christes Ministrie and the ordinances of his
newe Testament,1 Cor. 9. is aboue declared, and in this appeareth. For Christ
hauing instituted an other mainetenance for his ministrie,Gal. 6. 6 namely the
free contribution and beneuolence of his Sainctes in these Congregations
whervnto they belonge and administer;1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. The Church of England
iudging this al to base for her Ministrie, hath instituted or rather receiued
of her mother of Rome Lordly yea Princely liuings, Courtly iudicial
fees, Gleabes and tithes, sett & certaine stipēdes. She wil not haue
the lowest of her Ministrie to liue thus beggerly, to depend vpon the
benevolence of the people, as our Sauiour himself, his Apostles, and
Ministers did: (which a certaine Doctor of hers in di
                     •
                  daine caled the
almouse basket) But she wil haue al her ministry sure of their maintenance
before hand, they shal neither depēd vpon God nor the Church;
But she giueth them their lines and portion in the lande amongst the
people, and also giueth them a lawe ouer the people, wherbie they may
exact their duetie,Mich. 3. if the fleese or fleshe be worth so much. The Priest
here thrusteth his flesh-hooke into euerie poore bodies kettle,Ezek. 34. his 
                     •
                  ithe
and sick
                     •
                  e into euerie field,1 Sam. 2. prying and prowling in euerie place & corner,
skratching and gathering vp his tithes euē to the chicken & egge,
to the mynte and anise without regard to whom they belōge,Math. 23. 23 whether
to the faithful or prophane,Leu. 22. 25. papist, atheist, witch, or heretick, to the
poore or fatherlesse,Hab. 1. catching vp al with the angle, they cetch it in their
net & gather it in their yarne and burne incense to their yarne, because
this their portion is fa
                     •
                   and their meate plenteous,Math. 23. 14. deuowring widowes
houses vnder colour of longe prayer. Now how this tithing prowling
extortion, may be made the Christian Ministers maintenance, I would
faine learne,Esa. 30. 24 Who as the Prophet saith should be fed with cleane prouander
that is wynowed with the shoue
                     •
                   and with the fanne. Who
themselues ought to be examples of pietie, equitie, meekenes, and not
like greedy Wolues thus to make a praye of the sheepe.Ezeck. 13. 4 19. Likewise how
this tithe gathering and cōtynual prowling maie be enioyned or made
to accorde to a christian Ministers office, Or howe it is possible for the
true Minister of CHRIST diligently to attend his studie and office together
with this his tith gathering, let anie that knoweth the worke of
the ministrie iudge. Yea rather let the holy Ghost iudge, that expresly
forbiddeth the ministrie of the worde to be entangled with such busines
of this life.2 Tim. 2. 4 If it be here said these tithes may be gathered by an
other, yet this sheweth they cannot be gathered by the Minister. And
so stil this reason holdeth, that therfore they are no fit maintenance for
the ministrie. The other reasons aboue recited, proue the vnlawfulnes
of them.
               
                  
To the set stipendes also and gleabes, I in like maner affirme them
to be an other maintenance then that Christ hath instituted for his ministrie;
yea to take away that order, to the great detriment and manifold
inconveniences of the Church, and therfore likewise vnlawfull.
Holding this proposition firme, that where CHRIST hath instituted
a maintenance for his Ministrie, the Church may not devise or receiue
anie newe or other lawes for the maintenance of their ministrie, then
CHRIST hath giuen. CHRIST then hath ordayned that they that
dresse the vineyard & feed the flocke, should eate of the fruict of that
vineyarde and of the milke of that flocke, to which they attend. This
mainetenance in other places is set downe to be the free contribution
and benevolence of the Sainctes from tyme to tyme, according to the
present abilitie of the one, and necessities of the other. This the Lorde
in wisedome hath thought most meete for his Church and ministerie
vnto the wo
                     •
                  ldes end: As wherby to knit the heartes of them together
in the band of loue, in al mutual dueties, to haue each other in minde,
to care, prouide, and labour each for other as they ought. The Minister
according to his du
                     •
                  ty to s
                     •
                  eke pasture for them, to thresh thē out the
corne out of the eares, yea to grind, prepare, and diuide yet to the nour
                     •
                  shment
& comfort of them al. And they againe on their parte to labour,
to administer of their earthly goods to the necessities & wātes of
their Ministers & guides.Phil. 4. 10. &
                        •
                     . Wherby y• one is encouraged in their studies,
laboures, & diligēce, thus reaping the fruictes of the peoples faith and
loue, and are assured that they doe their dueties to the approbation and
good liking of the flocke; which when they shall faile and will not be
drawen faithfully to doe, then is not the flocke any longer burdened
with or bound vnto such a Minister. As one the other side, if the people
fal from the faith and refuse to walke orderly in the faith, then are the
Ministers no furder bounde, or to contynue to administer to such a
people. But now whilest the Ministers mainetenance is made certaine
by law, or bargaine, by stint, rate, or proportiō imposed vpō the people,
how much and when each one shal paye, how much the Minister shall
haue yeerely; It first depriueth God of the glorie due to him for his
blessing vpon their labours and indeuours, in restrayning the free contribution
and willing beneuolence of the people by this lawe or bargaine,
making yt of necessity, stinting, and apportioning yt to this or
that rate, which the Lorde hath left at the libertie, discretion, and will
of each one, as God hath prospered, and according to that present ability
God administreth.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 13. 16 with whiche contribution and sacrifice howe
wel God is pleased,2 Cor. 9. the Scripture euerie where witnesseth. Then it taketh
awaie or extinguisheth all those mutuall and contynuall dueties,Phil. 4.
beneuolence, loue, care, labour &c, betwixt the flocke and the ministerie.
The flocke therbie not knowing or hauing meanes to doe their
duetie vnto their ministerie. The Ministers therbie so hindered, incombred,
and with-drawen, as they either slack, or neglect their dutyes
to the flocke.
               
                  
By this corrupt custome also sondrie intollerable inconueniences &
grieuous mischieues doe ensue. This setting out land or certaine rates
by way of lawe or bargaine in euerie parrish or Congregation to the
Minister, doth hinder the Church from the choice & vse of such other
Ministers as Christ in his Testament hath ordained to the gouernement
and seruice of his Church, the parrish or Congregation neither indevouring
to haue more, neither indeed suffred to haue more, or by this
meanes able or willing to keep more. This setting out landes, tithes
&c, to the Minister by way of lawe, doth alwaies presuppose of necessity
a true established Church, and true Minister in those parrishes vnto
the worldes end: those landes and tithes being appropriate & bounde
thervnto, and hauing none other owners. Which cōfirmeth and establisheth
those grosse popish errors of a personal and continuall succession
of Ministers, and local contynuance of a visible Churche. Againe
when this liuing is thus by lawe giuen to a Priest for terme of his life,
be he neuer so vnable, vnworthie, or negligent, the parrish is so long
bounde vnto him, and can by no meanes get rid of him. yea be he neuer
so bad, his faultes & errors neuer so fowle, they cannot without or
vntil their Lord Bishop wil, geat rid of him, they must mainetaine him
and receiue his Ministry, whether they wil or no. Furder these annual
liuinges by lawe and set stipendes by rate, presuppose alwaies one permanent
and certaine estate both of the Parrishoners & Ministers, The
one, euen euerie person euer to be able to pay so much, The other neuer
to need more or lesse: Yea that alwaies to the worldes end all the
Parsons & al the Parrishoners of that towne shal neuer need or be able
to giue more or lesse, whether the Lorde send scarcity of plētie, dearth
or cheapnes, sicknes or health, losse or aduātage, childrē or no chardge
&c. Againe, such vnreasonable inequalitie is vsed in the distribution
of these liuinges, the Parson of some one litle Hamblet where are not
twētie houses hauing one hundreth or two hundreth-pounds by yeere
to liue on, an other of a much greater towne not hauing twentie
poundes, yea peradventure ten poundes by yeere for that chardge he
hath to liue vpon: And this for euer without regarde of the needes or
laboure of them, it being alike to them & their successors whosoeuer.
To conclude, the tithes & set stipēdes of these Parrish Priestes being of
the goods of the prophane, most wicked, and vngodly, euen of al their
parrish indifferently; yet are more odious & vnmeet for anie christian
Ministers, who are not to stande hierdes to such dogges & swine to administer
to them the gospel and sacramentes for their goods and hire.
It was not lawfull for the Priest vnder the lawe to receiue the offring of
anie stranger from the faith, such might not enter into or offer in the
Temple. Neither nowe vnder the Gospel maie the vnbelieuing haue
anie fellowship with the Church, or communicate in or intermeddle
with anie actiōs of the Church. But this contributiō is an action of the
Church, a communion & dutie of the Sainctes. How execrable thē is
this their sacriledge & coueteousnes, that thus make marchādize of y•
                  
holie thinges of God, and let out themselues to hire euen to the prophane,
for filthie lucre. The true Ministers of Christ may not be suspected,
much lesse openly 
                     •
                  aynted of such peremptorie faultes as these,
which disable him from all ministrie in the Churche, and are eueriewhere
set downe as vndoubted markes of a false Prophet. By al which
then as by al other arguments of their antichristian office, entrāce, and
administration, we may still and yet more strongly concl
                     •
                  de them not
to be the Ministers of Christ. Seing neither the office they execute, their
entrance vnto their office, their administration in their office, nor yet
their maintenance, can be ioyned vnto the Church, Ministrie, or Gospel
of CHRIST.
               THere yet remaine a few base stragling offices of their Church, vzt.
Their Church-wardēs, Questmē, Parish Clark. These are al lay mē
(as they call thē) yet intermeddle they with ecclesiastical affaires. their
offices perticularly I can neither describe, nor yet wel distinguish. The
Church-wardēs are (as yt seemeth) an other kinde of Deacons, They
gather and keepe the Church stocke and treasurie, and also the penalties
of such as come not to their diuine seruice, and also distribute the
same vnto the poore, the reparations of the Church &c: they keep one
of the keyes of the towne cheste. The Quest-men are liker vnto Elders,
these (I suppose) they looke to the order and gouernement of the
Church, as wel Priest as People. That the Priest vse his ministerial vestures,
vessels, and trincketts, reade his seruice, homelies, iniunctions,
orderlie. That the people do not bargaine, talke, or walcke in the
Church and Church yarde during the tyme of diuine seruice; They
also must looke to the ale-houses that there be no tipling or playing,
during the said tyme: and who be absent from their Parrish Church,
and present such defaltes at Masse Commissaries Courte accordinglie. The
Parrish Clarck he is the Priestes Accol
                        ••
                     th to help him to say his Mattens
and Euen-songe, with his due versicles & Resp
                        •
                     nse, to help him at his Sacraments
Marriages, Church-goings, Visitations, Dirges, Rogations at all assayes. He ringeth
their bells to and after their seruice, their knells and soule-peales; he
keepeth the Church doore keye; he sweepeth and 
                     •
                  rimmeth the
Church; he nurtureth the boyes and dogges that they be not to lowde
at seruice tyme; yea he may doe yet manie things more, if he haue the
Bishops letter; as in tyme of neede to christen children, and to reade
diuine seruice in the absence of the Priest &c. To stand to shewe the
forgerie, seuerall defaultes, or dissimilitude of these offices from the
Deacon or Elders that God hath appoyneted, were tedious and needlesse,
they hauing neither mention nor vse in Christes Testament and
Church.
               Thus now haue we summarily pervsed al this rable of the Ministery
of the Church of England, and haue not founde anie one of them right,
or almost in anie one poyncte according to the rules of Christes Testament,
they are all strangers there, they belonge not to Christes bodie his

Church, neither are they knit as members vnto that heade. But out of
the smoke of the bottomlesse pit they came when that fallen StarreReuel. 9. & 13. and 16. & 17. and 18. Chap.
                  Antichrist had the key thereof giuē him; to his bodie his kingdome the
false Church they haue alwaies belonged, alwaies serued; to him in
his seuerall shapes they haue alwaies bene knit, as the members to the
heade; from him and not from CHRIST we all with our bodily eyes see
the Church of ENGLAND hath receiued them. We see they beare not
CHRISTS but Antichrists image, marcke, life, power. What then should
hinder this assertion, that they together with Antichrist their heade doe
growe, liue, raigne, stand and fal as the branches with the tree.Luk. 11. 17. Should
a revoulte, diuision, and schisme in a kingdome within yt self? No,
this but hasteneth the Lordes iudgmentes the sooner to make it desolate.
Can this revoulte and schisme either transforme or reforme this
ministerie? Let their present estate iudge.2 Thes. 2. 7. Should Antichristes changing
his shape from his mysterie to his exaltation, from his exaltation to his Consumption,
                  Reuel. 13.
Or his Ministers transforming and masking themselues vnder
shewes and visardes of righteousnes,2 Cor. 11. 13. 14. 15. make them euer the better,
or hide and defend them from the light? No, all thinges when they
are reprooued of the light are manifest.Ephes. 5. 13. The light of the Gospel shal
discouer and abolish Antichrist.
                  1 Cor. 3. 13. 14. 15. As he rose by degrees, so shall he by degrees
vanish; As he and his trayne rose out of the smoke of the bottomlesse
pit Reuel. 9. so shall they all goe into vtter darckenes,2 Thes. 2. 
                        •
                     . euen
thether againe.Reuel. 16. The Beast and the false Prophet shalbe taken by him
that rideth on the white horse and his holie armie, these both shal aliue
be cast into that lake of fire burning in brimstone. The Lord himself
hath spoken yt. Reuel. 19.
               NOwe let vs see what arguments Mr. GIFFARD after more then two
yeeres studie hath brought vs to approoue his ministrie by. He
told vs erewhile that they were true Ministers of the Gospel, Pastors &
Teachers, had a true calling and ordination; Nowe come his proues.
The ministerie of the Gospell vvhich bringeth the vvorde of faith and reconciliation betwixt
God and the vvorld, is the true ministerie of CHRIST, for the Diuel and Antichrist ordaine
no such ministerie. Nowe the ministerie of the Church of England doth bring no vvorde nor
doctrine but the sacred Scriptures; yt preacheth faith in God through CHRIST, and the
doctrine of repentance, deliuering the holie Sacraments as seales to confirme the same. Let all
the schismaticks of the vvorlde barck &c. I am lothe to take Mr. GIFF. in a
Parologisme at the first where reasons are so geason, lest hereafter we haue
no more, especially lest we haue more varyance about the forme then
about the matter in this, yet when he shall haue reduced it to right
forme, he shall then but haue begg
                     •
                  d that which we demanded, and
still looke that he should prooue. vzt. That their ministrie is the true
ministrie of the Gospell. This, because euerie true ministrie of the
Gospell is in some office, vnto which office there must needes be a true
and lawfull calling, therefore we desired him to prooue their ministrie
in the office, entrance, &c, by the scriptures. Mr. GIFF. giuing vs his

bare worde that they are Pastors & Teachers, making no proofe thereof,
quite ouerskippeth their office and entrance, and prooueth them Ministers
because they doe administer. As if a priuate person should reason
thus. I haue knowledge of the lawe, I administer true iustice and
iudgment, Therfore I am a true Iudge, a lawfull Magistrate. Doth he
thinck that this reason wil excuse this vsurper either before God or his
Prince? If he then wil haue anie better speede, let him prooue his ministerie
directly and plainely by the scriptures, first in the office he chalengeth,
then in his caling vnto his office, as al the Apostles and true Ministers
of CHRIST haue donne, and ought to doe. And then if he can
iustifie his administration and be founde faithfull, he shall haue praise
with God and man. Otherwise by this balcking and begging that he
should, and hath bene so often vrged to prooue, he but manifesteth his
weaknes and forgerie in those poynctes, and but to loseth as many of
these preposterous argumentes, as he bringeth. Yet that he be not too
far conceipted, or any other deceiued with this argument, against his
next booke, we giue him to wiete, That the second part of his argument
is a false and impudent assumption. The Church of ENGLAND
bringeth and emposeth an other worde and other ordinances then the
holie scriptures, as that deuised abhominable Leitourgie their idoll seruice-booke,
the rule and foundation, yea the verie matter & substance
of their publick worship, and administration, their popish superstitious
ceremonies and trincketts, their vngodly and antichristian ordinances,
ministrie, and gouernement. To all these abhominations they
ioyne, or rather subiect and abuse the, Gospell. And therfore preach
not faith in God nor CHRIST, neither the doctrines of repentance truly
and sincerely: but denie God in their workes and CHRIST in his offices.
They beare the yoke of Antichrist, drawe all the people vnto
them, souder them euen the most wicked & impenitent in their sinne
and iniquitie, with their prayers, preaching, and sacramentes. Not
suffring any to forsake these seene sinnes and abhominations, or to
come vnto CHRIST, but drawing and holding all the land vnder the
wrath of God &c.
               NExt he by the way maketh a learned apologie for ye dumbe Pastors
of the Church of England his bretheren, against whom if yt be obiected
that their ministrie is not the ministrie of reconciliatiō, because
they cannot preach the Gospel; He here setteth downe a learned note
by way of two rare distinctions. We must first he saith distinguish betwixt
the ministrie & the Minister. The man may be of the Diuel, and
yet his ministrie of God. Then we must distinguish betwixt the function
yt self, and the execution of the same. As when the office is laide vpon
one that cannot preach, the function it self is entire, the defect only in the
execution therof; Therfore the ministrie of the Church of England is
the ministrie of the Gospell, though some doe not, and others cannot
preach. Sure this is so subtily contriued, as men of meane iudgmēt &

capacitie shall neuer be able to perceiue how it is or may be brought
about. The first Distinction is graunted, so the sinne of the Minister be secrete,
or not such as disableth him to the ministrie. But what of this,
may any open, vnworthie, or insufficient person be a Minister? Or is
the ministrie of such a one good & acceptable? Ther is no such consequence
from hence to be gathered. To the second in like maner it followeth
not, because we may distinguish and put difference betwixt the
office yt self and the execution of the office, that therfore any office
of the Church may be giuen to anie open vnsufficient, or vnworthie
person; Or if yt be, that the ministrie of such a one is good or acceptable:
For the calling of the Church cannot enhable such open
insufficient to the ministrie, whom God refuseth, or make acceptable
that ministration, which God disaloweth. Nowe then these dumbe
Pastors that cannot preach, are apparantly insufficient and incapeable
of that office, therfore no calling of men can make them true and lawfull
Ministers: And being no true or lawfull Ministers, their ministration
is then vnlawfull, accursed, abhominable to God & men. These
then being allowed Ministers, and their ministration publiquely by
lawe approued, and receiued in the Church of England, we may conclude
the publicke ministrie and ministration of the Church of England
to be vnlawfull, accursed, and abhominable thus far foorth, notwithstanding
Mr. Giffardes payre of distinctions. Otherwise, if he laboured
to prooue the ministerie of the Gospell to be in yt self alwaies entire,
holie, and blessed, notwithstanding the infirmities & faultes of mē:
this all men will graunte, and needed not his learned distinctions to
prooue the same. But what is this to prooue the ministrie of these
dumbe Pastors, Or the other ministrie of the Church of England to be
that ministerie of the Gospell: which we for all the reasons aboue alleadged
confidently denie.
               HIs second reason. Such as haue the caling & ordination of the Church, haue the ministrie 
of CHRIST, For it is giuen to the Church to cal & ordaine Ministers. In the
next sectiō his Minor followeth. In Englād the Ministers haue their caling & ordination
by the Church of GOD, Therfore &c. To the Maior he addeth a clause, that yt
may be a true caling notwithstanding some faultes of ignorāce or otherwise;
So he vnderstand this otherwise to be of negligence, and not of anie
wilful & obstinate transgressiōs: Or not any of those perēptorie faultes
excepted by the holy Ghost, which disable the elect & disanul the electiō,
then we thus far assent. But whē we reason of the caling of the ministri
of England, we speake not of a true caling, though vnperfect with
some faultes of ignorāce or negligence, but of a false counterfeit & antichr
                     •
                  stiā
caling, which we haue proued & affirme theirs to be. The caling
of the Church ought alwaies to be yt caling of Christ prescribed in
his Testament, which theirs is not. To his Minor now, first we denie the
Churche of England to be the true established Churche of Christ. He
prooueth it thus That people vvhich hath forsaken heresies and false vvorship, and

imbraced the doctrine of the Gospell hath in it the true Church vvhich hath the power.
Wee obserue much subtiltie and feare in this position. For whereas he
ought to haue affirmed Are the true Church, and haue the power, he fearefullie
& subtilly saith hath in it the true Church, which hath the power, not daring to iustifie
or ioyne issue of their outward estate, but leauing himself a starting
hole to flee to such secret ones as God may call and haue amongst
them. We doubt not but God hath in Turckye or Persia, yea in the
Church of ROME manie deare elect; but should we therfore say that
Turcky, Persia, Rome, are the true Church? We affirme also & will approue
against al the false Prophets of the world, that in this land the
Lord hath such a people that haue thus forsaken heresies & false worship,
embraced the Gospell, and haue this power of CHRIST. But we
denie this their Church to consist of this people, to haue forsakē heresies
& false worship, to haue truly embraced the Gospel, or to haue this
power of CHRIST, to elect, ordaine, excōmunicate, or to redresse anie
enormitie: but are dryuen to these antichristian Bishopps for al these.
Who receiue not power of the Church, but vsurpe and exercise absolute
power ouer the Church, yea the whole power of the Church, as
hath bene shewed. Which is vnlawfull either for the Church to giue,
or for any true christian to receiue or execute. Neither can th'aucthoritie
of anie mortall men or Parlament make that lawfull, which God
in his worde condemneth and forbiddeth. And so euen by this his
owne allegation, all this ministrie made by & standing vnder this vsurped
inordinate antichristian power of the Bishopps, are also vnlawfull.
To which if we add the vnlawfulnes of the office these Ministers are
called vnto and execute, the vnlawfulnes of their calling in the whole
maner therof vnto, by, and in no flocke certaine, the vnlawfulnes of
the ordayners, as also of the ordayned, their open ambition, greedines,
and insufficientcy, their false maner of probation and ordination,
with all the vngodly and execrable ceremonies, vowes, othes, subscriptions
vsed to the same, none can mistake this caling and ordination of
the Ministers of ENGLAND, for that true & holie election and ordination
of the Church of CHRIST: without which true caling there can be
no true Minister. No true Church may vse or can iustifie anie such
false caling as theirs. And so still we must leaue Mr. GIF. to proue the
office & caling of his ministrie.
               
                   THis Clarke procedeth to an other reason. That ministrie is of God, which is
to bring men to the faith, and to build vp the bodie of CHRIST. The ministrie of England
is to none other end. Therfore &c. The Minor he proueth Because the whole drift,
scope, and burden laide vpon them, is, to feede vvith vvholesome doctrine & to guide in the
waies of godlines the sheepe of CHRIST walking before them in godlie conuersation. Mr. G.
said erewhile that the Ministers of England were no intruders: But sure
vt seemeth they are verie nimble leapers which skippe ouer the hatch
into the house, & wil not stay vntil the Master of the house cal, vntil the
Porter of the house open, but without any lawfull calling or entrance

wil needes thrust themselues Ministers vpon the Lord and his Church
whether he and they wil or no. Yea Mr. Giff. wil proue himself & these
his presumptuous companions true Ministers without this caling or
entrance, by the endes of their administration, although the Lorde of
the house neuer caled them to be builders, or cōmitted vnto them the
worcke and ministrie of his house. The deceiptfulnes and disorder of
these kinde of argume
                     •
                  ts wee haue aboue shewed, and with the same
general answeare might dismisse this. Saue that by the way wee must
giue him to vnderstand, That his Assumption is a shamelesse presumption.
They build not vpon but destroye the house of God, the bodie of
Christ. This their worcke, the present estate of their Church witnesseth
to their face, and sheweth what maner of worckmen they are: where
we finde not one pinne, nayle, or hooke in due order and proportion
according to the true paterne. They feed not the Lordes sheepe but
the Lordes goates, and that not with wholesome foode, with sincere
milke, that they might growe and be encreased therby, as the generall
sinne, prophannes, and ignorance of al estates both Priestes and people
declare. Neither guide they in the way of godlines, but in the wayes of
destruction and calamitie. They haue al declined & bene made together
vnprofitable. And the way of peace they haue not knowen. And
as for the conuersatiō of these Priestes, it may wel be an example to the
flock in al idolatry, superstition, impiety, vnfaithfulnes, apostasie, halting
and dissembling with God and man; worldlines, coueteousnes, deceipt,
and what not. So that the saying of the Prophet is come about,
That there are like people like Priest. Al this Mr. G. in his festered cō
                  science
knewe before, and that his shamelesse assumption would not
passe with his adversarie with whom he had to doe, and therfore he
leaueth the proof of this assumption, as also of his office and entrāce, and
yet againe assayeth by a newe argument of the effectes, together with
that which is properly adioyned to the Ministrie of CHRIST, to proue
his Ministerie.
               
                  THat ministerie with the'xecution wherof there is ioyned the effectual grace, power, blessing 
and operation of the holy Ghost to the true conuertion of mens soules, is not a ministerie of
the Diuel nor of Ant
                        •
                     christ, nor cometh not in the life and power of the Beaste, but is indeed the
true Ministerie of CHRIST. But such grace, power, blessing, operation is founde in the Ministerie
of England. Therfore. First here stil must be obserued a begging and assuming
of a true Ministrie, which as yet is not proued: Neither doth
this reason proue a Ministrie, so much as shew the infallible effectes of
true doctrine & true preaching, whether it be by Ministers, or by other
faithful, which haue the gift of prophecie, knowledge, interpretation
vtterance &c. For, far from the truth is it to thincke, that only Ministers
beget and winne to the faith (as some most shamelsse Bishops, and
sencelesse Priestes of this age haue published and mainetaine.) Then
might they aswel with the Papistes permit the worde of God only vnto
Priestes: yea suffer none but Priestes to speake of the worde or holie

doctrines,Act. 20. 32 if this vse and end of the worde were taken away, if the blessing
and power of God should not goe with his holy word and truth in
the mouth of all his seruants,Iam. 1. 21 both to cal vnto the faith, an to super-edifie
in the faith: Ells should al dueties in families, all mutual exhortations,Rom 11. 16
admonitions,Heb. 
                        •
                     0. 24. 25. conferences cease.1 Thes. 5. But hauing the commandement
of God to al these,1 Cor. 14. the euidence and testimonie of the blessed and
comfortable effects following the faithful testimonies of al Christes Disciples
in all ages,Acts. 8. 4. & 11. 19. &c. and contynual experience hereof amongst out selues
dayly, we dare affirme that others besides Ministers may conuert soules
and begeate faith. So then this argument of the effectes proueth not so
much a true ministry, as it doth proue true doctrine. For no false doctrine
can beget true faith, though manie which be no Ministers may
beget true faith. Mr. Giff. thē reasoneth verie corruptly & deceiptfully
in attributing the conuertion of soules as proper & peculiar to the ministrie,
which is not so, and in bringing these effectes to proue a true
ministrie, which only are to proue true doctrine. And nowe to Mr. Gif.
his assumption. Wee denie that any false ministrie hath promise of
blessinge, or is sent of God for the conuertion of soules, but on the contrarie
we finde it accursed, and sent of God for the seducing of the reprobate.
The ministrie then of the Church of Englād being proued false
in Office, Entrance, and Administration, can haue no such promise
or blessing of God as Mr. Giff. assumeth. If it be demaunded then
whether al vnder this ministrie be damned. I say it is a newe question,
and kept secret to the Lorde, who onlie knoweth who be his, when
& how to call them. It becometh not vs to giue anie such finall iudgment
of matters not knowen vnto vs: Yet this wee may be warrant of
the whole scripture saie, That the waies of the false Churche and ministrie
are the waies of death, and haue no promise of saluation. But
for the persons wee iudge charitablie, euen so longe and so far as wee
may, measuring them by our selues, as wee sometymes were, hoping
and not doubting, but God hath manie thousandes deare elect there,
yea euen in the Popish Churches, whom he in his due tyme by his appointed
meanes wil cal. If Mr. Giff. here insist & say that many of those
thousandes are couerted by their ministrie, Therfore their ministrie
is not in the power of ANTICHRIST, or of the Diuel, but of God, hauing
that sure seale that worcke of the holie Ghost. We haue aboue answered
that this rather approueth the doctrine then the ministrie, and is to
be attributed to the worde of God, rather then to the person of man.
Furder, that the false ministrie hath no promise of blessing. Yet doe
wee not herebie restraine the infinite power of God from sauinge or
calinge his elect euen by the doctrine of the false Churche: which
though it be so throughly leauened, corrupted, peruerted, abused, yet
can the Lorde bring the truth of his lawe and gospel which is there
read, and after their maner preached in such sorte, 
                     •
                  o the eares & cons
                     •
                  iēces
of his chosen, as it shal both shew them their degenerate estate,

                     •
                  ow guiltie they are of the breache of Gods lawe, howe lyable to his

wrath, and also shew them the true meanes of their restoring, redemption,
reconciliation, saluation. Yet this doth neither iustifie the false
Minister of his ministration, no more then when a young Boye, dumbe
Minister, or vnbelieuing prophane person reading the holie scriptures,
or some other booke of true doctrine, some of the hearers (God so
opening their vnderstāding) should therby be brought to the ackowledging
and faith of Christ, the feare & loue of God &c. This Boy, reading
Priest, prophane person, by reading is proued a true Minister, a
true preacher, a true christian; Or these that are thus wonne, comforted
&c, to seeke no other Minister or meanes of their saluation then
thys reading by these persons. Let the doctrine then in that poyncte
wherby men are thus begotten to these beginninges of faith, or to anie
encrease therof, be alwaies true and sounde so far foorth, the maner &
tyme of apprehending, be the worke and power of God, the meanes &
instrumētes of conuaying or bringing, variable at the wil & appoynctment
of God. Yet are we only to s
                     •
                  eke, vse, and rest in those meanes
which the Lord hath ordayned for our instruction and leading foorth
in the wil and wayes of God, which meanes only haue warrant & promise
of blessing vnto vs, howsoeuer the Lord by his infinite power and
worcking can and no doubt doth saue some in Turckey amongst the
heathen, in the false Church amongst the false worshippers, by what
meanes yt pleaseth him: yet may not we herevpon either resorte vnto
or remaine in these forbidden places in hope of these effectes, because
God (if such be his will) can saue vs here, or if it be not his will to saue
vs thē no true Church of ministry cā auaile vs. This were most highly
and dangerously to tempt God, a reprobate kinde of reasoning. God
his wil vnto vs is, that we alwaies obey and rest in his reueiled wil, and
not to presume vpon his infinite will and power, which he keepeth secret
vnto himself. This caused the holy Martyres and faithfull at all
tymes, and vs the Lordes most vnworthy witnesses at this tyme, after
that Gods spirit had wrought effectuallie in their and our hearts, and
opened our eyes to see part of his holy truth, as also some of the heinouse
abhominations committed, defended, and wilfullie persisted in
in the false Church and ministrie, constantlie euen to death & bandes
to witnesse against the same, and to forsake the false Church notwithstanding
al the pretextes, g
                     •
                  oses, and arguments the falfe Prophet shal
adorne the Harlot with, or make for his Ministry. So deare is the loue
of God & of his holy truth vnto vs, as we can suffer our selues neither
by men or Angels be drawen into anie seene or willing transgression
of his holy word. And as for these arguments of Mr. Giffard what other
are they then the Papistes haue brought against the first faithfull witnesses
Iohn Husse, Ierome of P
                        ••
                     ge, Luther, Caluine, Frith, 
                        •
                     indal &c, Or may bring
at this daye against al the Churches that are departed from them. Vnto
the execution of our Ministery is ioyned the effectual grace, power,
blessing, and operation of the holy Ghoste to the true convertion of
some mens soules, Therfore our Ministrie is not of the diuil or Antichrist,

but indeed the true ministry of Christ. Ells al that haue liued thus
manie hundred yeeres before you in our Church, and knew not these
newe learninges you hold, are damned: Ells all that haue died in our
Church are damned: yea ells you must hold al the Kinges and Princes,
Nobles, Pieres, and people in our Church reprobates &c. But let
vs come to your selues ye that are the aucthors of this Schisme. Where
had you your faith, your first knowledge of God and of Christ, if not in
this Church by our ministrie? we haue the true scriptures amongst vs,
we teache truly concerning the Godhead and the thee persons therof,
God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the Holy Ghost, though distinct
in persons, yet one God &c: We preach Christ in his two natures
verie God and verie man. That he came into the world for the saluation
of al mankinde. That God so loued the world that he gaue his only begottē Sonne,
that whosoeuer belieueth in him should not perish, but haue life euerlasting. Wee preach
Christ crucified for our sinnes, dead, buried, risen againe, ascended, glorified.
We preach him in his three offices to be our King, Priest, and Prophet:
Wee preach al the fundamental articles of our christian faith; and as wee
preach, so you belieue al these. Yea and we appeale to your consciences
whether you haue founde ioy and comfort in your owne soules at
the preaching of these doctrines. Againe, we preach the lawes of God
in the tables, and beate downe such sinnes as wee see to be contrarie to
the same, in such sort as manie are drawen to repentance, to hatred,
sorrowe, and remorce for sinne: And these againe wee raise vp with
comfort and hope of forgiuenes, and with the promises of eternal life.
These things if ye schismaticks feele not, yet vnto many others which
by our preaching are converted vnto the Lorde indeed, which vnto
feare & trembling doe feele the power & sweetnes of the liuely worde,
we may say as the Apostle vnto the Corinthians in like case. If I be not an
Apostle vnto others yet ame I one vnto you, ye are the seale of mine Apostleship
in the Lord. And as for you Lutherans, if you contynue not,
that is not our default, if you fal from grace. It is enough for vs that
you haue felt this maiestie of the worde, and it sufficeth to proue our
ministrie that the power of the holy Ghost goeth with y
                     •
                  , when men
haue bene so moued, though they contynue not, seeing the reprobate
may feele this power and taste this sweetnes for a tyme. Now then our
ministry being thus proued by the law and the Gospel, and by the testimony
of the holy Ghost in these powerful effectes, How can you thus
separate from the meanes of your saluation, from that ministry which
hath begotten in you, or at least doth begeat in others this knowledge,
faith, comfort, &c? Our ministrie thē being thus proued, our Church
must needes followe, for a true ministrie doth not belong, neither is at
anie time founde in a false Church. Yea you must graunt that whilest
we hold the true foundation, wee are the true Church, though we erre
in matters of circumstance & other doctrines, as you thincke: yet that
taketh not away our beeing of a Church. The Churches at Corinth, Gallatia,
Asia abounded with many faults, errors, corruptions, as we reade, yet are

saluted by the Apostles, recorded by the holy Ghost as true Churches.
Now that we hold the foundation, our confession of the articles of our
christian faith, the ten cōmandementes, the Lordes prayer, &c. (which
you also confesse and vse) shewe. Therfore whilest you depart from
vs, you depart from the true Church. Herevpon they might also vse
those rethoricall flowers of Mr. GIFFARD his diuinitie to rayle, reproach,
and invaye. That they are ranck Donatistes, Lutherans, ignorant,
furious, franctick, schismatickes, yea damnable heretickes, forsaking
the ministerie and truth of God, condemning the Church of God,
bringing the holie ministerie thereof into contempt, and so bring in
flat atheisme, barbarisme, rebellion against Magistrates &c. Howe
thincketh Mr. Giff. would not these argumentes fit the, Papistes aswell
against them, as they do him against vs? Is he not driuen to hard shift,
when he must borrowe weapons of them to defend himself, his
Church, ministrie, worship, gouernment? They must needes stand
fast when they are built vppon their groundes. Let him then first answeare
the Papistes to these reasons, before he bring them against vs, and
then if he be not satisfied he shall heare what we can say to them. For
sure if they be not of force to bring them home againe to their Mother
of ROME, they wil neuer perswade vs to goe backe to them. In
the meane time Mr. Gif. we signifie vnto you concerning this reason
which you vrge and dilate, That it is a ground of Anabaptistrie to iustifie
open transgression by inwarde motions. It is a grounde of Atheisme to
pleade for or tollerate sinne, because of such good effectes as you imagine
to procede therof.
               Mr. GIFFARD his next argument is drawen from our confession.
                  VVe confesse that they vvere blessed Martyres that suffred in Q. MARIES daies. But
thei were converted by the same ministe
                        •
                     ie vvhich vve haue now. They had the same motions
at the preaching of Latimer, Hoper, Taylor, Bradford, which our people haue no
                        •
                      at our
preaching and Sacraments touching saith, repentance, and resolution to die for the testimonie of
the Lorde. Therfore let the Brownistes and al other wicked schismaticks barck that vve h
                        ••
                     e
no ministrie &c. This reason hangeth vpon the same thread with this
other last before, and is built vpon the same popish and Anabaptistical
grounds. Touching the persons of these Martyres, we haue alreadie in
our first replie vnto your answeare, set downe our christian opinion
and iudgment. Yet can this argument of their persons no more iustifie
this antichristian ministrie of Lord Bishops, parrish Parsons, merceanarie
vagrāt Preachers, then it hath pleasured the Pope heretofore, who
had as manie godlie predecessors and Martyres to boast of as they.
The forgerie of their whole administration, preaching, worship, sacramentes,
is furder discovered, then these winde-shaken fig-leaues can
hide the shame therof. The truth is, howsoeuer the Lord doth reserue
the canonical Scriptures, and some other doctrines of the Godheade,
the suffring, resurrection, and glorie of Christ, of the iudgment and

life to come &c, in the false Church and ministerie, and by his secret
power and wil can vse the said scriptures and doctrines to the saluation
of some, yet these effectes are not to be ascribed to the false ministerie
or their corrupt ministration, adulterate Sacraments &c, which
haue no promise of blessing:2 Thes. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. And therfore those inward motions and
comfortes receaued by them, are delutions, without grounde or warrāt
of Gods worde,Esai. 66. 3. 4. the actions as they doe them not being acceptable, but
accu
                     •
                  sed in Go
                     •
                  s sight. The faith and repentance wrought by their

                     〈◊〉
                   appeareth in the general estate and life of their people,Ie
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ 6. 19. 20. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . yea
of their whose Church. As to that christian zeale, courage; and constācie
to dye for the testimonie of the truth (which he popish lie caleth
Resolution) and saith is wrought by their ministrie, we shal beginne to belieue
yt, whē they beginne to walcke in the truth, and to shake off that
antichristian yoke they stand vnder; but whilest in this maner they
betray their whole ministrie and gospel, the whole power and libertie
of the Church into the handes of these antichristian Bishops, standing
their sworne and marcked souldiours, administring & preaching after
their prescription and limitation, being bownd by oath not to preach
against anie thing by publick aucthoritie established, how odious or
enormous soeuer,Pet. 2. but for feare & filthie lucre stād ministers of al these
abhominations, we are warned by the holie Ghost not to be deceiued
with their swelling wordes of vanitie, promising vs libertie, whilest
they themselues stand the bond seruants of corruption. And for the
aucthor of these blaspheamous bookes Mr. Giffard, who is apostatate &
fallen away euen from that litle faith and light which he sometimes
seemed to haue, building now againe the thinges he sometimes destroyed
retourned with the dogge to his owne vomite, & as the washed
sowe to the wallowing in the myre, yea most cursedlie blaspheaming
the truth of God and the poore witnesses therof, as a most bitter & professed
enimie fighting in most hostile maner against the kingdome of
Christ, for & vnder the kingdome of Antichrist, we shal belieue that he wil
suffer for the Gospel of Christ when Q. MARIE retourneth againe to persecute:
In the meane while we say with the holie Ghoste: It had bene
better for this man neuer to haue knowen the truth, then after he had
acknowledged yt to tourne from the holie commandment giuen vnto
him.
               YEt remayneth an other odd popish reason of Mr. G. his old store,
brought by him in his first answeare vnto certaine articles of ours,
as the onlie proof he thē could find for his ministrie, vzt: The affirmation
and consent of other Pastors and Churches, sending such as
doubted to enquire of these strāgers their iudgmēt of the Church and
ministrie of England, and in the meane tyme councelling them to suspend
their iudgment. This reason and councel because we reiected as
insufficiēt, vnsounde, and popish, requiring rather some proof by Gods
worde of themselues (wherin we wholly rested, and not in the opinions

of men) then thus to be sent in this case from the learned ministrie of
England vnto strangers to knowe what they thincke of their ministerie,
as appeareth in our replie, to which we refer ye reader for our answeare
to this argument. Herevpon Mr. G. in his first publick treatise against
the Donatists of ENGLAND reneweth this old argument or quarrel rather
by con
                     •
                  riuing this odious question. VVhither the people in these controuercies
ought to be sent vnto such hereticks and Schismatickes as we are, or vnto the learned Pastors
of other Ch
                        •
                     rches. This question after he had thus charitablie framed, he
as grauelie and reuerentlie discusseth with these and such like holie
christian passages. See how sottishly ye cauil. Blind presumptuous heretical Sch
                        •
                     sm
                        •
                     
                     tickes.
Yours is the course of al arrogant proude heretickes and Schismatickes which couet to
haue the people depend vppon them, that they might haue fame. Or vnto vnlearned rashe
Brownistes, intruding themselues without caling and running before they be sent. As the harl
                        •••
                     
and whoores of the stewes that boast and glorie of their chasti
                        •
                     ie. VVho is more 
                        •
                     ierce and outragious,
more vncharitable in condemning then ye Brownistes? And yet ye bragg of such patience
and charitie as can not be ouercome. The Diuel counterfai
                        •
                     ing Christes voice in heretical
Schismaticks should not be able to allure and cal away the sheepe from their shepheardes &c.
part of 78. and of the. 79. page of his first booke? How thinck you,
hath not this Clarcke bene wel nourtured and brought vp, that can
thus learnedlie deuise and handle a question and refute his aduersaries
in lesse then one page of his booke? He that findeth not these those
mightie weapons through God to cast downe holdes and reasonings,
and to the captiuating al vnderstanding into th'obedience of Christ; He
that findeth not this that quiet and gentle spirit, that heauenlie peaceable
wisedome from aboue, that lenitie and meeknes wherwith the
Minister of Christ instructeth the contrarie minded, might euen herebie
doubte of Mr. G. his ministrie. And see after this storme is a litle
blowen ouer, and he hath somewhat discharged and eased his ful stomacke,
in the end he alloweth of our course and councel for the tryal
and proofe of their ministrie by the worde of God only, and not by the
opinions of anie men who
                     •
                  soeuer; Saying that it is the same in effect
(if we could see) that himself gaue before. Peraduenture Mr. G. meaneth,
if we could see into his minde, for in his writing there was no
such matter. But wel, seeing we are agreed of this course and tryal of
their ministrie by the scriptures, whie are we thus reuiled and reproched
for consenting vnto, demaunding, and expecting this tryal? yea
whie is not this christian peaceable course taken, this tryal and proofe
made? whie hath not Mr. G. at the least approued his ministrie in the
Office, Entrance, and administration by the euidēt scriptures? And therby both
haue approued themselues and conuinced vs, before he had pronounced
this balsphemouse sentēce against vs, who acknowledg with reuerence
euerie worde of God, thervnto submitting our whole faith & life
to be tried, corrected, directed in al things, which reproachful sentence
Michael himself that head of Angels and men, du
                     •
                  st not giue euen
against the Diuel in controuercie betwixt them. These controuercies
betwixt them and vs being of no lesse momente then Moses bodie,

and none of vs our owne Iudges in this case, but al stāding to the iudgment
of God by his worde, ought to haue bene more soberlie and reuerentlie
handled. Wherein what Mr. G. hath failed wee leaue him to
his accomptes before that dreadfull Iudge, where the consent and applausion
of the Bishops and cleargie of England shall not excuse him for
al or anie of these despiteful reproches and fowle sclāders that he hath
brought vp and published in these his blasphemouse bookes, vpon the
Lords faithful seruantes and poore witnesses in bandes against this antichristian
ministrie and their vngodly proceedings. Which if here
with all the deipe learning of Sathan cannot be hid or defended, how
should they stand before his face that hath his eyes like a flambe of
fire,Reuel 2. that searcheth the hartes & reynes, and giueth euerie man according
to his worckes. And for vs, seing wee finde this their whole ministrie
by examining them by and comparing them vnto the rules of
Christes Testament, to be false, forged, and antichristiā in their office, entrance,
administration, and maintenance, to haue no place or mētion
in Christes Church; Seing vve before our eyes see them to haue serued
in and belonged vnto Antichristes▪
                   euen the Popes kingdome and throne,
the false Church, with all the abhominable idolatries therin, wee dare
boldlie affirme and conclude, That they keeping these offices cannot
nowe belong vnto or serue in Christes kingdom, his Church, neither be
kint vnto Christ as their heade. But as the Holie Ghost wittnesseth of
them, they haue a Kinge ouer them, the angel of the bottomelesse pit,
whose name in hebrewe Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, in all languages
and places,Reuel. 9. 11 the Destroyer. And as we finde them, so according to the cō
                  maundement
of God, we leaue and auoide them: turning our eye and
speach now a litle to the fourth principal cause of our dislike of, and separation
from the Church of England.
               
            
            
               THE FOVRTH PRINCIPAL CAVSE OF
OVR SEPERATION FROM THE
Church of England, is.
               4 FOR that their Churches are ruled by, and remaine in subiectiō
vnto an Antichristian & vngodly gouernmēt, cleane
contrarie to the institution of our Sauiour Christ.
               FRom this proposition is this argument manifestlie and directlie
drawen. No true established▪ Church of Christe may vvillingly receiue, or vvittinglie
stand subiect vnder anie other ecclesiasticall gouernment them Christ hath prescribed and instituted.
But the Church of England vvillinglie receiueth and vvittinglie standeth subiect vnder
a strange ecclesiasticall gouernment, other then that Christ hath prescribed and instituted. Therfore
the Church of England is not the true established Church of CHRIST.
               The chardge & argument being so euidient & ineuitable as Mr. G. in

his first answeare (whilest he stoode of the Reformistes side a sutor for Reformation)
durst neither for shame denie, not yet for feare affirme, he
sought by mouing, and after his maner prouing, a newe question, to
obscure and tourne away, at the least (vntil he sawe furder howe the
tymes would goe) to shift off the present proposition, that pressed so sore,
with such ambiguous doubtful delphicke words & speaches, as might
be interpreted in what sense himself list, And he salfly tourne to that
side that were likest to preuaile & carrie the creadit in the world. First
by way of Supposition and Admission, in these wordes. If it were admitted that
there is some yoke of antichristian gouernement, Vnder which the poore Church may groane, is
yt therfore no longer the spouse of CHRIST? Mr. Giff▪
                   hauing thus entrēched himself,
might issue out of this sko
                     •
                  ce and turne to which side he would.
As wel might he from hence haue stoode of the Reformistes faction, by
saying that he neuer sought to plead for, or to defend this gouernemēt
of these Prelates (but euen in these wordes he doth affirme and pronounce
yt to be a yoke of antichristian gouernement, a bondage, an
oppression of the Church &c.) As now being reuoulted to the Pontifical
side, he saith, he did but propounde it by way of question, supposition,
admission. For the present gouernment, he holdeth yt the true & very
gouernment of Christ in substance & matter, howsoeuer yt haue not the
same forme, and be not executed in that maner which Christ hath prescribed;
Of which forme there is great question, whether it be permanēt
or variable; Neither wil he meddle with the discussing therof, because
he wil displease neither side. But this he held, and holdeth, That the
true Church may be oppressed and remaine vnder some yoke of antichristian
gouernmēt. That it is the lot of the Church to be oppressed
with outward bondage, to be made to keep the vineyarde which is not
her owne, to be beaten of the watch mē &c. Mr. Gif. was answered vnto
these, That there is great difference betwixt ciuile bondage, and ecclesiastical
bondage: Betwixt outward oppression or persecution, and
an antichristian yoke or gouernment. That the Church had beene or
might be in ciuile bondage vnto, outwardly oppressed and persecuted
by either ciuile magistrates, as Pharao, Nebuchadnezzar &c, Or by
false ecclesiastical Ministers, proud antichristian vsurpers, as P
                        •
                     shur, Caiaphas,
Annanias &c. But yet that the Church of God may neuer by the one
or the other sorte be brought into bondage of, and wittingly remaine
in subiection vnto anie yoke of antichristian gouernement, not euen
to the least lawe, tradition, or deuise of man, which they see to be contrary
to the word of God. For this was shewed to be a losse of christian
libertie, if they should by the will or power of anie mortal man or men
whosoeuer,Gal. 4. 9. 10. &c. be againe entangled in any yoke of bondage, or brought in
subiection of anie lawe, deuise, or tradition of man, seeme yt neuer so
holie or expedient,Gal. 5. 1. &c be yt Circumcision▪ Daies, Feastes, Fastes, Meates &c,
                  Col. 2. To be so
cōtrarie to the Gospel, as the truth therof should not contynue amōgst
them, if they should giue place to anie man in the least of these thinges
by way of subiection for the space of an howre Gal. 2. 4. 5. To add vnto

the worde of God, to superordeyne vnto the Testament of Christ, yea to
abrogate the Testament of Christ. Gal. 3. 15. To worship God in vayne
Mat. 15. 9. Not to hold the head, but to be rashlie puffed vp in the sense
of their owne fleshe Coll. 2. 18. 19. It was shewed that Christ is the onlie
lawe-giuer, Kinge, Husband, and Lord of & in his Church. That one
kingdome cānot receiue two kinges, One marriage bed two husbāds,
One house two Lordes so contrarie as Christ and Antichrist, at on and the
same instant, And that one neck cannot be said to beare two yokes, and
drawe in them both at one instant: Neither one person be a faithfull
subiect, wife, seruant to two so diuers and contrarie Kinges, Husbands,
Lords,2 Cor. 6. 15 as CHRIST and Antichrist are. CHRIST diuideth not, neither
hath part,Reu. 11. &. 12. Chap. fellowship, or communion with Antichrist. There is contynual
warre betwixt their kingdomes and subiectes, betwixt the false
and true Church,Gal. 4. 20 the false and true seede, they that are borne after the
fleshe,Io
                        •
                     . 15. 18. &c. and 16. 2. 3. persecuting them that are borne after the spirit. It was shewed
that wee are his seruantes and subiects to whom wee obeye. That this
yoke and bondage of Antichrist, breaketh the wedlocke, breaketh the
Couenant with CHRIST;Math. 6. 24 CHRISTES loue and Couenant beeing no
longer bounde or plight to vs,Rom. 6. 16 then wee keepe faith to him. which
faith is forfeited, and warre ended, by yeilding and standing in bondage
to Antichrist, by taking and bearing his yoke. which bondage and
yoke was shewed and proued to be the badge of Antichrist,
                  Reu. 13. 15 16. 17 and 17. 15 the marcke
of the Beaste, which al the miserable multitudes vpon which the Harlot
the false Church sitteth, are compelled to receiue in their foreheades
or in their handes,Gal. 4. 26 &. 5. 1. 2 wherbie the children of mounte Sina are
knowen from the children of Ierusalem that is aboue and is free with
al her children:Iohn. 8. 32. &c. For al which children our Sauiour Christ hath purchased
a ful and perfect libertie at a deare and pretious price, hauing giuen
vnto al his children the arrhabon of his spirit,Ro. 8. 14. 15 not the spirit of bondage
but the spirit of adoption as sonnes.2 Cor. 3. 17 And where this spirit is, there is
libertie. For if wee be sonnes, then are wee free and no bond seruantes.
For the bond seruāt abideth not in the house for euer,Iohn. 8. 35 but the
sonne abideth for euer.Coll. 1. 12. 13 It was also shewed him to be a blasphemous
error to say That to beare Antichristes yoke and gouernement, is the
lot of CHRISTES Church. To conclude, it was made plaine vnto
him how fowllie he misvnderstoode, abused, falsified, and peruerted
those places of the Songe by him alleadged to proue that blasphemous
error. So that if Mr. G. would either haue bene aduertised or advised,
to make and put difference betwixt ciuile bondage and subiection,
and an antichristian bondage and yoke, betwixt bodilie oppression
and spiritual subiection, Or would dulie haue pondered our opinions,
reasons, and proues, Or would haue bene admonished of his
former dotages and errors, he could not againe in these poyntes
thus boldlie haue r
                     •
                  sisted the euident truth, turned away the direct
scriptures, vniustlie chardged and blasphemed vs, persisted in his old
d
                     ••
                  est
                     •
                  ble errors, tunne headlong into newe & more, and vnsufferably

abused and peruerted the holy scriptures therevnto.
               WE neuer denied, and therfore may euil be chardged to hold, That
the Church might not be held in ciuile bond
                     •
                  ge, bodily oppression,
persecution &c, by wicked vngodly guides both ciuil and ecclesiastical.
But what of this? may it herevpon he concluded, that therfore
the Church may be held vnder Antichristes yoke in ecclesiastical or spiritual
bondage? There is no such consequēce of this. yet this is the state
of the question propounded by Mr. G. in his first answeare. And this he
there endeuored to proue by this reason, as also by the places of the
Songe. And nowe againe laboureth to bring to passe by an odde subtile
di
                     •
                  tinction or diuision of his owne deuising, and by sondry moe places
of scripture. He diuideth this antichristian yoke into two sortes, a strict
yoke, and a lardge yoke. His strict or proper yoke, he saith is only spiritual
and inwarde, where the faith and conscience are burdened & be
in subiection to receiue Antichrist his lawes and worship. The lardger
yoke is, when the Pastors of the Church doe vsurpe more then they
ought in externall gouernment, or tyrannously abuse the power committed
into their h
                     •
                  nds. This he calleth som antichristian yoke. The
first he saieth cannot be borne without falling from the freedome
we haue in CHRIST. The second (as the lot of the Church) may be
willinglie suffred and wittinglie borne, and yet remayne the Church
of CHRIST. and this by sondrie places of scripture he endeuoreth
to proue.
               First vnto his distinction or diuision of an antichristian yoke into
straight and lardge, outward and inwarde, we acknowledge yt without
the compasse of our reading, or vnderstanding. Wee stil affirme that
no yoke or gouernement but only Christes, may be borne or receiued of
the true Church. We furder saye, and already haue proued, that al the
lawes and ordinances of Christes Testament (howe outwardly and smale
soeuer they may seeme) concerne the conscience: and that the wilfull
omission and transgression therof, bondeth both bodie and soule vnto
iudgment, without repentance. So likewise we hold, that euerie antichristian
yoke chardgeth and bindeth the conscience, both bodie and
soule, It being opposite vnto, and a transgression of CHRISTES lawes
and ordinances. And therfore wonder how these Academical diuines these
pleaders for iniquitie d
                     •
                  re hatch vs these poysoned distinctions, of
lardg and straight antichristian yokes, the one binding, the other not concerning
the conscience. Except they can shewe Gods lawe. Or ells
some transgression of Gods lawe that bindeth and chardgeth not the
conscience. Vntil Mr. Gif. can doe this, he must giue vs leaue not to receiue
his curious distinction of lardge and straight yoke, outward and
inward. Wee thincke also his reason somewhat hardlie constrayned,
when he concludeth, because Antichrists yoke is spiritual, Therfore
onlie inwarde. Wee call yt spirituall because yt commeth (as also

                  Antichrist himself doth) by the effectual worcking of Sathan: As also because
it is wholly about spiritual and ecclesiastical actions and procedings.
But shal we therfore say yt is onlie inwarde? Might not by these
reasons the whole visible Church yt self, al the publicke ministration,
actions, and ordinances therof, as also euerie person & member therof
be said only inward, because they are al said spiritual? Againe it semeth
that Mr. G. litle vnderstandeth what an Antichristian yoke is, that termeth
euerie sinne and disorder arising in the Church, an antichristian
yoke. We confesse the Church may transgresse of negligence or ignorāce,
yea & so suffer such vngodlie presumptuous persons & Ministers
to abuse their power for a ceason; yet this is not willingly to beare, or
wittingly to receiue anie antichristian yoke; neither cease they herevpon
to be true Churches, whilest they despise not admonitiō, neither
refuse to repent being reproued. Yet this we saie, the Church greatlie
sinneth in suffring such presumptuous inordinate persons, whom they
ought to cast out. And if so be the Church either want wil, and refuse
to cast them out being admonished; or want power and be not able to
cast them out being discouered, but it brought in subiection & remayneth
in bōdage to these guides, yt ceaseth in this estate vnto our iudgment
to be the true Church of Christ.
               
               And nowe to the scriptures Mr. G. bringeth, that the true Church
may wittingly and willinglie be brought into bondage of some antichristian
yoke Ezech. 34. Ierem. 5. 31. Ier. 20. 1. Ioh. 7. 13. Iohn. 9. 22. First wee
say, that these Ministers were by office and caling true Ministers of the
Temple, but their Ministers by office and calling are not, and so no
comparison. Then we say, that these were now so wholly degenerate
and apostatate in Iehoiakim and Zedechiahs tymes, and the whole state so
corrupted and fallen from God into most execrable idolatries, as they
were not to be held the true Churches of God, but were pronownced
by the holy Ghost whores, murtherers, idolaters, so commanded to be
iudged, esteamed, and forsaken of al the faithful: As euerie where in
those prophecies of Ezechiel & Ieremiah appeareth, & we haue lardglie in
ye SECOND PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION proued, And himself in that
estate confessed, that they ought to be abandoned by the godlie. For
the generall estate in the time of our Sauiour CHRISTS Ministrie
and suffringes, wee haue also proued, that they were that malignant
persecuting Church, which did excommunicate CHRIST and al that
confessed and belieued in him: from whom our Sauiour and his Disciples
separated.
               And now to the place of the third epistle of Iohn. I vvrote to the Church, but
of them Diotrephes louing the primacie receiueth vs not. For this if I come, I vvil bring to remembrance
the vvorkes vvhich he doeth, prating against vs vvith malitious vvordes, and not
content in these, neither himself receiueth the bretherē, and them that vvold he forbiddeth, and
casteth them out of the Church. These verses I haue thus englished to the
worde, because me thinckes the vsuall translation (though in yt selfe
not euil) seemeth a litle too much to nourish some false collections,

which neither the wordes nor circumstance of the text wil beare. But
now what wil Mr. G. gather or conclude from this place? Diotrephes he
saith abused the power of gouernment ambitiouslie. If he meane the
power of the whole Church, the power of communication, it would
be shewed and proued wherein. If he say, in that he cast the bretheren
out of the Church, We would first knowe of him what bretheren the
Apostle there speaketh of, whether those strāgers, or such members of
that cōgregation as were willing to receiue those strāgers, and whether
they were caste out by waye of excōmunication. If he say those members
that were willing &c, we affirme the whole context, the argument
of the Epistle precedent, the faultes of Diotrephes reckoned vp, & the admonition
subsequēt, to shew the cōtrarie, that he meaneth of the other
godlie strangers, Gaius in the premises being cōmended for interraignement
of those strangers. Diotrephes here blamed for these faultes, Of an
ambitious humor louing & aspiring to be chief or first, and could not
endure to be vnder the Apostles. 1. Therfore he receiued not the Apostles
letter, 2. He pratled against them with euil wordes, 3. neither himself
receiued these strāgers, 4. But forbad them that would, 5. And so
kept or caste them out of the Church. The admonition was, that they
should not imitate euil, but good &c. Manie reasons might be drawen
from these circūstances, from sondrie wordes in the original, but especially
by the right diuiding of these two verses it wil appeare, not to be
meant of the abuse of anie censure of the Church, of excōmunication.
As also by the exhortation drawen from these faultes. For how could
Gaius or anie other of the Church imitate him in this, when there was
no more Pastors of that congregation but Diotrephes (if he were a Pastor
as they suppose) and by their rule onlie the Pastor maie excōmunicate?
But what now if it were admitted (which can neuer by this scripture be
proued) that Diotrephes did both vsurpe & abuse the power and gouernment
of the Church, what wil Mr. G. collect and enforce from hence?
First that this tyrānous oppression did not make them to be no longer
Christes Church which remayned vnder him. Wel, and what wil, he cō
                  clude
hereupon, That these Parishes which wittinglie remaine in bondage
vnder the yoke of these popish Prelates, which receiue this false
antichristian ministrie, this popish idolatrous worship & ordināces &c.
are the true Churches of Christ? As ther is no consimilitude (except in
this one poincte of euil, wherin yet these Parishes far exceed) so is ther
no consequent or comparison betwixt a Church & no Church, a true
Church & ministrie, and a false Church & ministrie. Neither haue we
a better argumēt in al Mr. G. his booke to approue the ministrie & procedings
of the Church of England, thē the most odious sinnes & faultes
of other Churches; which were not recorded by the holy Ghoste for vs
to imitate or to pleade for sinne by, so much as left for examples, and as
yt were lande markes, to flee sinne by. Againe this Church here remayned
not wilfullie vnder this tyrannie of Diotrephes; They neuer had
bene reproued and admonished, therfore. Howsoeuer we iustifie not

or tollerate the least sinne that God condemneth in his worde, yet we
make not anie sinne, vntil impenitēcie and obstinacie be ioyned thervnto,
to disanul and breake the Couenant with God. Neither doe we
make euerie inordinate and presumptuous part (when the Ministers
of the Church extend themselues beyonde their lyne and the limites
of their office) straight waye an antichristian yoke, if they be not seene
or repressed at the first. For as it is said, both the Church and Ministers
may sinne in such thinges and transgresse the rule of ignorance or of
negligence. And so what wil this example helpe their Church, which
standeth wilfullie and wittinglie in seene bondage vnto these antichristian
Prelates? But Mr. G. saith the Apostle did not will the faithful
to separate themselues, or not anie longer to obeye Diotrephes in anie
thing▪ wel, and euen this his owne fonde collection doth shewe, that
Diotrephes sinne was neither so preiudicial, heynouse, or publicklie
knowen to the Church, as he would make yt. For if Diotrephes had
either vsurped the whole power, or abused the publique gouernment
of the Church so far, as to caste out of his owne sole aucthoritie in his
owne name what bretheren he luste, yea those of the most vertuous
and charitable, he had not to haue bene suffred in the Church, muchlesse
to haue remayned a Minister with such publicke heynouse sinnes
vpon him. This had bene contrarie to the lawes and rules of Christes
Testament, to the practize and procedings of the other Apostles, to the
safetie of the Church. To al which it is not credible or audible, that
this Apostle would be so contrarie▪ neither may it be inferred from this
place without grieuous peruerting the scriptures, and iniurie to the
holy Ghost. If Diotrephes fault had bene in this nature so heynouse and
publick, what needed the Apostle to say: If I come I will declare or bring his
worckes to remembrance, the Greeke worde is hupomneso. submonebo. I will
submonish. Againe, the begining of the. 10. verse, Dia touto. propter hoc for this.
sheweth an other cause, an other mattter, an other fault. Mr. Giffardes
other place. Iohn 16. v. 2. serueth his tourne as euil. They shal caste you out of
their Synagogues, yea the hower cometh that euerie one that killeth you shal thinck he doth
GOD good seruice. It is strange that Mr. G. should thincke and vse this as
spokē of the true Church, whē the verie next verse hath these wordes.
And these thinges they wil doe vnto you, because they haue not knowen the Father nor me.
I hope these are no marckes of the true Church, not to knowe God
nor Christ, or to vse such barbarous hostilitie towardes the disciples and
faithful seruantes of Christ. If then these marckes, this tyrānous vsage,
& the bloode of the Sainctes be founde vpon the Church of England,
they shal by this glasse and place descrie her to be the malignant persecuting
Synagogue, and not that persecuted Church consisting of Christes
true disciples and faithful seruants & witnesses. As to his other shoteancker
and fundamental vsual place at al assaies. 2 Thess. 2. v. 4. (from
whence he draweth a maine argument from the Church of Rome and
of England, to proue them both the Churches of God, Because it is there
said that Antichrist shal sit in the Temple of God, And Antichrist sitteth in

the Church of Rome and England, Therfore the Churches of Rome and of
England are the Churches of God) I doe refer the reader to the seconde
transgression for answeare, which place and argument he shal there
find lardglie handled and discussed.
               IN the next poincte Mr. G. in his bad conscience finding the litle consequent
from ciuile to antichristian bondage, quite forgeteth, forsaketh,
& tourned the questiō, And would now make vs or at least make
others belieue that we hold that the Church maie be in no outwarde
bōdage. wheras we hold yt may not beare Antichristes yoke, or be brought
into anie antichristian bondage. Hauing fullie set downe this opinion
as ours, he pronounceth vs. Anabaptistes, and wondreth how so prowde a
spirit could be in rotten flesh, so flatlie to contradict the spirit of God
in these places Genes. 15. Exod. 20. and al the places of the Prophets, where
the Lorde threatneth that they should be ledd into Babilon, & be there
in bondage. To take awaye his wonder though not his follie, We giue
him againe and againe to vnderstand, That we neuer denied but that
the Church might be in ciuile bondage, in bodilie oppression, but
neuer might be brought into anie antichristian bondage, either lardge
or straight, outward or inwarde, as he distinguisheth. And therfore
willed him to put difference betwixt ciuile and antichristian bondage,
betwixt bodilie oppression, persecution &c, and anie ecclesiastical antichristian
yoke. Wee acknowledge the Church to haue bene in ciuile
bondage, in great persecution and bodilie oppression in Egipt & Babilon;
But that they were there in anie ecclesiastical bōdage, or receiued anie
antichristian yoke, we vtterlie denie. And demande of Mr. G. where
he can shew that anie of that faithful there bowed downe to their idolatries,
receiued anie newe lawes and ordinances at those tyrantes for
the worship of God, the administratiō and gouernmēt of the Church;
Or if he can shew that anie did thus, whether those persons were by the
worde of God to be esteamed members of the Church? And as to the
place by him alleadged. 1 Corinth. 7. 21. 22. Art thou caled a bond seruant care not
for it; For the bond Seruant cal
                        •
                     d in the Lord, is the Lordes freeman, yt fullie sheweth
that difference which we are driuen so often to inculcate vnto him
betwixt ciuile and antichristian bondage, The one here shewed to be
an holie estate and calling, no preiudize to the kingdome of God, or
to the libertie of the Sainctes, The other in al those places aboue recited
to be contrarie to the kingdome of CHRIST, to our christian
libertie and faith, to be intollerable, and not to be borne or suffred of
the Church, or anie member of CHRIST. In as much as Antichrist is an
aduersarie, an opposite and lawlesse fellowe, that lifteth himself vp not
onlie against, but aboue God, shewing himself that he is God, 2 Thess. 2.
causing al both smale and great, riche and poore to receiue his marcke
Reuel. 13. which marcke we haue declared from sondri places to be bondage
and subiection to his statutes and decrees, euen as christian libertie
is the marcke of the children of the free woman, of the
heauenlie Ierusalem▪ Which bondage and subiection being the

marck of the Beast, all the men that receiue the same either vpon their
fore-heade or vpon their hād, shal drinck of the wyne of the wrath of
God, of that pure wyne mixt in the cup of his wrath, and shalbe tormē
                  ted
in fire & brimstone before the holie Angells & before the Lambe.
and the smoke of their torment shall ascend euermore, and they shall
haue no rest day nor night, which worship the Beast & his image, and
whosoeuer receiueth the prynt of his name. Reu. 14. And it followeth
immediatlie. Here is the patience of the Sainctes, here they that keep the commandements,
of GOD and faith of IESVS. Wherevpon we may cōclude, that no antichristian
yoke, not euen in the least things is to be borne or suffred in Christes
Church by waye of subiection not for the space of one hower, But all
thinges rather to be vndergonne, then to stoope downe to the Beast to
beare his marcke, or worship his image.
               BY this tyme Mr. Gif. hauing shot off al his newe ordināce to litle purpose,
retireth himself againe to his old skonce, & wil by no meanes
be driuen from his two places of the Songe. Wherbie (when he before
so missed to proue the Church in anie antichristian bondage) he nowe
letteth that matter fal, and bringeth these places to proue the Church
to stand in outwarde bondage. Which doctrine thoughe it was neuer
by vs denied, but that the Church might be in ciuile & bodily bōdage,
yet wee affirme nothing lesse to be proued by these places. In the first
vvee hope Mr. G. wil not be so grosse to take those vineyardes for locall
vineyardes,Cant. 1. and that setting or putting to keepe them, for ciuile or bodilie
bondage. for besides that nothing could be more grosse or diuers
from that heauenlie spirituall argument of Salomon in that songe, Soe
would CHRIST neuer wil the Church or anie member of the Church,
to shake off anie lawfull or ciuile yoke in that maner, to depart from
their earthlie Lords & Masters, to refuse such lawfull seruice & honest
labour as they shoulde enioyne them. Likewise to the seconde place
There may great differēce be put betwixt bondage,Cant. 5. and persecution or
oppression. That the Church there was in grieuous persecutiō is euident,
but that yt was in anie bondage we cānot by that text or anie circumstāce
therof perceiue. Thus Mr. G. euerie way misseth his marcke,
and as a giddye droncken man he reeleth from one side to the other.
Sometimes endeuouring by these places to proue the Church in bondage
to some antichristian yoke, yet not daring to affirme those vineyardes
(which her mothers sonnes put her to keepe) to be Antichristes
vineyardes, which if affirme and proue not, there is no antichristian
yoke to be dreamed on in that place, al the strength of his reason or rather
delusion lijng in these wordes The Sonnes of my Mother vvere incensed
against me, they set me the keper of the vineyardes, mie vineyarde that to me I kept not. The
true interpretation whereof it here booteth not to stande vpon, sufficeth
that no antichristian yoke or bondage can from this place, or
from anie one worde therof be drawen and inforced. But yet Mr. G.
doth herein presse vs vvith these places of the songe, in that the faithfull
did not here separate themselues from vnder these euil pastors

and gouernours, as herestickes and schismatickes doe. And this he
againe proueth by th' example of our Sauiour and his Disciples, who
did not separate themselues from the high Priestes, Scribes, and Pharasies,
so long as the vineyarde was not takē from them &c. To which
proof he hath in the SECOND TRANSGRESSION his ful answere. To
these places: In the first the Church hath an absolute and direct commandemēt
from God himself, To goe foorth, not to staye in the steps
of that flocke, to feed her kids aboue the tabernacles of those sheepheardes.
In the second we can but wonder to see Mr. G. so insensate &
grosse to imagine, that these persecuting watchmen were Ministers or
members of the true Church. Especiallie seing the two Churches so
liuelie in that place described, The one malignant & persecuting, the
other the true Church and persecuted. Betweene which I weene there
is as great a separation as betwixt light and darcknes, betwixt hel and
heauen. Neither did the Church there staye with, or was stayed by
those watchmen, but went to the Daughters of Ierusalem to seek and
enquire for Christ; much-lesse (as this man doteth) stayed in their fould
in their tentes, Or remayned vnder the gouernment and bondage of
those persecuting watchmen that openlie opposed against Christ, and
could not endure that the Church should seek him. Neither can anie
thing be imagined more false or contrary to the argument of that heauenlie
songe, then that the Church of Christ; may at anie hand beare or
stand in anie bondage to the yoke of Antichrist. Whose necke Christ adornes
with chaynes, and she againe her doore postes with garlandes
for him. Song. 1. 9. & 6. 13. Vnder whose heade CHRITES left hand
alwaies is, and his right hande embraceth her. Song. 2. 6. Song. 3. Shee
layethe holde of CHRIST, and bringethe him into her Mothers
house, into the chamber of her that conceiued her. There also is his
bedde set vp muche more glorious then the marriage bedde of Salomon,
about which bedd sixtie, valiant men of the mightie men of Israel
are said to stand and guarde, all of them handling the sworde, expert in
warre, with his sworde vpon his thinge from the feare by might. Song. 4.
The necke of the Church is likned to the tower of Daniel built for the
armorie, where a thowsand shieldes doe hange, al the targetts of the
stronge men. And Song. 8. Christ, saith his vineyard is allwaies & wholly
before him, he chalendgeth and gathereth al the revenues therof himself,
he diuideth them not nor imparteth th
                     •
                  m to anie other as Salomon
or other earthlie Princes are constrayned to doe. What part or right
then, what honor or homage, especiallie what bondage is left here to
Antichrist? But thus they are broken that thus wilfullie & of set purpose
stumble at the worde, as this man doeth.
               YEt procedeth this graceles man furder, And is not afraide to affirme,
That the Church & euerie member therof is in some spiritual
bondage to sinne, and draweth an argument from this position.
That therfore much more may yt be in some outward bondage to Antichrist.
This execrable position and argument, the holie Bishops and

learned Priestes of England are cōtent to let publiquelie passe from their
viewe and correction, because yt pleadeth for the antichristian vsurpation
of the one, and the seruile bondage of the other. But when
this argument shal neuer so litle by the worde of God be skanned, yt
shalbe found most heretical and blasphemouse. For verilie if after our
faith in Christ, wee be now left in anie bondage to sinne, then doth sinne
stil liue and raigne in vs, and we stil bounde vnto and with yt, then hath
not Christ fullie freed vs from the curse of the law, Death, and Hel. Thē
was not Christes death a sufficient ransome for, neither extēded to al our
sinnes, neither hath he subdued or set vs free from al our enimies, neither
haue we as yet anie perfect peace or reconciliation with God, And
then was his comming vayne, then can no flesh be saued therbie, then
must wee looke for an other redeemer, or ells looke for him to come
againe to dye for our sinnes that remaine and raigne in vs. For the
rewarde of the least sinne is death, being a transgression of Gods lawe;
And if wee be in bondage to sinne, then are we not Kinges and Priestes
vnto God. Is not this a meete Minister of the Gospel, that knoweth
not yet the worck of our redemption, the benefite of Christes death, the
priueledge of the Sainctes, that cannot and will not learne to put difference
betwixt the frailtie or pronenes to commit sinne which is in
this mortal flesh of all the faithful, and that bondage and subiection
to sinne which is neuer founde in anie of the faithfull, after they haue
once trulie acknowledged and embraced Christ? Howsoeuer the ministrie
of the Church of England may allowe & publish these doctrines,
yet are they most odious & execrable to the soule and conscience of all
that knowe, feare, or loue the Lorde IESVS CHRIST.
               NOwe at length we are come to the second proposition of our argument,
or rather to the fourth TRANSGRESSION wherewith their
Church of England is chardged, vzt. That their Churches are ruled by and wilfully
remaine in subiection vnto an antichristian and vngodly gouernment contrarie to the institution
of our Sauiour CHRIST. This wee shewed in our first writing by the publicke
and present estate of the Church of England, in their whole ministrie,
worship, administration, ordinances, ceremonies, censures, cannons,
customes, Courtes, to be antichristian, euen the same yoke and
gouernment that the Pope sometimes exercised by those his naturall
children and vnfaithful seruants the Bishopps, who nowe haue gotten
this power into their owne handes. Most of these (if not all) haue
bene alreadie in this present treatise declared and proued to be idolatrous,
popish, blasphemous, false, and antichristian, wholly swarued
from the rules of Christes Testament. Anie of these howe Mr. G. hath
by the worde of God approued, let the vnpartial reader iudge; This
their ecclesiasticall gouernment which nowe is in question, he faith is
the same in matter though yt varie in forme f
                     •
                  om CHRISTES gouernment.
Wherof nowe is arisen a great question in their Church, Whether
that Apostolicke forme of discipline which they prescribed to the

Churches, should be perpetuall, or variable. The Reformistes that hold
yt perpetuall sue and complaine to the Parliaments for the same Apostolicke
forme to be established, and to haue this present gouernment
of these Bishopps and their false hierarchie with their Courtes and offices
quite remooued out of the Church and abolished. The Prelates
that holde yt arbitrable at Princes pleasures according to the variable
estate of tymes and Countries, holde fast that popish inordinate vsurped
power which they haue gotten into their handes, and therbie incarcerate,
silence, seque
                     •
                  ter, depose al such of the contrarie faction as
speake against their power, and present gouernment, with al possible
hostilitie. yet al this deadlie debate Mr. G. couereth in a worde, calling
it but a questiō about the outward forme of discipline: As also hideth
all the other most heynouse and detestable enormities that arise and
flowe from their monstruous antichristian gouernment, vnder the
same title of outward forme of discipline. For both sides he saith doe
agree in the matter That CHRIST hath left a power to his Churche to
chuse, to trye, and to ordaine Pastors and Teachers, And likewise that
he hath giuen the power of admonition, suspension, excommunicatiō.
Onlie here is the difference, that th'one side woulde haue this power
exercised by Presbiteries of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, as in the Apostles
tyme; The other hold it the more salf and quiet waye to commit this
power to the handes of the Bishop. Which side holdeth the truth you
shall hereafter knowe Mr. Giffard
                        •
                     
                   minde; when the battell is fought he
wil then tell you of which side he wilbe. Till then he wil take the Bisshops
side against the Brownists tooth & nayle, and affirme their gouernment
to be the holie gouernment of Christ, and the defaultes therof not
such as make yt to become antichristian, or a yoke of bondage, as the
Brownist with open throte exclaymeth. And for the other side (wherof
he sometyme was) they, howsoeuer they woulde haue yt remoued, yet
are far from the Brownistes opiniō; for they for the peace of the Church
had rather stād vnder yt, then vnder Christs crosse by witnessing against
yt. Concerning the opinions of both these sides for the execution of
this discipline they speake of, wee haue alreadie shewed both sides to
erre, and fully refuted their seueral opinions by the way in the SECOND
PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION, where we haue declared that th'execution
of the cēsures & power of the Church belongeth neither to such
a sequestred withdrawen presbiterie, Nor yet to anie one mā, but vnto
the whole Churchioyntlie &c. We haue also in that Second Transgression
shewed the forgerie of their idol Suspension, and of the popish Excommunicatiō
                  
of these Bishops. And how the Church of England hath no power to
excōmunicate any person for any sinne or heresie whatsoeuer: but only
abuse this most high iudgment of God vpon earth, to their filthie lucre
and pompe, excommunicating for nothing but for contempt of their
antichristiā Courtes, Or for not paying their rauenous fees and extortions,
as also absoluing them for money when they please. Whervpon
whilest they want this power of excommunication, it followeth▪
                  
that admonitions were vayne & fruictlesse amongst them, whē they cānot
haue their due power, processe, and effect. sondrie of them also as these
Bishops, the whole rabble of their false hierarchi
                        •
                     
                   and Priestes being incorrigible,
such as wilbe subiect to no censure, neither receiue admonitiō;
but be more readie to smite & blaspheme such as reproue them.
Moreouer in ye THIRD PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION we haue shewed,
how their Churches haue no power in themselues to elect or ordaine
them any Ministers, but are inforced to receiue them from the Patrone
& the Bishop, whether they will or no. Where we haue also set downe
the counterfeight and false maner of the ordination and institution of
their Ministers or Priestes. Whereby euidentlie appeareth what kinde
of gouernmēt this their discipline of the Church of England is. So that
here remayneth the lesse to be spokē of this poyncte, the chief matters
being alreadie handled. Onlie here we wil a litle entreate of this controuersie
betwixt these Bishops and Priestes about their forme of Discipline,
and somwhat generallie of their Courtes in fewe wordes, and so put
an end to this poyncte.
               THis controuersie Mr. G. affirmeth to be about the forme & not about
ye matter of discipline, wherin both sides agree That Christ hath
lefte a power to his Church &c. Doth not Mr. G. deserue high cō
                  mandations,
that with one logicall distinction can both defend all the
Popes hierarchie, Courtes, Cannons &c. and make also these two opposite factions
the Bishops & Priestes to agree in matter? So that now belike al
this long bitter hostilitie, contention, and controuersie amongst them
hath bene about no matter. And then wil not this rare distinctiō hide
or excuse the blame of either partie. Againe (saue that we wil haue no
strife about inanitie of wordes) we alwaise tooke the forme to haue giuē
the beeing to the thing, and to haue bene so principal a parte therof, as
yt might neuer be seuered from the same, howsoeuer in vvay of discourse
the forme and the matter may for argument sake be distinguished.
For euen common sense teacheth, that no man or creature may
be separate from their peculiar and natural, forme or shape. Neither
anie member of them from that forme, place, and office, which God
hath giuen & appoyncted to that member. But al mē hould yt monstruous
to haue a mixte or false shape. How much more impossible &
intollerable were it, but to admit anie other forme, or to change that
forme which God hath giuē & apoincted to anie actiō of the Church?
Either that forme which God hath giuen & prescribed is no true and
right forme, Or ells those actions without that true and right forme,
cannot be said those true actions of the Churche. Howe monstruous
then is their presumption that dare vndertake to change, yea to abrogate
those formes, rules, ordinances that Christ hath prescribed to his
Church in his Testament? Howe shamelesse and blasphemouse their

                     •
                  mpudēcie, that dare pronownce this adulterate mōstruous discipline
of their Church, the same in matter and effect with that gouernment

                  Christ hath prescribed? Is not this of the one sort to sit in the Temple of
God as God, to change the ordinances &c? Is it not in the other with
the false Prophet to dawbe and vphold the throne of the Beast? If God
vnto MOSES prescribed an exact paterne in al thinges that belongedExo. 25. 4
                        •
                     
                  
to that Tabernacle,Hebr. 8. 5. euen to the least pinne, tape, hooke, vtilence, with
the due forme,Hebr. 3. 5. shape, measure, waight, place, tyme, v
                     •
                  e &c, and left
nothing to his wil or discreatiō (but his praise was that he was founde
faithful in al the Lordes house,Hebr. 2. and 12. 25. &c. and had made and donne all thinges
according to the paterne shewed him in the mounetaine). If that
worde spoken by Angels was made firme, and euerie transgression and
disobedience receiued iust retributiō of reward; How shal they escape,
and where shal they stand, that neglect, yea reiect, that heauenlie archtype,
and onlie perfect paterne of CHRISTES Testament, deliuered by
the holie Ghost to the Apostles, by the Apostles to the Churches, confirmed
by the death of CHRIST, and by diuers signes & wonders from
heauen: that take boldnes to innouate, change & alter the inuiolable
perpetual ordinances of CHRISTES Testament, and to set vp a n
                     •
                  we
Leitourgie, and to bring in a newe ministrie and gouernment according
to the same.1 Chron 28 
                        •
                     1 &c. If God were so iealous ouer the ordinances and vtilences
of that material Temple, which cosisted but of wood and stone,
that he permitted not anie thing to those excellent seruantes Moses, Dauid,
Salomon
                  1 Kings 6. and 7. chap. in al that busines, which they receiued not by diuine oracle
from his owne mouth,Leu. 10. Neither suffred wilful transgression in anie that
drewe neare to administer before him,Nomb. 16. but executed most fearefull
exāples vpon sondrie,2 Samu. 6. as Nadab, Abihu, Corath, vzzah vzziah &c. How much
more iealouse and seueare shall he be ouer the ordinances and administration2 Chron. 26
of this spiritual house, which consisteth of the soules and
bodies of men,Heb. 12. 28. ouer that kingdome of his Sonne which cannot be shaken,
ouer that Tabernacle which cānot be remoued,Esa. 33. 20. the stakes wherof
can neuer be takē away, neither shall anie of the cordes therof de broken
for euer?1 Cor. 3. 17. Shal not the Lord destroye them which thus misbuilde
and dest
                     •
                  oy his Temple? Can they thinck themselues wiser, or more
in fauour with God their Moses, Dauid, Salomon?
                  1 Cor. 11. To haue greater priueledge
then the Apostles?1 Cor. 4. 17. who deliuered not anie thing which they had
not receiued,Mat. 28. 
                        •
                     0. And bownde all builders and Churches to that which
they deliuered, vnto the worldes end, teachinge them to obserue all
thinges whatsoeuer Christ had commaunded them,2 Tim. 1. 1
                        •
                     . to keepe the true
paterne and that holie commandement vndefiled and without blame,1 Tim. 6. 13. 14.
vntil that appearing of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. yea can they thinck
themselues wiser and fuller of eyes within and without,Zech. 3. 9. to haue greater
sight and prouidence of thinges present and to come, thinges inwarde
and outwarde then the Lorde and builder of the house himself,Hebr. 3. 6.
That they dare thus presumptuouslie violate and innouate the ordinances,
the outwarde forme of gouernment & administration (to vse
their owne wordes) which he hath instituted for his Church & kingdome?
Thinck they these of lesse momēt & value, thē those ordināces

& 
                     •
                  utward formes belōging to the Tabernacle & Tēple vnder ye lawe▪
Or is not this to perfer that material Temple & the ordināces therof to
the spiritual Temple & the Testamēt of Christ? The person & ministrie
of Moses, to the person & ministrie of Christ? To make Moses more faithful
& absolute in his house then Christe? In as much as the ordināces of the
Temple were perfect and inuiolable, such as no Prince or Priest might
add to, alter, innouate, or breake the least of them. But the ordinances
& formes of Christ in his Church so imperfect, weake, insufficient, yea so
incōgruent & vnmeete, as they are left arbitrable at the discreation of
men, conformed to the wil of Princes, to polecies, times, and states? yea
doe not these men that hold the forme or maner of the administration
of Christes discipline (as they terme yt) variable and arbitrable, and that

                     •
                  resume to prescribe an other maner of executing the same, hold their
owne waies & deuises more wise, equal, and conuenient thē the Lords
waies, and thrust their owne into the place of the Lords? which formes
& deuises of theirs can no more agree or be ioyned to the Lordes ordinances
in his gouernmēt, order, administratiō, then heauē & earth can
be mingled. Neither may they without sinne be compared togither.
The Lords forme that he hath giuen & disposed to euerie part, actiō,
and exercise of his Church only & best fitting & agreeing to the same,
neither suffring or receiuing auy other.Reuel. 21. 16 For as it is writtē, the forme of
this Citie is fowre square, most firme, immoueable, and proportionable
the height, length, and breath therof being equal. Yea as our Sauiour
pronounceth with his owne mouth most gratiously & oftē in the Songe,
Al the mēbers,
                     
                        •
                     ant. 4. 6. features, and proportiōs of his Church, are most beautifull,
amiable,1. Chap. and euen rauishing the senses to behold, as we see there
from top to toe described; not only in the seueral partes, members, and
ioyntes, but euē in the proper peculiar formes, proportions, features of
each. How wicked then & diuelish is the opinion of these Bishops &
their side, that hold the formes, order, and maner of the actions, administration
& gouernment of the Church prescribed in Christs Testamēt,
and together ioyned & cōmanded with the actions &c, not to be perpetual,
alwaies meete or convenient, but to be variable at the dispositiō
& will of men? But how monstruous is their presumption, and barbarous
their hauocke, that dare not only to bereaue the Church of that
heauenly forme which Christ hath prescribed in his Testament, but in
stead therof set vp & impose their owne L
                        •
                     ito
                        •
                     rgie, their owne ougly, deformed,
and monstruous shapes,Reuel. 13. which cā no more agree to the offices
& actions of Christes Church, then the pawes of a Beare, the mouth of a
Lyon &c, can agree & be ioyned to an humane bodie. which strange
shapes & 
                     •
                  alse members agree & belong rather to the mōstruous bodie
of that Beast, then vnto the heauenly bodie of CHRIST. For if the great
Creator haue not permitted or giuē power to any mortal man to makeEsay. 14. 13. 14. 15.
or giue shape to the least member or part of an humane natural bodie,
not to make one hayre, or being made to giue yt colour or sharpe, white
or blacke, short or long; Muchlesse thē hath the Lorde & great Architect

of the church his spiritual bodie, giuē power to any Angel or mortal
creature to make or change the least part or action therof in matter
or forme.Rom. 11. 34. But as he hath not called anie man to councell concerning
these thinges,1 Cor. 2. 16. but hath deliuered vnto all men a perfect paterne in his
worde,2 Tim. 3. 16. 17. where we haue his whole minde, howe he will haue all thinges
donne in his Church, so it behoueth al men soberly to rest in, and carefully
to beware not to change,Act. 20. 32 transgresse, or swarue from the same at
any hand willingly:Heb. 12. 28. 29. knowing that euen the Lorde our God is a consuming
fire, and wilbe serued also of vs in this his kingdome to his owne
good liking with reuerence & feare.
               Now seeing we finde the forme & paterne which Christ hath instituted
& giuē most perfect & absolute, such as cānot be corrected or amēded
by anie humane deuise or ingenie, such as cannot be separate from the
partes & actiōs vnto which Christ hath ioyned them, neither may those
places or actiōs receiue anie other forme, but that therbie they become
adulterate, displeasing to God, pernitious to mē. It is euident that this
gouernment which the Bishops exercise ouer the Church, cānot be the
true gouernmēt or discipline of Christ, because by their owne confessiōs
yt is executed after an other forme & maner then Christ hath instituted,
Seing (as we haue by manie reasons & expresse Scriptures proued) the
forme is inioyned & ioyned together with ye actiō by the same aucthoritie,
neither may by any mortal man be changed or separate from the
same. So y• Mr. G. his owne cōfession in that their gouernmēt wanteth
the true forme (for here we reason not of faultes in a true forme, but of
a diuers & false forme) is reason enough to shew, that it is not that true
gouernment which Christ hath instituted, And then must yt needes followe
to be a false and antichristian gouernment: And consequently all
that stand vnder yt to stand vnder the yoke of Antichrist, and not to haue
Christ their kinge & gouernour. Moreouer the Brownist with whom he
hath to doe, hath learned & doth fully belieue, That CHRIST ruleth in
his Church by his owne officers and lawes, and not by any such popish
Officers, Courtes, and Cānons, as these BBs. doe in the Church of England.
All which he hopeth Mr. G. will not say to be of the forme of discipline.
For sure he holdeth a true ministrie and the rules of the Bible
to be of such necessitie, as the true Church may neuer receiue anie other
Ministers or lawes for their administration and gouernment. We
haue likewise lardglie alreadie proued this whole ministrie, administration,
ordinance, and maner of gouernmēt, not to be according to the
rules of Gods worde, but forged, popish, and false. Only in this place
we would knowe of Mr. G. if the Bishopps and their false Hierarchie,
Courtes, iurisdiction, gouernment were of God, how thē these learned
Reformist Preachers may sue & seeke to haue them vtterly remoued out
of the church. I would not here be vnderstood of their persons (wherof
might be some colour & reason enough) but of their offices, Courtes,
iurisdiction, gouernment: Al which they would haue vtterly abolished
& taken away; which if they were of Christ could not be donne without

most heynouse impietie & sacriledge, without a most grievous woūde
& mayme in the body of Christ, by cutting off such pretious and principal
members and officers of Christ, and that for euer. If those BBs, their
accomplices, Courtes, and gouernment were of Christ, then are these
Reformistes which sue and labour to haue them remoued and abolished,
most dangerous and pestilent seducers, that perswade the Prince and
realme to doe this violence to the bodie of Christ his Church, to reiect
the holy gouernmēt and ministrie of Christ, which who so despiceth or
putteth away, despiceth & putteth away Christ himself; and so perswad
and drawe they their Prince and the whole land into the assuted wrath
and vengeance of God. 
                     •
                  ut nowe on the contrarie, if these Bishops,
officers, courtes, gouernmēt be not of Christ, then belong they not vnto,
neither haue anie thing to doe or to intermeddle with the ministrie or
gouernmēt, or anie action of the Church of Christ. How great then on
the other side is the perfidie & apostasie of these Reformistes, that knewe
and pronounced in open Parliament that they were not of God, and
sought to haue them vtterlie remoued; Yet now for filthie lucre, & for
feare of persecution subscribe, sweare, and submit to their antichristian
Hierarchie, power, courtes, iurisdiction, & to al the detestable enormities
that flowe from their throne? That diriue their ministrie from, & exercise
yt vnder them? yea that exercise their ministrie & keep the whole
land vnder their yoke, and so in the knowē wrath of God? How odious
is the hypocrisie & apostasie of this graceles ma
                     •
                  , that somtymes knewe
& stood against these enormities, yet now as a withered fruictlesse tree
twice deade, plucked vp by the rootes, is fallē & apostatat from al faith,
light, sauoure, consciēce, & feeling, as that starre wormewood that poysoneth
& maketh bitter & deadly al the waters he faleth into: now pleading
& fighting for that apostatical throne of iniquitie, terming that
nowe the gouernment & power of Christ in matter and effect, which he
himself Page 56. & 58. of his booke cōfesseth not to binde in heauē, not
to be iust as in respect of them that doe excōmunicate &c, colouring al
the abominations that flowe from this throne, and al the controuersies
about their gouernment with a diuers outward forme. I hope he wil
admit the Testamēt & ministrie of Christ to be of the matter & substāce.
And thē shall his halting on both sides, & double dissimulatiō appeare
to al mē, that durst not set downe so much as the cōtrouersie amongst
thēselues trulie. which yet T. C. his Lord of VVinchester dealt more rowndly
in, flatlie denijng the Apostolick discipline to be either perpetual or
necessarie: but especially elections, excōmunication &c, by the people
to be either expedient or tollerable, bringing sondrie fleshly reasons &
politicke incōueniences & impedimēts to the contrarie, the refutation
of whose blasphemies belōgeth to an other place. But this mā thincking
to keepe in with both sides, setteth downe the controuersie to be
onlie about the forme & not about the matter of discipline, although
the Bishops abash not in playne wordes to the veiwe of the world, & to
the face of Christ, to denie the verie matter yt self. As both sides also doe
in deedes & effect; whilest they acknowledg that Christ hath giuen vnto

his Church the power of elections & censures,Tit. 1. 16. yet both of them withdraw
this whole power frō the Church. The one into their sequestred
Synodes, the other into their popish Courtes;1 Cor. 4. 20 If so be this power wilbe
graūted to be of the matter of discipline. But this questiō is soone put
to an end, whilest the Bishops denie the Apostolick discipline yt self as
tollerable in the common wealth,Luk. 19. 14 &c. and flatlie denie Christ to reigne ouer
them or ouer this Church by his owne officers & lawes. And therfore
except he wil giue their persons,Math. 21. 33 accōplices, and trayne, an immunitie
from al ecclesiastical censures, not to be subiect for anie transgressiō or
error to the reproof or power of the Church: yea except he wil resigne
his right into their handes, and giue them leaue to reigne & rule ouer
al the Churches in this lād, and that by their owne officers, courtes, cā
                  nons,
constitutions, iniunctions &c, he is no Kinge or Christ for them:
Nay if he wil not bowe downe to al these and take their yoke vpō him.
he is no subiect for them,Reu. 13. 17 he may not buy and sell, nor liue in this market,
in this Church. Which Officers, Courtes, Cannons &c, if Mr. G.
had proued to haue bene of the matter of Christes discipline (for of the
forme we wil al graunt him they are not) and had approued & iustified
them by the worde of God, then had he some colour to aske this question,
whether some faultes in their discipline should make yt antichristian.
But seing these Bishopps & their Courtes, Officers, Cannons
&c: were by vs affirmed vnto him to haue no foundatiō or mention
in Gods worde, no place nor vse in Christs Church, but to be contrarie
to the one, most preiudicial & dāgerous to the other, And he in
all this space could bring vs no defence for them, Wee cannot see by
his owne reason (seing they haue neither the true matter nor the forme
of CHRISTES gouernment) howe their gouernment should be held
and esteamed the true and holie gouernment of Christ; And then must
that sequel (which he so feareth) needes followe, that yt is an antichristian
gouernment & yoke, such as the true Church & seruantes of Christ
may not beare and wittinglie stand vnder.
               To perticulate all the seuerall corruptions, abuses, enormities of the
gouernment of these antichristian Bishops, is not in mie skil or power,
not knowing in anie measure their Cannons, customes, orders, priueledges,
proceedings. Onlie this in general I may affirme, that of such
pompeous stagelike popish mixt Courtes, handling both ciuile & ecclesiastical
causes iudiciallie, I neuer read through al the book of God,
or to belonge to Christes Church; Especiallie exercising such absolute
power & iurisdiction ouer al Churches, causes, and persons ecclesiastical:
yea vsurping, assuming, and executing the whole power, offices,
and dueties of al Churches, yea euen the proper prerogatiues & priuiledges
only belonging to Christ himself. To make, impose, or abrogate
lawes, To giue or rather sel licences & dispensations, to haue more benefices
then one, to marrie, to eate flesh at tymes of restrainte &c, To
cal, sommon, and fetch by cōstrainte al causes & persons of the Church
before them, There to determine & decree, to censure, silence, suspēd,

sequester, depose, incarcerate, punish by mulct what Minister or mēber
of the Church they lust of their owne absolute aucthoritie without any
controlement reprose or redresse. The Church hauing no power or libertie
to reprooue or refuse, no not so much as call into question anie
thing they do or decree, to rebuke or censure these inordinate lawlesse
fellowes for anie thing they doe either publickely or priuatly. The
Church must receiue & obey as most holie, whatsoeuer they decree or
impose with al reuerence as the oracles of God, though they be neuer
so contrarie to the worde of God. The Church or any other member
of the Church in these Courtes be not permitted so much as to propounde
or pleade their owne cause; But are by them cōpelled to their
romish litigious course & procedinges, To speake & pleade by a feed
Advocate or Proctor, after their popish order and custome. Where for
bribes & fees, al causes (be they neuer so fowle & corrupt) are handled,
pleaded, and proceede, that I say not succeede. And without such
bribes & fees, no cause (be yt neuer so iust, and ye partie neuer so poore
or innocēt) hath audience or help. Here being so many officers, catchpolles,
attendantes to be feed & pleased. To all these rauenous Birdes
with fingers the suetors & sommoned become a pray. But especially
the faithful, such as speak against, and will not of conscience and faith
vnto God stoope downe vnto their antichristian power, or obey their
vngodly decrees; These shalbe worse vsed then any trayterous Papists
or facinorous persons whatsoeuer; who shall all of them by their
purse or freindes escape well enough & find fauour, when these poore
soules shall neuer geat out of their handes without wrack either of bodie
or soule, either death or denying the faith. These though there be
no direct matter, euidence, witnesses, or accusers against them, yet
shall themselues be inforced to a corporal oth (as they call it) vpon and
by a booke, to answeare directly and truly to such articles and poyncts
as shalbe propownded vnto them. If they denie or make conscience
either of the maner or matter of this oth, then instead of godly instruction
or christian persuasion, they are forthwith committed to prison,
yea for the most parte to close prison, there to remaine shut vp from al
ayre, exercise, friendes, dueties, callings &c, vntill they either yeild to
take this idolatrous, blasphemous, and impious oth, or dye vnder their
handes. No baile, maineprise, help, benefite, or redresse by lawe, by the
Queenes Royal writtes or Courtes allowed to any, that are committed
by the leaste of this hellish Anarchie. Whose lawlesse and insolent dealinges,
oppressions, iniuries, violence, may not be caled in question or
examined by anie ciuile Magistrates or Courtes. All which they patronize
by her Maties. high or especiall Commission vnto them, Although
her Matie. suffreth her Roial Prerogatiue to be handled & considered
of in some of these ciuile Courtes: yea & graunteth to all her
free borne subiectes the benefite & free vse of her Highnes lawes euen
in anie cases or causes betwixt her Highnes and them according to the
great Charter in the Magna Charta, whervnto her Matie. is sworne. which

Charter also these lawlesse Prelates most presumptuouslie and tyrannously
violate & breake vnder colour of her Maties. Commission: thus
setting her Maties Commission against her Maties. Prerogatiue & Courtes
Royal, against that great Charter of the land, against all her Highnes
lawes, yea & against al the lawes of God & the Testamēt & Kingdome
of Christ. But to say as it is, their procedinges are both against ther cō
                  mission,
(if they might be dulie examined & conferred thervnto,) and
against her Mat•es. meaning. Whose milde, preceable, & iust gouernmēt
in al causes that procead from her self, assure vs, that She would neuer
wittingly graunt such a commission as shoulde be so preiudicial to her
owne Crowne & Royal dignitie, to the estate, of the Church and of the
whole common wealth, as this wherby these Prelates beare themselues
& their vngodly procedings, is. That power graunted vnto her Matie.
by Parliamēt, to appoinct & aucthorize whom she shal thinck meet to
execute vnder her al maner iurisdictiōs, priuiledges, and preeminēces
concerning ecclesiastical causes to her belonging, is, as also al other her
Princely power & aucthoritie alwaies to be vnderstood in the Lord, so
far as shalbe found consonant to his word. For neither is there giuen
neither may or wil her Matie take or exercise any furder or other power
then the Lord her God giueth her. In whom Kinges reigne, of whom
their power is diriued and holden, by whom yt is circumscribed and
limited, to whom they shal as anie other persons, accompt.
               If then these Prelates and their antichristian Hierarchie, these romish
Courtes and their popish procedinges in the same, be not fownde to be
of God, to haue anie warrant in his word, or to belong to the ministrie
& gouernment of Christes Church, then can no commission or humane
aucthoritie whatsoeuer make them lawfull, impose, or enioyne them
vpon the Church. Neither ought anie Christian to obey them at the
Commandmēt of any mortal mā. Men must alwaies be obeyed in the
Lord.Act. 4. 19 Vnto whom when or wherein they be fownd cōtrarie or opposite,
there must God rather then mē, be obeyed. His indignation that
cā cast both body & soule into hel fire,Mat. 10. 28 is more to be feared thē theirs,
that can but touch the body only. To obey Gods commaundements,
and to refrayne from al thinges that are fownd contrary to the same, is
no disobedience to Princes, neither to withdrawe or derogate from
their sacred power, as this malignāt Clergie would persuade. But they
rather, that encroch vpon & openly impugne the Princes royal prerogatiue;
that so highly abuse their Prince, and that trust she cōmitteth
vnto them; that break & violate al ye publicke lawes & charters of the
lande; that vsurpe ye ciuile sword, aucthority, and iurisdictiō, which are
vtterly prohibited thē by God; that vsurpe place aboue al in aucthoritie
vnder her Matie. whoesoeuer, to whom by the lawe of God they ought
to be subiect; that wil not submit their lawes, doings, & persons to any
ciuile tryal at the Princes royal iudgmēt seates, but rather seek to withdrawe
some of the most high and chief causes from her royall Courts
and iudgment Seates into their owne Courtes; that vsurpe the proper

peculiar place, titles, preuileges, power of Christ himself, exercising absolute
aucthoritie ouer al Churches, doctrines, causes, persons, to bring
in or cast out, erect or abrogate, what lawes, ordinances, ministrie, ministration,
gouernment they lust without controlement; that wil not
submit their publick ecclesiastical decrees & procedings, nor yet their
priuate liues and conuersation to the tryall and censure of Christ in his
Churche by the worde of God; that make such barbarous hauocke,
mis-rule, and confusion both in Churche and common wealth; that
seduce and deceiue their Soueraigne Prince, their Nobles, Maiestrates,
and the whole land, leading them in the wayes of death & destruction,
tourning them out of the straight waies of life & peace; that with their
vtmost endeuour and skil oppose against the Testament & kingdome
of Christ; that molest, spoile, and persecute in al hostile maner the Lords
most faithful seruantes her Matis. most loyall & true hearted Subiects,
for refrayning from their idolatries and enormities so contrarie to the
gospel of Christ, which flowe from their antichristian gouernment and
ministrie; that nourish, fauour, and support the Lordes & her Matis.
pernitious knowen enimies the Papistes, those idolators, those conspirators
and traytors, who they say are not such enimies to their pontifical
estate and regiment as these faithfull christians are; that are of nothing
so iealouse, vigilāt, and careful, not euē of their Soueraigne Princes
life, or of the peace & prosperitie of the whole land, as of their owne
vsurped ruynous kingedome, lest the light of the Gospel should break
forth, and discouer their apostaticall throne, and antichristian procedings;
And therfore with al their might and may ne they striue to suppresse
this light, and to oppresse all such as in anie sinceritie and good
conscience professe and practize the Gospel, tollerating & chearishing
rather anie mischief, anie vile flagitious and dissolute persons, as by
daylie experience is seene. So that by these markes and fruicts let the
Christian or but indifferent reader iudge, Whether these Prelates and
their antichristian Hierarchie be to be held troublers of the Church and
state, abridgers of the Princes power, vsurpers of publick aucthoritie
without lawful caling like Corath, Dathan, & Abyram, Or wee, as this accuser,
this trompe of Sathan, (to bleamish our holie profession & glorious
suffringes) shameth not to giue out of vs. Although they all hitherto
haue not, neither shal euer be able (in the confidence of Gods grace,
and of a cleare conscience wee affirme yt) iustlie to detect, or so much
as to suspect vs of anie such crime,
                     
                        •
                      Pet. 2. endeuoure, or intēt. We reuerence
and are subiect to euerie humane creature for the Lorde, whether vnto
the Kinge as hauing aucthoritie ouer all, or vnto rulers as sent by him,
for the reuenge of euil doers, or for the praise of them that doe well,
That according to the wil of God, by doing wel, we might put to silēce
the ignorance of vnwise men. Yet hold wee not the offices, Courtes,
and iurisdiction of these Prelates and their Hierarchie within the compasse
of this Commandement, or to be the ordināce of God; But finde
them that verie throne of Sathan, that Anarchie of Antichrist opposite to

the kingdome and Testament of CHRIST, most pestilent & pernitious
both to the Church and common Wealthe. And therfore may not by
Princes be suffred in Churches or cōmon Wealth, muchlesse by them
be established ouer the Church and common Wealth,Reuel. 17. without giuing
their sacred power to the Beast. Neither may anie faithfull Christian
be brought in subiectiō to this their antichristian power & yoke,Reuel. 13. 15 without
bowing downe and worshipping the Beast.
               To discusse or perticulate the seuerall & innumerable errors, faultes,
abuses, corruptions, enormities, in the cānons, constitutions, customes,
procedings of the seuerall Courtes that belong to these Prelates antichristian
regiment, I am not (as I haue said) able, neither were yt in this
place expedient. By this which hath bene here generally said of them,
their Courtes, and proceedinges, appeareth, how contrarie they are to
that gouernment, and to those ordinances which CHRIST hath established
and set ouer his Church for euer. CHRISTS Scepter is an euerlasting
Scepter, a Scepter of righteousnes. He hath set downe a most
perfect & absolute gouernment to his Church. He hath perticularly
and exactly prescribed what officers, lawes & ordinances he requireth
in his Church. He cannot be separate from his owne gouernment.
He ruleth not his Church by anie other officers or lawes, then by his
owne which he hath instituted. These godlesse Prelates then, that appoinct
other officers and lawes vnto him & ouer his Church, wrest not
only the Scepter, but the Kingdome out of Christes handes. And al such
as stand vnder the antichristia gouernmēt of these presumptuous idol
shepheardes,Zech. 11. stand not vnder Christes staffe, amenitie, vnder his Scepter
of grace, as the sheepe of his fould within his couenant & protection;
but as the sheepe of destruction vnder his yron rodd,Psal. 2. wherwith they
shalbe broken as a Potters vessel. Here is our controuersie touching
this fourth principal transgressiō, fully decided & determined by Gods
owne mouth; That all which stand vnder anie false ecclesiasticall gouernmēt,
stand not within the Couenant, but vnder the wrath of God.
All the mitigations then, reasons, and delusions of the false Prophets,
shal neuer be able to make voide, tourne away, or diminish these iudgments,
otherwise then by their vnfaigned repentance & speedie conuertion
from their euil wayes.
               HITHER TO hath Mr. Gif. brought vs not one reason or place of scripture
to prooue the present gouernmēt of these Prelates and their
hierarchie, to be that heauenly gouernment which CHRIST hath instituted
in his Church, but hath grieuouslie peruerted manie scriptures to
prooue that the Church might stand vnder some antichristian yoke,
although we in our first writing in this 4 PRINRIPAL TRANGRESSION
blamed yt, as false and antichristian, In our second shewed yt to be such
in the Officers, Courtes, Cannons, procedings. Now at length for a

clusiue reason to prooue and determine all the poyncts at once; and to
shut vp his booke, he hath hatched & brought vs foorth this worthie
reason to rest vpon. If the execution of discipline by Bishops be the yoke of Antichrist,
and if all the Churches vvhich doe stand vnder the same doe vvorship the Beast and be not
christians, it must needes follow that such as did euer execute this power, were Antichristes,
and no children of GOD at that time or before thei repented. But by your owne confession manie
of them died blessed Martyres. I conclude therfore, That the Brownistes cannot but vvith
heresies and most heinous iniurie & inordinate dealing condemne a Church as quite diuourced &
separate from CHRIST, for such corruptions & imperfections in Gods vvorship as be not fundamentall,
nor destroy the substance: for that wicked men come vvith the godly to the publick
exercises of religion: for some wantes in calling & ordaining Ministers, and in ecclesiastical discipline.
               
               BElike Mr. GIF. is hard driuē when this old popish reason alreadie by
vs answeared, and now by him not ouer wel repayred, is fayne to become
his cheif corner stone to approue this Church in all these chardges,
and the only reason he can bring for the Hierarchie & regiment of
the Church of England. By this reason his holie Father the POPE was
wonte to defend his triple Crowne & apostaticall Chaire. Because in
the same haue sit manie godly Bishops & blessed-Martyres &c: so that
if the office, power, and dignitie of his Popedome be antichristiā, then
must all these godly learned men that haue executed the same needes
be Antichrists, and not true members of CHRIST, vntill they repent: But
they neuer were founde to haue repented these thinges, yet are confessed
by al that knewe them in that age to be learned & godly: Therfore
Mr. G. and all this horned Cleargie and Lordly hierarchie of England,
cannot without schisme reuoult from, without heresie pronownce, this
holie Sea & office antichristian &c. Let Mr. G. now he seeth the fordge
& issue, bind or loose, followe or leaue this argument, at his owne pleasure
& perill. If he suppose to escape by shewing discrepance betwixt
these godly predecessors & vngodly successors in manie circumstances
and vertues: And so thinck this reason wil not presse him half so sore
as it doth vs: yet let him consider (though I will not be the POPES aduocate)
that they here reason of the same office, and not of the same
circumstāces, and that these godly predecessors executed the self same
office with these their bad successors. Yea so might th'example be put,
as yt should be without anie great difference in circumstance also. And
as to the difference betwixt the persons of the one and of the other, (if
that may be a solution to this argument) we shall not greatly need to
feare, finding this viperous generation, these idle, proude, wordlie,
fleshlie, persecuting, blasphemous Prelates, nothing so like these their
godly predecessors these Martyres, in laboures, humilitie, bowntie,
spiritual & holie conuersation, faith, patience, loue of the truth, of the
Sainctes of CHRIST &c, as they are in that which is euill in these antichristian
titles, offices, Courtes, iurisdiction, reuenues, pompe &c.
Which, (as we before said vnto you) so say we againe, that no men or

Angels can iustifie where Gods worde condemneth, though all the
Martyres in the worlde should dye in and for them. We may not be
leed or drawen by the examples & persons of men (how good soeuer)
from one iote of Gods reueiled truth. The best men we see doe erre
and sinne, there neuer was or shalbe anie man, that erreth and sinneth
not in manie thinges. But should we because good men haue donne
euill and erred, therfore iustifie sinne and error? That were high presumption
greiuouslie to tempt God, and to abuse the holie Scriptures,
which recorde not mens faultes to that end. What sinne or error might
not so by th'example of some good man or Church be iustified? yet
these are Mr. GIFF. his best reasons for his Church, ministrie &c. and
here his only reason, to approue the gouernment of these Bishops and
hierarchie.
               
               But now as we here iustifie & allowe not any sinne by the examples
& persons of the godly; so condemne we not these godly mens persons
for sinne & error, vntil obstinacie be ioyned thervnto, which Mr. GIFF.
cannot shew in these holie Martyres. And therfore we denie the consequent
of his Maior or first Proposition; That because the office & iurisdiction
they executed were Antichristian, therfore the men that exercised them
were Antichristes, and not children of God. We may vtterly condemne
the sinne, and yet not so peremptorily condemne the sinner. It is a sure
position that euerie sinne is of the Deuil, yet is there no consequence
therof, that euerie one that sinneth is of the Deuil. we see no such necessitie
as Mr. G. would persuade of that matter. The godly may sinne
of ignorance, of negligence, of fraylety, yet not thervpon vntill obstinacie
be added vnto sinne, cease to be christians. These godly Martyres
so lately escaped out of that smokie fornace of the popish Church,
could not so clearely discerne, and sodenly enter into the heauenly &
beautiful order of a true established Church. It is more thē one dayes
worcke, to gather, to plante and establish a Church aright, much more
so manie thowsand seuerall Churches as are supposed in this land. It
can be no wonder that those godly men being so vnexpert and vnexercised
in his heauenly worcke, neuer hauing liued in, seene, or hearde of
any orderly cōmunion of Saīnctes, anie true established Church vpon
earth of so many hundreth yeeres, euer since the general defection vnder
Antichrist so much foretold of in the Scriptures, no maruaile I say, if
they erred in setting vp the frame. But what then? should we therfore
iustifie or persist in their errors? especially should we reiect the true paterne
of CHRISTS Testamēt which reproueth our workes, and sheweth
vs a better course? should we not suffer our worckes to burne, after the
maner of these deceitful workmen of these tymes? God forbid. For thē
should we receaue their reward & perish with our worckes.
               Now to the second propositiō of this argument we haue alreadie expressed
our minde concerning the suffringes, faith, and death of these
Martyres. We finde them obstinatly to haue resisted no part of Gods
worde or truth he gaue them sight of at anie tyme, but to haue bene

verie faithfull & constant euen vnto bandes & death in that truth they
were come vnto. Furder we doubt not but they truly repented them of
al their sinnes knowen, and faithfully laid hold of Gods mercie in Christ
Iesus for al their secrete & vnknowen sinnes. Gods grace we are assured
is so much greater then all our sinnes, as the sea is greater then one
dropp of water. Therefore we doubt not of their happie and blessed
estate; all their sinnes & these false offices & ministrie, which they executed
in their ignorance amōgst the rest, being forgiue them. Th'example
then & errors of these Martyres will not approue the antichristian
offices & gouernment of these Prelates, nor yet iustifie the publick
worship, ministrie, confusion, sacriledge of the Church of England.
               
               Mvchlesse wil these two lame propositions of Mr. G. his final argument,
beare vpp his forged conclusion. where he concludeth the
Brownistes hereticks &c, Because they condemne a Church as quite deuorced
& separate from Christ, For such imperfections & corruptions in
Gods worship, as are not fundamental, nor destroy the substance; For
that wicked men come with the godly to the publicke exercises of religion;
For some wantes in calling & ordayning Ministers; And for
some wantes in ecclesiastical discipline. If Mr. GIF. had taken the wise
mans councel, he should not haue answered a matter before he vnderstood
it, much-lesse would he (if he had bene ledd by the spirit of God)
haue blasphemed the truth or cōdemned the innocent without cause.
But as he began his booke without councel, cōtinued it without grace,
and ended it without truth; so hath he herebie but purchased to himself
shame, and brought vpon his owne head the iudgments due to an
accuser, a blasphemer, a false witnesse and iudge. What opinion the
Brownistes hold of the Church of England, their worship, people, ministrie,
gouernment, we neither knowe nor regard, neither is there cause
whie we should be chardged or condemned for their errors & faultes.
For which themselues, and this Church of ENGLAND that receiueth
and nourisheth all sectories, hereticks, wicked and abhominable persons
whatsoeuer, shall accompt. For vs, whom it pleaseth Mr. G. to
terme Brownistes, and whome he endeuoreth to confute in this treatise,
we neuer condemned any true Church for anie fault whatsoeuer,
knowing that where true faith is, there is repentance, where true faith
and repentance are, there is remission of all sinnes. Far be it from vs
to condemne anie whom CHRIST iustifieth. 1. And for the Church of
ENGLAND we neither did or doe condemne yt, (as this accuser suggesteth)
for such imperfections and corruptions in their worship as be not
fundamentall or destroy the substance: but we condemned the publick
worship of their Church of ENGLAND presently inioyned, receiued
and vsed, as deuised by men, popish, superstitious, idolatrous, abhominable,
not such as God commandeth, requireth, or accepteth, and
therfore not such as anie faithfull christian may offer vp vnto God, be

compelled, or consent vnto. This wee shewed in the first PRINCIPALL
TRANSGRESSION: this we haue proued in the first part of this treatise.
2. Secondly wee condemne not the Church of England as separate from
CHRIST, for that wicked mē come with the godly to the publick exercises
of religion, But rather as neuer rightly gathered to CHRIST, for
that al the prophane and wicked ar receiued and retayned as members
of their Churche. Wee gladlie acknowledge that CHRIST came a
light into the world, to offer saluation vnto all men, to haue built his
Church vpon an hil, there to be lifted vp by the preaching of the word
as a standard to al people and passengers, there to haue made a feast to
al natiōs, and thither to inuite them. Neither were we euer so enuious
of the saluation of others, or of the glorie of God, (as hauing founde
mercie, and being entred our selues) to shut the doore or stop the fountaine
of Gods grace against others: yea God is witnesse with what
heartie desire we long after them all, that they, euen our greatest persecutors,
might be partakers of the same saluatiō, ioy, comfort, & happines
with vs: And howe wee intermit not, much-lesse exclude, anie
meanes thervnto that God putteth in our power (though it were with
the hazarde of our owne lyues) to bring them of the water of the wel
at Bethelem. But now though we affirme that al the vnbelieuing & prophane
not onlie may, but ought to resort to the publick exercises of
religion in the Church, as the most excellent meanes to call them to
the faith; yet do we not therfore belieue or affirme, that the prophane
or vnbelieuing may be receiued or admitted as mēbers of the Church,
before they haue made voluntarie publick profession of their owne
faith and obedience; Or being entered by such profession, be permitted
longer to stand or remayne of the Church, then they contynue orderlie
to walke in the same faith and obedience. And therfore we blamed
these parish assemblies of England, as consisting of a confuse multitude
of al sortes of prophane and wicked people in differentlie: where
they are al receiued, nourished, and retayned, as mēbers of ye Church,
though they were neuer called & gathered by the power of the worde,
entered & receiued by the profession of their owne faith, neither walke
orderlie in the faith, or in anie duties either publick or priuate: And so
are al guiltie of most high sacriledge & prophanatiō of the holy things
of God; No such assemblie or communion of Sainctes, as Christes faithful
seruantes ought to repaire or ioyne vnto. This wee shewed in the
second PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION. This we haue lardgly proued in
the secōd part of this treatise. 3. Thirdly we condemne not the Church
of England for some wantes in calling and ordayning Ministers; But for
hauing, maintayning, and retayning a false and antichristian ministrie
imposed vpon them, with a false & antichristian calling & ordination
euen the self same that the Pope vsed & left in this Realme; which false
offices and ministrie cannot be ioyned vnto, or exercised in the true
Church of CHRIST. This wee shewed in the thirde PRINCIPAL

TRANSGRESSION, this we proued in the third part of this treatise.
And therfore with an euil and corrupt conscience hath Mr. G. sought
to hide this transgression vnder some vvantes in the calling and ordaining Ministers,
and thus boldlie and falselie thervpon to accuse vs. Wee knowe
there may be faultes either of ignorance or negligence in the calling
ordination &c, yet these not to disanul the action, much-lesse the Couenant
so longe as they are not obstinatlie held and persisted in. But
our assertion and controuersie here is not of a faultie ministrie, caling,
ordination &c, but of a false ministrie, caling, ordination &c, which
we haue proued theirs to be, and that no such belongeth vnto, may be
imposed, receiued, or retayned in the Church of CHRIST. 4. Fourthly
in like maner wee reason not of some wantes in the gouernment and
order of their Church, but of a false and antichristian gouernment set
ouer the Church. Neither condemne we the Church of ENGLAND
for some faultes in a true ecclesiasticall gouernment, but for hauing
and standing vnder a false and antichristian gouernment, euen the
self same Hierarchie, Officers, Courtes, Cannons, Customes, Priuileges,
Proceedings, that the Pope vsed and left. This wee also haue
shewed in the 4 TRANSGRESSION, and haue nowe in this fourth
parte, and through this booke, fullie proued their present ecclesiastical
gouernment to be. To which fower principall transgressions a
willfull obstinacie, an open reiecting & resisting the truth & al reprofe,
a violent and most hostile persecution of all such as either refraine,
speake against, or reproue their cōmunion, ministrie, worship, gouernment,
being ioyned, We may by all these reasons, seuerally, and haue
by them altogether, proued these Parrish assemblies in this estate not
to be the true established Churches of Christ, to which the faithful seruants
of Christ ought to resort and ioyne.
               So then all men maie see how falsly this accuser hath sclandered vs,
and howe far he hath strayed from the present matters and transgressions
in question, both through his whole booke, and in this conclusion
of his booke, where he chardgeth, pronownceth, and condemneth
vs as heretickes &c, for condemning a Church for some light
imperfections in their worship, wantes in their discipline &c: wheras
we for their idolatrie, confusion, sacrilege, false and antichristian ministrie,
and gouernment, obstinacie in all these sinnes, hatred of the
truth, and persecution of CHRISTES seruants, haue proued the
Church of ENGLAND not to be the true, but the malignant Church.
Therfore wee condemne no true Church as he accuseth, neither for
such causes as he surmiseth. Nor yet do wee, but rather God himself,
condemne them. Wee but discouer their sinnes, and shew them
their estate by the worde of God, refrayning and witnessing against
their abhominations, as we are commāded by that voyce from heauē.
Go out of her my people,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 18. 
                  that ye communicate not in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her
plagues &c.
               
               
                  
In the same loue, knowing this terror and irreuo
                     •
                  able decree of
the Lorde against the false Church and all her children, wee most
earnestly exhorte and instantlie beseech, euen so manie, to whom the
truth of the Lorde and their owne saluation is deare, to flee out of the
middest of her,2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. and to saue themselues from this peruerse generation,
and to deliuer euerie man his soule from the fierce wrath of the Lord,Acts. 2. 40.
according to the councel of the Prophets and Apostles of God.Iere. 50. &. 51. Chap. And
not to be stayed by the vayne persuasions,Zach. 2. 7 titles, and promises of these
false Prophets, of thinges present, as of the Church, worde, ministrie,
Sacraments &c, or deluded by their vayne hope of things to come, as
reformation, saluation &c, or deterred with their vayne threates of
schisme, heresies, daunger, persecusion &c, from obeying the voyce of
God, whilest he yet speaketh and calleth vnto you, and offreth grace,
lest you despise the acceptable tyme of the Lorde, the day of his saluation,
and he sweare in his wrath that you shal not enter into his rest for
your disobedience, and then hereafter your flight be in the wynter
or on the Sabboth, when the wrath of God is come vpon you, and
there be no meanes or way to escape. For the vaine boastings of these
Prophetts of things present, and promises of things to come, reade
Reuel. 18. where the Holie Ghost sheweth their Church to become the
habitation of Diuells, the prison of euerie vncleane spirit, the cage of
euerie vncleane and hatefull birde, howsoeuer she boast her self a
Queene; to be no Widowe, to see, no sorrowe. For this in one day shal
her plagues come, death, and sorrowe, and famine, and she shalbe
burnte in fire, because the God that cōdemneth her is a mighty Lorde.
You there reade how neither her shipmasters, marchantmē, Princes, or
multitudes, shalbe able to reserue her wares, or preserue her from the
burning of this heauenly fire; No lamentation cā ease or diminish her
sorrowe and grief: No balme can cure her woundes, no arte reforme
or repaire her breaches, nor arme or power shield her from the weight
of that great milstone that shall presse her and all her children to the
deapth of hell, being lifted vp ouer her by that mightie Angel. The
Lord hath pronownced & his decree is irreuocable. The voyce of his
heauenlie harpers & musitions, the psalmes & spiritual songs & laudes
of his Saincts, shal neuer be heard in her anie more: the skil and art of
any heauenlie artificer, worckman, or builder, shall neuer be found in
her any more: the voyce of the milstone that grindeth foode for the
soule, shal neuer be heard in her any more: the light of a candle, muchlesse
the burning lamps of Gods spirit, shal neuer shine in her any more
to keepe out darcknes: the heauenlie and comfortable voice of the
Bridegome, and of the Bride; of CHRIST speaking to his Church in
instruction, exhortation, comfort, of CHRISTES Church speaking
to him in prayers, prayses &c, shall neuer be heard in her anie more.
Let her Ship-masters then, her Mariners, Marchantmen, Enchanters,
and false Prophets vtter and retayle her wares, deck and adorne her

with the skarlet, purple, gold, siluer, iewels, and ornaments of the true
Tabernacle, Let them in her offer vpp their sacrifices, their beastes,
sheepe, meale, wyne, oyle, their odors, oyntements, and franckencense,
Let them dawbe and vndershore her, builde, and reforme her, vntil
the storme of the Lordes wrath breake foorth,Ezech. 13. the morning wherof al
these Diuines shal not foresee,Esay. 47. much-lesse eschue or withstand the terror
therof,Prou 1. 24 &c. vntil the wall and the dawbers be no more. But let the wise
that are warned and see the euill, feare and depart from the same, so
shall they preserue their owne soules as a praye: And the Lorde shall
bring them amongst his redeemed to Sion with praise, and euerlasting
ioy shalbe vpon their heades, they shall obtaine ioy and gladnes, and
sorrowe and mourning shal flee away.
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               AS WE shewed in these 4. PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSIONS, in ye worship,
cōmunion, ministri & gouernment of the Church of ENGLAND,
the causes of our separatiō from their publick assemblies in this
estate; So at their instance we in like maner set downe vnto them our
purpose & intent, what we now indeuored & meant to doe, in certaine
breife Articles. Of those transgressions & chardges, how this Champion
hath defended & cleared their Church, by that which hath bene
written now on both sides may appeare. The articles of themselues
are so iust and holie, as no Diuel can impugne or denie▪ no man of religion,
conscience, or shame gaynesay or resist anie one of them: yet
hath Mr. GIFFARD (instigated by the spirit of vayne-glorie and envie)
in a singular zeale enterprised to answere and confute them all, as you
may see in his first writing. The cauills and vanitie wherof, as also his
vniust suspitions, calumniations, reproches against vs thervpon being
layd open in our first reply vnto him, so far hath he bene from desisting
to sporne against the prikes, to sclander, accuse, and rayle on vs, or
to take a more sober and christian course for the discussing and deciding
these controuersies betwixt him and vs, as he hath burst forth
yet into furder malice and madnes, blaspheming vs in euerie sentence
of this his second answere to these our articles with such store of contumelious
and odious wordes, as if that corrupt synck of his heart
could neuer be emptied, the malice of his minde and venome of his
tongue neuer satiate or vttered against vs, euen now as fresh as if he
had not rayled enough or all in his writings and booke before. But
seing his reproches want both profe and truth, they deserue neither
refutation nor repetition. Neither can they preiudize our holie profession,
or vs, or anie way iustifie or excuse him before God or man;
but rather add to his feareful accompt before God, and euidently shew
vnto all men, by what spirit his heart and pen were guided at the writing
of these contumelious answeres. Wherein yet most strange it is,
how he could take occasion to 
                     •
                  ade vs with all this vituperie, for propounding
these godly articles & holy duties, especially hauing shewed
withall such iust causes of our separation from their assemblies. But
let vs nowe take a viewe of his reasons wherewith he hath disproued
our endeuours in these articles, and see whether they be of
as great validitie, as those wherewith he hath approued their assemblies
in the transgressions by vs obiected. The articles, answeres, and
our former replie I will not here againe insert, referring to the copies
aboue.
               HIs cauilling & trifling about these wordes [CHRISTES Kingdome] in
his former answeare to our first Article,
                  Article 1. together with his hypocrisie
in seeming to labour for CHRISTES gouernment, were by vs layde
open in our replie: as also his vniust surmize, that we should hold
that CHRISTES Kingdome could not be in anie, except they had that
his outward ecclesiasticall gouernment, was there by vs fullie answered

and cleared. He nowe in his second answere as vaynely endeuoreth
to cleare himself of his former cauilling and hypocrisie, by denijing
the necessarie sense of his former wordes; and by propounding
two newe questions vnto vs instead of answering our two questions
vnto him, which we rather expected. Let the indifferent reader
iudge whether to all intendement he made not CHRISTES Kingdome
only inwarde, and his ecclesiasticall gouernment but an help
for the preseruation of his inward kingedome, in the first parte of his
former answeare, howsoeuer afterward he vouchsalfed yt to be a part
of his Kingedome. Vnto his contumelious blasphemous questions
we answere, That when he shall haue dulie conuinced vs of heresies,
or schisme, to haue condemned a true ministrie, to haue falslie accused
a true Church, then we will confesse our selues to be more then
ignorant and rash: till then all these reproches shall but followe his
other sinnes into Gods sight to hasten his owne iudgment. Our
questions also whilest they remaine vnanswered, (and as we thinck
vnanswerable,) must still lay open their bad estate and hypocrisie, In
that whilest they remaine antichristian Ministers in the false Church,
And haue so longe continued vnder Antichristes yoke and ecclesiasticall
gouernment, they cannot be said either to haue or sincerelie to labour
for CHRISTS ecclesiasticall gouernment, as he and they then pretended.
And here by the way I must drawe two dangerous positions,
and in the same obserue great contrarietie in Mr. G. vnto himself.
First, in that they and he pretended to laboure, and had so longe sued
to Parliamentes for CHRISTES gouernment or discipline, they confesse
the absence and wante of the same: For a fond thing it were to labour
and sue for that which alreadie they haue. Then if they wante
and haue not CHRISTES ecclesiasticall gouernment; and receiue an
other ecclesiasticall gouernment ouer their Church and ministrie
which is not his, yt must needes be a false and antichristian gouernment:
And so they and their whole Church by their owne confession
stand vnder Antichristes yoke and gouernment, and haue not CHRIST
their King to rule ouer them, except they can shew that CHRIST
doth rule in his Church by Antichrists officers and gouernmēt, which
I thinck will be harde to prooue: and then are they and their Church
in a bad estate. As also Mr. G. herein contrarie to himself, who erewhile
affirmed this present gouernment of these BBs. their hierarchie
and Courtes to be the true ecclesiasticall gouernment of Christ. And
that they were not antichristian. Furder he hath obserued & reserued
one special poyncte in our replie. That the kingdome of God may be
in the scattered faithfull, which as yet haue not the ecclesiasticall discipline.
This we graunt & neuer denied: although Mr. G. whatsoeuer
he now say, then surmized the contrarie of vs, or ells had smale cause so
vehemently to haue refuted this opinion. But we are content that yt
shall now remaine to his vse.
               
                  
THe second article of seeking Gods true worship,Article. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   he granteth that al
men ought to approue. Being demanded in our Replie, howe then
he cōtinued in idola
                     •
                  rie, a Minister of idollatrie, prophecied in BAAL,
and pleaded for BAAL; Or howe he could approoue our article, and
yet condemne vs of schisme and heresie because we forsake their false,
deuised, idolatrous worship, and seek to worship God according to his
worde. To those he answereth that when we haue proued their worship
to be idolatrie, and that they prophecie in BAAL, and pleade for
BAAL, then he is content that men take vs for no schismatickes or hereticks.
And this I hope we haue in this treatise donne, hauing shewed
their worship to be deuised by man, idolatrous, abhominable, their
ministrie to be as false, diriued from and exercised vnder their BAALS
these Bishops; And how earnestly Mr. G. hath pleaded for these Baals
their throne and all the enormities proceding from the same, these his
owne bookes shall testifie. So that I hope we are now cleared with all
men, and shal hereafter be spared of him, from the odious accusations
of schisme and heresie.
               THe.Art. 3. 4▪
                   3. 4. and 5. Articles (after Mr. G. his diuision) tending to one effect,
and begetting but the same cōmon difficulties, may together
be handled. The chief controuersies about the same are these two.
1. Whether these publicke assemblies of their parishes be antichristian
& Babilonish. 2. Then whether the Church consisting but of priuate
men, may in this estate erect & establish amongst them such offices &
ordinances of CHRIST, as he hath instituted to the ministri & gouernment
of his Church. Of the first, both Mr. G. & I haue now lardgly set
downe our mindes: so that I leaue yt as fitter for iudgment, then anie
furder discussing in this place; The reasons here repeated. 1. How their
Churches are from antient discent within the Couenant. 2. And how
their Church in this estate hath begotten and nourished children vnto
God, as the Martyres, haue bene alreadie often propounded and vrged
by him in his book. I hope by that time he hath wel considered of the
heresies, sacrilege, and absurdities of the first, and of the vayne assumption
and litle consequence of the second, as they are set downe in our
answeres, he shal haue litle cause to vse them so often, or to vrdge them
with such confidence & bitterness. For when Mr. G. shal prooue, that a
Nation so highly apostatate & fallen from the faith, so deiply plunged
into such execrable idolatries, abhominations, & hardnes of heart, as in
the papistical corruptiō, stil continueth in this estate a true established
visible church, within ye outward Couenāt of God, so far as we may &
ought to iudge by his worde, thē doubtlesse for mie part I wil graunt yt
a sounde Maior proposition. And if he shal bring the church of Rome for instance
in the Minor, I must then yeild to his argumēt. Because y
                     •
                   church
at Rome was sometimes rightly gathered, established, and within the couenant.
Yet euen then I suppose yt wil be harde for him to make the
like assured proof, that euer her daughter of England was rightly established

into that christiā order & within the couenant: But I doubt rather, and
by her present estate iudge,Reu. 17. 2. that she was among the childrē of her Mothers
fornications,Deut. 23. 2. and therfore without the Couenant. To the second
reason it will also hardly followe, that because some faithful men haue
bene called to some generall knowledge of God and of Christ in this
estate, and because they in their ignorance cotynued in the same estate,
that this should therfore iustifie the outward estate of the Church
which the worde of God condemneth, or prooue yt in this estate the
true established Church of Christ, when they haue nothing aright according
to Christes ordinance, as we haue prooued in this treatise, whether
I refer for a more ful answeare of these reasons, hasting to the second
poyncte.
               Wherein I before shewed how God commandeth al his faithful seruantes
(of what estate or degree soeuer) to flee out of Babilon the false
Church, and being escaped not to stand still, to remember the Lord a
far off, to let Ierusalem come into their minde, to goe vp to SION, to
seeke out and to repaire vnto the place where God hath put his name.
To seek the Church and the kingdome of CHRIST, to take his yoke
vpon them, to assemble together in his name, with his promise of direction
and protection; and with his authoritie to establish his offices
and ordinances amongst them, giuen by him to the ministrie and gouernmēt
of his Church vnto the worldes end, there to leade their liues
together in all mutuall duties, in his holie order, faith, and feare. Now
as we shewed all perticular and priuate men whosoeuer, to be called
out of the false Church from confusion, and out of the world from
dispersion, vnto the true Church vnto order. So likewise shewed we,
that all these faithfull persons whosoeuer, were as yet but priuate men
at their first comming out of the false Church and gathering together,
none of them being as yet called to anie ecclesiasticall office
or function in the Church, yt not being as yet established into order.
Wherevpon we concluded, and still of necessitie enforce, That
seing God calleth all his seruantes out of confusion, and will not
haue them liue in dissipation or disorder, but only in this order which
he hath prescribed in his worde; And hath giuen his Church aucthoritie
and commandement, to erect, retaine, and obserue this order
vnto the worldes end; And seeing in this estate the Church
now consisteth but of priuate men; That therfore the faithfull being
as yet but priuate men, ought by the commandement of God to assemble
& ioyne themselues together in the name & faith of Christ, and
in all mutual dueties orderly to proceede according to the rules of the
worde, to a holy choice & vse of such offices & ordinances as Christ hath
ordayned to the seruice & gouernment of his Church. And sure were
not Mr. G. as forgeatful as he is ignorāt of the scriptures, he could not
but haue seene by the verie phrase the first proposition confirmed by
many scriptures; The secōd by many prophecies of this general defection;
and if not verified in these present tymes, yet he cannot denie but

some former not long sithence. Therefore whilest he fighteth with
the conclusiō, he but spurneth against the prickes, bewraieth the folly
of his owne heart, and no waye auoydeth or defendeth the daunger
therebie.
               His best answeare to this reason, or rather manie reasons summed
vp, is (as he thinketh) to tourne it away by two questions, and by manifold
contumelies against our poore persons; or (to say as yt is) by inaudible
blasphemies against the Church of God: likening the assemblie
of the faithful gathered in the name, and ioyned together in the faith
of Christ, proceding to th'establishing and exercise of Christes or dinances;
to the rebellious company of Corath, Dathan, & Abyram, to a rowte of mutynous
prentices assembled without leaue of their Prince to chuse a
Lorde Maior &c. His first question is, That if all were priuate at the
first comming out of the false Church, who they were that caled them
together? Or whether their cōming together doth make them otherwise
then priuate? We answeare, that for anie thing we can see, or may
iudge by the word, they were but priuate men that first caled them out
of the false Church, and that caused them to assemble together, howsoeuer
peraduenture indued with more excellent giftes, and more rare
graces then other. Furder, that being thus assembled they ceased not
to be priuate men, vntil they were lawfully caled vnto some true ecclesiastical
office in and by the Church. Yet al this notwithstanding, the
Church in this estate nowe consisting onlie of priuate men, ought to
procede to a right choice of Ministers &c, according to the commandement
of God. His next stombling-block or question, is; VVho should
ordaine these Pastors & Elders. And whether we euer read of any ordained but by Apostles,
Euangelistes, Pastors, Teachers, and Gouernours? And vvhether that power vvas not at the
first deriued from th'extraordinarie Ministers to the Ordinarie. To this we haue aboue
answered, where wee entreated of the ordination of the Ministers of
England, and here againe doe answere. That the Church had alwaies the
power to chuse and ordaine their owne Ministers, wherevnto yt ought
to vse the most fit instruments, whether these Pastors, Teachers, Elders
(if such be to be had) or ells where they be not to be had to vse the fittest
meanes and instrumentes that God exhibiteth. For this power of
ordination is not (as Mr. G. and the vnruly cleargie of these dayes suppose)
deriued from the Apostles & Euangelistes vnto the permanent ministrie
of Pastors and Elders, neither belongeth yt by anie peculiar right to
their offices and persons segregate from the Church. But yt is giuen
by Christ and properlie belongeth vnto the Church, wherevnto their
Ministrie and persons also belonge, and are by the Church to be vsed
vnto this worck as occasion is administred. And thus (if a vaile were
not laid ouer Mr. G. his heart at the reading of the scriptures) he might
finde that those cheife builders the Apostles & Euāgelistes themselues vsed
this power, not to take yt from the Church, but therein to assist the
Church, As we reade Act. 13. Where the Church being assembled vnto
fasting, prayer, and other holy exercises, yt is there said also, that they

layde handes vpon the Apostles, and sent them out, though wee doubt
not the Church did it by some one or moe of the Prophets or Elders,
                  Act. 14. 26. 27. and
vnto the Church at their returne the Apostles declared the successe of
their iourney. In which iourney also, the Apostles ordayning or rather
helping the Churches to chose and ordaine Elders,Act. 14. 23. the word cheirotonesantes
lifting vp handes, whereby the whole action of chusing & ordeyning
is expressed, doth clearly giue the propertie and right therof vnto
the Churches, and not vnto the Apostles only. who, as also the Euangelistes,
did but instruct, direct, help, and assist the Church herein, and not
pluck away this power from the Churches. Likewise the rules for the
choice and ordination of Ministers in the Epistles to Timothie & Titus, and
other places of ye scripture, as Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. Eph. 4. are not perticularly
directed or committed to the cōsistorie of Elders, as they cal yt, sequestred
& withdrawen from the Church, but vnto the Church consisting
of al the members. which is therevnto to vse (as in all other publicke
& waighty causes) such meet & fit instruments as the Lorde affordeth
and apoyncteth. Neither is this action of approbation, and acception,
or ordination of Ministers so seuered or disioyned from the election as
these men dreame: Or so tyed to the office or persons of the Elders, as
the Church might either not ordeyne, or not ordeyne without Elders.
And aswel might y• Elders take into their hands the elections, excommunications
&c, of the Church, as the ordinatiō in this maner; Againe
if the ordination were thus of necessitie tyed to the handes & office of
Elders, how thē should the Church after this general defection & corruption
vnder Antichrist (where al the starres were fallen to the earth,Reu. 6. 12. 13. 14. and
the whole shape of the heauen departed away as a booke wrapped vp,
a new & strange ministry brought out of the bottomlesse pit with him,
as wee reade) euer recouer or haue anie true▪
                  Reu. 9. Ministrie againe in this
world? where should they haue true Elders to ordaine their Ministers?
In the false and papisticall Church there can be no true Elders or Ministers
of Christ The true members of Christ can not be made the members
of that Beaste, the members of that Harlot. The true Ministers of
Christ cannot belong vnto, neither can administer in the false Church,
but only belonge vnto and administer in the true stablished Church of
Christ. But now in the tyme of this general apostasie and papistical corruption
Mr. G. cannot shewe anie where anie true visible established
Church vpon earth, with the true ministrie, gouernment, worship, sacraments,
ordinances of Christ, howsoeuer in a singular conceipt of his
owne, he haue pleaded the Church of Rome, and her daughters in their
deipest apostasie, to be in the true Church, they and al theirs within the
Couenant from antient discent, to haue the true seale therof, namelie
baptisme, there giuen vnto them all. Yet here not being to be founde
anie true christian Ministers or Elders, who shal now ordaine their Ministers,
at their first comming out of popery & departing from the Romish
Church? For nowe we wil transfer the case from our selues (who
are so odious in Mr. G. his eyes as no good thing wilbe allowed in or to
vs) vnto themselues.
               
                  
When they first came out of poperie were they then Corah his companie,
an assembly of mutinous prentices? Were they not all priuate
men? Or which of them was otherwise? Ordinary or permanent Ministers
they could not be: because there was no true visible established
Church vpon earth, and for a thowsand reasons that might be drawen
frō the forgery of their office, administration &c, in ye popish Church.
Extraordinarie Ministers, Apostles, or Euangelistes the could not be,
because (as we haue aboue proued) they were ceased after ye foundatiō
was once laide, and ye work rightly erect according to the true paterne.
Neither finde we to any one established Church, the offices of Apostles
or Euangelistes perticularly giuē, belonging, or erected in anie of them
as a ministri of contynuance. Neither had these mē the caling due to
Apostles & Euangelistes. Nor yet did they chalendge or execute anie
such office, as appeareth by their writings and profession, where they
would not haue bene ashamed of ye ministry God had caled them vnto
to haue published themselues such as they were. But if so be they had
donne this, yet their practize being so discrepant from the Apostolike
paterne & worke of the former Euangelistes, we might not at any hand
accept them for such. Thus then at their first comming out of the false.
Church, and gathering together, they were but priuate men. What
then, were they hereticks & schismaticks for departing out of the false
church? were they cōuenticlers, sectories &c, for assembling together?
were they vsurpers and intruders without caling, mutiners, rebels against
Princes, and abridgers of their power, aud withdrawers frō their
obedience & allegeāce for dissuading the people frō the false Church,
the yoke of Antichrist & al their detestable idolatrys and enormities, for
caling them to the communion of Sainctes, to procede to the choice of
Ministers, and to the practize of Christes Testament as the Lorde shoulde
reueale vnto them? Al this they did, or at the least professed & endeuored
to doe. Yet I hope Mr. G. that so buildeth their Tombes and garnisheth
their sepulches, wil not thus say of them, howsoeuer he rayle
on vs that doe and protest to doe no whit more. If they were faithful
Christiās, such are we: holding the same commune faith with them &
al Sainctes, not (as yet) truly chardged, or duly conuinced of any one error
contrary to the faith. They left the false Church, so do we. They
assembled & ioyned together in the faith of Christ, so do we, or at ye least
would doe. They were but priuate men, and so are we. They herein are
not iudged to haue offended God or their Prince, and why should wee
for the same? They herein did more, then to come out of Babilon, They
did more then sweepe or repaire the house, for they proceeded to the
choice & ordination of Mi
                     ••
                  sters, to the building of the house &c, Or
ells Mr. G. by his owne reasons must condemne them, the Church, and
al the ministrie of the land, yea of all Europe, as wel as vs.
               IF he alleadge that though they left their popish administration, and
to administer in the popish Church, yet they left not that ministerie
they there had; Wee answere (as we haue answered) that they receiued

no better ministrie in the false Church, then the false Church could &
did giue them; neither could they bring anie better out, thē they there
receiued. But the true ministerie belongeth not to the false Church,
neither cā the false Church ordaine true Ministers. Againe whoseuer
leaueth the publick administration of his Ministrie, forsaketh his Ministrie:
But they left the publick administratiō of their ministrie. The
like argument may be drawen for leauing the Church whereof they
were Ministers. And yet to stop his mouth farder, if the Martyres and
first witnesses had a true ministrie, such also haue sondrie of vs whom
he termeth Brownistes &c, yea by so much a better, as he holdeth the
ministrie of the Churche of England better then the ministrie of the
Church of Rome. Yea if Mr. G. his owne ministrie be good, such & the
same haue diuers of vs had, and are as yet vndisgraded, otherwise then
by vnfaigned repentance of so detestable a Ministrie. So that if they
lost not their ministrie by forsaking the Churche they receaued it of,
and exercised it in; why shoulde Mr. G. be so seuere to iudge others,
that may make the same plea? If they saye they left not the Church of
Rome but the corruptiōs therof, what should let vs to alleadge the same
nowe against them, if we would stand vpon those shiftes & doublings,
But we vse no such coloured excuses, neither relye vpon mens persons
and doinges. wee haue the expresse commandement of God for our
warrant of al those thinges we doe, or refuse to doe, and stand to make
proofe & tryal therof by the same word, gladly submitting our selues,
al our actions and whole faith vnto this tryal. Although also we haue
and vse th'examples and practize of these faithful, that first came out
of the popish Churche, and enterprised the erection and practize of
Christes Ministrie & ordinances amongst themselues, according to that
measure of knowledge God gaue them. Whose errors though wee
shunne (neither will mainetayne our owne when they shalbe shewed
vs, cleauing onlie to the true paterne of Gods word) yet make we their
presidēt a bulwark for vs against these cauilling enimies; Who must,
for doing these thinges either condemne them, and so themselues, and
their whole Church and doings with them, Or ells with no shame or
iustice condemne vs of heresie, schisme, sectes, presumption, intrusion,
rebellion &c, for doing the self same thinges they did, or at the least
professed to doe; yea for doing them better & nearer the true paterne
then they did. If they in this doing neither intruded without caling,
nor presumed aboue their caling, Why are we iudged for this doing to
doe both? yea for this saying, to haue put an halter about our neckes?
Doth not this our hange-man & executioner (that with ioye speaketh
of the chaynes and fetters, that these bloodie Bishopps lay vpon the
faithful seruantes of Christ, for leauing their antichristian yoke and seking
Christs heauenlie gouernment) put with the same hande, and trise
the halter about these godlie Martyres neckes, yea about his owne and
his Lorde Bishops neckes, and al the Ministers neckes of the land? that
haue no other defence for their vngodly ministry and doings, then the

erroneous practize of these godly Martyres, who (as hath bene proued)
were but priuate men at their first cōming out of popery & erection of
these Churches, as we now be? Mr. GIFF. had not best shew vs manie
of these trickes of legier du main, lest he ensnarrle & choke himself with
the same halter he would cast about our neckes, and kil himself & his
whole Church with that sharpe weapon wherwith he would kill vs at
once in his furious moode. For sure if it be vnlawful for priuate men
to assemble, and in this estate to proceede to the election & ordination
of Ministers, then by the same lawe was it vnlawful for them so to doe.
Then are all these Bishops & Ministers priuate men, vsurpers; no more
true Ministers, then such a one as the mutinous prentices should make
Maior, were a true Maior. Yea let me goe furder, if the Church consisting
of priuate men, may not in this estate erect and ordaine Christes true
ministrie amongst them, then is there no true ministri vpon earth, neither
euer can be, vntil God raise vp new Apostles and Euangelistes, and
buildeth a new Church vpon a new foundation, which shalbe when
vve haue a newe Christ. And then Mr. G. shal haue his dreame. For he
saith that vvhen God vvill haue his vvorke donne, he vvill raise vp extraordinarie
workemen thervnto. But where read Mr. G. this positiō,
if not amongst the Anabaptistes? Sure he neuer founde it in the new Testament,
vvhere vve haue the minde of Christ, a perfect foundation, an
accompleat ministrie,Deut. 30. 11 12. 13. 14. vntil Christes comming. So that we neede not to
say in our heartes, who shall ascend vp to heauen for vs, or descend
from heauen vnto vs,Rom. 10. 6. 7. 8. or goe ouer the sea for vs to bring or teach vs the
Commandement of our God, when the worde is so neare vs euen in
our mouthes and in our heartes for to doe yt. Therfore when Mr. G.
shall make his proofe of this assertion, And shew his warrant and promise
that God will now raise vp to his Church extraordinarie worckmen,
and that til then no priuate men ought to proceede to the choice
and ordination of Ministers, but to tarye and expect this promise of the
Lorde: Then surelie we will acknowledge him no false Prophet, no
Anabaptisticall dreamer, and that we haue presumed ouer far vpon
the Lordes authoritie and commandement giuen to his Church vnto
the worldes end, to chuse and ordaine his ministerie, and to practize
amongst them whatsoeuer he hath commanded. But nowe because
this were to bring Christ from aboue, and againe from the deade, because
also we haue Gods direct commandement to goe out of the false
Church; being come out, to assemble and ioyne together; and being
so ioyned, to proceede to the erection of his ministrie and practize of
his ordinances, and haue his aucthoritie & promise of blessing to these
proceedings, because we haue the practize of Christes Apostles in planting
the primatiue Churches, and now latelie th'examples of such as
endeuored to build this Church they liue in, we dare not by any vayne
hope or threates of this false Prophet be drawen to neglect so great saluation,
to continue either in apostasie or disorder, and to transgresse or
neglect the Lordes commaundement.
               
                  
THe next obiection against vs is drawen from an especiall obseruation
in our first Article, where we confessed the vniversal Church and
kingdome of CHRIST to extend to all such as by true faith apprehend
and confesse CHRIST IESVS, howsoeuer they be skattered, and wheresoeuer
dispersed vpon the face of the whole earth. Hence Mr. GIFF.
concludeth, that seing the faithfull may be in state of grace and haue
CHRIST their Kinge, though they liue not vnder that gouernment &
order that CHRIST hath established in and to his Church, therfore it
is not necessarie for priuate men to set yt vp. Sure this is a weake argument,
and not worth half the noting & obseruation he hath made
of yt: we must for all this denie yt: and finde no more consequent,
then if he had therfore concluded that the communion of Sainctes,
the ministrie and ecclesiasticall gouernment of CHRIST are not to be
sought of the faithfull, because some faithfull may be saued that liue
not in an established church, vizt: such as are in captiuitie, sicknes, age,
or in such times & place, as they knowe not where to finde one day of
the Sonne of man.Luk. 17. 22. &c. He might aswell conclude, that because God is
able & doth saue some in the false Church, Therfore priuate mē ought
not to forsake the false Church. God is able to saue some in dispertion
out of the established Church, Therfore priuate men ought not to
seek the established Church.
               THe last & greatest matter is, that we runne before the Princes commandement,
whose dutie it is to reforme Churches. Priuate men
might not so much as sweepe them, much-lesse build them. For this is
to erect a state & gouernmēt, because the power of the Church is both
publicke & greate. We haue aboue shewed, that ye Church hath Gods
cōmandement & authoritie alwaies, to erect Christes ministri & gouernment
amongst them. That the Church in this estate consisteth only of
of priuate men, neither are there anie true Ministers anie where to be
found vpon the earth: neither any extraordinarie Ministers to be looked
for, seing they are long since ceased. Therfore the Church in this
estate consisting only of priuate men, ought to erect this ministerie and
gouernment: ells should they also cease and neuer be had againe vpon
the earth: and so should there neuer be any established Church, ministrie,
Sacramentes &c, agayne in this world. yet here must be noted by
the way, that Mr. G. runneth too much vpō, and wresteth too far these
wordes [priuate men] when we speake of the Church consisting only of
priuate men. Now vnto his crimination, the Church hauing this cō
                  mandement
& aucthoritie giuen of God vnto the worldes end, we before
shewed him that no Prince might take it away, or without great
wronge hinder them from the performance hereof. yea that the seruantes
of God ought not to be staied from doing the cōmandements
of God, vpon anie restrainte or persecution of any mortall man whosoeuer.
For this we alleadged the examples and practize of the Apostles,
who then had bene guiltie of the same disobedience & rebellion,
if Princes in this busines had bene to be stayed for, or their restrainte

had bene a sufficent let. yea that persecution and the crosse of Christ
were vtterly abolished, if the Church and faithfull were not to proceede
in their dueties, vntill Princes giue leaue. We shewed also, that
the obedience and practize of Gods will was no disobedience or prei
                     •
                  
                  dize
to the Prince. That we attempted nothing beyonde our calling,
neither transgressed in our calling. We medled not with the reformation
of anie publick abuse either in the common wealth or in their
Church, otherwise, then by prayers vnto God, and godly exhortation.
We only according vnto Gods commandement refrained from their
idolatrie and other publicke euils, and assembled together in all holy
and peaceable maner to worship the Lord our God, and to ioyne our
selues together in the faith vnto mutual duties. This we shewed to be
the duetie of euerie priuate man that would be saued, to leaue the false
Church, and to seeke the true Church. And being thus assembled &
ioyned in the faith, we shewed it to be their dutie together to seeke that
ministrie and gouernment which Christ hath left vnto his Church, and
for the Church to erect the same.
               VNto the Apostles proceeding without the licence of Princes he
maketh a double answere. One in respect of the persons of the Apostles,
that they were furnished with a special cōmission and authoritie
from CHRIST himself to set vp his kingdome: which commission
and power the Pastors and Teachers successiuely receiued & deliuered
ouer to others, so that priuate men may not haue this power. The other
in respect of those Princes in the Apostles tyme, which were all
heathen, and therfore it had bene bootlesse to sue to them. But where
there is a christian Prince that holdeth the fundamentall poynctes of
the christian faith (though otherwise this christian Prince doe erre
in some matters of doctrine, or touching the rules of discipline) euerie
godly priuate man is to keepe a good conscience, not breaking the
vnitie and peace of the Church. But not to take publicke authoritie
to reforme.
               THese instances of the persons of the Apostles and Princes as they
are litle to the purpose, so doe they him as litle good. If the commandement
of God were sufficient warrant to the Apostles to doe
their worke, though al the Princes of the world resisted; then must
the commandement of the same God be of the same effect to all other
instrumentes, whom it pleaseth the Lorde to vse in their callings
to his seruice also, though all the Princes in the world should withstand
and forbid the same. For neither dignitie of the persons that
are vsed, make the commandement of God of more authoritie or necessitie
to be donne: neither yet the greatnes or the goodnes of the
persons that withstand this commandement of God, make yt of lesse
authoritie or necessitie. Onlie let the seruantes of God be sure to
haue the commaundement and calling of their God for that they
doe, and then they neede not feare the Powers that are placed ofRom. 13.
                  
of God for the praise and not for the punishment of the good. Our
question then is not whether priuate men may doe that which is not
their dutie, to which they haue no commanndement, as this accuser
surmizeth to bring vs into danger and hatred; But whether they may
not doe that which God commanndeth them, within the limites of
their caling. As to for
                     •
                  ake idolatrie and the false Church, to seke the
true worship of God in the true Church, though all the Princes of the
world, whether belieuers or infidels should forbid the same; And this
we affirme to be the duetie of euerie perticular person, whosoeuer forbid.
We say not now that priuate men may reforme the false Church,
abolish publick idolatrie, or depose a false ministrie that the Kinge
setteth vpp. This were to breake the boundess of their calling, to intrude
vpon the Princes office; and great cause had they then to feare,
for he beareth not the sworde in vayne. Againe, our question is not
whether it is the office and dutie of Princes to see abuses reformed
both in the Church and common Wealth (which we thinck no man to
be so ignorant or barbarous to denie, except the Anabaptistes▪
                   But vvhether
the Church ought not now amongst themselues freely to practize
CHRISTS Testament, either in erecting his officers and ordinances,
or in reforming or correcting anie fault or abuse that ariseth amongst
them, vvithout staying for the Princes licence: yea though the
Prince should vpon the paynes of death forbid. This we affirme to be
the dutie of euerie perticular Congregation,Math. 18. & 28. 20. CHRIST hauing therfore
giuen vnto each and all of them his sacred power and aucthoritie to
binde and to loose in earth, and to doe all thinges whatsoeuer he hath
commaunded them, vvith promise to be with them vnto the end of
the world. He hath giuen them the two edged sworde of his mouth
to cut downe all sinne, The mightie spirituall weapons of his worde
to bring in captiuitie euerie thought to the obedience of CHRIST,2. Cor. 10. to
to the ouerthrowing of all munitious reasonings and sublimitie lifted
vp against the knowledge of God, and to haue in a readines to reuendge
all disobedience. To cast sinne into the Epha, and the talent of
Gods iudgment vpon yt, and to remoue yt out of the Church with all
power and celeritie,I
                        ••
                     b. 5. with the vvinges of a Storke and the wynde vnder
their vvinges, and to lift vp the Epha betwixt the heauen and the
earth in the eyes of all men.Marck. 34. &c. CHRIST hath giuen this aucthoritie to
his seruantes whom he hath left in his house, and hath commanded
them all therfore to watche together.Rom. 16. 17. To obserue and avoide them
that cause anie diuisions or offenses contrarie to the doctrine that
they haue learned.Iude. 3. To contende for the maintenance of the whole
faith.Gal. 1. 8. Not to intermit or to be withdrawen from anie part of the
same by anie man or Angell, for persecution or anie thing that
man can doe vnto them: euerie where vvarning, instructing,
and exhorting his seruantes not to feare persecution for righteousnes
sake, to take vp and beare his crosse daylie &c: Likewise for the
neglect of those thinges God reproueth and stirreth vp the Churches

To repent and to doe the first workes, or ells he wil come against them
speedily, and remoue their candlestick.Reu. 2. 10 & 3. 10. &c To repent or ells he wil come
against them speedily and fight against them with the sworde of his
mouth, Commending those Churches that kept that they had, the
worde of his patience in persecution, promising them the Crowne of
life, if they remaine faithfull vnto the death: to make them that ouercome
pillers in the Temple of God &c.
               Mr. Giffard he is contented, that vnder heathen or popish Princes the
Church now may reforme or proceed in the practize of the whole will
of God, but at no hand where the Prince posesseth the faith in the fundamental
poinctes, though otherwise he erre and mis-leade the whole
Churche in some matters of doctrine, or touching the rules of discipline.
In these abuses and corruptions euerie priuate man is to keepe
a good conscience, but none to take publick aucthoritie to reforme:
Because these Kinges are principal members of the Church &c. What
cleare conscience any priuate man that yeildeth to these publick seene
errors or transgressions, Or the whole Church, whilest yt wittinglie
doth, or suffreth these thinges to be donne, can keepe, we haue aboue
shewed in the SECOND PRINCIPAL TRANSGRESSION. How expreslie
contrarie this leauened traditionall proposition of Mr. G. is to all these
Scriptures and doctrines aboue recited, is so euident to all men, as yt
needeth no furder or lardger refutation. If God haue committed his
whole worde vnto his Church, as the foundation of their faith and of
euery action they doe, commanding them to stand to the death for the
maintenance of the whole truth and the holy practize of the same; and
to cast out in his name and power all, that publicklie and obstinatlie
hold anie opinion, or that so commit anie transgression contrary to his
worde: If God for the neglect hereof haue menaced to come in iudgment,Deut. 13.
and exhorteth the Churches vpon the first discouerie hereof to
speedie repentance;Ier. 6. 8. 23 Howe can Mr. G. persuade the Churche to contynue
wittingly in open errors & publick transgression, or in this estate
promise them peace? The holie Ghost hath not set downe this as a
note of a true Prophet: Neither hath God promised anie peace to thē,
that wittingly contynue in any error or transgression, vntil they repent:
Doth not one deade flie putrifie and cause to stincke the whole oyntment
of the Apothecary? A litle leauen make sower the whole lumpe?
Wee would knowe of him therfore, whether that diuelish distinction
of fundamental errors and transgressions, and such errors and transgressions
as he holdeth not fundamentall (wherebie he turneth away the practize
of what part of Gods worde he lusteth, and iustifieth (or at the least
tollerateth) what open errors & publick transgressions of Gods worde
he lusteth) will excuse him, or anie that wittinglie breake the least of
Gods commandements? And whether the aucthoritie or christianitie
of anie Prince wil in that daye excuse before the Lorde anie man, that
hath at the Princes commandment committed, much more contynued
to committ, anie transgression, without vnfaigned repentance?

But if the least error be contrarie to true faith, the least transgression
sinne, and no knowen sinne or error to be committed or continued in:
howe can he persuade the Churche to commit or to contynue in anie
error or transgression? so highly to tempt and prouoke the Lorde?
And now to the poynct. we would know of him whether anie Prince,
much-lesse a christian Prince, may abrogate the commandement of
God, or take away that power and aucthoritie that God hath giuen to
the Church vnto the worldes end. If not, but that the commandements
of God remaine alwaies the same, and the Churche hath the
same power vnder a christian magistrate, that vnder a heathen, why
then yt ought not to proceede to the obedience and practize of Gods
worde, whether in correcting and redressing faultes, or in going forewarde
in the wayes of God as they are reueiled vnto them, as well and
freelie vnder a Christian Prince as vnder an heathen? Is it because a
Christian Princd is the principall and greatest member of the Church▪
why by so much the rather ought and the better may the Church doe
it, hauing now such a singular help and rare accomplement of so pretious
a member. Euerie true member is giuen for the help and comfort,
and not for the hindrance and hurt of the body: Wee may then
much better conclude, that the Church vnder a christian Prince may
procede with all freedome in the sincere practize of CHRISTES Gospel:
because he is a member of CHRIST & of the Church: then vnder
an infidel Prince, that is an enimie to CRHIST and to the Church.
               ANother reason he bringeth, whie the Churche vnder a christian
Prince may not reforme without his licence, or vntill hee will▪ because
it is the office of a christian Prince to reforme the Church, and
therfore the Church in taking such a publicke worke vpon them,
shoulde but vsurpe and encroch vpon his office. Because wee are so
apt to mis-vnderstand one an other, and to take words in too lardge or
straight a sense, it were good wee set downe what is meant by this reformation
here spoken of, before we proceede. Wee meane then by reformation,
to reduce all thinges and actions to the true antient and primatiue
paterne of Gods worde. This we graun to be the office and duetie of
the Prince to doe aswel in the Church as in the common Wealth. The
Princes eye may suffer no transgression of Gods lawe, he is to ouersee,
and see euerie one to doe their dueties in the office and caling God
hath placed them. Yet is this no preiudize to the Christian libertie
and power of the Church, no impediment to anie member therof,
but rather a singular preseruation of all dueties, and an excellent instigation
of them all to doe the wil of God in their calings. For in all
this here is no power giuen the Prince to restraine anie iore of the libertie
and power of the Church, or to with-hold anie one person from
doing the whole will of God in their caling: Much-lesse is here anie
power giue the Prince to drawe or compel the Church or any member
therof to the least transgression or error: yea when the Prince shall in

anie thing be founde contrarie to God, God is then to be obeyed rather
then man. And this is no disobedience to the Princes soueraigne
and supreame power ouer al persons and causes ecclesiastical or ciuile,
is no preiudize or impediment to the Church, or to anie member
therof, from doing the whole will of God in their calings: So in like
maner are not the proceedings of the Church according to CHRISTES
Testament, any derogation from or enchrochment of, the royal power
and prerogatiue of Princes, as this false Prophet out of the mouth of
Sathau woulde perswade: but rather a singular preservation and most
rare illustratiō therof. Whose reignes are neuer so glorious as when, or
glorious but when, God is worshipped and obeyed according to his
reueiled worde, and those most chearished and fauored, that are most
faithful therin. In the Church of CHRIST are al duties most faithfullie
taught, and no knowen transgression of anie knowen duetie suffred,
either to God or man. Howe then can Sathan himself say, that the proceedings
of the Church, or rather or Christ in his Church, are contrarie
to, or derogate from the royall power of Princes? They cannot be of
God that thus set at variance these blessed powers which God hath so
conioyned and contempered for the mutual help each of other, and
the seruice of his glorie. No it is the false Church and this antichristian
hierarchie that are preiudicial vnto, enchroch vpon, and vsurp the
Royall aucthoritie, power, iurisdiction, titles, honors, prerogatiues,
lads, palaces, pompe &c▪ of Princes. The true Church both knoweth
howe to obey the Lorde, and their Prince in the Lorde. They vsurpe
not the Princes office when they reforme anie publick fault in the
worship, administration, gouernment ecclesiastical &c, but execute
their owne office. For this is not the Princes office to doe in person,
but to commande the Church to doe it by such instrumentes as God
hath ther vnto ordayned. This commandment of the Prince doth
neither giue the Church more power, or make the action more lawful:
Neither doth the prohibition of anie Prince take away this power
of the Church that God hath giuen, or make the action that God hath
commanded more vnlawful. How then doth the Church more sinne
in doing these duties in reformation and correctiō of publick faultes,
and proceeding in the practize of Gods will, (which God hath commanded
to be donne by his Church) then anie priuate man sinneth,
when he correcteth anie fault in himself or in his family, or beginneth
to doe anie duetie (which he before neglected) without his Princes lycence?
Seing the Princes eye, power, and office extendeth aswell to ciuile
as to ecclesiastical dueties, aswell to priuate as to publick reformation.
yea the Princes licence in al Christian consideration, extendeth
to al godly duties & honest actions, euen to as many things either to be
donne or to be left vndōne, as the cōmandements of God extend vnto;
For he is the Minister of God for ye praise of them that do wel, and for
the punishment of them that doe euill. when the Prince resisteth or
suffreth not the worde of God to haue free passage, he sinneth & doth

not his duety. But this cā be no excuse for vs to cease to doe the wil of
God, or to intermit our duetie. If he drawe the sword and smite vs for
wel doing, that but augmenteth his sinne, and the blessing of God resteth
vpon vs that suffer for righteousnes sake. wee may not for feare
of persecution, or for the indignation of Princes leaue the commandements
of God vndonne. For that were with this false Prophet to mancipate
the lawe of God to the wil of Princes, and vtterly to abolish the
crosse of Christ out of the world, For Princes neuer punish mē for obeying,
but for breaking their hestes. Beastly then & hellish is the speach
of this mā, That saith, the Church refuseth the peace of their Prince,
and prouoketh him to strike, when they either reforme such faultes as
are in the Church, or proceed to doe such things as God hath commanded
them, though the Prince forbid and wil not giue licence. But
especiallie where the blasphemer is not afraid to say, that the Church
when it procedeth to the establishing and practize of Christes ordinances,
erecteth a state & gouernment of their owne. Doe they erect anie
thing of themselues, or that CHRIST himself hath not erected? Is not
this to accuse CHRIST of treason, because he saith he is a Kinge? And
his seruants of sedition, because they set vp his kingdome without the
licence, and against the will of Princes, though it cost them their liues
for the same? Is not this man a faithful seruant of CHRIST, a faithfull
subiect to his Prince that so reprocheth CHRISTS heauenlie kingdom,
reiecteth his ordinances and commandments to make them depend
vpon the wil of Princes, that so seduceth his Prince, and would drawe
her into battell against God almighty and his Church? Yea if to set vp
Christes kingdome in a christiā estate without the leaue or licence of the
Prince or state, be rebellion and disobedience, a derogation from their
sacred power, an intrusion into their high office, how then will he excuse
our Sauiour CHRIST himself? who being borne in the flesh, but in
th' estate of a subiect and a priuate man (hee neither being Minister of
the Temple, nor magistrate in the commō Wealth, and that in a godly
state vnder faithful magistrates, as himself acknowledgeth) did notwithstāding
by al meanes in deuour to set vp his kingdome, preached,
baptized, caled al men vnto him, although the whole state and gouernours
earnestly sorbad and resisted him. Those gouernours were to be
obeyed, and he himself was obedient in al things, as became a true subiect.
If it be answered that he did it by the especial commission and
commandment of God; Wee readilie graunt that a sufficient warrant
vnto him before God and men: as also vnto all others that haue the
commandement of the same God for that they doe. But what is this
to our question? Whether the Church or such as haue aucthoritie
from God, ought to be stayed from doing the commandment of God,
by the inhibition of a christian Prince or state? Wee graunte it high
sinne and intollerable presumption for anie that haue not aucthoritie
of God, to enterprise to doe anie thing in the Church, whether with or
without their Princes licence. But if yt be vnlawful for the Church, or

such as haue aucthoritie of God, without the licence of their christian
Prince or gouernours, Then verilie our Sauiour & his Disciples offended
herein, who stayed not to doe the will of his heauenlie Father for
the threates & laying wayte of the Rulers. Furder, if it be vnlawfull &
derogatorie to a Christian Princes office & aucthoritie, for anie to doe
Gods wil in their callings, and for the Church to proceede in the practize
of CHRISTES Testament, though against his wil, Then is it also vnlawfull
vnder a heathen Prince. For the christian and heathen Princes
haue one and the same aucthoritie, office, duetie, to see all thinges
both in the Church and in the commune Wealth donne according to
the wil of God. There is the same reuerence and obedience (though
I say not the same bowells of loue) due to the heathen, that is due to
the christian Prince in regarde of their office. The heathen Prince
shall answere aswell as the christian for the neglect of their duetie, for
the abuse of their power and place. And thus also if Mr. G. doctrines
be sownd, the Apostles likewise sinned against the aucthoritie of Princes,
in erecting CHRISTS kingdome, and the Churches in proceeding
to receiue the same, and to doe the wil of God, without their Princes
licence, and notwitstanding their prohibition, Seing that the vnbeleeuing
Princes haue the same place, office, and aucthoritie, and ought
to haue the same obediene in respect thereof, that christian Princes
haue, or ought haue. And sure most diuelish and detestable are these
two published and generallie receiued opinions of these contrarie factions
of our English Cleargie men; The one giuing out, that the forme
of ecclesiasticall gouernment prescribed in CHRISTS Testament, practized
by the Apostles and primatiue Churches in the tymes of persecution,
is not nowe necessarie or tollerable vnder a Christian Prince.
The other giuing out, that those ordinances and that gouernment
which they acknowledge CHRIST to haue instituted and prescribed
to his Church vnto the worldes end, may not nowe, vnder a christian
Prince, be put in practize by the Church, if he forbid the same, as
they might, ought, and were vnder heathen Princes by the faithful in
all ages. With the one of these blasphemous positions, the Prelates defend
their outragious gouernment, and all their antichristian proceedings.
with the other, the tyme-seruers these counterfeite Reformistes,
colour and defend their perfidie, not witnessing vnto and practizing
the Gospell of Christ, and their seruile subiection to the gouernment of
Antichrist. By which positions both sides most impiously abrogate the
heauenlie gouernment and ordinances of Christ in his Church, and intollerably
seduce and abuse that most blessed and comfortable ordinance
of the christian Magistracie. Both of them hereby shut vp the
kingdome of heauen against all men, neither entring themselues nor
suffring such as would, but holding the whole land vnder the enormous
gouernment of Antichrist in the wrath of God, whose iudgment
therfore sleepeth not.
               
                  
YEt remayneth an other dangerous error which Mr. G. hath picke
                     •
                  
out of a certaine answere made by me HENRIE BARROVVE to three
greate Bishops of this land  where being demaunded whether the
Queene may make lawes for the Church which are not contrarie to
the worde of God. I (seeing wherat they aymed: vzt: to maintayne al
these popish reliques, deuises, tromperies &c, wherwith their worship
& Church is pestered) answered (as I remember) to this effect. That
no Prince, neither al the mē of the world, not the Church yt self, could
make any lawes for the Church, other then CHRIST hath left in his
worde: But I thought it the dutie of euerie Prince (especially of euerie
christian Prince) to enquire out & renewe the lawes of God, and to stir
vp all their subiects vnto more diligent & careful keeping of the same.
This answere Mr. G. after his accustomed maner pronownceth Anabaptisticall,
de
                        •
                     ijng and cutting off a great part of the power God hath giuen vnto Princes: and
a great part of Discipline. Proof of these chardges he maketh none, except
we must take these two assertions in way of proofe, vntill he bring better.
The first is, that CHRIST hath giuen general lawes or rules for matters
of circumstance that be indifferent & variable in the perticulars,
and so to be altered and abolished, as the peace and edification of the
Church shall require. And therfore that Princes with the Church are
to ordaine & to establish such orders by those generall rules, as may afterward
for iust cause be altered. Mr. G. his antecedent here is so general
& extendent, his conclusion so doubtful and indefinite, taking such
roome to himself in both to escape & euade, as except he drawe nearer,
and in his next booke take the paynes to set downe what he meaneth
in his proposition by [general lawes & rules] and by [matters of circumstance]
And in his conclusion, what kinde of orders those [such orders] are
the Prince should ordeine & establish, he shalbe so far from distressing
or convincing me, as I shall neuer perceiue where he is, or where about
he goeth. This when he shal doe, then I shall knowe what to answere
him. In the meane tyme I confesse manie thinges of circumstance as the
tyme & place of assembling, what scriptures to reade or to interprete,
how longe to continue in prayer or prophecie &c, to be left in libertie
at the discretion of the Church, to be wisely vsed according to their
present occasions, to edification, order, decencie. Of these & sondrie
such like, the Lord in wisedome sawe it not good to set downe positiue
or permanent lawes for all Churches and tymes: because the present
estate and diuers occasions of all Churches, yea of anie one Church,
are so diuers & variable, that prescript definitiue lawes could not be set
of such things in perticular for the space of one moneth, without manifold
incōveniences & great preiudize to the Church. Of such things
then as the Lord for these wise endes & waighty causes hath left in the
libertie & discreation of the Church to be vsed and ordered according
to the present estate and occations therof &c, may man make no prescript
positiue lawes in perticular, to enioyne therby this forme, this
tyme &c vpon all or vpon anie one Church, without restrayning that,

which God hath left at libertie; yea without cōtrolling & contrarijng
the wisdome of God (which no doubt is most excellently perfect euen
in the least thinges) and without manie other grieuous inconveniences
& intollerable preiudize to the Church of God. Much better therfore
should the Prince prouide for the Church to see them duly to obserue
the lawes that God hath giuē, and to vse their libertie aright, Or where
they transgresse in either of these, to reprooue or to correct accordingly,
then to make and enioyne new lawes of his owne deuising, so contrarie
to the libertie, yea euen to that order & discipline CHRIST hath
giuen: which cannot be ioyned vnto, exercised, or preserued by anie
other lawes then God hath made; as by due examination in perticular
of the least or best thing they thus deuise and enioyne, will appeare.
CHRIST that great Architect of his house hath left vs a most absolute
& exact paterne of all things belonging therevnto. vnto which no humane
deuise can more be added or ioyned, then heauē & earth can be
commingled. Wherefore we may by better right esteeme Mr. G. a corrupter
of CHRISTS discipline, or rather a fordger of a newe discipline,
for making & bringing in new lawes into the church other then Gods
lawes, Then he may pronownce vs denyers & cutters off of CHRISTES
discipline, for allowing and receiuing no lawes for anie action in the
Church, but Gods lawes.
               HIs other reason is this. Princes ought to establish the whole christian
religion, to punish idolaters, wicked despisers, heretickes, schismaticks,
blasphemers  But this cānot be donne but by lawes made
& established: Therfore Princes ought to make lawes for the Church.
And I in denijng this, denie a great part of that power, which God hath
giuen vnto Princes. His first proposition is no more then I haue professed
in mine answere. If he vnderstand his second proposition of other
lawes then God hath made, I then denie yt as most false & vntrue.
whereof vntill he make proofe, he hath not obtayned his purpose, nor
convinced mine answere. And therfore til then must withdrawe his
triumphant conclusions. I hold that Gods true religiō is only founded
vpon, and established by his owne holie worde & lawes, and not vpon
or by mans lawes: And that the Prince may aswel make a newe religion,
as newe lawes for religion. Furder, as I hold in Gods worde sufficient
rules & directions for all actions of the Church: So hold I in the
same most iust iudgments & meete punishments to euerie transgressiō.
So that the Prince can no way better advance & establish true religion
then by, yea can no way establish by but yt, the promulgation, and due
execution of Gods lawes: calling all men of all degrees to the hearing
& sincere practize thereof in their calings, and dulie punishing al such
as transgresse the same after such order proclamed & established. God
hath incommended & inioyned the booke of his lawe to all Princes,
therbie the gouerne both the Church & common Wealth in al things,
as we plentifullie reade Deut. 17. 18. 19. & 5. 32. & 29. 9. &c. and 4. 6. Ioshu. 1.
8. 1 Kinges. 2. 3. 1 Chron. 28. and in sondrie other places. The Kinge is not

made the Lord, but the Minister of Gods lawe, to which he is bownde,
and for the transgression therof shall answere vnto God, as anie other
person. He is placed in the seate of God, and the worde of God committed
vnto him, not to alter or neglect the least part thereof, Not to
make newe lawes, but to keepe & see obserued those lawes which God
hath made. Greate then is their ignorance that thincke not that God
hath giuen sufficient instruction & direction in his holie worde for all
actions of his Church. And greater their wickednes that knowing
this, dare giue mortal men leaue to make lawes for Gods Church. If
they say that the Princes lawe must be consonant to Gods lawe, Then I
answere they haue warrant & groundworke in Gods worde. which if
they haue, then are they Gods & not mans lawe: For Gods lawe extendeth
as farr as the equitie of his law extendeth. But what lawes soeuer
haue no warrant of groundworke in Gods worde, those cannot be said
to be cōsonant to Gods wil, because there we haue the whole minde of
CHRIST, and so are to be auoyded as superfluous, burdenous, and contrarie
to Gods word, how necessarie or expediēt soeuer they may seeme
to humane wisdome.
               AND now let the christian reader iudge what cause Mr. GIFFARD had
to pronownce this mine answere to the Bishopps question Anabaptistical,
when I therein acknowledged the whole lawe of God, the place, office,
and whole power of Princes that God hath giuen them, all which
the Anabaptistes vtterlie denie. Or with what conscience he hath
chardged vs as seduced by Brownes writing, And to hold that
Princes ought not to compel their Subiectes to the true
worship of God. Neither ought to reforme the
Church. All which sclanders this
my answere
which he here endeuoreth to confute, refuteth to his face:
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            A BREIFE REFVTATION
OF Mr. GEORGE
GIFFARD HIS SVPPOSED CONSIMILItude
betvvene the Donatists and vs, wherein is shewed
how his Arguments haue bene and may be by the
Papists more iustly retorted against himself
and present estate of their Church.
            Mr. GIFFARD a man inexpert in discerning the times & seasons,
hauing long skirmished with vaine titles, and assuming
the matter in question, vndertaketh now to deface all
Gods inuiolable ordināces with a certayne dialogue betwene Augustine
and the Donatistes, and to make CHRISTS ordinances and our persons
odious as he supposeth to all men therby, to heale the wounde of the
Beaste and dawbe vp the whole rable of the Romish Ministerie, lawes,
worship, gouernment, which al men of anie iudgment know to be receiued
from the Pope. He taketh vpon him to compare vs to the Donatistes,
and without considering the causes & persons from which and
from whome they separated, as also the times and ages, He sclanderously
wresteth some perticular doctrines about separation, and wee
therevpō must needes be Donatistes. But we haue learned that we ought
al to take heede to the most sure word of God, and that he that speaketh
ought to speake as the wordes of God. and to this lawe and this
testimonie if anie speake not, it is because there is no light in him. We
refuse vtterly to be drawen into this kinde of fruictlesse strife, and will
not intermedle either with the Donatistes not Augustines persons, nor yet
with their causes or maner of pleading them; but only shewe in a fewe
breif notes how vniustly this godlesse quarrelous man hath dealt herein,
euen in the thinges he hath set downe, leauing the better veiwe
thereof to such as will bestowe their tirne that waye, and those to due
consideration, and vnpartiall triall by the worde and spirit of God.
            AT his first entrance into his discourse, he denyeth vs to be Christians,
saying, all that are gathered by CHRISTS doctrine only vnto
Christ alone as yt is written one is your Doctor, euen CHRIST, Math. 23. are only by
his title called Christians. But we are wicked Schismatickes, therfore
we must be called by the first Aucthors or chief maintayners thereof.
To which we answere that Mr. Giffard & his Collegiates haue giuen out
for vndoubted doctrines, that such as hold the fundamental doctrines
of iustification by faith in Chr
                     •
                  st alone, are to be holden Christians; and
to cleare our selues a litle further, we seeke to be gathered and ruled by
Christs doctrine only, and by Christ alone as our King, Priest and Prophet,

yea therfore we suffer, because wee wil not denie this faith. But by his
owne argument he hath turned himself and their whole Church and
Priesthood out of the folde, whiles they are not gathered vnto CHRIST
alone by his doctrine only, but maintaine Antichristes lawes & orders;
his seruantes they are to whome they gyue themselues to obey.
            To proue his former reason, hee aledgeth the custome of the olde
time in Gods Church and the scripture yt self Reuel. 2. where the Nicolaitanes
are mētioned, Arians of Arius, Montanistes of Montanus, Nouatians
of Nouatus, Pelagians of Pelagius, Donatistes of Donatus. The doctrine we
do graunt, that wicked Heretikes & Scismatikes may iustly be named
of the aucthors and leaders; But heresie and schisme we denye to be
maintayned by vs: And you hauing neuer conuinced vs of heresie,
neither can proue your Churche to be the true apparant established
Church of Christ, must gyue accompt for your malitious sclandering of
vs, and numbring vs among such hatefull heretickes as the Arians &c.
If wee be Christians, then must you gyue accompt for this offence,
which is not only done to vs, but to his truth and to himself. You affirme
in an other place that you had rather gyue accompt for to much
charitie shewed to the wicked, yea for iustifijng an euil man, then for
cōdemning the iust, being iguorāt that the woe is pronounced against
both. But here you haue forgottē your self herein, and by sclandering
the truth you know what danger you incurre Luke. 17. 1. 2. Math. 18. 7.
            He draweth the original of Brownisme (as he termeth yt) from Donatus,
and sayth Browne was the cheife renewer therof, yet afterward saith
ther was a Church of them eighteene yeeres agoe in London, wherin one
Bolton was a cheife doer, whose fearful end is not forgottē. For the original
of our profession we fetch yt from Christ and his Apostles & practize
of the Church in the Apostles time, as all the Martyres from time
to time haue done, according to the light they sawe. For Donatus and
Browne they must answere for themselues. We are buylt vpon the foundation
of the Apostles & Prophetts IESVS CHRIST being the chief corner
stone; Other foundation then this can no man lay; wee offer our
workes to be tryed hereby. It is Mr. Giffard himself that so wel may remember
the fearfull end of Bolton, for yt is true that (as I haue heard) he
stood against your ministerie for Cappes, Surplus, Crosse, with many
other your Romish trynckets, as I haue heard your self haue done; after
reuolting and become a conformable member of your Churche,
hanging himself, yt is a remembrance for Apostates. Donatisme (saith
he) in old time about twelue hundreth yeeres past was condemned, as
approued detestable schisme & heresie: The Brownistes and Donatistes shal
appeare to agree together as two peices of cloth that are of the same
woll, same threed, colour, working, and bredth. If this man had read
with iudgment the holy scripture as concerning the general defection
& Apostasie, with the encrease & decrease of Antichristes kingdome,
hee would haue blushed to haue entred this comparison. For the Donatistes
wee haue not to deale, yet if the right eye were not blinded, hee

might haue considered better the Donatistes causes of separation and
ours, and it woulde not haue seemed so like together: the times, causes,
persons from whome and maner of their separation must be better
weighed, which because he hath taken in hande to perticulate afterward,
I wil only shew one here wherin we make such a difference, as al
his other are but trifles. The Donatistes held still the same worship, gouernment,
offices, officers, entrance, and the same administration of sacraments
&c, that the other did from whome they did separate, and as
it seemeth receiued whole Cities and Contries to be the Church as before;
so that their separation was more like the sectes and schismes amonst
your selues; you from the Papists, the Martinistes from you, the
forward Predicants (as they are called) from the Bishops, then any such
separation as we by the cōmandemēt of God make from false Church,
false ministerie, false Sacraments, Antichristian gouernment &c, vnto
the true ordinances of Christ: Heretickes and Sectaries make schisme;
but this true conuertion from the euill to the good, from the false to
the true fewe, finde yt; although it be the plaine commandement of
God. Reue. 18. 4. and the way to saluation Acts. 
               
                  •
               . 40. For indeed it is not
enough to forsake the false wayes, but to seeke the antient wayes of the
Lord, and to walke in them, that wee may finde rest to our soules. Mr.
Giffard his setting downe of the causes of the Don
                     ••
                  istes separation, bewrayeth
himself to seeke onlie the defamation of the truth, without
shew of reason. First he sayth that in the persecutions by the Romish
Emperours manie being (as they were then termed) proditors and traditors
of the Bookes of God, the holy vessells their bretheren &c, there
was a rumor that such offences had b
                  •
               ne committed by some. Nowe
(saith he) there came certeine Bishops from Numidia to Carthage a famous
Citie in Africa to ordeyne a Bishop, and found Cecilianus alredye ordeined
and placed in the seate &c. Thus farre I trust it will be granted me his
peeces of cloth are not both of a woll; for the difference, I refer to the
obstinate & heynouse trāsgressions wherwith we haue chardged these
parrish assemblies. Further the Brownistes (as he in the spirit of blasphemy
termeth them) approue of no such Bishop or Bishoprickes, no such
seate nor ordination as they came about.
            Well, the Bishops of Numidia were wroth that they could not ordeine.
In this poinct his threeds are not proportionable. Wee thrust not our

                  •
               elues beyond our lyne in these actions, neither do any thing in the
high matters of God through ambition: These things are all founde
amongst your selues, the kingdome through enuie diuided; for al your
chiefest strife hath bene, whither a Sinode of parrish Priestes, or a Lord
Bishop should create your Priestes: this being your principal contention,
the one side must needs be Donatistes. He procedeth and saith, thes
                  •
               
Bishops of Numidia ioyned together, and layed a crime vpō 
               
                  
                     •••
                  cilianus; they
say his Ordeyner delyuered the holy books & was a Traditor; wherevpon
they would haue Caecilianus reputed no Minister of CHRIST, but the
sonne of a traditor. In this Mr. Giff. discerneth not colours: The Brownistes
               
separate not for anie one mans person through envie, they shewe
other causes whie they repute your whole ministerie to be a false and
Antichristiā ministerie and not the true ministerie of the Gospel; they
allowe not ordination by one man but proue the offices, entrance, and
administratiō of your ministerie to be wholly Antichristian; and herevpon
wee repute them no true ministerie of Christ. For the triall of this
matter (saith hee) there was no assemblie of learned Pastors to iudge in
this case according to Christs ordinance, but furor, dolus, tumultus did beare
the swaie. Here Mr. Giffard saith it is Christs ordinance that an holie assemblie
should iudge in such cases. Howe will this agree with the office
of your Arch-Bishop. Further (as a mā ignorant in the scriptures,
he would haue the people excluded in their Synods. The holye Ghost
setteth before vs another order. Acts. 15. And for a christian trial of our
cause, wee haue euerie way sought it by supplication and all maner of
wayes, but could neuer obteine it: But your whole broode haue not
only refused it, and shewed al exquisit tyrannie vpon our bodies so farr
as they had powre, by close emprisonment, rending vs from our trades
and families, and al ordinary meanes of liuehood, but set their Priestes
eueriwhere to crye out in their pulpits, gyuing out lyes and sclanders
openly & secretly, in Articles, in printed Bookes, in priuate complaints
and false suggestions, wherin Mr. Giffard hath not bene behinde, yet neuer
vouchsafed vs free conference, nor haue or can conuince vs of
crime or error maintayned by vs. In whom then is this furor, dolus, tumultus
now found, but in these godlesse Priestes, that cānot abide the light,
because their workes are euill.
            HE procedeth now to shew what tryalls were granted the Donatists before
the Emperour, and by his apointment. Wherein there wil be
found litle consimilitude betwene our estate and theirs: for these Antichristā
Bishops vsurpe such powre, as the magistrate may not cal their
actions into question, shutting vp the benefit of the common lawe against
vs, suffring no Iurie to passe vpon those they murther in pryson▪
nor no bayle for anie they commyt. I meru
                  •
               l you could set forth these

                  •
               rialls alowed the Donatistes without blushīng, and make such hauock
amongst Gods children now without anie trial granted them.
            Further it is rehersed how these men the Numidian Bishopps and their
companie condemned all Churches through the worlde, as wrapped
together in the guyltines of those Churches of Africa, al polluted, al vncleane,
al fallen from the Couenant of God through such as had committed
sacriledge and were not separated: They said there was no true
ministerie, no true Church, no true sacramentes. To which wee answere,
that wee are not to pleade the Donatistes cause; but setting their
persons and causes aside, I trust it will be granted me, that the def
                  •
               ctiō
& Apostasie vnder Antichrist was generall, in which defection you wil
stil remaine in obstinate confusiō not only retayning that ministerie,
worship, lawes, offices &c, but reiecting Christs prescribed and for euer
commanded in his Testament; which your ministerie, lawes, worship

& gouernmēt we are able to prone false & Antichristian: So that there
is no consimilitude in the Donatistes separation and ours in this poinct;
their matter being about sinnes cōmitted in the Church, where there
was lawful office, worship, gouernment as they did not denie; and our
cause being about the not hauing of a Church gathered vnto CHRIST
from the Apostasie, from all them that remaine vnder that Apostatical
ministerie, gouernment, and worship, and in that confusion we haue
warrant to separate Reuel 18. 3. 4.
            Now to the poinct: These Numidian Bishops taught, that so manie
as would saue their soules, must separate themselues. Mr. GIFFARD wil
graunt I doubt not, that if there were no true Church, true ministerie,
nor no true sacramentes, it was tyme to come out from amongst them,
and haue no cōmunion with the tables of Diuells, as the Apostle reasoneth
1 Corint. 10. If the Donatistes separated from the true Church, we
do not so; but we separate according to Gods cōmandement from the
false Church, false ministerie, worship, and Sacramentes. Proue your
Church therfore a true Church, or our separation is iust and holy, and
the only way to saluation. In the meane tyme let the Papist reason thus
with you: You separate from our Church, therfore you are Schismaticks,
Donatistes, Heretickes. If Mr. GIFFARD say no we hold you the
true Church, to haue the seales of the Couenant, to hold many doctrines
of faith, to be the Temple of God, then we may lawfully hold
you still Daughters of that damnable harlot, murderesse of the Saintes
so often accursed, in whose cupp of fornication you are dru
                  •
               ken. If
he say separation from the false Church is a commandement of God,
and that they haue made a kinde of separation, then all are not Donatistes
that make a separation, but the cause must be considered from
whome, for which, in what maner, and to what we separate or ioyne.
            Where he alledgeth that Augustine thought it an vnequall thing to
condemne as they did at the first all the world for one mans sinne;
namely, for the sinne of this Caecilianus, and they therevpon tooke on
hand to affirme, that as the Church of Carthage and the Churches elswhere
in Africa were fallen from God by the pollution of the sacriledge
of Caecilianus and others, so all other Churches in the world were destroyed
by the like sacriledges committed in the dayes of persecution.
There is litle consimilitude betwene the Dona
                     ••
                  stes and vs therein: For
we separated not at the first for one mans sinne, neither do since condemne
the Churches we know not▪ but for the whole ministerie of
CHRISTS Testament, worship, lawes and ordinances▪ which you reiect,
deface, and peruert, standing subiect vnto & administring in the Apostaticall
orders and offices of Antichrist, do wee separate. But to answere
your perticulars as you haue filled the printe with rayling, lying,
and vnfrui
                  •
               tfull and impertinent matters, were but to trouble the
Reader and maintaine strife. You bring a storie of their comparison
betwene Caecilianus & Iudas-Iscariot whether should be greater sinner, a repetition
of Caluines Institutions, histories out of Augustine, Tertu
                     •
                  lan &c▪
               
which your labour, as yttendeth but to a shadowe of defence of your
rayling, so I will leaue their writings and you to the iudgment seate
of God, where euerie one must answere for himself, and breiflie proceed
to your perticular accusations falsly fathered vpon vs most of
them.
            THus we see (saith he) that the Donatistes departed disorderly out of
the Church, not condemning yt for anie poincte of doctrine, for
therein they did not disagree. Herein then we cannot be compared,
till you haue prooued your parish assemblies the true Church; and we
holde that you haue poysoned all the fountaines of sincere doctrine,
and peruert the whole Testament, and turne away the practize thereof
by your damnable false expositions, yea that you teach not one poincte
sincerely. Againe, where you say afterward that you will affirme the
worship in the Churches from which the Donatistes separated as corrupt
as yours, and here say they agreed in all poinctes of doctrine, we wonder
what your make your worship to be some things indifferent, as reading
for prayer mens writings, for scriptures homilies for interpretation,
but no doctrine conteined in your worship.
            And where you affirme that the Donatistes cryed out all was polluted,
because such as reuolted from the faith in time of persecution▪ returned,
and were againe reco
                  ••
               ed into the Church. you know we hold no
such doctrine, but all that God gy
                  •
               eth grace to returne by repentance
ought to be receiued, though no Apostate 
                  •
               uer to beare office in the
Church: yet such we take to be wholly purged in the blood of CHRIST
by repentance, which your parish assemblies neuer did. But this (setting
their persons aside) we take to be an vndoubted truth of God, that
where no separation is made from Idolatrous prophane Atheistes, Heretickes,
tyrannicall persecutors, nor no couenant entred by the faithfull
vnto the obedience and orderly practize of CHRISTES ordinances,
but a generall commixture with the world in sacriledge, in false worship,
vnder a false ministerie, such assemblies are no true Churches orderly
gathered or established.
            Now looke saith he vpon the Donatistes of England. Antichrist hath
bene exalted according to the prophesie of Paule; he hath sat in the
Temple of God &c. This man by his whole former discourse & present
Argument (it semeth) herein chiefly compareth vs to the Donatistes,
that as they made all their quarrell for Caecilianus his vnmeetnes for his
office; so we make our quarrell for that Antichrist reigned, or doth
reigne (as h
                  •
                after expoundeth it) in the Church of God: wherein he
affirmeth, that they which submitted or stand still in subiection vnto
his decrees, iurisdictiō, ordinances, ministerie, are yet notwithstanding
the true apparant Church of God. First we answere, that we take not
the word [Antichrist] to be vnderstood of one mans pe
                  •
               son, but of all
the falsly called Fathers of the Sea of ROME, and more generally of
all that exalt themselues aboue the ordinances of CHRIST and his
Church, establishing their owne deuises in place thereof, or giue life

vnto the image of the Beast; for if the same markes of pride, blasphemie
and tyrannie, erection of a strange ministerie, lifting vp themselues
aboue CHRISTS Testament, ordinances, and worship, be sound
emongst your spirituall Lords in England, we see not but Antichrist
spoken of by Paul may be also found amongst you. Now if Mr. GIFFARD
had considered Caecilianus his estate (who at the hardest was but
vncapable of that lawfull office, and to that lawfull administration, as
it was on both sides supposed, and concerning the outward order or
maner lawfully ordeyned) there can be no comparison betwene him
and Antichrist. And for Antichristes sitting in the Temple of God,
Mr. GIFFARD must know, that manie times the Church is called the
Church, not because yt remayneth still vnder the outward couenant,
but because yt sometimes did so: yea and at the first creeping vp of
that man of sinne, while the iniquitie wrought in a mysterie, yt was
the Church out of which he sprang, and in which he sometimes sat.
The holy Ghost giueth vs then hereby to vnderstand, that this Antichrist
who should change the holy ordinances, should be an Apostata,
he should be neither Turke nor Pagan, but the bottomlesse pit should
be opened by him in more subtile and strange delusions; out of which
smoke all your ministerie is proceeded. But when he had changed
the ordinances, destroyed euery greene thing, caused all high and
low, rich and poore to receiue his marke in their hande or foreheade,
and suffred none to buye and sell which would not fall downe and
worship him, the sunne now couered with sackcloth, the Moone turned
into blood, the starrs fallen from heauen, the true worshippers
murthered if any one stood vp, Gods curses threatned to all that worshipped
the Beast or his image, or receiued his marke in their hand or
foreheade; we hope this man will not say yt was now the apparant
Church of God, lest he cōdemne not only the scriptures, but al whome
God commanded to come out of her, calling her the mother of fornications,
the harlot that sitteth vpon many waters, hold of all vncleane
spirits, cage of all vncleane and hatefull birdes, confused Babell
&c. So that if Mr. GIFFARD had anie salt of grace, he would better
pervse the booke of Reuelations, which with all the prophesies of the Prophets,
of CHRIST himself, and of his Apostles, make manifest this generall
Apostasie and defection vnder Antichrist, and not now tell vs a
tale of Caecilianus. Doth he not see in the whole Booke the false Church
& true lyuely described? the one worshipping the Beast, the other following
the Lambe; the one persecuted, the other persecuting in most
bloody murder of the Sainctes.
            Well (saith he) but Antichrist is disclosed by the glorious light of the
Gospel, his damnable doctrine, cursed idol
                  •
               trie, and vsurped tyrannie,
are cast forth of this land, the true doctrine of faith is published &c.
First we must here demaunde, whether these assemblies were then
the true Church when they were ledd by those damnable doctrines,
and lyued in that cursed idolatrie, bowing downe to the Beast, and

persecuting the Sainctes. Secondly, as we are not vnthankfull for the
abandoning of the POPES person, supremacie, with much of his damnable
wares, we demaund of you what you thinke of those persons
which set opē his shoppes againe, keepe his Courtes, and exercise like
vsurped power and tyrannie that was before. But to answere directly,
Antichrist is not discouered in your assemblies, his dānable doctrines,
cursed idolatries, vsurped tyrannie, are not cast forth, the doctrine of
faith is not sincerely published. Againe, what is al this to the prouing
of a true Church, a lawfull ministerie, true worship, and holy gouernment
of CHRIST. Your parish assemblies were receiued from the Popes
hand, without anie conuersion by repentance or orderly gathering by
doctrine into any communion, the Popes ministerie set ouer them, the
worship, though a litle changed out of latine into english, some of
theirs left out, but al yt remayneth either takē frō his Portesse or mens
deuises, these assemblies still gouerned by those Courtes, Officers and
Canons, that before. What place hath now Christes Testament amongst
you? how is Antichrist discouered, or his damnable wares cast forth? Is
it not made subiect to these Antichristian ordinances, ministerie, worship,
gouernment? It is not limited, stinted, and aportioned, no further
to be opened then to vphold these execrable orders, idolatries, sacrileges?
yea is not only the bare name therof vsed as a stale, and doctrine
therof peruerted to the deceiuing of the people in this estate? Moses law
was read euerie Sabboth day in their Synagogs, when they crucified
CHRIST: But you should haue proued you had such assemblies, such a
ministeri, such a worship, such a gouernmēt, as the Gospel prescribeth.
Being then the same assemblies, contynuing in false worship vnder the
same ministerie, gouernment, al the Atheistes, Papistes, Hereticks, Antichristian
officers &c, in one cōmixture that the POPE left, we may wel
affirme you to remaine stil the marcked seruantes of Antichrist, not
speaking here how many Antichristes are here exalted: leauing the
damnable doctrines, cursed idolatrie, false preaching of the Gospell, to
our lardger discourse in due place.
            But now Mr. GIFFARD beholding these things, that they haue made
no separation, nor drawē the people vnto the ordinances of the Gospel,
is compelled to runne backe againe to iustifie the Church of ROME,
and to maintaine that these assemblies were the true Churches of Christ
in the deepest defection vnder Antichrist: The Apostasie hauing invaded
the Church, yt contynued euen then the Tēple of God in which
Antichrist did sit, and that the very Idolators were sealed with the seale
of Baptisme, professed CHRIST in some poinctes rightly, their childrē
from antient discent within the Couenant, the ministeri so far remayning
as yt was the authentick seale delyuered by them; the Brownistes
not vnderstanding the scripture, thus in mad furie lyke blynde hypocrites
condemne &c. Let vs reason a litle more coolely, rage will not
serue to carie the matter. We will here take it granted that your parishes,
ministerie &c cannot now be proued the Church and ministerie

of Christ, except they were so in the time of poperie. We see further how
wel the Gospel is opened or Antichrist discouered with you, whē such
a famous Prophet hath not learned to reade the mysterie writté in that
Womans forehead, which the holy Ghost recordeth to be this [grea
                     •
                  e
Babilon the Mother of whoredomes and abhominations of the earth] Reuel. 17. Againe, the
scripture saith Cap. 14. If any man worship the Beast & his image, and receiue a marke
in his forehead or on his hand, the same shall drincke of the wine of the wrath of God. Who
wil Mr. Giffard make this Woman, if not the Church of Rome sitting vpō
the people, tongues, and nations that were seduced or are seduced in
this Apostasie. And howe hath he read the scriptures that saith, the
seales of the Couenant belong to open blasphemous Idolators & their
seede? God saith, hee will punish the transgression vnto the third and
fourth generation: He saith nay, though they be the childrē of Idolators
and contynue in their Fathers steppes, they ought to haue the seals
of the Couenant. Againe, if he say the seale of Baptisme in the false
Church belongeth vnto that adulterous seede, howe wil he denie that
blasphemous sacrifice and bread God, against which so manie witnesses
haue gyuē their lyues, which is plainely denijng of Christ to be come
in the flesh, and imagining him a fantastical body to be in euery place▪
How can Mr. Giffard yeild them one Sacramēt, and not the other? Fu
                  •
               
               ther,
how ignorantly he speaketh of the Couenant, and of a Sacramēt
made by that ministerie, it were too long to discusse. Wel, in al this he
hath forgotten his comparison betwene the Donatistes and vs; they had
no such controuersie with Caecilianus: but now pervse one of Mr. Giffards.
The Church of papacie in the deepest defectiō was the visible Temple
of God, hauing the true seales of the Couenant. I then reason thus:
The Church of of Ge
                     •
                  eua, Scotland, lowe Contries, France &c. haue separated from
the Church of Rome which is the apparant Church of God, (for none
haue the true ministerie & the true authentick seales of the Couenant,
but the true Churche) Therefore they are Schismaticks, Donatistes,
Brownists, Hereticks. Againe Geneua, Scotland &c, condemne the Church
of Rome by separating from yt; therefore they do also condemne the
Church of England, which approueth of and communicateth with the
Papistes. Moreouer howe wil he answere this: Her Ma•ie. hath expelled
the Pope, his ministerie, his doctrine, and idolatrous worship; therfore
she hath expelled the ministerie and worship of the true Church:
And what followeth by Mr. Giffard his collections think you? they that
reiect the ministerie of Christ, reiect Christ himself.
            But these Brownis
                     •
                  es condemne the reformation by Magistrates &c.
No, it is a false sclander: We only put difference betwene the reformation
by the Magistrates sworde, and the reformation by doctrine; and
he is a false Prophet that either goeth about to set these at variance, or
confoundeth them. The Magistrat suppresseth the euill within the
Church & without the Church in their Dominions by bodily punishmēts
in equitie, and defendeth the godly. The ministerie of the word
gather
                  •
               th, guydeth, ordereth &c, a people vnto and vnder the true ordinances

of Christ, by the Word and Spirit: The Prince may and ought
suppresse all false vvorship, false ministerie, idolatrous assemblies; and
proclaime and commaund true worship, orderly assemblies, true ministerie
&c. But the workmanship hereof is spiritual, by doctrine &c,
to be accomplished in due order according to the rule of the word. Stil
wee vrge you therfore to shewe vs this gathering, ordering, and gouerning
of a true Church in these parrish assemblies, by the word of God.
In the meane time you bestowe but your oyle, meale, and your whole
ministerie and guystes to dawbe vpp Idolatrie, confusion, sacrilegde.
Neither doth the word [reforma
                     •
                  ion] agree to your Church, for cursed is
he that buyldeth the walles of Iericho, not one stone of Babel wil serue for
a foundation.
            What comparison is there then betwene your reformation, and the
reformation by Ios
                     •
                  as; shew the perticulars, we wil answere: Ells it shall
suffice that he sacrificed the Priestes of BAAL vpon the Altar, reduced
the people to the true ministerie and ordinances of the Temple; If the
Priestes did not this according to Gods worde, then they were guyltie,
and to be punashed by his sword. So that these false Prophets, Inchanters,
counterfeit time-seruers (which extol her Mati• for hauing grāted
the freedome of the Gospel, true ministerie, true worship, gouernment
&c, and yet themselues do misleade the people in a false way to pe
                  •
               dition)
shall not only lye open to the Magistrates sworde when God shall
put in their heart to execute his wil, but answere before the Lord for al
this confusion, sacriledge, Idolatrie, and filthines maintained by their
deceitful tongues. I do not pleade to haue them put to death, because
they neuer knew or prof
                  •
               ssed the truth; but to haue their false offices
abolished, and they compelled to some lawfull calling in the Church
or common wealth, as they should be therevnto founde meete, and be
lawfully called.
            Wee are not deceiued then in imagining that you woulde make vs
belieue the Princes did compell them to be a Churche which were no
Church before, without any orderly gathering, guyding, and ordering
of them by Christes lawes, worship, ministerie, and ordinances; for wee
deny yt your parrish assemblies were in time of popery true Churches,
or haue nowe forsaken all false worship. Proue your asseitions, and
what discipline belongeth to the false Church iudge you.
            
               Of the pollution by communicating with open sinners.
               WHere hee maketh the cause of our separation, and (as hee calleth
it) our accusing of these parrish assemblies to be vtterly fallen
from the Couenant of God, to be for that they are polluted with communicating
with open sinners, he mistaketh, and (I feare) purposly fal
                  
                     •
                  ifieth
our minde & writings; for we haue added to this an obstinate &
wilful retayning of al sortes of prophane as members of your Church,
gyuing them the Sacraments &c. But as I haue donne before so must

you here take my answere, that vve deny these parrish assemblies to be
true Churches, or to haue anie power or aucthoritie to cast our any according
to Christes ordinance; so that wee cannot reason vvith you as to
make the controuersie of open sinners in the Church, but as a confused
assemblie, not being euer gathered vnto Christ, or guyded by his ordiances.
We know that in the true Church are & shalbe opē sinners,
yet ther are rules & lawes by due censure to bring them to repentance,
or els to cast them out if they remaine obstinate in anie open grosse
sinne, of which things we wil not enter into discourse with you, denijng
you to haue eyther true Church, or power to redresse abuses in your
parrish assemblies.
               And where he demandeth vvhat order of discipline wee haue obserued
in our separation; We haue learned that no other censures belong
vnto the false Church, then powring forth the vialls into the ayre, waters,
sunne &c. For this wee haue the direction and commandement
of God Reuel. 16. & 18. 6. Againe, where should we finde your Synod of
Pastors in the whole tayle of the Dragon: you haue no such order as
you prate of vnskilfully; your L. Arch-B. or Ordinatie can teach you
otherwise then plead for Synods of Pastors. For anie Christiā or equal
triall either in free conference by the Scriptures, or triall by the cōmon
law, we haue vpon the dispence of our lyues long sued for it, and cānot
obtaine anie as vvee haue said, and finde nothing but furor, dolus, tumulius
amongst your broode.
               Now after his former discour
                     •
                  e, he will from poinct to poinct proue
vs to agree with the Donatistes. First (saith he) the Donatistes did accuse and
condemne the Churche and ministerie of the Churches most falslie.
And I say (saith he) the Brownistes are as false accusers as they, and condemne
as iniustly in all crimes. Here are bold and sore chardges; but
Mr. Giffards▪
                   bare word wil not stand. The Donatistes cause was not about
the orderly gathering of a true Church, but for the casting out of the
vnworthie: not about the office, entrance, or administration of the ministerie,
but about the sinnes of such as were in that office: So that if
Mr. Giffard would looke againe of the cause, he should finde no cause to
keepe this stirr as vpon a stage to no end or edifijng. Wee haue often
told him in our former writinges, that our matter is not about offenders
in the Church, but about the beeing or not beeing a Church. In
the meane time he handsomly layeth vpon their owne filthines saying
companies and swarmes of drunckardes, gluttons, whoremasters, couetous
worldlings, greedie vsurers, extortioners, oppressours, bribers,
defrauders, lyers, backbyters and sclanderers, envious hateful and contentious
persons, swearers and cursers are suffred and admitted to the
Lords Table; this saith he in manie or in most of their parrish assemblies,
And many of their ministeri such. Where admit them a Church
in his owne cōceit, let him ad now this more which is as true; that they
haue no power to redresse these euils by due censure, for that they thus
cōtynue after they haue bene long & oftē reproued for this sacriledge,

and we are bold to pronoūce the Priest as the people, a dēne of theiues,
a cage of vncleane spirits, as the harlot that receiueth all commers, cast
together into Iesabels bed.
               Hee further confesseth that the threatnings of the Prophets against
Israel are due vnto them; Whereby hee confesseth these assemblies not
to be the Churches of God: For all the Prophets that prophesied against
Israel in the defection, pronounce her not to be the Churche of
God; reade Hosea. 1. &. 2. Ieremie. 3. Ezechiell. 23. But saith he, might not the
Donatistes haue pleaded that there were manie wicked people & wicked
Ministers in those Churches from which they separated. We answere,
that is not questiō; For first we denie you to haue anie Church orderly
gathered vnto the ordinances, worship, gouernment of CHRIST,
which they did not: And againe we haue not to reasō what they might
haue excepted against those assemblies or ministers, but what they
made the cause of their separation; wherein you trouble but your self,
and with odiouse names deceiue the ignorant, to make anie shewe of
agreement betwene our cause and theirs.
               It wil be demanded (saith he) whither Cyprian & the rest of the godly
did worship together with those open sinners in their dayes, ioyning
with them in prayer and in the sacramentes &c. No, the question shalbe
Mr. Giffard, Whether if they did communicate with the open transgressions
of the lawe in their time, they did wel and lawfully therein, or
no; for I trust you will graunt that the Church hath alwayes power to
cast out the obstinate offenders; reade then the 
                     •
                   of the 1 to the Corinth.
a litle more cōsideratly, and tel vs whether they faulted not in keeping
in their fellowship the incestious person, and for not purging out the
leauen from amongst them; for what saith the text, Now I write vnto you
that you companie not together; If anie that is called a brother be a fornicator, or an Idolator,
or railer, or a drunckard, or an extortioner, vvith such an one eate not. Where the words
me synanamignysthai be not together commingled; and after, vvith such an
one eate not sheweth a plaine inhibition of communicating with the open
prophane or impenitent offendors: For where is this commixture or
commixion, if not in that holy banquet and coniunction in the communion
and supper of the Lorde: and if Mr. Giffard could discerne the
spiritual things, he might see the outward signes of bread and wyne to
be tokens not only of our vnion with Christ and benefit of his death, but
also of our communion vvith the members of his bodye spiritually; as
the holy Ghost reasoneth saijng, The cup of blessing vvich vvee blesse, is yt not
the communiō of the blood of CHRIST, and the bread vvhich vve breake, is it not the commanion
of the bodie of CHRIST? for vve that are manie are one bread and one bodie, because 
                        〈◊〉
                     
are partakers of one bread: For vs then to come together in this banquet and
spiritual reioycing with the members of CHRIST (to our iudgment) we
haue true comfort one with another: But with the open prophane or
obstinate open knowen transgressor ther cā be no good reioycing, fellowship,
or communion: for besides the vvicked Priest that presumptuouslye
blesseth where God curseth, and committeth sacriledge in

delyuering the signe of Gods Couenant with his people in CHRIST,
to the treaders vnder their feete of his body and blood; so the whole
Congregation, and euery one that participateth with those open wicked,
transgresse (in not admonishing & casting out the leauen) against
so manie rules as command admonition & excommunication by due
order, and partake with ye wicked against God by their reioycing with
them as bretheren. But (as I haue stil pleaded with you) we know better
order then blinde separation in pride, for the sinnes committed in
the Church; denijng to reason with you what is to be done in the
Church, till you haue proued your Church to be a true Church established,
guyded by the officers and lawes of CHRIST; so that all your
matter is but the fighting with your owne shadowe, and flying the
question in hand.
               But my purpose is not to follow your gameplay either to iustifie the
Donatistes, or those learned Pastors, neither to reiect the truthes, nor
maintaine the errors of either of both sides; we haue a better foundation
to buyld vpon, and a surer word to trust vnto; it is because you
haue no furniture on your self that you set forth this shew, and fight
vnder other mens names; Your sauour is lost if euer you had salt:
Looke on one of your Arguments how well it wil prooue your matter.
The Brownistes vse 5. or 6. places of scripture which the Donatistes vsed;
therfore the Brownistes be Donatistes. Let the Brownistes answere for themselues;
but sure I must deny both Proposition and Consequence: For
neither do we agree in the application of these, with them; neither do
we aledge all the same places because we alledge some which they alledged
for excōmunication of the open knowen obstinat wicked in the
Church, or separation from the false Church. Neither doth it follow
that because we alledge some places they did, that therfore we are Donatistes.
If you allow anie separation from Turke or Pope, you must agree
with Donatistes in some of these scriptures. Esaias 52. 2 Corixth. 6. And in
this your exquisit search you haue had one place alledged yet now,
which if you had well looked vpon, you would haue bene ashamed to
haue compared vs to the Donatistes. It is written Reuel. 18. 2. 3. 4. 5. verses &c,
where your mother Church of ROME with all her Daughters is proclaymed
no longer to be rested in, or communicated with. If your assemblies
be such a cage, stand in such confusion, haue the same ministerie,
lawes, worship &c, then we must come out of her.
               Where in consideration that you would conningly turne away all
places that commaund a separation, by other mens expositions, and
haue not managed your cause in your owne name, I will brieflie demaunde
whither you wil maintaine these doctrines or no: For the convincing
whereof I shall either refer you to our hādling of the 4. transgressions,
or els gyne you answere when you deale perticularly in your
owne name. First beginne to set downe vnder your owne hand that
these scriptures Come out frō emongst them, Depart out of her, Separate your selues &c,
are not vnderstood of a separation both of bodye and minde.
               
                  
Secōdly, that the Minister being a swearer, drunkerd, couetous worldling
&c, he continuing obstinate in his sinne, in that estate may be suffred
to administer, and the godly may cōmunicate with him in sacramentes
and prayer.
               Thirdly, that it is lawful for the Minister to delyuer, the parties to receiue,
the people to cōmunicate with open knowen vnrepentant professed
whoremasters & multitudes of wicked.
               Fourthly, that open sinne may be tollerated in the assemblie.
               Fiftly, that when open sinners be common, and such persons manie,
it were no safe to vse the censures of the Church.
               Sixtly, that ther may be a separating in heart, and cōming out from
them in minde, with whome we cōmunicate in the Church.
               That ther is no polution, participation, or cōmunicating with other
mens sinnes, but either by doing the same euill, or consenting in heart
to the euill; and though they remaine in their open filthines vnrepentant,
our communicating with them in the sacrament or prayer, or the
priestes delyuerie of the Sacrament vnto them, is no reioycing with
them in their sinne, no communicating with other mens sinnes, no allowance
or consenting or approuing of them in euill, nor no sinne or
transgression in vs.
               That they which are the Temple of the lyuing God, and in the middest
of a crooked & peruerse nation, apearing as lightes in the world,
hauing the word of life, nothing can infect them which they tollerat
for vnities sake, neither are they put vp in anie straight, because God
dwelleth in them and walketh amongst them.
               That to separat from such a peruerse and crooked generation were
dangerous, lest we should separat in spiritual separatiō from the good,
such separation were seditious.
               That Dauid was not separat in body from the open wicked & vncleane
in the sacrifice, in his dayes.
               That Is
                        •
                     ias himself in one Congregation with them, did touch the
vncleannes which he reproued in the people.
               That the Apostle Paule & the Church of Corinth did tollerate & communicate
with such as cōmitted fornicatiō, though they repented not
but continued in their sinne after due admonition.
               That in policie for feare of schisme excommunication may not be
vsed against open obstinat sinners, but they may be tollerated & communicated
with of the godly.
               That when he which for some notorious crime is reprehended hath
the multitude his companion, it is not healthful to reprehend or excō
                  municat,
but to tollerat.
               That the cause & person of the tares being vnderstood of the open
wicked and vnrepentant, doth not preiudicate the cause and person of
the wheate growing together in the field, and whither you will interpret
this of the Church.
               That the cause & person of the chaffe doth not preiudicat the cause

and person of the corne being together in the same floore, vntil the last
wynowing: the same of the goates & sheepe in the pastures: the fishes
good & bad in the net: the vessells of honour & dishonour.
               The causes & person of the chaffe, bad fishes, goates, vessells of dishonour
being vnderstood of the open knowē wicked, whore-masters,
murderers, heretickes, Idolators &c, and the field, floore pastures, net,
howse &c, of the apparant Church, and make the inhibition of plucking
vp the tares a cōmandement, then is not only the censures of the
Church, admonition, excommunication &c, but the vse of the magistrats
sword not only needlesse, but vtterly vnlawfull to be exercised against
anie transgression. Let Mr. GIFFARD see how he is plunged in
Anabaptistrie, Athisme, and blasphemous contradiction of the whole
reueiled will of God for the cutting downe of sinne. But let Mr. GIF.
or his Ordinarie in their owne name subscribe these foresaid Positions,
and he shal heare our answere: We wil not confute them in the persons
of dead men.
               We then conclude this point thus; that Mr. GIFFARD hath ignorantly
skambled about the sinnes arising in the Church, and the order
of reprehension, when all our question is of a separation from a false
Church, consisting of the world, of Athiestes, Papistes, heretickes, and
all sortes of prophane not gathered vnto CHRIST: So that he hath but
fought with his owne shadow in comparing vs to the Donatistes in this
poinct. Againe, al Augustines reasons are against separtiō in ye Church,
without discreet and orderly vsing of the power of CHRISTs by the censure
of excommunication; wheras you all confesse you haue no discipline
to execute, neither belong CHRISTS ordinances to your Antichristian
ministerie & Babilonish assemblies, which we denie to hold
the head CHRIST in this their subiection to Antichristes ministerie, ordinances,
worship. It is but then your ignorance to make comparison
betwene the Donatistes and vs.
            
            
               To the Worship.
               THat the Donatistes did separat themselues from as corrupted a worship
as the Brownistes doe, Mr. GIFFARD wil stand to affirme. Saith
he there were prayers & oblations for the dead, then significatiue ceremonies,
superstitious signing of themselues with the signe of the
Crosse &c. To which we answere, that Mr. GIFFARD affirmed in the
6. page of his booke, that the Donatistes departed disorderly out of the
Church condemning yt not for any poinct of doctrine, for therein the
other Churches & they did agree. Now here he would make comparison
betwene them & vs, in disalowing the worship. But it seemeth
Mr. GIFFARD holdeth not anie doctrine to be contayned in the worship,
which indeed ought to cōteine nothing els, and sure it is a strang
worship that is not grounded vpon doctrine.
               The second thing in this place we will note, is, the time of these corruptions
in the worship: namely as he reckoneth within two hundreth

yeares after CHRIST. If their worship were then as corrupted as ours is
now,
we merueil how you will defend the platforme of your Church
gouernment from that tyme that was so corrupt, calling yt the primatiue
Church. Your fellow Priests Argumentes from the primatiue
Church (as thy falslie call those times) will be of small weight, if you
make their worship as corrupt as this deriued from Antichrist. In the
44 page he graunteth as much of the gouernment, that it was then thus
corrupt, when our tyme-seruers will only cleaue to that paterne, and
neither he nor they to the Testament of CHRIST.
               Thirdly he hath forgotten his scope & Argument: He should by his
promise haue prooued that the Do
                        ••
                     tistes & we were of one iudgment in
this poinct; and that they made the false worship one principal cause
of their separation, as we do: so that he hath forgotten himself in this
place, as a man not knowing where to make shew of somthing.
               Next, where Mr. GIFFARD grantes that in those assemblies where the
worship is idolatrous it is lawfull to separat a mans self, he (contrary to
those expositions of the 2 Corinth. 6. and other places to that effect) now
granteth a separation in body and minde both. I will not rebuke him
nor charge him of inconstancie, because I perceiue him to contradict
his holy Pastors of these tymes where he seeth them to erre.
               But he by and by returneth to his vomit againe thus: Ther are many
& great corruptions in the worship before it come to that: where certeine
fundamental poincts of doctrine are holden, the worship cannot
be idolatrous; but in the deepest defection in poperie ther were certeine
fundamentall poincts holden (as he faith in an other place) wherby
they were stil in the Church and vnder the Conenant, therfore ther
is no idolatrous or blasphemous worship that may in the Papistes
Church be separated from. Mr. GIFFARD may be a good subiect, but
sure his groundes of doctrine are popish and pernitious. We here demaund
of Mr. GIF. whither such corruptions & errours as he speaketh
of, might be of the godly that knew them such be offered vp by themselues
or communicated with in the Church.
               And Mr. GIF. must giue vs leaue to say it cannot be their worship was
so corrupt as yours, consisting of so manie patched deuises of your
learned Popes so long hatched, and by so manie heades as haue out of
that fordge of Sathans minting howse contriued yt, euen out of Antichristes
treasurie of deceites. As for errours that haue no good foundation,
we may shew him twentie for one. Hitherto then Mr. GIFFARD
& his bretheren that haue separated from the Church of ROME as they
would pretend, yet retayning still that worship, are bretheren with the
Donatistes, as he pleaseth to deride that holy name of bretheren.
            
            
               To the Ministerie.
               THe Donatistes cried out that the Churches from which they separated
had no true Ministers, but that they were all false Prophets, Iudasses,
persecutors of the iust, generations of vipers, because they said

they had their ordination from them that were such. The Brownistes lift
vp their voyces with all their might & call vs Baalls Priestes, the marked
seruantes of Antichrist, false Prophets, seducers and such lyke, because
(as they say) we are ordeyned by Antichristian Bishops, therfore we be
Donatistes. Mr. GIFF. his Argument is denyed. Ieremie, our Sauiour Christ,
and diuers of the Prophets against Israell did in this maner pull off the
visardes of the false Prophets, disclosing their wickednes to ye people;
were they therfore, Donatistes or Schismatickes? Calvine & all of you cry
out against the Popes ministerie at ROME, are you therfore Donatistes and
Schismatickes? The matter then must be considered for which they
so called them. The Donatistes for no other cause, then for that some of
them were ordeyned by Iudasses and traytours: the Brownistes, for that
these are ordeyned by Antichristian Bishopps which exercise an other
spirituall gouernment then CHRISTS. Wherein if you had eyes to see,
there is no comparison betwene their cause & ours. First the person
that did ordeine sat
                     •
                   in a lawful office as the Donatistes supposed; did also
ordeine (as they thought) in maner according to the rule of the word;
the partie that was ordeined, meete for the ministerie; the office to
which he was called, lawfull; the administration wherein he was to administer,
holy and good for anie thing they sawe. The contrarie of all
which we finde in your ministerie, and the thing wherein you would
haue vs likened together was neuer our reason, which is the wickednes
of the mans person that doth of his sole authoritie ordeine for manie
Churches, which we neither approoue in the Donatistes or you: Our
exceptions in this case I say hath neuer bene against the person of your
Ordinarie, although we might iustly. Take next time your matter together,
and looke whose kingdome you administer in, what calling,
office, Leitourgie, flock, and be ashamed of your comparison, by so
much as your ministeri is more wicked. Again, you here put the cause
of our casting of the Bishops & their traine into the lake, to be, for that
they exercise an other discipline then CHRISTES, as though this were
some small matter, which if you put the word gouernment of the
Church, you shall finde it the denial of CHRIST to reigne in his kingdome,
a suppression of at his lawes & ordinances, euen the whole Testament,
and erection and practising of an other. Let him that readeth
consider what state all stand in that remaine in this kingdome erected
against Christ, and what ministerie the seducers in this foraigne priesthoode
exercise of God or of the Deuill, for CHRIST hath but one ministerie,
one Gospell, one gouernment ouer his Church.
               Now seeing ther is no comparison betwene the Donatistes cause & ours,
I would (if he would forbeare to conclude me a Donatist for this poinct)
demaund this question in their cause if their accusation had bene true,
Namely, whether one that hath professed the faith, and after so foully
apostatat as to accuse his bretheren, denie the faith, persecute the truth▪
he sometimes professed, may without repentance be receiued into the
Church againe. Then whether though he repent and be receiued, he

be euer capable of the ministerie or no. Then whether he alone may
ordaine an other Minister or no; if hee do, whether the other be a lawful
Minister or no. But in such cases in the Churche I could like well
to here some man to perswade to repentance, or to cast out the obstinat
by due order; and neither Augustine nor Angell from heauē to plead for
a tolleration of open transgression; which pleading for sinne maketh
vs suspect the matter verie deeply, iustifijng neither.
               Their similitudes, the riuer from the fountaine, the members, the
head, the stock and the plant in their application wee approue not, but
hold the doctrine erronious that they thought anie thing could be ordeyned
from the person of the man in that sort. But your discent from
Antichrist and pedegree in that kingedome is an other thing, if you
would please to conceiue it; namely, that your office, names, liuinges,
entrāce, administration &c, is of the Pope & of Satan, and that whē his
kingdome shalbe abolished, your office, name, entrance, Vicarage, leitourgie
and all shalbe cast with the great milstone vpon them with all
such trafique into the bottome of the sea. Herevpon it is we say your
discent is from the Pope within few degrees, being the childrē of these
Antichristian Bishops, which are the creatures of the Pope, who is the
eldest sonne of Sathā, and his vicar generall vpon earth, whose image,
marke, power and life you beare, and together with him lyue, reigne,
stand and fall as the branches with the tree; for when the power, decrees,
gouernment, offices, worship &c, of Antichrist is gone, all your
ministerie is vanished for euer. The Lorde therfore put in her Maties.
heart to extirpate the same, and to aduāce CHRISTS lawes, ordinances,
ministerie, worship &c, as he is worthie, that euery knee may bowe vnto
him.
               But Mr. Giffard affirmeth we shal not be able to proue our accusation
of their Ministerie, that yt is by discent from Antichrist; his reason is,
ther is no Minister in England by the Pope &c. We shal not here need to
seek out a Pope in England: If hee will learne to distinguish betwene the
Popes person, and his decrees, Canons & orders after the Popes orders
of priesthood, he must be driuen to confesse their whole ministerie, office,
entrance &c, to be drawen by discent, and wee thinck Mr. Giff. will
not hang the life and vertue of holy thinges vpon mens persons, but
vpon the ordinances of God, lest he be a Donatist.
               
               Hee further affirmeth the ministerie of publishing the Gospel, delyvering
the sacramentes, is not the deuise of man but Christs ordinance.
Do you thinke Mr. Giff. can begg the question to affirme a Ministerie
whose office, entrance &c, is of Antichrist, doth publish the Gospel▪
Againe, that they receiue yt as Christs Ministery, when it is from point to
point wholly found to be after the orders of Antichrist.
               And when no shift wil help him out, he is faine to affirme valiantly,
that the ministery was not vtterly destroyed in popery, for there remained
the Sacrament of Baptisme. See here how he hath plunged himself
into the sea of poperie, and ouertumbled ye doctrines of his learned

Fathers. T. Co. saith from Malachie, that the ministerie is not tyed to the
succession of mens persons, but to the law & ordinances; and what ministery
the Popes is, reade Reuel. 9. &c. You charge her Matie. verie far, to
haue cast out ye true ministeri out of the lād for putting our Pope, Cardinal,
shauē crowned Priest, Fryer, Monke, Abbot. And if ye Baptisme
could not be a true Sacramēt without a lawful Minister, then your ministerie
being vnlawful, ther is no seale wt promise, no true church &c.
               Seeing then the holy Ghost hath described that Church to be the
Harlot sitting vpon many waters, the mother of fornications, confused
Babel, murderesse of the Saintes, an holde of vncleane spirits, and a cage
of euerie vncleane and hatefull birde, neither ministerie, Sacramentes,
worship, or anie thing remayneth there according to Gods ordinance;
and at the best you make your self & this whole land Scismaticks from
the true Church, Ministeri, Sacramentes, if it so stand with the Church
of Rome & ministeri therof, and of necessitie you are al Donatistes by your
reasoning, though my purpose is not to defend and proue in this discourse,
but to call a fewe notes to your memorie: I will conclude this
point, that you are driuen to the Popes ministerie for your orders, now
desiring you to satisfie vs next time concerning the Popes damnable
masse or Sacrament of the Altar; if they be true Ministers, whether the
Church cā haue one Sacrament good and in other euil, one with promise
the other damnable, blasphemous, and accursed; for I take it they
cannot be true Ministers at the Font, and sacriledgious massmongers
at the Altar. Weigh these things more cōsideratly, before you publish
such doctrines in England againe.
            
            
               To the Sacramentes.
               THe Donatistes did hold that the Sacramentes or efficacie of them, depend
vpon the worthines and holynes of the mā that administreth:
But the Brownistes are not of that minde. To this obiection hee verie
charitablie answereth, that in this great ranke point of donatisme hee
can finde no difference at all: Let the wordes and meaning of both be
skanned, and it shall appeare manifestly that they hold the self same
thing, neither more nor lesse, but like euen bretheren, or ells Mr. Giffard
wil be found a common lyer and sclanderer. This mā may not be suspected
of anie malitious practise to deface the truth, yet is found to
make his comparison by his false sclanders, and not of anie direct sentence
of ours. What sinne hee is fallen into that so often dirideth the
word bretheren, let the godly consider.
               The Donatistes held that if the man being a lawful Minister were a sinner,
the Sacrament delyuered by him was no true Sacramēt: Mr. Giffard
confesseth we hold no such thing; where is then the consimilitude.
               The Donatistes held that the faith or conscience of the gyuer did giue
faith vnto, purge & make cleane the conscience of the receiuer; and so
of the contrarie the guyltines: which doctrine we holde to be blasphemous;
it is only ye holy Ghost that worketh faith, and purgeth from an
euil conscience.
               
                  
The Donatistes held, that if he which did administer were an open sinner,
he was no Minister, and so no Sacrament. We do not hold that
euery opē sinne maketh the Minister no Minister, seing the high Priest
manie times sinned vnder the law, yet his office still retained: but we
hold that the Minister ought to repent his sinne before he administer,
and the Church to admonish him of his knowen sinne before they
suffer him to administer, and not cōmunicat with him if he be obstinat.
If the Church neglect their dutie, he and they transgresse, yet do
we not say that it is no Sacrament that he deliuereth, or that his ministerie
is disanulled. But we must put Mr. Giffard in minde how far he is
gone from our cause in this comparison. We neuer disalowed their
Sacramēts as being administred by a lawful Minister in a lawful office,
yet the man a sinner. But of such counterfeites as haue neither lawfull
office, entrance &c, but stand enchanters in Antichristes kingdome:
so that these are not the personal sinnes of a Minister in the Church;
wherin Mr. Giff. wickednes appeareth to make the questiō of the mans
person or his sinne, when it is the ministery, office, entrance, administation,
al which wee hold to be Antichristian, and to haue nothing to do
with the seales of Gods Couenant in this estate: not here to speake of
the altering of the institution in the maner of administring yt, vvhich
the Donatistes neuer either had cause or made question of, as it seemeth.
               And whether anie promise is made to the elementes abused in the
false, yea whether to the elementes or to the keeping of the lawes and
ordinances in the true Church, let Mr. Giffard. make answere.
               Further, when we affirme the Sacramentes of the false Church to be
no true seales of the Couenant, because they are Idolatours and Idolatrous,
the Lordes ordinances prophaned and lawes wholly violated,
wee do not therby conclude it to bee no Baptisme concerning the outwarde
washing; for wee can put difference betwene a false and none,
a false Sacrament or counterfeit signe, and none, for the false Church
is saide to haue her peace offringes. And although wee holde them
highly to tempt God to their owne condemnation (if they repent not)
that wittingly prophane or of wilfull ignorance transgresse those high
ordinances, as in the false Church to be superstitious of the element
where the lawe and Couenant is broken, yet do wee not therevpon affirme
wee neede anie reiterating of the outward signe, as the Donatistes;
but hold this false signe nowe a true signe, sufficient to vs concerning
the outward washing. Circumcision in the Apostasie of Israel which
was without promise to the receiuers in that estate, and nothing but
sinne in yt, yet stood for a sufficient outward cutting whē anie of them
returned to the Church and ate of the Passouer, wherof it was not lawfull
for any vncircumcised to eate: how the signe might haue bene reiterated
if need had so required, we may see by that of ye Apostle 1 Cor. 7.
for gathering againe their circumcisiō if it might be gathered againe,
then secondly cut.
               Where Mr. Giffard then in stead of performing his comparison saith,

that the Donatistes in rebaptising did better of both, because he that is
not baptised ought to be baptised  he bewrayeth his ignorance,
that cannot put difference betwene a false Sacrament and none, a false
signe and none: The grossnes also he supposeth to haue bene in vs, is
found in himself, that lest he should make the false and counterfeit
washing in the false church to be none, runneth to iustifie the Church,
ministerie, sacramentes &c at ROME, and so must conclude himself of
necessitie a Schismaticke or a popish Priest, which he will.
               And where he demandeth whether he that knoweth he was neuer
baptised can be saued if he seek not to be baptised when he may haue
yt. We demande againe how euer true baptisme should be restored,
if the false signe of baptisme which was then without promise in the
false Church, should not now be sufficient concerning the outward
signe.
            
            
               To the Government.
               IN the principle of principles, that I say not the verie summe of all
causes of our separation from these assemblies, namely the gouernment
which Mr. GIFFARD termeth discipline, he can not finde any cō
                  similitude
betwene the Donatistes and vs; for the confesseth he hath not
read that they did take anie exception against it in that tyme. Take
your word discipline for al the meanes that CHRIST hath apointed by his
lawes, ministerie & censures, to keepe, guyde & gouerne his Church,
ioyntly and seuerally to be instructed in their duties, and see what a dilemma
you are come vnto, this being grāted that herein ther is no agreement,
seeing the chief cause of our controuersie with you is for the rable
of this Antichristian and pse
                        •
                     dohierarchie Courtes, &c, which haue no
place in the Church of God, where CHRISTS officers, offices, lawes, censures,
ought to gouerne and guyde his Church.
               But here according to your accustomed maner you goe about to say
there were faultes to be found in their gouernment then, yea as well as
in their worship &c, which you affirmed to be as corrupt as yours is
now; wherein (if ante regard were to be had of your words) you would
not only make those Bishopps in as euill state as these, that Church as
yours now; but haue cast into the fire al the platformes that your learned
Reformistes haue pleaded for, from that falsly so called Primatiue
Church. Well, I haue told you the question is not whether they had
the true gouernment or no, whether in that gouernment there were
corruptions, defaultes or negligences, but whether the Donatistes separated
therfore or no; they had the same offices officers, lawes, censures
that the other, so that you speak not only false in saying they might
haue had as iust cause in this respect of separation as we, but also bring
the Argument to confound your self with your whole Church wherin
you stand a Priest. Thus you are separated from the Church of ROME,
but retaine still the same hierarchie, worship, gouernment that they
vsed and haue, as the Do. of the Churches from which they separated;

therfore you in this as in the rest of your Argumentes conclude
your selues Donatistes, Heretickes, and Schismatickes from the Church
of ROME.
               But Mr. GIFFARD will denie that the Donatistes had as great cause to
separate from those Churches frō which they separated, as those English
Priestes from their Graundfather the Pope, for it was not so corrupted.
The same we answere to you for your gouernment, how then
shall we end this matter? I take it, thus; that the Priestes of England
despise the Popes person, and yet keepe the same orders, lawes, officers,
offices that he erected: So the Donatistes kept stil the orders of gouernment
that the Churches they separated from. Now if we can cleare
our selues that we retaine not the same gouernment amongst vs that
the Church doth we separat from (which I thinke cannot be denyed)
then Mr. GIF. hath in a chief principle put himself and this whole laud
into the number of Donatistes. The Argument is now this. The Church
of England separateth from the Church of ROME, and yet keepe their
gouernment & worship, therfore the Church of England are Schismamatickes and Donatistes; and an other poinct, that ther can be no true Sacramentes,
no true Church vnder a false gouernment: And Mr. GIFFARD
is yet further out of his way.
            
            
               To the Argument of manie Churches.
               HE granting that we herein differ from the Donatistes, in that they condemne
all Churches in the world we do not, will needes notwithstanding
haue vs Donatistes in this poinct also: For (saith he) though they
shoote not their arrowes at them, yet their arrowes strike them, their
Argumentes vpon consequence will reach so far, yea runne thorough
the sides of all Churches. This we answere: you must first cleare your
selues of those thinges wherwith you are chardged and pressed, and
trouble not your self with other mens matters, seing you make this but
a cloke for your wickendnes to shrowde your self vnder other mēs persons
with whome we haue not to deale. We vtterly refuse to enter into
this controuersie of the estate of other Contries: we know the word
of God is neere vs (thankes be to God) by which if your cause be good,
suffer it to be tryed. As for the consequence of our Argumentes they
are but your owne collections to passe ouer your owne sinnes, and sett
the strife betwene vs and other Churches, which we wil not be drawen
vnto. And all men may here behold this sower of wordes and strife
maker will counterfeit not only consequence, but Argumentes of his
owne head, to raise quarrell: In all which he hath forgotten his promise
to compare our writinges and theirs together; and flyeth to his
owne collection.
               In this part of his stage-play he beginneth thus. The Church of
ENGLAND is esteemed & reuerenced emongst the Churches as a sister,
and so cōmunicated with, yet they all know what her faultes be in her
assemblies, in her worship, in her ministerie & gouernment, in asmuch

as they are apparant. Vnto the first we suppose your worship, ministerie,
Church gouernment, are not so apparant vnto them as you gyue
out. Secondly we doubt, yea I may say it is vntrue, that they iustifie
your ministerie, worship, or gouernment. Thirdly admit they
should thus sinne either of ignorance, negligence, or infirmitie, standing
otherwise orderly gathered to the practize of CHRISTES ordinances,
they are not for this sinne (till after due convincement and admonition
they remaine obstinat) to be presently iudged no Churches: But
what I thinke of their estate, you shall here pardon me, I wil not intermedle
till I be called.
               As for your harmonie of Confessions, if it be not the harmonie of
the Prophets, CHRIST and his Apostles, it skilleth nothing vs what cō
                  sent
you make. Againe, it is not an accord in certeine general Articles
that can satisfie this matter, when in the perticulars you discent to the
ouerthrow of al: Such an harmonie you may very wel make with your
mother Church of ROME, and a great deale more large: Neither do
their Confessions agree with you in the estate of the ministeri, Church
gouernment, nor worship: Scotland, Geneua, France &c, haue an other ministerie,
offices, choise, ordination and ministration, an other gouernment,
worship  but it were too large to discusse: And now hold to
your Argument, and see what wil follow. The Church of ROME haue
the same confession of faith, which you call your Apostolick Crede,
that you haue, yea the Lordes prayer, (as you cal it) Athanasius Crede &c,
therfore they and you agreeing in this harmonie of confession, are one
body one Church. Againe these Churches you say hold you the
Church of God, and you hold the Church of ROME to be the Church
of God, therfore you are one body al, and then you & al the Churches
Schismatickes from your mother Church.
               If the Church of ENGLAND be Antichristian & idolatrous, and worship
the Beast &c, then the Churches which perfectly know the same
and yet acknowledg her a sister, are partakers of her sinne, and so to be
condemned with her. The same Argument we thus returne you.
               If the Church of ROME be Antichristian & idolatrous & worship the
Beast, thē the Church of ENGLAND which perfectly knoweth the same
& yet acknowledgeth her a sister (as Mr. GIFFARD doth say) is partaker
with her sinnes, and so to be condemned with her.
               Al those Churches saith he which know the Church of ENGLAND in
this estate & do yet reuerence her as a true Church of CHRIST, do cō
                  dempne
those as heretical Schismatickes which cal yt Antichristian &
separat themselues from yt. We answere, that all those Churches he
speaketh of do not approue the church of ENGLAND in this estate, neither
condempne vs in the thinges we withstand therein, and receiue it
againe thus: At the first cōming out of papacie all the Churches in the
world did approue the Church of ROME, and condempne those as heretical
Schismatickes which caled it Antichristiā & separated from yt:
Let Mr. Giffard put to what conclusiō he wil. I take it Mr. Giff. must now

leaue the bare title of Church, ministerie &c, and flee to the proofe of
their profession & orderly walking, by the word of God; which if he
do not, yet do we buyld therevpon as vpon a most sure foundation.
               As to Mr. CALVINE, we refer you to his confession of faith printed in
the latter end of his owne Catechisme, and if he be cōtrarie to himself
in his other writinges, look you vnto it; we do not for the holynes of
the man iustifie anie of his errours (as no man is without) neither for
his errors reiect any truth he held; knowing of the one God hath had
mercy as we hope, and for the other Gods word approueth it: so that
we beleiue not any thing because such a man said so, but because by
the word & Spirit we heare CHRIST himself speak. And you do greatly
abuse his writinges, in vsing them after your owne 
                     •
                  ense in his name
contrarie to his minde and purpose, and by your leaue wrasting them
to your owne iudgment, deceiuing others therby. In his confession he
affirmeth ther is no true Sacrament with promise (as I do remember)
but where the Minister hath a lawfull office and outward calling to administer;
so that all his Argumentes must be vnderstood of such a
Church as haue a lawful ministerie in office, entrance, and administration,
and cannot be applyed to yours. Moreouer he reasoned against
the Anabaptistes and such as held an integritie and perfection in the
Church, and separated for euerie sinne cōmitted, without due seeking
of redresse. And if he erred in these or anie other doctrines, we do not
therfore hold them presently to be no Church in which he was Minister,
or which did in like ignorance receiue the said doctrines; it is obstinacie
in error that only deserueth casting off, and that by due order.
As for most of your places expoūded by his mouth & now receiued by
you to maintaine open sinne & to cōmunicate with the open knowne
transgressours, they are so cōmon & stale, that euery infant in the faith
can shew you your vanitie, if in your owne name you durst propound
them. Your learned bretheren haue gyuen them ouer as sclender collections,
you will now reuiue them; put them in your owne name, ells
we haue nothing to say, the man being dead, whose steppes God giue
you grace to follow in that which is good. But this is a simple course
to iustifie your owne wayes by mens names and writinges, when Gods
word convinceth you of sinne and wickednes. For that place of the
Epistle to the Corinth. 11. Let a man examin himselfe, and so let him eat of that bread &
drink of that cup, yt doth not discharge vs of any dutie to others by admonition
& due censure, for the same God hath said Admonish one another, tell
thy Brother his fault, if he repent forgiue him; goe first
                        •
                      reconcile thy self to thy Brother,
then bring thine offring: If anie that is called a Brother be a fornicatour &c, be not com
                     
                        •
                     ingled
together, with such an on
                        •
                      eat not: So that our examination must be whether
we do follow these rules also; and Mr. CALVINE himself saith it
is sacriledg for the Pastor to gyue the Sacrament to the opē vnworthie.
What cōmunion is ther then betwene him that openly standes vnder
the wrath of God the Minister that cōmitteth sacriledge, and vs in that
banquet. We may better reason thus then: we are cōmanded to examine

our selues and so eat, therfore I must examine my self also with
whome, what, and howe I do come to receiue. But what haue wee
to do to reason what is to be done in the Church to the preuenting of
Gods wrath and reprofe of sinne, when our question is of the vtter
forsaking of the false Church with all her wares and stolen waters. So
that wee conclude al Mr. Calvines Argumentes must be enforced against
such as separate themselues from the true Churche, otherwise himself
and you all shall be found Schismaticks from the Church of Rome.
As for the Church of Corinth and Churches of 
                     
                        •
                     alatia, they were separated
from Idolatours, orderly gathered, established and governed
by CHRISTES lawes, true Ministerie, worship, and stood not obstinatly
to maintaine and retaine open grosse sinne, and to murder the messengers
sent early and late to reproue them, as you doe: So that ther is
no comparison to be made betwene you and them; for thus the Papist
might pleade with you. Ther were sinnes and corruptions in the
Churches of Corinth and Galatia, but it was not lawfull to separate from
them, therfore it is not lawfull to separate from the Church of Rome,
wherein stil you see your selues concluded Schismaticks & Donatistes. But
because wee will not intermedle with Calvine nor other Churches, Let
vs returne againe to your comparison betwene the Donatistes & vs, from
which you are so farr and so long digressed, as a man litle regarding
wherein hee busieth himself.
            
            
               Concerning the Magistracie.
               IN this matter he first termeth vs Donatistes, for that we crye out of persecution,
and of the false Prophets that incence the Magistrates herevnto.
Wee answere, wee complaine not of impatiencie nor yet for revenge:
only (as duty bindeth vs) wee seeke to the lawfull Magistrates
for some redresse of our miseries which wee wrongfully sustaine, and
shewe the people the vngodlynes of their woefull guydes, or rather
wolues; and if you had anie grace you would rather be moued with
pitie, then compare vs to either Schismatickes or hereticks for our
iust complaintes. But herein our cause differeth from the Dona
                        •
                     istes,
that wee are persecuted by the Clergie, which is armed (according to
the order of their bloodie predecessors) with ciuile power together
with their popish ecclesiasticall iurisdiction both in one person, contrarie
to the lawe of God: which vnlawfull power they only vsurp to
keep CHRIST out of his office, suppressing his lawes, offices, people,
worship, with al force in all vnmercifull crueltie, so far as their hornes
will reach pushing poore Israel. And howsoeuer her Ma••e and her honorable
Councill see not their wickednes, or suffer them and winke
at their doinges (which God grant it be not layd to their chardge) yet
wee finde this Antichristian prelacie both the false accusers, and hatefull
molestours of Gods children; so that the persecution is chieflie by
that broode: And whether haling vnto, and shutting vp in most

straite close imprisonment till they haue murdered them without trial
whom they get into their clawes, neuer loosing their hold till eyther
they dye in prison or reuolt from the truth, so that manie are made to
blaspheme & denie the holy wayes of God though their mercilesse tyrannie,
whether this kind of tyrannising without anie free conference
or iudicial proceeding, thus pulling the husband from the wife, Father
from children, seruant from master &c, al from their lawful callings &
trades, be not barbarous persecution, let al men consider. If we diserue
death let vs dye in due execution, if banishment banish vs; but first by
order convince vs of some crime or errour worthie therof, if you will
cleare your selues.
               Mr. Giffard after this Ismalitish derision of our persecution, proceedeth
to accuse vs of some doctrines derogatorie to the Princes aucthoritie.
As first; that Princes may not make lawes. 2. that wee should hold the
Prince ought not to reforme the Church by their authoritie. 3. That
none of the godlye Kinges of Iuda did compel anie to the Couenant.
4. That the people of CHRISTES kingdome be spoutanei &c. In al which,
besides that ther is no comparison betwene the Donatistes and vs in these
poinctes, hee doth but followe the steppes of that olde peruerter of the
truth. We wil thē first shew briefly how we hold this doctrine, and how
far we are from that hee would insinuate into the Magistrates eares, as
though we sought to diminish their lawful iurisdiction, power, or rule.
For lawes making we hold, that Princes are limited by the law of God
(as he himself in an other place confesseth) & ought not to proclame
any law that hath not warrāt from Gods law either in expresse words or
necessary collection from general rules, stil keeping within the equitie.
For reforming we hold, that ye Prince ought to supresse all transgressiō
of Gods law, and punish al persons without partialitie according to the
offence within the Church or without the Church within their owne
dominions as wel for the transgression of the first Table as the second,
and to defend the obseruers therof in al equity, and yt whiles we walke
in the wayes of God we are not afraid of yt powre, but gyue God glorye
& them due obedience, whether they be of the Church or no. To the
4. we hold, that none can be receiued into the Church, but yt willingly
maketh publick confessiō of his faith, for neither may the Church receiue
nor they be holden of the Church, without this repentance and
confession. Yet we grant that the Prince may cōmand and compel her
subiects to the hearing of the publick doctrine & prayer of ye Church,
but to enter Cou
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  t or be receiued a member it is to be done by doctrine,
faith and repentance: Neither did the kinges of Iuda compel the
Priestes to receiue anie vncircumcised or Idolatours into ye fellowship
of the Church. Faith is the gift of God, wrought by his Spirit & word:
The Prince may cōpel to the meanes therevnto, but not enforce faith.
               The Donatistes resisted the Magistrate so far as they durst (saith he) and
whē 
                  Iulian the Apostata shewed them fauour, their circumcelliōs made
reuel in companies, walking with clubbes & staues, did spoile & beate

such as lighted in their hands &c: The impatient heare of Brow
                        •
                     istes is
not vnknowen &c. Let this lawlesse man shewe where euer anie of vs
haue resisted the Magistrate, or spokē euil of the ruler of the people, or
gone about to reuenge our selues by any violence or vnlawful meanes.
As for his prophesie what we would be if we had power, it layeth open
himself to be a malicious false Prophet to incitate the Magistrate with
lying dreames. Let him better consider and he shal find that this Antichristian
Prelacie hath bene not only the procurers but shedders of
much innocent blood, vsurping ciuile power: And how they haue behaued
themselues towards their soueraigne Kings & Princes, let ye Records
be searched; in your Church are found dayly treasons, bloodshed
&c, and most plentifull in your mother Church of Rome: This then is
but the false report of Sanballat and Tobia to hinder Gods Temple.
               Nowe admiring Mr. Giffards clearing of the Donatistes of errour, affirming
they differed not from the other Churches in doctrine, as also
manifest or al least protest our innocencie from these and all other errours
in the perticular course handled or els where to be found, I will
set downe three or fower grosse errours before him, which we detest
in the Donatistes; as:
               That he which or deineth a Minister (as it seemeth they allowed ordinatiō
                  
by one mā) is the head of him ordeined yea the fountaine, and
the other the riuer; therfore if the head be holy, the other is therby
made holy, and so on the contrarie if the first be wicked.
               That the conscience of him that gyueth, may wash the conscience 
of him that receiueth.
               That when hee which baptiseth is manifest a good man, hee gyueth 
faith, hee is the original, the roote, the head of him that is by Gods
spirit renewed.
               That those which are baptised by a wicked man though in a lawfull 
office, ought to be baptised againe.
               That it is lawfull in some respectes to kill themselues.
               
               That the Magistrate cannot compel vs to that which is good.
               
               That we haue free wil after regeneration. I wil not now iustifie Mr.
                  Giff. explaining of their mindes, whether in these or anie other wee
handled, I take al in this matter from his record, which I hope hee will
not affirme to be false.
               As for his learned Fathers how they haue wrasted the scriptures new
Testament and old in more then twenty false expositions and flat contradictions
of the scope of the whole Canon of the worde, to iustifie
opē iniquitie by slightes, and tollerat it in the publicke assemblies with
all their doctrines of separating in heart and not in bodye, at comon
meates and not at holy communion, that all nations should be the apparant
Church &c, wee leaue them al, denying to enter controuersie
with dead men, wishing Mr. Giffard to spread such deceites in other
mens names no more, but to come orderly to some christian triall by
the Booke of God. In the meane tyme hee seeth wee neither hold of

                  Donatistes nor of Augustine, but followe faith in a pure conscience to our
knowledge, readie to be instructed wherein wee erre. And when hee
hath made such a lardge discourse to proue vs Anabaptistes, Montanistes,
Arians, Pelagians, Nicolaitans &c, we shal in stead of conflicting with a beater
of the ayre, and vnconscionable sclanderous rayler, demand the
end and vse of his labours, and nowe leaue him to his accompt for his
defacing and blaspheming of the truth, wishing all men to beware of
such methodes of imposture.
               
                  I. G.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            A FEWE OBSERVATIONS
OF Mr. GIFFARDS LAST CAVILLS ABOVT
stinted read prayers, and deuised Leitourgies.
            HAving heretofore written an answere to Mr. George Giffards pretended
defence of stinted read praiers & deuised Leitourgies, and
since receiued an emptie replie, wherin he doth nothing lesse thē yeild
to any sound reason alledged, but vngodlily cauilleth at and peruersly
wrasteth the sence of so much as he toucheth, I seeing no cause of further
strife (his former convinced) to intermedle againe with perticular
handling of his chaffe & smoke, his reasons in effect the same before
answered, haue only thought it my dutie to illustrate vnto the Readers,
some few brief poincts abused by him, that they may the better be able
to iudge of the former writings, wherevnto with these few helpes following
I refer the trial.
            WHERAS I alledged out of the 8. to the Rom. and out of the
4. to the Galath. that in the verie time & action of our prai
               
                  •
               ng
to God, the spirit of God was the only instructor and
the only help, no other help mentioned or that can be collected in the
Scriptures, Mr. GIFFARD hauing granted that reading prayer is not
praying, doth now answere, that how soeuer the Scripture doth extol &
magnifie outward helpes & meanes, yet when they are compared with
God which worketh all in all by them, or when the scripture will set
forth the efficacie & worke to be his alone, they are either not mentioned,
or els if they be mentioned, so cast downe, as if they were nothing.
God buyldeth his Church (saith he) by the ministerie of men, yet Paul
is said to plant, Apollos to water, but God to gyue the encrease 1 Corinth. 3.
and therfore to gather from those places Rom. 8. Galat. 4. that there neede
or may be no outward help or meanes in the verie action and instant of
praying, is far awrye. In which answere it euidently appeareth he is so
bent to turne away all truth & raise new strife, as ther can be no expectation
of agreement: There is no sequence, neither doth the Scripture
alledged proue his owne reason, so that nothing hangs togeather. No
man doubteth but that sometimes and in some places of Scripture the
outward meanes of begetting and encreasing faith is only recited, and
sometimes the secret work of Gods spirit only, sometimes both, when
yet they are not diuided but goe together, and all of God both inward
worke & outward meanes, though in way of cōparison I neuer so read,
but rather the one repeated for both: For shal I say, that whē the word
of God & preaching therof is 
                  •
               hewed to be the power of God vnto saluation,
that the inward worke of the Spirit is therfore not mentioned,
because the other is of God? thē both inward & outward meanes being
of God & Gods owne worke, though the one by instrument, that there
is silencing of the one in way of comparison, is not true. But all this is

nothing to our matter: He should plainly haue affirmed, that frō these
places Rom. 8. & Gal. 4. it cannot be proued, that in the very instant tyme
& action of owre praying to God, the spirit only instructeth, without
outward helpes of instruction; and he should haue seene I could proue
(as then I did) the contrarie vnto him Rom. 8. 26. The Spirit doth together
supplye or h
                     •
                  lp our infirmities, for we knowe not vvhat to pray as we ought, but
the the Spirit yt self maketh request for vs vvith sighes and grones vnvtterable. In
the action of praying the Spirit is here set downe in this place to be
the meanes and help of instruction, teaching vs to aske aright, no other
meanes or helpes of instruction in that instant time and action of
pra
                  •
               jng mentioned in this or any other place of scripture: Therfore in
the time of our praying and laying our hearts open to God, the Spirit
only doth instruct and openeth our mouth. In this place let the word
synantilambanetai be wel considered. Againe Galath. 4. 6. it is said because yee
are sonnes, God sent the Spirit of his Sonne into your hearts crying, Abba, Father. The
Argument here is the same that before: this word [crying] sheweth the
worcke of his Spirit or rather office, in our continuall occasions of
prayer to direct vs to vnburden & vnfold the heart, so that in the instāt
action we see no other. And where I shewed him that reading in the
action of praying could not be caled an help of instruction at that time
when we were powring forth our hearts vnto God, the eyes and hands
lyft vp to heauen, our meditation fixed vpō our knowen occasions, and
heart & mouth vnfolding them, my reason this, That the minde & bodie
could not be intent vpon two diuerse distinct & seueral exercises &
duties of minde & bodie at one time & instāt, he inverteth my words,
and stealeth them as a new shift to help himself (as he supposeth) returning
them thus in way of question, demanding whether fasting, lyfting
vp our eyes & hāds to heauē, prostrating the bodie & kneeling be praier
yt self, or outward meanes & helpes to make the prayer more 
                  •
               ervēt.
Euery simple man wil laugh at him (saith he) if he make them prayer yt
self; and if they be helpes, then I haue brought the former proofes not
frō an idle, but frō an vnsound brayne. Leaue scorning & reproch, and
consider what helpes we did al this time intreate of; was yt not instruction
of the minde by some other spiritual exercise then prayer in prai
               
                  •
               ng?
wil he call fasting, kneeling &c, instructions of the minde what to
pray? then be must needs plead for his Image & al poperye, if these bodily
actions & gestures be instruction of the minde, which are but preparations
to make the body seruiceable & apt to & in this dutie. Further,
how learnedly he disputeth to make reading one of these bodily
gestures or bodily actions only, let it be considered of. And as he confoundeth
these bodily exercises and spirituall exercises, so he sheweth
himself ignorant & vnable to discerne spiritual gyftes & exercises one
from an other, with the distinct vse of them; demanding whither the
voyce of an other that prayeth, be an outward help or prayer yt self, an
outward meanes to make our prayer more fervent. He thinketh I will
be laught at, if I say it be prayer yt self. Sure if in anie assemblie, or

where two or three are in CHRISTS name gathered together epi 
                  •
               oa
                  ••
               o &
homothymadon vnto the same thing & with one minde, for avoyding cō
               fusion
they do vse but one voice, and that by Gods order & cōmandement,
the others hearts going with the wordes & saying Amen, they that
heare pray not as wel as he y• according to Gods ordinance speaketh,
our publique prayers are not ye prayers of the Church, but of him that
speaketh only. But now God hath otherwise taught 1 Cor. 14. &c. Acts. 4.
yt must needs be, that Mr. GIF. is in great error to thinke none but he
that speaketh prayeth. I take thē such hearing of an others voyce, prai
               
                  •
               ng;
and this to be a foule error to publish the cōtrarie; but that prayer
both edifieth him that speaketh and him that heareth, and together in
heart prayeth, I make no doubt. Yet herevpon to affirme, that there are
other meanes of instructiō to be vsed in the instātactiō of praying then
praying yt self, were as grosse as the other, and both a confounding of
spiritual exercises, and flat cōtradictiō of the Scripture, especially so diuerse
weightie actiōs of minde & bodie, as proseuche, & anagnosis, powring
out our hearts to God in prayer, and reading. At other times I did not
only allow, but teach, that we haue al the dayes of our lyues need to be
instructed to pray aright, and that reading is a blessed meanes therevnto.
So that you see whiles you of purpose will oppose, you runne
your self vpon the rocke; in stead of iustifijng your accusation of two
heresies to be found in my first reason, you haue published this follye,
which you must retract, if you wil obey the truth.
            Mr. GIFFARD thē granting, that reading is but to help to prayer & not
praying, and now being shewed yt it can be no help in that instāt action
of praijng, let vs proceede to pervse an other of his mistakings & wilful
peruertings. I affirming, that the holy Ghost neuer enioyned vs to any
certaine number of words by stint & limitatiō in praijng, as cōmanding
the very words to be said ouer whē we pray, he euery where in his wrytings
as a supposed foundatiō to their Leitourgie & Collects, alledged
out of Numbers the 6. Mat. 6. Luke. 11. example of Psalmes, and now Deut. 26
that ye Lord did by cōmandemēt bynde them to those verie words saijng
ouer, when they prayed or blessed in those formes which are there
prescribed. For my reasons in disprouing this popish carnal conceipt, I
refer the Reader to my former answere to his published pretended defence
of reading for praijng. One reason was drawē frō the words of y•
text Numb. 6. 32. where ye hebrew words Coh Tebaracu, thus shal you blesse,
do not import a tying them to ye verie words of this forme in blessing,
but to the rules & instructions there taught them concerning the matter
yt self for their directiō, which I collected by this word Cob, which is
an adverb of similitude, signifijng with vs as much as [after this maner]
and therfore cannot be to say the same words, but according to ye same
instructions. Where first he reprocheth me for that Tebaracu was false
printed, therevpon chardging me I cannot reade two words right of
hebrue, which were no great ignominie in their priesthood: But shall
we say Mr. GIF. cannot reade two words in latine rightly▪ because in the

28. page of his booke he repeateth out of Augustine, 
                     •
                  poli sui, for populi sui?
This I mention as sory to see the defendor of this false Hieratchie so
emptie, to leau
                  •
                sounde doctrine, and thus to trifle; if he had bene at
the print, it should haue bene amēded it seemeth. Now to the doctrine
gathered of this word Coh, Mr. GIF. would invert the words in his owne
sense, thus; that where I said, the Lord did not cōmand to say the same
words but the like, that is, according to those directions of doctrine, he
gathereth, that I should affirme yt vnlawfull to vse those words at all,
yea that th
                  •
               y might not vse all or anie of these words at anie tyme.
Whether this be a Christian interpretation of my words or no, I leaue
not only to all mens, but chieflie to his owne conscience to be considered.
Yet he still couertly persisting in his error, produceth a place
of Scripture, where the word Coh (as he thinketh) is vsed for the saying
of the verie words. Exod. 3. The Lord said to Moses, Thus shalt thou say vnto the
children of Israel EHEIE hath sent me vnto yee; moreouer God said vnto Moses, thus shalt
thou say vnto them, The God of your Fathers &c. According to Mr. Grenewo
                     •
                  ds interpretation
(saith he) Moses is not cōmanded to say those words, but the
like. True, he is not here bound to this certeine number of words, or
the same words. If then they should say, vvhat is his name that hath
sent thee, he may not say EHEIE hath sent me, because God said Coh &c.
Now Mr. GIF. sheweth himself a shifter: I did neuer hold it vnlawfull
to vse anie wordes of the scripture as need required, it is your sclander:
vvhere you haue in all your bookes affirmed we hold it vnlawfull to
say thy kingdome come, or vse anie phrase of scripture to right vse; your
vvoeful vvrasting of the tongue for vntruthes, vvil tourne to your further
iudgment. I proued only by the word Coh, which signifieth [after
this maner] that God cōmāded not the very certaine number of words
to be said. And vvhere I sayd the word Coh was so vsed in all the Prophets
(when they say, Thus saith the Lord) to this end, that neither the holy
Ghost had registred al their verie wordes they spake, nor that they
were tyed to the prescript number of words, he would haue it thought
I should hold those words which are recorded, n
                  •
               t to be the words of
God; which vvrasting of my vvords, is but his emptie quarreling to
turne away this firme doctrine: namely, that God did in those formes
of prayer mentioned by him, prescribe the somme of their blessings &
petitions, vvhervnto they ought according to their seuerall occasions
vvithin the limits of these doctrines, frame their suites and desires, and
did not tye them to a certaine number of words. Now he finding himself
pressed, in that all his proofes are at once brought to be vveapons
against him rather thē vvarrant, It being prooued vnto him that those
formes are repeated in other words in other places, and that the Priests
vsed other in blessing the people, as Eli blessed Hanna: also that the
Apostles vsed other vvords in prayer, and neuer that verie forme
and number of vvords, he playnly denyeth that our question vvas about
the bynding & limiting to the verie vvords by commandement,
and saith our question vvas, vvhither it vvere idolatrie to vse those

prescript phrases or no. Thus the man is fled, not only contradicting
all his writinges, making voide his proofes, but granting as much as I
affirmed vpon the word COH, hath gyuen mee the whole cause against
his wil: For if these places wil serue to proue an apportioning by number
and stint vpon commandement, then Mr. Giff. hath no profe for his
Collects, no though these had bene so, yet his patched broken mass-booke
shoulde haue bene far from comming in place of true prayer.
But that this is a popish dreame to think in prayer they were bound to
some certeine number of words saying ouer, it was also cōuinced vnto
him by the Greeke word houtos, where Christ commandith his Disciples,
saying, VVhen you pray, pray thus, Our Father &c. Which word [thus] Math. 6. 9.
singnifieth, [after this maner] or according to this forme, rules, and instructions;
for if the commandement shoulde goe to bynde vs to the
very words, then this word [when you pray] would bynd vs neuer to vse
other words, for the text saith, whē you pray, say thus. To this he answereth,
that respecting the rules for matters, when is as much as whēsoeuer you
pray, because we may not depart from those matters cōteyned in those
general petitious: But in words it is not so there, We must consider to
distinguish &c. Wel, hath he not lost himself, and still against his will
yeilded the matter; namely, that wee are not in these formes of prayer
bound to the verie words saying ouer, and that ye holy Ghost did neuer
by commandement stint or limit vs to anie words in praying, which in
deed is common with inchanters: And I take it he will easily yeild me
this point, for if he remember Augustine to teach, that then we pray that
prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, whē our prayers are grounded
vpon those doctrines and instructions, or to that effect: And Calvine to
to say; the Sonne of mā would not prescribe vs vvhat vvords vve must
vse in prayer, he should haue put vs to lesse trouble: So that besids his
mass-booke vvas neuer prescribed by the Lord himself or vvarrant of
his word, he seeth it vnlawful to apportion, limit & stint as by measure
and vvaight certeine members of vvordes, sentences &c, in prayer. As
for his examples of the Psalmes, I refer to my former answere, namely,
that praying is one thing, and singing a psalme an other.
            Now then vve haue heard that reading is not praying or any help to
pray in the instant action of praying, vvhen we should powre forth our
owne hearts to God: Also that it is vnlawful to bynde man to numbers
of vvords of sentences in praying. Let vs come to the first generall argument,
vvhich is this. No Apochripha must be brought into the
publick assemblies; for there only Gods word and the lyuely voyce of
his owne graces must be heard in the publick assemblies: But mens
vvrytings & the reading them ouer for prayer are Apochripha: Therfore
may not be brought into the publick assemblies, eyther for lawes
or vvorship. Here hee finds fault vvith the vvorde Apochripha (although
it hath bene an antiēt vvord in this sense, and now published in
their Bibles to distinguish other vvrytings from the authentick scriptures)
vvilling mee to goe to the matter yt self, drawing by firme conclusiō,

that nothing is to be allowed any place in the Church, which is
not ye perfect rule yt self in writing or without errour vttered in speach,
and he wil yeild. This I did proue vnto him by an Argument hee was
not able to answere, and did leaue out the word Apochripha, thus. Only
the Canonical scriptures & lyuely voice of Gods owne graces are to be
brought into the publick assemblies for doctrine & prayer: But mens
writings or Collections are neither Canonical scripture, nor the lyuely
voice of Gods graces in such as he hath appointed to speak in ye publick
assemblies. Therfore no mans writing may be brought into nor
imposed vpon the publick assemblies for doctrine and prayer.
            Now where he cauilleth about the perfectnes of the rule & absolute
perfectnes of the graces, it doth not help him: For the word of God
being of necessitie by the lawe and ordinance of God, to be read in our
owne language, I trust he will not denye yt to be the written word of
God for the vnperfectnes of the translatiō, being (to the best search the
Church can make) skanned by the original tongue and stil amended;
or at least the Church no further bound to yt, then yt shal be found to
be the perfect rule: so likewise the lyuely voice of Gods graces are not
for the imperfectnes to be excluded, being Gods appointed ordinance;
neither is anie fault in the translation to be allowed, and errour in doctrine
or prayer are presently to be admonished & repented of. Mr. Giffard
then must denye the Bible translated into our owne language to be
the Canonicall Scriptures, and denye the lyuely voice of Gods lawfull
officers, and such as are therevnto called, in doctrine and prayer, to be
the manifestations of the spirit and vtterance of Gods graces for the
assemblie, or els grant the proposition firme: And if hee can put dead
mens writinges into the place of either of these, I will yeild. In the
meane time I hold such translations to be the worde of God, and by
Gods ordinance put into our owne language, to all our knowledges
retayning ye words of God, which word & the lyuely vse of Gods owne
graces in the mouth of such as he therevnto appointeth, are only to be
brought into the publicke assemblies for prayer and doctrine; for God
hath cōmanded these vnto vs as his owne ordināces in his assemblies,
and no other means wherby either God speaketh vnto vs, or his people
vnto him, in the Congregation. To this all the scriptures beare witnesse;
the word is always firme, confirmed with miracles from heauen,
and cōmended to vs by Christ, the Prophetts & Apostles, to be the foundation,
Canon, light, lanterne &c, the graces of the Spirit gyuen for the
interpretatiō, prayer, doctrine &c. CHRIST is ascēded vp into heauen,
and hath giuen giftes vnto men to serue their tyme & minister in their
place in this house. These graces stil renewed, not only in those called
of God in this seruice for their dayly administration, but newe workmen
thrust forth into this haruest, as the Lord of the house disposeth:
which graces of his Spirit are compared to two oliue branches, which
emptie out of themselues thorow two golden pipes Zacharie 4. 12. And
to seuen thunders which vtter their voices that cannot be written.

Away therfore vvith your patched mass-booke, yt may neither stande
for a foundatiō in Gods house, nor for the lyuely voyces of these thunders:
you make yt a monstrous Idoll by putting yt in either of these
vses, yet you will make yt serue for both. Wee haue nothing to do
with your matters of order, as you vnderstand that order for tyme,
place  wee reason of the spirituall action yt self, when wee entreat
of ye meanes whereby God speaketh to vs, and appointeth vs to speake
vnto him. Wee can cast out the errours in the translation or doctrine
or prayer, and yet retaine Gods vvorde in our owne language,
and the liuely voice of his graces in the assemblie: When you can do
so with your deuises and newe hatched Leitourgies wee will giue eare
vnto you and them; till then wee thinck of your counterfeit playes
and pleas for your Idolls and detestable sacriledge and high prophanation
of Gods ordinances with Iannes and Iambres to resist the truth.
Paraphrases wee hold to be mens writinges and expositions, and not
the word of God, nor the liuely voice of Gods grace of interpretation
or prayer, therefore to be excluded this place of seruice vnto God.
Thus you see the further you wrastle, the further you make your
wares, the best of them, odious to euerie godly conscience. You say I
deceiue the simple by gyuing them one crabbe amongst many apples;
but you may behold your best apples such as the holy Ghost hath foretold
vs Reuelations. 18. to be entisements to euil: It is well you will grant
my Propositions so sound; and I would wish (if such be Gods wil) they
might be better favoured.
            Nowe because I wil not stand either repeating or contending about
Syllogismes, I will take this much yeilded of your owne conclusions,
which is as much in effect as I haue affirmed, where you teach me thus
to reason. No mans writings are the vndoubted truth of God, but
haue errours and imperfections: therfore men cannot further ground
vpon them, then they be consonant to the Canonicall scriptures. Againe,
The Church is builded vpon the foundation of the Apostles &
Prophets: therfore our faith is not to rest vpō mens writings. Wherevpon
doth necessarily follow, that if mens writings may not be builded
vpon nor rested vpon, howe should you dreame it lawfull to impose
them for lawes vpon the publick assemblies, or to haue them
there read to beare rule as the wordes of God? And this you confessed
in an other of your writings, that God spake vnto vs out of his vndoubted
worde, or by his owne word. If then God speake not vnto vs
by mens writinges that be of priuate interpretation, in the assemblie,
nor that they can be made groundwork to buyld our faith vpon, or to
rest assured vpon, yt will be granted I hope that they are not to be
imposed vpon the publick assemblies as lawes and rules, but left to
euerie mans priuate vse in their libertie, as they wil answere for themselues
what vse they put them to, and whither they doe not prefer
them before the booke of God, or preiudice themselues by them.
This first poinct is then plaine, That only Gods vndoubted worde is

to be imposed, brought in, and maintayned in the publick assemblies
as lawes and rules, no other vvritings being authentick or Canonical.
But here Mr. GIFF. doth in effect affirme, that the word of God
yt self is not authentick or Canonical, except in the Hebrew or Greeke
Copie: Wherein he goeth a litle beyond the Papists, that wil yet allow
the vvorde of God in latine: And if it shoulde be defended, that the
vvorde of God vvere not the vvorde yt self that vvee haue in our owne
language, it wil follow that no mā could haue assurance of faith, except
he vnderstoode both Hebrew and Greeke, yea be able soundly to interpret
the scriptures in both. If the translations be so far mens vvritings
that yt ceaseth generally to be the vvord of God that is not vvritten in
Hebrew or Greek, and mens vvritinges not to be grounded or rested
vpon, vvhere shall our assurance stand? And might not Mr. Giff. as vvel
say, the Hebrew and Greek Copie are but paper and ynck, many faults
and errours by the print in vowells, accents, letters; and so conclud vve
had not Authentick or canonical scriptures at al, except mēs erronious
vvritings might be of equall authoritie in the assemblie that the scriptures?
must he not beare vvith mee in accompting him an Atheist or
Libertine in thus reasoning? Hence then vve see vvhiles you go about
to abase the Canonicall scriptures, and extol your patched Leitourgie,
you fall into manie blasphemies, as I haue before told you. Wee hold
yt the vvord of God in vvhat language soeuer, stil reiecting the errours
in the print, in the translations  as they are knowne vnto vs, and
not to the vvord yt self for the imperfections or errours in the translation
and print. Now vvhen you can so reiect the errours in mens writings,
as you can make that vvhich remayneth the vndoubted vvorde
of God, not agreeable only, but an Authentick approued Canonicall
scripture, authorised from God to be the verie eternall foundation and
rules, limitts and lawes giuen by himself vnto his people, you may lift
vp your stumped Dagon into this place, if there be some truth in their
vvritings (as vvhat mens vvritings haue not some, and the holy name
of God verie much) yet is that truth in the Scripture yt self & here so
mingled vvith chaffe, that it vvere not only vnprofitable & a hinderāce
of the true vse of Gods vvorde, but an abolishing and defacing of the
vvord yt self; the maiestie vvhere of ought to terrifie you from this presumption.
And vvhere you say that you decide not controuersies by
anie translation, but by the Authentick Copies of the Hebrew and
Greke, I trust you speak only of such as are able by the interpretation
therof so to decide controversies, and holde it not vnlawfull for anie
such as haue not that help, to cōvince errour by the powre of the vvord
and conferring one place vvith an other in anie translation, according
to the analogie of faith, though I grant vve ought to vse y• best approued.
But if this vvere not lawfull, surely no mā might prophesie in the
Church, vvhich hath not the gift of interpretion of the tongue, neither
might any affirme any scripture to be true, but they vvich haue knowledg
of tongues: How blasphemous is this geare, vvhiles you are ignorant

of the powre, wisdome and agreement of the word and spirit, and
diuersitie of giftes giuē vnto men; the Word & the Spirit approue ech
other, and beare witnesse ech of other, in what language soeuer God
giueth yt, to our vnderstanding. Prophesie & knowledg of tongues are
two seueral giftes, not alwayes giuen to one member, but distributed as
God in his wisdome hath appointed. 1 Cor. 12. and prophesie cōmanded
for the more excellent Cap. 14. But this is sufficient in this place, that the
word of God is the word of God in what language soeuer, and to accompt
yt being verbatim translated, or at least so far fo
                  •
               rth faithfully
translated, mans writing, were blasphemie: but mens writings can neuer
be so holden the authentick scriptures of God, how agreable to the
word soeuer they be. My Argument is then firme, and thus left vpon
you: Those writings which be not the word of God being imperfect, &
neuer without error, may not be imponed as lawes & Canons vpon the
publick assemblies, or there be read or i
                  ••
               erpreted, or offred vp in worship:
But such are almens writings that be not the authentick word or
God yt self. The publick assemblies are only bound to the reading &
interpretation of the Scriptures, which God hath ordeined to be read
in a knowne language, and for prayer & prophesie hath ordeined the
liuely voice of his owne graces in the mouth of such as he hath appointed
to be the mouth of the Congregatiō vnto him, and his mouth
vnto them. So y• your pa
                  •
               ched Leitourgie, paraphrases, songes in rime,
homelies, and al your dead mens writings, are cast forth of the publick
assemblies, and manifest to be Idols whē they are thrust into that place.
            Now where I alledged that the binding of the publick assemblie, yea
of all assemblies, to certaine writings of men euerie day & yeare their
number & portion of words, daylie, monthly & yearely in al assemblies
the same matter an words reiterated, in stead of powring forth their
hearts vnto God according to their present needs and occasions, was a
setting of themselues in Gods seate and taking the office of his Spirit,
which only knoweth the wantes of the seueral assemblies according to
their diuerse occasions, he runneth away from the matter, as one vnwilling
to heare of this their 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                & counterfet babling, demanding
whether euerie one should vtter their owne perticular wantes in the
publick assemblie, or should pray nothing but that euerie one feeleth
the present want of in himself, or should tell the Minister before hand
what euerie one of their wantes were; then how the Minister should remēber
al. Are these any thing but mere canils? can any of these follow
vpō the former doctrine? And let him looke againe, whether he that is
the mouth of the Cōgregatiō vnto God in publick prayer, must not cō
               sider
the present publick occasiōs of that publick assemblie, and thereafter
frame his prayers, all the people ioyning in heart to his words of
petition or thanksgyuing, saying Amē to so much as he asketh according
to the wil of God & neede of the time, yea & if they haue not feeling
in such prayers, they are vnfeeling members: yet neither doth he
intermedle with priuate or secret wantes, neither neede they tell him

them; he is sent for the publick affaires of the Church, to cōmend the
seueral actiōs general & publick, vnto God: And as they are diuerse in
euerie assemblie, so must he be a man of wisdome to know, see, and cō
               sider
them, lest they al rashly step into the house of God to offer vp the
sacrifice of fooles, & make a coūterfeit babling Eccle. 4. Yet the sinne of
this is nothing cōparable to th
                  •
                doung your Priests cast forth by pratling
ouer your English Portuis, which y
                  ••
                Lord wil one day cast in your
faces. As then in priuate prayer we are to lay forth our owne wantes &
estate of our owne soule, which cannot be done by reading an other
mans writings, alwayes singing one song, customably repeating in superstitiō
certaine words, our hearts neuer ripped vp, examined, nor the
diseases therof layd open vnto God, seeking due cure: So the man that
is the mouth of the whole assemblie prayeth, as the mouth of one bodie,
for al their open publick present wantes & occasions: Which occasions,
considering the persons & actions, are diuerse & cānot be writtē
for one assemblie before hand, muchlesse for all assemblies in a whole
kingdome, neither by man nor Angel. See then the mock erye of your
seruice booke, and what Idolatrie is cōmitted by yt, to the abandoning
true prayer according to the present wantes & occasion.
            The next thing to be cōsidered, is, about making of lawes in the worship
of God. Where he would persuade vs that their whole Leitourgie
conteining al their publick worship, gouernment, offices & ordinances
of their Church, be but matters of order & conveniencie. Then the
compelling & teaching the publick assemblie to reade ouer mens writings
both as Canons & lawes in the Church, and publickly & priuately
to offer them vp in stead of true prayer & holy invocatiō, is a matter
of comelines & conveniencie. In the meane time it must be a turning
away of the whole order & ordinances of God: For what is the whole
Testament of Christ but an order for euerie office, person, action in the
Church, if he wil haue it taxis, and then must confesse their Leitourgie
an other order of publick administration, and so as I haue said an other
Gospel, an other Testament, a setting vp an other worship. And herevpon
I trust I may cal al this an adding to the word of God; yea I wil go
a litle further, an abolishing & disabling & dishonoring of the word yt
self & graces of his spirit. And whither all this smoke of the bottomlesse
pyt may not be reproued with these scriptures, not only Prouerb. 30
verse. 5. 6. Deut. 4. verse 32. but also Reu. 22. verse. 18. 19. let the godly ponder
and search: and let the fearefulnes of the threats deterre all flesh from
presuming to alter the ordinances, lawes & worship of the most high
God. And that the verie reading of an other mans writing for my owne
praier, or the prayer of the Church, in stead of powring foorth our
owne hearts, is a changing of the whole worship into the making
mens writing an Idoll, which is by these places condemned as an accursed
sinne, let the most hard text (as he in carnall wonder exclaymeth)
be looked into Reuel. 22. verse 18. 19. The words are plaine: If anie
man put or add any thing vnto these, or if anie man take away from these words, he shalbe

iudged as followeth. Now if the adding an other whole Worship, and
suppressing of that God hath apointed, be not an adding to these things
writtē, gyue sentence as you wil answere. O (saith he) but it is said God
wil add vnto such al the plagues written in this booke; and there is in
this booke mentioned the lake of fire: As though the lake of fire is not
due for euery sinne, and yet not euery one that committeth sinne to be
condemned; what sinne is it that deserueth not the eternall wrath of
God? yet not euery one that sinneth giuen ouer to that iudgmēt, for either
yt may be of ignorance, or of negligence, and washed away by repentance
in the blood of Christ, or it may be repented of & left whē wee
see yt. Mr. GIFFARD hath read wel the curses of the law & all the curses
due for sinne, that seeth not how many curses the law & the Prophets
pronounced vpon sinne, to call the persons themselues to repentance;
shewing together the equitie of Gods law, & yet withal the free mercye
of God to al yt truly repent their euil wayes. Al that receiue the Beastes
marke in their hand or forehead, are thretned to be cast with the Beast
and false Prophet into that lake; yet I doubt not but manie that haue
bene so seduced into that sinne, shal by repentance be saued: Not that
I encourage anie to cōtinue in such fearful estate, to hardē their hearts
against the threatnings of God, but that I would haue Mr. GIFF. to put
difference betwene the curse layd to the sinne, and the condemnation
of the person sinning: And seeing he taketh that lake a perticular seuere
threat to the Apostasie vnder Antichrist, I would he had the grace
to consider how it lyeth vpon him, whiles he speaketh out of ye mouth
of the Beast, if he repēt not to turne from his euil wayes. Let it further
be weighed how ignorantly he chargeth me to cōdemne al Churches,
for this smale examplifying of this Egiption darknes, Idolatrous worship,
and exalting mens writings into this defacing of Gods word and
true worship, they neither being guylty of such a sacrilegious Leitourgie,
as this Egiptian Calf hatched at ROME, neither are to be presently
iudged no Church for others sinne, till they ioyne obstinacie to their
transgressiō. But shift the matter as you wil, or rather as you cā apeare
before God, I wil not make lesse the sinne, or the iudgmēt due to sinne,
for mēs persons, no not of whole Churches, if they shal be guilty therin:
My desire is by discouerie of the sinne, to bring men to repentance,
and vnto the awe of God in his worship: who are guyltie besides your
selues in such sacriledge, as to abrogate the Leitourgy of Christ, & set vp
an other, or to restraine Gods true worship, & to giue life to ye image of
the Beast, it skilleth me not; let sinne be sinne, and God righteous, and
thē examine your selues, if they or you be cleare I reioyce, neither do I
think or cā charge them with such Idolatrie as is here erected: I take it
you wil be found ye sclāderer of other Churches, to hide your owne filthines.
But saith Mr. Giff. those scriptures are against the adding of humane
preceptes & lawes to be kept as partes of Gods worship to bind
ye cōscience to seek righteousnes & ye forgiuenes of sinnes, or ye merit
of eternal life in them, or against such rules of gouernmēt as God hath

to be perpetual. In which we must take your meaning to be this; that
you grāt where anie humane precepts & lawes be enforced as a part of
Gods worship, or as lawes to bind the conscience, or when righteousnes
is sought in them, and forgiuenes of sinnes by obseruing of them,
or merit by them, or if they be against such rules of gouernment as
God hath set to be perpetuall, if the additions or constitutions be such
as anie of these, then such lawes and constitutions are against the perfection
of the word of God, against Christian libertie, and in the chief
things which con
                  •
               erne Gods worship, against the ground and foundation
of our faith, and so a thing most detestable & accursed, which our
Sauiour CHRIST refused iustly to obserue with the blinde Phariseis,
wherein you haue granted as much as I euer affirmed: For is not your
whole Leitourgie being an other then CHRISTS Testament, your whole
reading mens writings in place and in stead of laying forth your owne
present wantes and occasions in prayer to God, humane constitutions,
and made a parte of Gods worship? at least such pretended vvorship as
you thinke good enough for him? Weygh the matter vprightly: Againe,
whither your whole Antichristian gouernment, offices, Courtes
and ministerie, be not constitutions and ordinances against such rules
of CHRISTS gouernmēt as be perpetual, and an innovating of his Testament,
examine; which you shall soone perceiue, if you looke but
what CHRISTS perpetual ordinances, offices, officers and lawes for the
guyding, ordering and gouerning of his Church be, prescribing euerie
one their place, dutie & limites ioyntly & seuerally, and not finde your
ministerie registered there, but a strange Leitourgie and worship borrowed
from the Pope, which came out of the bottomlesse pit; confesse
your sacriledge in suppressing CHRISTS whole ministerie and ordinances,
and erecting an other for the perpetuitie of his, euen to euerie naile
and py
                  •
               : The holy Ghost sheweth that only to be his ministerie, till we
be all a perfect body in him, and his whole ministerie and ordinances a
kingdome that cannot be shaken Hebr. 12. Ephes. 4. a commandement to
be kept vndefiled till the apearing of IESVS CHRIST; his Scepter an
euerlasting Scepter; the Sonne as faithfull in his house as MOSES a seruant
in the Tabernacle, who made all things according to the paterne:
So that it is to be wōdred Mr. GIFFARD should think anie part of Christs
gouernment should not be perpetuall, that was giuen by his Apostles
the master buylders and layers of the foundation, wherby all actions
should be tried to ye worlds end. May not Mr. Giff. as wel cal into question
the perperuitie of the Testament, as the lawes & rules for the gouernment
of his Church. Now if your whole false Hierarchie, Offices,
Officers, Lawes, Worship, be plainly other thē CHRISTS, as in our other
writings are proued, and shame will inhibit you to denye, how can you
be so drunke with the cup of the Whores fornication, to think you
haue no constitutions, lawes or traditions, which are a part of worship,
and against such rules of CHRISTS gouernment as the Apostles haue
prescribed for the ordring of his howse, and the same ordeyned for all

Churches til we become all a perfect bodye in him? But if Mr. GIFF.
wil shew himself so voide of al conscience and truth, to say al their traditionall
worship and Antichristian Offices and ordinances be neither
part of their woship nor constitutions disanulling the ordinances of
Christ, yet wil be confesse I doubt not this kinde of worship and gouernment
to be imposed as matters to binde the conscience, being all the

                  •
               eruice of God they haue, seeing hee woulde also haue all that obserue
them not, to be censured and excommunicat for this merchandize: yt
were a sore matter a man should be cut off from Christ and his Church,
gyuen ouer to Satan, and the i
                  •
               dgment ratified in heauen against soule
and bodye, for a matter that byndes not the conscience, As though the
soule & bodye (howsoeuer some things perteine to the one, or is done
by the one as proper worke thereof) were not both to be counted whē
the conscience shalbe opened to answere for all done in both, or by eyther
of both, even whatsoeuer wee haue done in soule and bodye; and
Calvine would but diuide the soule and the bodye in Ciuile causes. But
Mr. Giffard would goe a note further; namely, that in the seruice of God
in such causes as the transgression deserue excommunication, to be no
matter bynding the conscience. But it may be Mr. Giff. doth suppose,
that except the constitutions ecclesiasticall be such, as righteousnes be
commanded to be fought in the doing them, and forgiuenes of sinnes
and merit by them, all is wel. Then, besides the other abuses granted,
he must be demanded whither those traditions of the Fathers, which
our Sauiour Christ and his Disciples refused to obserue, were imposed
as meritorious? whervnto wee answere, No: For in the superstitious
washings of cuppes, of beddes, with al such trincketts, wee see to be no
such matter Marke. 7. and Christs words in saying, they layde the commādemēts
of God aside to set vp their owne traditions, doth shew wherin
the sinne was; namelie, to do and obserue such things of vaine glorie,
superstition, or custome, as God had not inioyned them, and to leaue
vndone the lawes and commandements of God; which sinne is your
transgression at this day: Reade therfore the 7. of Marke & 15. of Mathew
more diligently. Further those superstitious traditions Gal. 4. & Colos. 2.
the obseruing wherof were the denyall of Christ, were neither held meritorious,
nor iustificatiō sought by them, manie of them being Iewish
ceremonies, sometimes as rudiments commanded of God, now abolished
and no further burden to be layde in such outward thinges; no,
We reade not that the law of God yt self was eyther commanded, or so
obserued, as to seeke righteousnes by yt. Now then to the matter; Mr.
Giff. thinketh CHRIST and his Apostles did well in refusing to obey the
traditions of the Fathers at the Pharisies commandement, and so must
confesse it lawful and a dutie of vs to refuse to obserue your Iewish cerimonies
and Romish superstitious traditions, which are so manie as
euen your whole Leitourgie and worship conteine nothing els, Gods
lawes and ordinances not only left vndone, but al that pleade for them
and seeke to walke in them, persecuted with deadly hatred. And how

Mr. Giff. will proue that there is no adding or diminishing to or from
the word of God, by imposing and creating more lawes then God hath
made in his vvorship and gouernment of his Church, but such as bee
made part of the vvorship, or bynde conscience, or bee meritorious, or
against such rules of his gouernment as bee perpetuall, though I take
all your orders, lawes, vvorship in this compasse; yet howe you can
poue this, I know not; for looke againe vpon the scriptures Pro. 30. 5. 6.
De
                     ••
                  . 4. 2. & 12. 32. and. Gal. 3. 15. Reuel. 22. 18. 19. and you shal finde, that to
add, superordeine, innovate or diminish or take anie thing from the
lawes of God already prescribed for his vvorship, were to abrogate his
lawe, to laye further burdens then hee hath layde, to make his lawe
vnperfect, and set our selues in his seate; yea vvhatsoeuer wee put to
vvhich hee hath not commanded, or whatsoeuer wee inhibit that hee
hath commanded, is here forbidden: For this saith the Lorde, Ye shall
put nothing vnto the vvord vvhich I command you, neither shall you take ought therefrom
that you may keepe the preceptes of the Lorde your God vvhich I commande you Deut. 4. 2.
And that this was as well in the outwarde ordinances of the Temple
as in the iudgments, is plaine in the first verse. Againe in the 12. Chap. 32.
VVhatsoeuer I command you, take heede you do yt; Thou shalt put nothing therto nor take anie
thing therfrom; and in the Prouerbs. Euerie vvord of God is pure, put nothing vn
                     •
                  o his
vvordes lest hee reproue thee and thow bee found a lyer. Now the scripture speaking
so absolutely and generaly against al addition or detraction to or from
his ordinances, Mr. Giff. ouershooteth himself of his bare word to contradict
and limit so expresse commandementes; for these scriptures
(saith hee) are against adding of humane preceptes and lawes to bee
kept as partes of Gods vvrship, to bynde the conscience to seeke righteousnes,
forgeuenes of sinne, merit in them, or against such rules of
gouernment as God hath set to be perpetuall. This is true, but this is
not all, for the lawe is generall against all inventions, traditions, constitutions,
vvhatsoeuer God hath not commanded, as the second Commandment
doth also teach. Thou shalt not make to thy self  so yt God hath
left nothing to be layde vpon his Church by cōmandement, which he
hath not cōmanded: And therfore that place of the Apostle to the Gal.
3. 15. must be better pervsed: If it be but a mans Testament vvhen yt is confirmed no
man doth abrogate yt or superordeine anie thing to yt: CHRISTS Testament then
being much more perfect, his vvhole minde for the ordering of his
house manifested therin, it is wicked presumption to alter the ordinances
thereof, or to holde them vnmeete or vnsufficient for anie age
or estate. Well, Mr. GIFF. coulde nowe bee content thus far to limit
the povver of the Church; namelie, to haue her subiect and obedient
to his voice; but that he supposeth there may be lawes ecclesiastical
made, of things in themselues indifferent; that where the scripture
hath commanded such things to be vsed at our libertie for order,
for comelynes, edification and glorye of God, as matters of place,
time, and such circumstance. But hee here mistaketh his text, for the
Lorde commandeth by the Apostle in that place 1 Corint. 14. that those

publique busines and exercises of the assemblies, shoulde be done in
order, in comlynes, to edifijng; and doth not leaue somthing to bee
commanded, vvhich the maister buylders hath not prescribed: For to
binde those thinges by lawe vvhich God hath not bound in his worship,
wee are to add new traditious to bring vs into bondage of the
creatures, vvhich the same Apostle denyeth euer to bee brought into
bondage vnto 1 Corint. 6. 12. in his owne person teaching vs so to walke:
the Lord see in his wisdome cause to leaue them in our libertie, knowing
there vvoulde bee no end of such perticular lawes, especially if he
had left it to mans wyt to make and vnmake lawes therin: For the orders
you speake of then, meaning circumstances of time, place, kneeling,
sitting, standing &c, there can be no further lawes of them, then
the Apostle hath set, and (as the Minister of CHRIST prescribed) that al
be donne to edifying in comlynes, order &c. Of theis to set perticular
lawes, vvere to break these general lawes of God, whereby he teacheth
vs the true vse of them, and leaueth them in the Churches libertie as
need requireth to vse them or not vse them: Neither can all assemblies
bee bound in these thinges to the same in perticular, that being
needfull and decent in one, that is not in an other. And in that you
woulde haue them no further commanded, then they bee needfull,
convenient, decent &c, you condiscend that there can bee no setled
lawe in perticular layde vpon the Church in them: For to vse them so
far as they bee convenient, necessarie, and to edifijng, is the lawe and
commandement of God; and to vse them further at anie mans commandement,
were both a breach of Gods lawe, and making the creatures
stumbling blockes, Idolles, bondages, and euerie way sinnefull.
And when the Church commandeth them so far to be vsed as they are
commanded of God, the Churche doth but ratifye and see Gods lawe
executed; so that you haue lost your selfe, whiles you shoulde haue
proued your bold assertion: That the Church hath power to ordeyne
lawes, for to create or make lawes, which you see the folly of, being
nowe driuen to another shift; that in the perticular thinges vvhereof
God hath giuen generall lawes, wee may make setled lawes, and yet
but for the tyme they be convenient; Wheras in deed Gods lawe is the
same and nothing ells. But because they bee necessarye in one place,
that bee not in another, at one tyme, that bee not at another, of some
persons, that bee not to other, ther can bee no lawe sett in the perticular
one daye for all assemblies in such thinges. Neither shall anye
disagreement bee such amongst the seueral Churches, as need anye
contention for them, vvhiles euerie assemblye doe that vvich is to
themselues most meet, most convenient and necessary in such things,
for the present tyme. The Pastor and Elders vvere of small discretion
if they might not haue these thinges in their libertie; and euen these
doctrines and examples are in this point against your selfe, vvhich you
haue alledged from other Churches. But my purpose is not to contend
about mens writings, nor to be drawē into cōtrouersie with other

Churches, whē I am to deale with your present sinne; for the auoiding
wherof you thus rage. If your cause be good, plead it by ye scriptures,
and I wilbe so farre from casting out darts against al Churches, as I wil
not deale with their estate, till I be further occasioned; the rather may
I omitt this labour, for that you haue alledged one place of scripture
which you suppose wil beare 
                  •
               p all your matter: If yt helpe you not, I
see not how you wil de
                  •
               end your assertion. In the 15. of the Acts where
it is said the Apostles, Elders, and brethren at Ierusalem met about the
question of Circumcision and other Ceremonies of Moses lawe, which
some would haue burdened the Gentiles with, we see there (saith he)
that the Apostles themselues did decree some thing for ye time, which
afterward were to be altered when the occasion vvas taken away, namelie,
that the Gentiles should absteyne from blood, and from strangled,
for auoiding offence to the weak Iues. First let vs see what the decree
was, and then it will appeare how litle yt serueth Mr. Giff. his purpose:
these be the wordes. Act. 15. 28. 29. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to
vs, to lay no more burden vpon you then that vvihich is necessary of these thinges, to absteyne
from Idolothytes, and from blood, and from strangled, and from for
                     •
                  i
                     ••
                  tion; fro
                     •
                   vvhich keeping
your selues, yee doe vvell. For one of these, which is [fornicatiō] we haue
here no question, it being by the moral lawe alwayes forbiden: For the
other Mr. Giffard would thus reason. The Apostles themselues did decree
them for the tyme, therfore the Church hath power to make and
ordeyne lawes in things of themselues indifferent, about the worship
of God and publick exercises. For our answere, wee vvould haue Mr.
Giff. first learne, that he, in saying ye Apostles themselues did this by the
direction of the holy Ghost, hath ouerthrowē himselfe; for these were
the Maister builders, appointed of God to be law makers for the whole
Leitourgie and vvorship of CHRIST to all posterities, euen all the lawes
and ordinances of the newe Testament, confirmed by miracles from
heauen, deliuered by their ministery vnto vs: It vvill not follow then,
if the Apostles had made and ordeyned some lawe here, that therefore
euerie Synode or anie Synode may impose lawes & commandements
by themselues ordeyned, till they shew they haue that power giuen
them the Apostles had, and an other Leitourgie to be made, vvhich
they shall neuer be able to doe, vvithout a newe Christ. Wee haue a sure
foundation alreadie layd, vvherevpon all Synods and Counsells must
build, and suffer their actions to be tryed therby; they haue not power
to inioyne one title, vvhich is not by y• word of God inioyned vs. Further,
vvhat did the Apostles here that they had not vvarrant for; neither
vvould they lay anie yoke or burthen. And as for these thinges,
they doe as much binde vs nowe if ther be like cause, namelie, not in
Idolothyts, blood, or that vvhich is strangled to offend our vveak brethren,
if the Iues should be now againe called, neither to offend anie in
meate or drinke for vvhome Christ hath dyed: Neither vvas ther here
any absolute law made of these thinges, nor necessitye for the present
tyme, fu
                  •
               der then it should bee necessary for the respect set downe; for

otherwise it had bene to build againe the thinges destroied; onlye
they thus counselled and adonished the Gentiles to vse their liberty
in these thinges, as they might gyue noe offence to theyr
weake brethren of the Iues, the more to drawe them on in the
wayes of CHRIST; for they doe not inioyne yt as a lawe, but tell
them they shall doe well if they obserue these thinges, by no necessitye
inforced. But wee doe not nowe obserue these thinges,
the occasions being remoued. True, therfore I trust you wil grant,
that no man shall bee furder bounde to anye constitution in such
thinges indifferent, then there shall bee cause, neyther need wee
publicke order to retract; so that you leaue the matter to me, that
wee can bee no further bounde in such thinges, then by those rules
of edifijng, order, comlines, occasion shall require, so that wee
neither need nor can haue setled lawes herein: howe much more
bondage and burden is imposed vnder this Antichristian yoke,
the thinges being of themselues most lothsome and detestable Popery,
abrogating and making voide all the true ordinances lawes
and worship of CHRIST, and so inforced as whot persecution
procedeth against anye that of conscience absteyne from them, let
it bee considered. Neither hath there euer bene detracting this
thirtye yeares of anye your abhominations, neither is held lawefull
for them that seeth them vnlawfull, to forbeare them, without
deadlye hate, to bee followed to the death. Blessed bee our
God, that hath deliuered our soules out of such Egiptian seruitude;
our liues are not deare vnto vs, neither shall your reproch
moue vs.
            Nowe concerning the last places of the Treatise, where hee is
vtterlye mute in this, that all whiche stand vnder another Hierarchie
or spirituall regiment then CHRISTS, bee by outward profession
no true Christians, or vnder the promise of saluation, also
for the freedome wee professe in holye obedience to all statutes and
ordinances of God; as hee hath left vntouched the matter, for
which hee aledged the 7. to the Romanes, namelye, the outward professed
bondage to a false spirituall gouernment, so I having before
largely expressed my minde in that poinct of doctrine, and in such
as then were about these thinges opposed, referre anye that desire
the truth herein, to ponder the reasons & proofes there set downe,
not minding to repeate againe, or to bee set aworke in vnfolding
his troublesome and confuse cauills in abusing this place, or to
make further replye, till I see more capeable conceypt in him of
such principles of regeneration and sanctification, of freedome and
bondage; yet for others direction, one cauill or two shalbe breifly
set in veiwe. First where hee supposing I had bene in error (and he
himself fast fettered in heresie and feeth it not) chargeth mee to
runne as farre on the other side, as a wheele turned with contrarye

motions of the streame, for saying I helde the deare children of God
might fall into any sinne, except the sinne against the holye Ghost,
yet bee restored by rep
                  •
               tance, Gods grace so far abounding, alwayes
considered (as then I noted) that obstinacye in anye sinne, made
them to vs the seruants of sinne whiles they so remayn
                  •
               d, not speaking
this to giue leaue or incouragement to presume in the least or
first step of sinne, lest God leaue them to themselues, but to giue
them hope if they returne that haue so fallen▪ hee excepteth generally
against all presumptuous sinne, saying, of 
                  •
               railty Gods children
may fall, but of presumption hee maketh great doubt, for 
                  〈◊〉
                so
sinning to bee renued by repentance, for it is spoken of the Maranatha
to bee pronounced in this life to none, but that bee in that sinne against
the holye Ghost: and here to fill his paper (as his common
shift is, when hee can neither affirme nor denye) hee putteth me to
newe questions: You must (saith hee) declare howe filthye incest is,
not sinne against the holye Ghost, nor if a man kill his Father or Mother
or children, nor witchcraft, nor familiarity with spiritts, is not
your meaning that the regenerate man may of presumption and
obstinacy commit these? If Mr. GIF. shoulde thus vnderstande the
worde may, hee is in the same fault to say the regenerate may sinne
of frailty: And I answere furder, hee coulde vnderstand the worde
may otherwise, if (as in all his writinges) hee caryed not this minde
to take all in euill part, to quarrell, hee coulde haue vnd
                  ••
               stood it
thus; that God suffereth of his elect to fall into such sinne, yet hee is
able to reduce them by repentance, and hath made promise to receiue
them if they retourne; and not haue cauilled in this maner in
such thinges, the horrour in the verye naming of which sinnes shaketh
the flesh and bones of the godlye to heare or behold; so that
his drift is but to cast in a litle wormewood, to deface the truth deliuered:
Therefore I will onlye prooue the generall doctrine before
affirmed, and for these perticulars, let him that taketh pleasure in
r
                  •
               king in them, being sinnes not once to bee named amongst Gods
children, answere himself. And much better might hee haue put
his question thus. Whither wilfullye committing of sacriledge, and
presumptuous continuing to enchant in a false m
                  •
               nistery, with Iannes
and 
                  
                     ••
                  mbres resistinge the truth, persecutinge the light against their
knowledge, bee not within the compasse of that sinne against the
holye Ghost. That Gods elect after regeneration doe fall into presumptuous
sinne, and for a time persist in obstinate sinne, and may
bee restored by repentance, I thus prooue. Manie of Gods children
may bee excommunicat, and vpon the repentance bee receiued againe,
as the incestious person 1. Cor. 5. therefore do for a time remayne
in obstinate sinne. Againe euerie sinne is to bee prayed for,
but that one sinne against the holye Ghost 1 Iohn. 5. 16. Therfore pre
               
                  •
               umptuous
sinn is committed of Gods elect after regeneratiō. That

all presumptuous sinne is not sinne against the holy Ghost, wee shall
see by the discription of that sinne Hebr. 6. & 10. where there is dispyting
of the spirit, accompting the blood of IESVS an vnholy thinge,
persecuting the light they haue sometimes tasted of, and such like
notes, which are degrees further then presumption; for there is
presumption of ignorance, of rashnes, of hope of mercy, and many
times do the Prophets charge the people with rebellion against God;
so that all presumption cannot haue the curse maranatha pronounced
vpon it, or the persons not to bee prayed for. But sure I grant, that
presumption is neere to that sinne, and there cannot bee that high
sinne without presumption. But now if all sinne but sinne of frayltie
were vnpardonable, your Clergie were in a wofull case, that thus
maynely resist the truth, and persecute Gods seruants.
            Neither is this doctrine anye way contrarye to that I delyuered,
namelye, that the regenerat man cannot bee sayd to stande in bondage
to sinne after regeneration, and the seruant of God at the same
time by outwarde profession; for none are in bondage to sinne after
their calling to the faith, (to our iudgment) but suche as contynue
obstinate in their open knowne sinne after due admonition:
that such stande not by outwarde profession the seruants of CHRIST
but of sinne, and are to bee excommunicate, hee willingly granteth;
and herevpon merueileth how I shoulde gather, that obstinat
grosse sinners shoulde not bee excommunicat, which hee might
playnlye perceiue if hee had eyes; for if al the regenerat bee in bondage
to sinne, and so the seruants of sinne and of Satan, howe should
they cast out an other for bondage out of their fellowship by the
power of CHRIST? If Mr. GIFF. say, because the obstinate is in
greater bondage then the other; this proueth not that the bond can
cast out the bond by the power of CHRIST. Againe, if all bee in
bondage, then none can bee holden without for being in bondage
to sinne; so that none shoulde bee excommunicat, none without,
the worlde and the Church, light and darknes, CHRIST and Beliall
should bee mingled together. To all which hee hath made no answere,
but demandeth certeine questions, and maketh such a formal
conclusion, as if all were in bondage vnto sinne. His questions
I grant al affirmatiuely, yet denye his cōsequence. Let him plainely
proue therfore by euidence of scripture, that all that do sinne are
bondslaues of sinne; and when hee hath so done, I shall therevpon
conclude him a flat Anabaptist in the cheif ground of their profession.
Verye gladlye therefore vvoulde hee leaue out the worde [bondage],
and falslye accuseth and sclandereth mee, in saying I holde
that men can not outwardly appeare sinners, and stand the seruants
of CHRIST both at a time, vvhich is an open vntruth: Yt is hee,
that cannot put differēce betwene sinning, and bondage vnto sinne;
so that in one vvorde all his questions are answered: If anie bee in

bondage to sinne, hee standeth a seruant thereof. Now for the 7. to
the Romanes, the Apostle setting forth the strift betwene the flesh and
the Spirit, speaketh somtimes in the person of the one (if I may so
speake) and somtimes of the other; somtimes of the newe man or
regenerat part, or of himself so far as hee is regenerat; somtimes of
the olde man, which is not wholly slaine, but full of rebellion striueth
for maisterie. Nowe I must demand of him, whether of these
two haue the preheminence, dominion and rule in the regenerat,
the graces of the spirit, or the rebellions of the flesh? The same Apostle
saith the spirit, and that part of the man renewed therewith,
which wee call the inner mā In the 8. Cap. hee maketh it playne, The
lawe of the spirit of life in CHRIST hath freed mee from the lawe of sinne and of death.
What is the lawe of the Spirit but the powre, rule, and dominion
of the Spirit of God in vs? And what is the lawe of sinne, but the
powre of sinne, and bondage, wherewith wee were somtimes led
headlong by Satan at his pleasure, but are nowe freed, that it no
more doth reigne or beare rule in vs vnto condemnation. Againe,
whosoeuer are ledd by the Spirit of God, are the sonnes of God;
and in the 7. Cap. 4. and 6. Cap. 16. knowe you not that to vvhome you ex
                     •
                  ibit
your selues seruants vnto obedience, his seruants you are to vvhome you giue your
selues obedient? DAVID feeling the great assaultes of sinne in his flesh,
and his inhabilitie to keepe the Lawe of God, earnestlye prayeth
vnto the Lorde Direct my steppes in thy vvorde (saith hee) and let none iniquitie
haue dominion over mee. After the stronge man is cast out, CHRIST beareth
the rule ouer vs and in vs, by his Spirit. So the scripture euerye
where pronounceth vs Saincts by calling, Kinges, and Priestes,
a people set free; not that wee sinne not in thought word and deede
howrely and daylye, but that sinne hath not dominion ouer vs: If
then wee were in bondage to sinne, wee are the servantes of sinne
and of death, which God forbid. Where Mr. GIFF. therfore reasoneth
thus; the regeneration is imperfect, therefore the freedome
is imperfect, therefore there is some bondage, yt is blasphemie: For
first our freedome is perfect in CHRIST, ells his death is not sufficient.
Then though our sanctification bee not perfect, yet is there
no bondage, but a rebellion of sinne; which if yt shoulde reigne,
wee were not the seruantes of CHRIST: And while it seemeth for
a time to reigne, and wee obstinatly to cleaue vnto yt, wee are iudged
(soe far as men can iudge) the seruantes of yt, and so gyuen ouer
from CHRIST vnto Satan, till the grace of the Spirit againe to our
iudgement againe appeare to beare rule. As for DAVID in the
whole yeare after hee had commytted adulterye and murther, hee
neuer pleaded for his sinne when hee was reproued, nor did no longer
cleaue vnto yt. Soe likewise though wee fall and sinne, and bee

                  •
               edd awaye with sinne, yet are wee not in bondage therevnto, vntil
wee obstinatly and wilfully giue our selues vnto yt from CHRIST,

which you finde not in the 7. to the Rom. but resisting of sinne, a hatred
of sinne, a will to doe good, a repentance and continuall recouerye
of himself, and flying vnto CHRIST. Soe that your doctrine
is false, to saye, the Apostle stoode in some spirituall bondage; and
my Argument still firme, that these Ministers and people which
stande in a professed bondage to a false gouernment, their pray
                  •
               rs
are an abhomination vnto the Lorde, till they repent and submit
themselues vnto CHRIST and his lawes and ordinances. Whiche
the Lorde gyue them grace to doe, euen speedely to depart out of
the house of bondage, and from all subiection of his Antichristian
Hierarchie.
            
               
                  CHRISTS vnworthie vvitnes for the
truth and freedome of the Gospell.
IOHN GRENVVOOD.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   