
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ An introduction
into phiſycke,
wyth an vniuerſal
dyet, gathered
by
Chriſtofer
Laugton. E W
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the ryght worſhypfull
knyght ſyr Arthure Darcye
his humble ſeruaūt Chriſtofer
Langton wyſſheth
health & encreaſe
of vertue.
            
               A Softe as I remēbre
youre kyndeneſſe and
beneuolence towarde
me (my ſinguler good
maſter) it is harde to
ſaye, howe greatly I
deſyre to recompence the ſame: leſt I
ſhulde eyther ſeme vnkynde and vnthankefull,
or els not to vnderſtande
and perceyue the greatneſſe of youre
manifolde benefytes, employed vpōme:
of ye which, as ye one is a ſigne of
a noughty hert, ſo the other is a tokē
of a dul wytte: but they be both very
euident argumentes of vnthankefulneſſe

and ingratitude. From the
which, as I haue alwayes hytherto
abhorred, ſo I deſyre nowe to be
voyde from all ſuſpicion of the ſame.
For me thinke, I perceiue euery day
more and more, howe moche ſhame
and fylthyneſſe is in that vice, almoſt
by the teſtimonie of euery wyſe man
in ſomoche that I thynke hym to treſpaſſe
greatly, agaynſt the ſocietie of
this our commune lyfe, which doeth
vnthankefullye receyue benefytes of
any man. For as gratitude or thankfulneſſe
doeth encreaſe lyberalitye,
which is the eſpeciall parte of iuſtice:
ſo ingratitude diſſolueth vtterly, and
abolyſheth the ſame: the which liberalitie,
yf it fall ones in decaye, it taketh
away the cōmutation of offices
and the doing of one for an other, the
which ones taken away, what helpe
I praye you is left to the cōſeruation

of ye cōmune wealth, ſeing yt the hole
courſe of our lyfe, conſyſteth in ye ſocietie
and mutuall doinge one for an
other. Wherfore the wyſe kynges of
the Parcians made lawes, for to punyſh
ſuche as were vnkynde and vnthankefull
perſonnes, bycauſe they
thought none to be ſo vnnaturall as
they, nor anye to treſpaſſe more agaynſte
the cōmune weale. Theſe &
other ſuche (myne eſpecial good maſter)
hath cauſed me to deſyre vehementlye,
to ſhewe ſome token of the
pure zeale and loue which I haue euer
borne vnto you, leſt I ſhoulde be
founde vnnaturall, eyther vnto you,
or to this my natiue countrye. Wherfore
ſeinge that fortune hath gyuen
me no rycheſſe, wherewith I myght
longe yer this haue recōpenced ſome
parte of your kyndeneſſe, I thought
mete to offre vnto you, the fyrſte frutes

of my ſtudyes and learnynge, verely
truſtynge, that your wyſedome
wyll eſteme for the beſt, my loyall
hert, and diligēt endeuour, although
my boke peraduenture ſhall not ſatiſfye
your expectation.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Phyſyke ſpeaketh in her owne perſon,
to her myniſters and Phiſicious.
            
               AFter that Prometheus
hadde ſtollen fyre out of
heauen, the father and
ruler of the goddes Iupiter,
beinge ſore offended
with his malicious facte, ſwore
by a great oth, that he wolde not only
be reuenged vpon hym, but of all
his poſteritie, wherfore, commaundyng
his ſonne Vulcanus to ſhape a
beautyfull woman, called al the goddes,
and goddeſſes togyther, to whō
he ſpake on this faſſyon: what auayleth
vs our ſcepter & crowne mooſte

valiauntlye conquered, of our father
Saturne? whom we depoſed for tyrannie:
what auayleth vs the notable
victorye of Thiphocus and hys brethren?
or the punyſhmentes of Titius,
Tantalus, Siliphus, and Ixion? ſeing
that one can not be ware by an others
harme. I am ſure none of you
be ignoraunt of our iniuryes, which
we haue receyued of the handes of
Prometheus: my wyfe and ſyſter Iuno,
for Paris his ſake deſtroyed the
whole natiō of the Troians, and my
doughter Minerua burned an hole
nauy of the Grecians, for one mans
offence: and ſhall we Iupiter father
of all the goddes, and ruler of heauē
and earth, ſuffre our eternall fyre to
be ſtolen out of heauen vnpunyſhed?
whyle he ſpake theſe wordes, Mulciber
his ſonne brought in the ladye
which was now already ſhapen, thā
               
Iupiter, cōmaundyng as well goddes
as goddeſſes, to trymme & decke
her to the vttermoſt, named her Pā
               dora,
bycauſe euery god and goddeſſe
had gyuen her ſomthing, and he him
ſelfe gyuyng her a boxe, wherin was
encloſed al maner of diſeaſes and maladyes,
ſent her to Epimetheus, by
hys ſonne and faythfull meſſenger
Mercurius, which Epimetheus, although
he were warned of his broher
Prometheus to receyue no gyft
from Iupiter, moſt louyngly retayned
her: and openyng her boxe, lette
forthe abrode al maner of maladyes,
and diſeaſes, wherwith al mankynd
was cruellye punyſhed, vntyll ſuche
tyme as Iupiters furour and indignation
was ſūwhat ſlaked through
the prayer of Eſculapius, to whome
he ſente me as a remedye and medicine,
to all ſuch euyls and gryeffes.

whome for his faythefull ſeruyce, I
made a god. And I praye you, haue
I not rewarded both Hypocrates &
Gallene accordynglye? ſeinge that at
this daye they are glorifyed in fame
as moche as eyther Alexander Magnus,
or any other notable prince? but
out alas what cruell fate of fortune
is this, that I ſomtyme the ſpryng &
welle of al felicitie and goodneſſe vnto
man, am now cleane turned to the
contrarye. For where as before I
was authour of health, to euery māſekyng
for me: now I am not onelye
a cōmune murtherer, and a cōmune
thefe, but alſo a mayntayner of Paricides,
moche more vyle then ye ſtynkynge
whore of Babylon. For you
that be my myniſters and Phiſiciōs
to you I ſpeake: I praye you tel me,
why doth euery man now vtterly abhorre
my company? trumpyng eftſones

in my waye, who is wyllyng to
dye, let hym goo to Phiſyke: who is
wyllyng to be robbed of his money,
let hym go to Phiſyke, yf I be not a
thefe & a murtherer? But what ſayd
I, did I cal you my ſeruaūtes? no, I
knowe ye not, & moche leſſe ye know
me: wo ſhall be vnto you, which rauyſhyng
me agaynſte my wyll, hath
thus brought me in captiuitie & bondage,
wo ſhalbe vnto you, which for
youre owne lucre and aduauntage,
hath made me an inſtrument of miſchefe:
woo ſhall be vnto you whyche
haue ſclaundered me with the death
of ſo many thouſandes: woo ſhall be
vnto you that haue robbed and polled
of theyr money ſo many nacyons.
But paraduenture ye wyll ſaye that
I wrongfully and without all cauſe
do ſclaundre you, laying the fault in
me, that ye heale not as other, that

were my ſeruauntes and myniſters
dyd, bycauſe there is not lyke vertue
in me now, as was then: and wherof
I beſeche you cōmeth that? of me,
or of you, which knowe me not? For
what ſoeuer he be that hath not exactly
learned naturall Philoſophye,
be he neuer ſo well practiſed, he neuer
knewe me. Therfore whoſoeuer
wyll be my ſeruaunt, let him firſt be
ſure that he haue a good natural wit
that he maye be able to practyſe any
thynge that is taught hym, and thā
let hym be exercyſed, euen from hys
tendre age, in dialect, arithmaticke,
and mathematicke, he muſt alſo be
very payneful, ſettyng his mynde on
nothyng but only on learnynge, and
conferryng his ſtudyes alwayes wt
the beſt, and ought alway to be a very
diligent ſercher of the truthe, forſakynge
all other thynges, and cleauynge

hollye vnto it. Moreouer he
muſte take an ordre in hys ſtudyes,
not begynnyng as the mooſt part of
you do, wyth the ſymples, and practyſe
at the fyrſt, ouerleapynge the elementes,
the temperatures, the section
of the body, with all the faculties
and actions of the ſame: then after
he hath conſtitute an ordre, in his
ſtudyes, he muſt exercyſe the ſame: &
ſo doinge he ſhall not nede to ſeke on
me, for I wyll offre my ſelfe to hym,
without any ſekyng. But as for you
that haue not ſought my ſeruyce of
this ſort, ye lytle knowe me: yet with
your lying and craking, calling your
ſelues excellent Phiſitions, ye haue
brought me in depe ſclaūdre wt you,
but I counſell ye take hede, and leue
your lying, leſt I put you to a foule
rebuke: and if ther be any of you that
knowledgeth his faulte, and wolde

ſerue me, I haue alredy ſhewed hym
a waye, without the which it is not
poſſible to know me. Now ye know
my mynde, beware how ye preſume
to my ſeruyce.
            
               The .i. Chapter.
               ¶Of the diuerſitie of ſectes
in phiſike, & which
are to be folowed.
               
                  THe olde and aunciente
phiſitions, amonge the
Grekes whyche paſſed
al other in phiſike were
deuyded into .iii. ſectes.
They that were of the firſt ſect, were
called Empirici: and they that were
of the ſeconde ſecte, were called Methodici:
the laſt and beſt were called
dogmatici. Empirici were they that
wroughte onelye by experience, and

thought it a great poynt of wiſdom
in no caſe to admyt reaſon, markynge
very diligently, by what maner meanes
they had healed anye maladyes
or diſeaſes, in the whych yf they had
lyke ſucceſſe afterwarde by healpe of
the ſame medicins, than they were
bolde to call that ſame medicine, by
the whiche they had holpen oftentymes
one kynde of diſeaſe, Preceptum
fidele, whyche is as muche to ſaye as
a faythfull precepte, and whan they
had gathered of theſe a greate numbre,
they called the whole gatheriges
in greke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : whyche in Latyn
woorde for woorde, is as muche to
ſaye, as Intuitus proprius. and in oure
vulgare tongue, it maye very wel be
called a certayne memorye of thoſe
thynges, the whyche hath bene ſene
oftentymes to chaunce of one ſorte,
the whych alſo may very wel be called

experience, for it is nothynge, but
an obſeruation and memory of that
whych hath chaunſed oftentymes after
one faſſion. Than after that they
had gathered after th
                     •
                  s faſſhion, a
great many of experimētes, they did
vtterly abolyſhe, and condempne all
reaſon as voyde, and of none effecte
to the learnyng of phiſyke. They dyd
alſo nothyng regarde the tyme of the
yere, the temperature of the wether,
nor yet the powers of ye patient, puttynge
no dyfference betwyxte yonge
and olde, weake or ſtronge, whote or
coulde, drye or moyſte, but thoughte
that they might ſafelye venture that
vpon one, wyth the whych they had
healed another in lyke diſeaſe, and
of thys ſecte was Theſſalus, & Cornelius
Celſus, wyth all theyr ſcholers.
The ſeconde ſecte was called
Methodica, the whych dyd nothing

regard the place affected, nor ye cauſe
of the gryefe, nor the age of the pacient,
nor the tyme of the yere: nor the
temperature of the countrye, nor the
habyte of the ſycke manne, nor yet
the kynde of hys former lyfe, & conſtantly
affirming that there was but
two dyſeaſes, the one the ſtoppynge
of the pores, and the other the ouermuche
openyng of the ſame: condemned
vtterly Hyppocrates, becauſe he
ſayde that phyſike was a longe arte
and that mans lyfe was very ſhort:
for they affyrme that it is clene contrary,
that is to ſaye, that mans lyfe
is longe, and phiſyke is ſo ſhorte an
arte, that yf all thynges whyche (as
they ſaye) be ſuperfluous, were cutte
out: it myght be learned eaſely in .vi.
monethes. They diſcent alſo from
the fyrſte ſecte of phiſitions, in that
they thynke there commeth no profyte

of expe
                     •
                  ience, vntyll ſuche tyme
as they haue learned the vertues &
faculties of medicines and remedies
And moreouer that it is not poſſible
to fynde any remedye or medicyne,
by diligent markynge, ſeing that all
remedyes, be gathered of ſuche thinges
as be euident to the ſenſe, and of
this ſecte and opinion was Eraſſiſtratus,
& Aſclepiades with all theyr
retinue. The thyrd and laſt ſect were
called Dogmatici, the which ioined
experience alwayes with reaſon (cō
                  ſyderynge
very diligently the cauſes
of the euyll, as well thoſe that be obſcure,
and harde to fynde as thoſe alſo,
whiche are euydent and open to
euery mans eye) and doth giue moch
both to the nature of the ayer & water,
and region, where the ſycke abydeth,
ſtedfaſtly affyrmyng that it is
mooſt neceſſarye for the Phiſitions,

both to knowe and conſydre the differences
of the ſame, & alſo to marke
diligentlye his accuſtomed dyet, as
well in meates and drynkes, as bathes,
exercyſes, and other thynges.
And to cōpare thynges that be paſt,
wyth ſuche as be preſent, & to know
perfytely the powres and vertues of
medicines, by the whiche they maye
take eaſely away the cauſe of al maladyes,
and finally that he be ſuche a
one the which cā proue and improue
by good reaſon, that this medycyne
hath this facultye of nature, to the
whyche he maye attayne, by the
helpe of Logycke, he muſte knowe
alſo (they ſaye) the internall partes,
by dyligent ſearche, and cuttynges
of bodyes, he muſt be ſene alſo in naturall
Phyloſophye, Aſtronomye,
Mathematycke, and Arithmatycke.

Of thys ſect was Gallen, and longe
before him Hipocrates, whom wold
to God our Phiſitions wolde ſette
as a glaſſe before theyr eyes, I wold
then thynke, that Phyſycke ſhoulde
not be ſo lytle ſette by as it is. But
alas, there is no mans Phyſycke ſo
lytle regarded nowe a dayes as Galennes
is, and in deede to ſaye the
truthe, it maye very well be perceyued,
by theyr doinges, that they werneuer
Galennes ſcholers: for he teacheth
them, not to iudge all dyſeaſes
by the vryne, where as the moſte
parte of them (I do not ſaye all) after
that they haue ones ſene the water
of the ſycke, yea though they neuer
knewe hym, nor can not be enfourmed
by the bearer in what ſtate
he is in, wyll not ſtycke to wryte the
Appotecarie a byl for ſuch maner of
drugges, ye if they were layed before

theyr eyes, they coulde not tell, whether
they were the ſame yt they write
for, or no. How is it poſſible for theſe
Phiſitions, to do any leſſe then kyll
theyr pacientes, but it maketh ye leſſe
matter, ſeinge they be hyred to it,
wyth golde and ſyluer.
               Well, I wyll ſaye no more at thys
tyme, but ſurely, yf I were diſpoſed
I coulde proue that there is as moch
iugglyng, and deceyuyng of the people
now a dayes amongeſt our phiſitions,
I wyll name none (but euerye
man knoweth his owne weakeneſſe
and infirmitie) as euer was amongeſt
the Popyſh preeſtes, and a
redreſſe myght be had, yf it pleaſed
the kynges hyghneſſe, yt none might
be ſuffered to practyſe, but ſuche as
be learned.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapter.
               
               ¶Of the Elementes.
               
                  NOw after that I haue declared
and opened the ſectes
and opynions of the
mooſte noble and mooſt
auncient Phyſitions, I
I thynke it verye mete to ſhewe the
nature of the Elementes, whyche be
iiii. in numbre: the fyre, ayer, water,
and earth. But to auoyde ambiguitie,
I wyl (by goddes grace) fyrſt declare
the ſignification of this worde
Elementum, which we maye verye
well call in our tonge a begynnynge
of any thynge: and thereof it cōmeth
yt the Alphabete letters be called elemētes,
bicauſe they are beginners of
al maner of languages, & the principles
alſo of euery arte be called Elementes,
bycauſe they are begynners
of the ſame. The Phiſitions alſo do

call the veynes pulſes, and bones, wt
all other ſuche partes as the Latyne
men call similares, ſenſible elementes:
bycauſe they are the fyrſt beginners
of mannes bodye, as moche as
maye be perceyued by ſenſe. For the
fyre, ayer, water and earth, (of the
which all thynges vnder the moone
be made) can not be perceyued by any
ſence: wherfore as they are ye fyrſt
begynners of mannes bodye, ſo they
are not the fyrſt ſenſyble begynners.
For yf they coulde be perceyued by
ſence, then euerye man as he paſſeth
other in quyckneſſe of ſence, ſo ſhuld
he ſe, and feale mooſt fyne elementes
as the Aegle, bycauſe his ſyght is
mooſt perfyte, ſhoulde eaſelyeſt perceyue
the leaſt Element, but percaſe
ſome wyll ſaye vnto me, that there
is no man ſo madde to ſaye, that the
fyre, ayre, erth, and water, can not be

felte, and perceyued by ſenſe: But
whoſoeuer ſhal moue this doubt, I
wyll anſwer hym, of thys faſſyon:
that yf he meane our fyre, our water
or our earth, I wyl ſaye as he ſayth
which is, that they may be felte and
perceyued by ſenſe. For in dede they
are no Elementes, but thinges mixt
and corruptyble: hauyng theyr compoſition
of dyuerſe thynges, where
as the pure element is a body mooſt
ſimple, withoute all generation or
corruption. Nowe be it, of fyre made
thycke, commeth ayer: and of ayer
made thycke, cōmeth water: and of
water made thycke, commeth earth.
And yet here is neyther corruption,
nor yet generation of the whole, for
this is a mutatiō of the partes only.
Then as I ſayde before, Elementū
in this ſignification is a body mooſt
pure and ſimple, and the leeſt parte

of the ſame, wherin it is: whiche can
not be deuyded into any other kinde,
and of it all thynges naturall haue
theyr originall begynnynge. This
definition is taken both out of Gallen
and Ariſtotle: therfore I truſte,
no man wyll be ſo impudent to contrary
or impugne it. And there be alſo
as is aforeſayd .iiii. Elementes, of
the whiche the fyre is extreme hotte,
and moderatly drie: the ayer extreme
moyſt, and moderatly hotte: the water
extreme colde, and moderatelye
moyſt: the earth is extreme drie, and
moderatelye colde. In heate the fyre
with the ayer, and in dryneſſe wt the
earth, in moyſture the ayer wt the water,
& in heate with the fyre, in coldeneſſe
the water with the earth, & in
moyſture with the ayer, the earth in
dryneſſe wt the fyre, & in coldneſſe wt
the water, doeth conſent and agree.

And as ye water to ye fyre is extreme
contrarye, ſo is the ayer to the earth.
Of the myxture of theſe elementes,
al natural bodies haue theyr compoſition,
& yet it is nothing neceſſary yt
they be equally myngled in the body
but accordyng to that, that hath dominion,
the bodye is named eyther
choleryke, ſanguyne, phlegmatycke,
or melancholye: and theſe names be
gyuen of .iiii. natural humours, that
is choler, blood, flegme, and melancholie,
whyche take theyr qualityes
of the elementes, for choler is hotte
and drye accordynge to the nature of
the fyer, and blood is hote & moyſte,
accordyng to the nature of the ayer,
flegme is colde and moyſt, according
to the water, and melancholye in no
poynt dyſſenteth from the earthe.
            
            
               The thyrde Chapiter.
               ¶The differences of temperatures.
               
                  
                  HOwe that I haue declared
vnto you, howe
all naturall bodyes be
made by the mixture of
the elementes, I thinke
it moſt neceſſary, to ſhewe in as fewe
woordes as I can, the differences of
temperatures.
               Temperatures in numbre are .ix.
of the whyche .viii. do excede, & therfore
in my fantaſie, they maye better
be called diſtemperatures, than temperate
craſes: the nynthe in dede is
temperate, for it excedeth in no qualitie.
Of the diſtemperate .iiii. be ſimple,
and .iiii. be compoſide. the ſimple
are heate, colde, drynes & moyſture,
of the whych coupled and ioyned togyther,
the reſt whyche be diſtemperate
are made. The nynth is neither
hote, colde, drye nor moyſt, and yet is
made of them all: and therefore the

grekes call it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whyche is as
muche to ſaye in latyn, as Bene temperatum,
and in Englyſhe: wel tempered.
And this is that whyche Arithmetricions
call Temperamentū ad pondus,
whyche we maye cal in our language,
a complection meaſured by
weyght, bycauſe there are as many
degrees of heat, as there is of colde,
of dryenes as of moyſture: the other
whyche are diſtemperate craſes, be
meaſured not by weyght, but by dignitie,
as in the heart wel tempered,
heate doth excede, in the brayne well
tempered, moyſture doth exceade, in
the fatte well tempered, colde: in the
boones well tempered, dryenes.
               And thys is called Temperamentum,
ſecundum iuſtitiam diſtributatiuam.
               
               Whyche is as muche for to ſaye, as
a temperature meaſured accordynge
to iuſtice, whiche gyueth euery man

hys owne. But peraduenture thys
declaration ſhall ſeeme ſome what
harde to ſuche as be vnlearned: and
therfore I entende to declare ye ſame
agayne, bothe more largely and alſo
more playnelye.
               Fyrſte ye ſhall vnderſtande, that
theſe .iiii. heate, colde, dryenes and
moyſture, whych are called the firſt
qualities, becauſe all other come
of them, haue eche of them .iii. diuers
ſignifications. Whanſoeuer ye fynd
heate, colde, drynes or moyſture, abſolutely
and ſimply ſpoken, than vnderſtande
that it is meante by thoſe
ſimple bodyes, which be hote, colde,
drye and moyſte, in the hygheſte degree:
and that is onely the fyer, water,
earthe and ayer, whyche be the
.iiii. elementes whereof we ſpake before.
And whan ye fynde the ſame
qualities myxt in any natural body,

by the which it is named eyther hote
colde, drye or moyſte, than ſuppoſe yt
it is ſpoken eyther by compariſon, as
hote for hotter, colde for coulder, dry
for dryer, or moyſt for moyſter, orels
that it is hote, colde, drye or moyſte
by nature, as whan there is in one
bodye, more heate than colde, more
drynes than moyſture, or otherwiſe.
as Summer is called hote, bycauſe
it hath more heat? than colde: Winter
alſo is called colde, be cauſe that
it hath more colde than heate: & hereof
it commeth, that one bodye is choleryke,
becauſe in the myxture of the
foure humoures, whyche is choler,
blood, flegme and melancholy, there
is more of choler, than of anye other,
and therfore choler hath the dominion,
cauſynge the bodye to be named
cholerycke after it: and in lyke maner
doth eche of the other, where he beareth

rule & gouernaunce. But he that
wyl knowe perfectly howe to iudge
the differences of bodies in temperature
by compariſon, must conſtitute
in euery kynde of thynges, that ſame
temperate meane, whyche before we
called Eucraton to the whiche he muſt
referre the ſame bodye or complexiō,
of the whyche he dowteth, and than
yf it doe excede the meane, eyther in
heate, colde, dryneſſe or moyſture, it
ſhall take name therof, and be called
eyther hote, colde, drye or moyſte, becauſe
it exceadeth the meane whiche
is named Eucraton, whan it is eyther
hote, colde, drye or moyſte.
               Somme do vſe to iudge the diuerſitie
of complexions, by comparynge
one diſtemperate bodye, to an other
of the ſame kynde diſtemperate alſo,
as in mannes kinde, Socrates compared
with Ariſtotle, is hote, becauſe

he is hotter than he, but in reſpecte
of Ariſtippus, he is colde, bycauſe
Ariſtippus is muche hotter, & thus
one man compared to dyuers, maye
be bothe hote, colde, drye and moyſt:
And ſome by comparynge diſtemperate
bodyes of dyuers kyndes lerne
to knowe ye conſtitution, as a dogge
compared wyth a man is hote, wt a
lyon, is colde, and wt a ſhepe, is drye:
wyth a pyſmyre or a flye is moyſte,
and of thys faſhion contraries maye
be in one bodye, and none otherwiſe.
Howe be it (as I thynke) the beſte
waye is to ſeke out the meane, to the
whiche al that be of the ſame kynde,
ought to be referred, and afterwarde
as he excedeth in any quality to haue
his nomination accordyng to ye ſame
But percha
                     •
                  ce ye wyl ſay it is hard
to fynde in euery kinde a cōplexioned
body meaſured by weyght, which is
the meane, I graunte yt, for in dede

there was neuer any ſuche, nor ſhall
be, yet as that ſecte of Philoſophers
whyche were called Stoykes, what
tyme they defyned a wyſe man, dyd
deſcrybe ſuche one, as was not poſſible
to be founde any where: and as
Quintilian deſcrybeth hys oratour,
ſo we, to bryng our purpoſe aboute,
muſte ymagyne ſuche an one in oure
mynde by cogitation, as neuer was
made, neyther is lyke to be, by conſente
of nature, as thus. In the hole
kynde of lyuynge thynges, that that
is moſte temperate and perfecte, is
as a meane to the reſt, whych by the
hole conſente as well of the philoſofers,
as of the phiſitions, is man, by
cauſe any of the other kyndes compared
wyth hym, is diſtemperate, than
yf ye wyll proue man alſo to be diſtemperate,
ye muſte ſeke amongeſt
the hole kynde, the moſt perfecte and

temperate: and he that is perfyt and
temperate, and worthy to be a mene
to the reſt, is neyther ouer thicke, nor
ſclendre, nor very full of heer, nor yet
ſmooth and without heer, nor ſofte,
nor yet harde, blacke nor whyte, hote
nor colde, drye nor moyſte: and to be
ſhorte, kepyng a meane wythout all
exceſſe. Yf ye can fynde ſuche a one in
the hole kinde, then are ye ſure of the
complexyoned bodye meaſured by
weyght, whiche we ſpake of before.
In caſe ye can fynde none ſuche, ye
muſt imagyne a like in your brayne:
and ye muſt not do this onely in mā
                  kynde,
but alſo in other naturall and
lyuely creatures, as wel in the kinde
of lyons, dogges, elephauntes, and
wolues: as alſo of byrdes, fyſſhes,
wormes and trees, cōparyng euery
one in his owne kynde. But in caſe
ye wyl fynde what of all thynges is

mooſt temperate: then muſt ye go agayne
to the man before ſayd whych
is neyther hotte nor colde, and the
ſkynne in the myddeſt of the inſyde
of hys hande, is of all thynges moſt
temperate. For the temperateſt part
of euery mannes body, is the ſkynne
in the myddeſte of the paulme of the
hande: then the temperateſt parte of
the mooſt temperate man muſt neades
be the mooſte temperate thynge
in the worlde, ſeing that of al lyuyng
creatures man is mooſt temperate.
               Now that I haue ſhewed howe by
compariſon made, in euery kinde, the
differences of the bodye may eaſe lye
be knowē, there remayneth behynde
to declare how to fynde out the ſame
wythoute compariſon. Where as
I ſayde before, that euery qualitye,
myght be taken thre dyuerſe wayes
as heate in the hygheſt degree, is onlye

in the fyre, and in a naturall bodye
myxt of the Elementes, it is eyther
referred to an other, by compariſon:
as hotte for hotter, or els it is
ſo of nature, whyche maye be taken
two maner of wayes, as hotte in
acte or in power. Thynges that be
hotte in acte, maye eaſelye be iudged
by ſence of fealynge: for who hathe
ſo dull ſenſe in fealynge, that he can
not perceyue the fyre to be hotte: yf
he put hys fynger in it. But to know
whych is hotte in power is a thynge
of more difficultye. For it can not at
the fyrſt brunt be perceyued by anye
ſence, neyther of fealyng, ſmellynge,
hearynge, ſeinge, nor taſtynge. For
who can perceyue by anye of theſe,
yt caſtoreū, or euphorbiū or naſturciū
is hotte, or that Mandragora, Salamandra
or Papauer is colde. But
in caſe ye take any parte of them inwardlye,

eyther as meate, drynke, or
medicine: then ye ſhal eaſely diſcerne
whiche is hotte and whiche is colde.
But peraduenture ye wyl condemne
this profe as noughte, bycauſe it is
daungerous medlyng with poysōs:
I graunt that, & therfore it is moch
ſafer, to laye them as a playſter, to
ſome vtter part of your ſkyn, where
as they can not hurte, and after that
they haue lyen there a whyle, they
wyll ſhewe theyr power and qualitie,
which ſhalbe perceyued quycklye
by ſenſe in felyng. But to iudge thinges
moyſt, or drye, I can ſhewe you
a mocheſurer rule, what ſoeuer thing
is ſoft, and moderately hotte, that of
nature is moyſt: whatſoeuer is harde
and moderatly hote, yt of nature and
power is drye: and this is alwayes
true, as well in lyuely bodyes, as is
other thynges.
            
            
               
               The .iiii. Chapter.
               ¶The geueration of the liuer, bert,
and brayne.
               
                  FOr aſmoche as there is nothyng
ſo neceſſary to attayne
to any perfyte knowledge in
Phiſicke, as to be perfyte bothe in
cuttyng and in openynge the bodye,
and partes of the ſame. And ſeing it
is ſhame for a manne to be learned
in ſo manye artes, and haue knowledge
of ſo manye thynges (as the
mooſte parte of men nowe a dayes
haue) and be ignoraunt in his owne
bodye, the whych he ſhoulde mooſte
perfytely knowe: I thynke it no leſſe
then my bounden dutye, to employe
my laboure and diligence to the furtheraunce
of the ſame, that ſuche as
be but begynners as yet verye rawe
in Phyſycke, whoſe bryngynge vp
hath not ben amongeſt learned men

of the vniuerſityes, wherby they are
deſtitute, bothe of dialecte, naturall
Philoſophye, and other artes, with
out the which Phyſycke can hardlye
be learned, maye haue ſome helpe by
this my lytle rude boke, bothe to attayne
ſome learnyng in Phyſycke, &
alſo to knowe theyr bodye. Bloode
and the ſeed of the man be beginners
of our generatiō, of the whych blood
is the ſubſtaunce and matter wherof
our body is made, and the ſeed of
man is nexte vnder God, the maker
and faſhyoner of the ſame, and theſe
ſame be made of the ſame elementes
whyche I haue ſpoken of alreadye,
whyche is the fyre, ayer, earth, and
water, and theſe two dyffer one frō
an other in temperature. For in the
ſeede there is more of fyre and eyer
then of water and earth, and in the
blood there is leſſe of fyre and ayer,

then there is of water and earth: and
yet in the ſame there is more heate
then colde, and more moyſture then
dryneſſe. After that theſe two be receyued,
and .vi. dayes retayned wtin
the wombe of the woman, the great
heate which is there doth ſo bake the
ſeede & blood being mirt togyther, yt
it cōpaſſeth them about wt a ſkyn, or
a cruſt, not vnlike the vtter cote of an
egge, whiche the Grekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
& in latin is called ſecūdine, or ſecūdina:
what oure mydwyues call it I can
not tel: how beit, it may very well be
called a ſkyn wherein is wrapped yt
that is cōceiued, and this is made in
ye fyrst .vi. dayes, with diuers pulſes
and veynes, as fyne & ſmall as anye
thredes, whiche ſerueth afterwarde
to nouryſh the infant by the nauyll.
For in this ſame ſkynne, whiche before
is called Chorion, there are many

fyne holes, moche lyke the lytle holes
in the ſmall lamparie heedes, by
the which the nauyll after the ſeuēth
daye, doth drawe vnto it both ſpirite
and blood, to the nouriſhment of the
infant. Then in the meane ſeaſō the
reſt of the ſeede boylynge all hotte,
doth make thre lytle bladers, which
is the place of the lyuer, herte, and
brayne. For a veyne whiche is ſtretched
ryght vpwarde from the nauil
dothe drawe vp the groſſed bloode,
which for lacke of heate eaſelye congeleth
in ye ſeede. And there is made
alſo a double forked veyne, and to
one of the forkes of the ſame veyne
is faſhyoned this forſayde congeled
blood, which is the liuer: and lyke as
from the nauyll, the veyne bryngyng
groſſe bloode into the forſayde lytle
bladder was cauſe of the generation
of the liuer, ſo lykewyſe a pulſe or an

artery bryngyng fyne blood and ſpirite,
commynge from the ſame place,
ſumwhat nere ye backe, into another
lyke bladdar, is cauſe of makynge of
the hearte, whyche is made of verye
ſounde fleſhe, thycke and groſſe, mete
for ſuche a pourpoſe, and of the moſt
fyne and ſubtyle blood, that cōmeth
from the hearte, the lyghtes be made
and the whole breſt alſo wherin thei
are cloſed. In to the thyrde bladdar,
whyche is mencioned before, a great
parte of the ſeede beynge full of ſpirite,
is driuen, the whych to kepe him
ſelfe moyſt, doth drawe a great parte
of the ſeede to it, and maketh a lytle
ſell, whiche is the brayne, to ye which
ther is added afortres of hard bone.
And thus the brayne, is made of the
ſeede only, that he myght be furnyſſhed
wyth moſt fyne ſpirites, whom
the brayne conſerueth and altereth,

the whiche are the cauſe of ſenſe, and
voluntarie mouynge, as ſhall be declared
more playnely hereafter.
               Nexte to the brayne groweth ye marye
of the backebone, whyche the Arabians
call Nucha, it is of the ſame
nature, that the brayne is, and differeth
very muche from the marye, of
the other partes.
               I haue ſhewed to you nowe, thoghe
very rudely, the original begynning
of mannes body▪ Of the ſede is only
made all the bones, griſtels, veynes,
pulſes, ſtrynges, ſynowes, tyinges,
ſelles and ſkynnes, whyche be called
Spermatyke partes, becauſe they be
made of ye ſeede and not of the blood.
They are the verye ſame, whyche I
ſayde before that the Latyne menne
called Partes ſimilares, and the Phiſitions,
ſenſible elementes, al the reſt
be made of the bloode, as the lyuer,

the hearte, and the lyghtes, wyth al
the fleſſhe, and fatte of the bodye.
               The infant whyles he is within his
mothers woumbe, is nouryſſhed of
that blood whyche is called Sanguis
menſtruus. drawynge it at hys nauyl,
and after he is delyuered, it is tourned
all to mylke, whych is his meat
long after, and therfore there is manye
conduytes from the woumbe, to
the pappes.
               After that the infant is fully proportioned,
& figured, ī the firſt monethes
he piſſeth by the conduyte, that commeth
through his nauyl, in the later
monethes that is ſhut vp, and he pyſſeth
wyth hys yerde, he auoydeth no
excrementes at hys fundament, becauſe
he receyueth no noryſſhemente
by hys mouthe. There is a ſkynne,
muche lyke a puddynge, whyche receyueth

hys vrine and excrementes,
leſt they ſhulde hurte eyther hym, or
els hys mother. I ſhulde ſeme bothe
to longe and alſo to tedious, yf I deſcrybed
the hole bodye, but bycauſe
the action of the inſtrumentes, canne
not be vnderſtande, excepte I ſhulde
touche ye moſt principal partes, therfore
it was neceſſarye to entermedle
wyth the deſcryption of the bodye, in
the whyche I wyll not be ſo ſcrupulous,
as to reherſe euery lytle part or
the ſcituation or fygure of euery bone
and vayne, no nor the knyttynge of euery
muſcle, (for why ſhulde I make
me more cūnyng than I am) in dede
it paſſeth my learnynge as yet, but I
entende to ſhewe, and ſette forthe the
greateſt, and moſte noble partes, the
whyche he muſte nedes knowe that
wyll profyt in phyſicke.
            
            
               
               The .v. Chapiter.
               ¶The ſections of the bodye.
               
                  THere was no nede in y•
olde tyme, to wryte of
the body, for than children
were excerſiſed in
their yonge and tender
age, daylye in cuttynge and openyng
of the ſame, but nowe that thys diligence
is vtterly extyncte, we haue very
great nede of wrytynge, wherfore
I haue taken this lytle payne vppon
me, whyche I ſhall thynke wel beſtowed,
yf it ſhall eyther healpe the ſtudyes
of thoſe that be rude and rawe
in phyſicke, or ſatiſfye them that be
learned. And fyrſt I wyl declare (by
goddes grace) ſuche partes as couereth
the head wythout, & afterwarde
thoſe that be wtin, begynnyng wt the
heares thogh they be but excrementes,
& ſuperfluities, nexte vnderneth

the hear, there is a ſkynne ſomwhat
thycke and fleſhye, wherein the hear
is rooted: vnderneth thys ſkin, there
is a lytle fleſſhe, aboute the browe &
temples. Than next vnderneth, ther
is a fyne kell, whyche is made of ſynowes
and tyenges, commyng thorowe
the ſeames of the ſcull, whyche
the Grekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vnder the
whyche immediatly, is the ſkulle, in
greke called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , & for the defence
of the brayne, it is made lyke an helmet,
the latyne men call it Caluariam,
and it is not one hole continual bone
but is deuyded by certayne ſemes in
to ſeuen bones. Then within ye head
vndernethe the ſculle, is Dura mater,
which Galen calleth Craſſum 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
it is a thycke and harde kel or ſkinne
made of many ſtronge ſinowes and
bondes, to the entent it myght holde
vp and ſuſteyne the veynes, whyche

nouryſſheth the brayne: After thys
is pia mater. whyche is an excedynge
fyne ſkynne, made of ſynowes, not
onely compaſſyng the hole ſub
                     •
                  tance
of the brayne, but alſo penetratyng
into dyuers partes, that are wythin
the brayne, & noryſſheth it as muche
as the ſkynne whyche before we called
Chorion, doth nouryſhe the ſede, &
becauſe it is made of ſynowes, it gyueth
ſence to the brayne. At the laſte
we be come to the brayne, the which
whan I conſyder that it is made of
the ſeede, I can not choſe, but maruayle,
howe all our cogitations & ymaginacions
ſhuld come frō thence &
howe the brayne beyng ſo groſſe and
maſſye of ſubſtance, ſhuld hang as it
doth wtout any ſtey or vnderſettyng,
in ſuch holow & wyde places, we ſe y•
houſen be vnderſet wt poſtes, or els
they wold ouerwhelme ye floure vnder

thē, but the brayne being vnderſet
wt nothyng, how fortuneth it, that ſo
longe as lyfe remayneth in the body
it choketh and ouerwhelmeth not the
wyde holowe chambers vnderneth▪
Whan I dydde depely conſyder the
cauſe of thys, I thoughte the brayne
had a certayne ſimilitude of the ſky.
For as the ſkye beynge a great & heauye
ſubſtance without any proppes,
or vnderſettes, doeth not fall, nor is
ſtroken out of hys place: ſo the brayn
by a certayne diuine nature yt it hath
doth conſiſt wythout any ſtay or fortreſſe
that can be perceyued by ſence,
and thereof it commeth that man is
called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whyche we maye
call in our touge a lytle worlde, & ſurely
the bryght ſpirites which come
from the brayne to the eye, doeth declare,
that there is a certayne cognation
or kynderede betwene the ſkye,

and mannes brayne, whiche though
it be made of the ſeede (as I ſayd before)
yet it is ſome diuine and celeſtiall
thynge: yea and the nature of ye
ſeede is ſo moche the more to be meruayled
at: how moche it paſſeth our
knowledge and capacitie, to ſhewe &
declare the cauſes whereby it worketh
ſuche wonders in the brayne,
which is ful of holes, as eyes, replenyſhed
with ſpirite, maye very well
be the cauſe why the brayne falleth
not downe. Howbeit, bothe the ſubſtaunce
of it, and the wonderful motions
alſo may better be maruayled
at, then deſcrybed. This I dare ſay,
that it is made of the fyneſt parte of
the ſeede, and of that, that is fulleſt
of ſpirite, and is deuyded into two
partys, by that ſame ſkynne whyth
before is called Dura mater, ye one lyeth
before and the other behynde.
               
                  
That whiche is before, (as it is of
the fineſt and mooſt pure ſubſtaūce)
ſo it bryngeth out moſt fine and ſubtyle
ſynowes, and is the place of reaſon
and intelligence: the other (as it
is courſe of ſubſtaunce) ſo there groweth
of it greate and ſtronge ſynowes,
not vnlyke them that growe
of the mary of the backe bone, and it
is thought to be the place of memorie:
now that after a rude faſſyon we
haue deſcrybed the brayne, there remayneth
behynde the deſcription of
his ſelles, and chambres, whiche in
numbre be .iii. in the former part of yt
heed, there are .ii. depe holow places,
not vnlike ye figure of the moone whē
ſhe is newe chaunged, and of ye bygneſſe
of an egge, reaching downe almoſt
to the eares. The ſame cauities
(though they be .ii. of them, one on ye
right ſide & another on ye left ſide) yet

for the moſt part they be called ye firſt
chaumbre of the brayne, whyche alwaye
is full of ſpyrite, hauynge his
ſydes couered, and cladde, wyth the
ſame rymme or ſkynne, whyche before
is called Pia mater, which is ful
of veynes and pulſes for ye nutrimēt
of the brayne: vnder eche of theſe chā
                  bers
ther is (if I may ſo cal it) a long
rope, which is made of veynes & pulſes,
couered wt a fine ſkyn yt groweth
of Pia mater, theſe ſmall longe ropes
hath ioyninges, wherby they claſpe,
& be red, moche lyke wormes, wherfore
they be called wormes, and do
extende in length as farre as the eares,
and the myddle chaumbre of the
brayne, whome they replenyſſhe
wyth ſpirit. In the ſame place at the
ende of the firſt cauities, vnder them
is an other cauitie. For at the latter
ende of the forſayd wormes or ropes

there are two lumpes, whych of the
verye ſimilitude of buttockes be called
Nates, and be cladde wt the ſkyn
of the wormes which whē the ſayde
cauitie or chābre: is drawē togyther
do touche one an other, and when it
is open, they alſo be ſeperate. This
chambre or ſelle is as bygge as the
yolke of an egge, and being couered
rounde about with the brayne, is called
the myddle chābre or ſell, whiche
is ſhut wt a peſſule or barre of the bygneſſe
of a lytle walnut, and therfore
it is called in latyn Glanduia or, conarium,
and it is iuſt betwyxt the myddell
chambre, and the entryng into ye
thyrde, his offyce is to ſuſtayne, and
beare vppe, the veynes and pulſes,
whiche brynge ſpirite to the myddle
chambre. The thyrde chambre is behynde
in the laſte parte of the heed,
whiche before we ſuppoſed to be the

place and ſeet, of the memorye, and
in this chambre is a greate parte of
the brayne, whiche the Grecians call

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in latyne it is called Cerebellum:
in oure tungue we haue no
propre name for it, whiche I can do
no leſſe then count the negligence of
our Phiſitions to be the cauſe of: for
yf they had wrytten of theyr arte in
theyr mother tunge, as they do in other
places, why ſhulde we lacke englyſh
names, more then we lacke eyther
Latyn names or Greke names?
and yet to ſaye the truthe, it is better
for vs Engliſh men to haue Engliſh
names, then eyther Latyn or Greke.
Of this part of the brayne groweth
the mary of the backe bone, which is
called 
                     
                        ••
                     cha, vnder the mydle chambre,
th
                     •••
                   is an holow cauitie, which
receyue
                     ••
                   the excremētes and ſuperfluyties
of the brayne, the which being

turned into ſpettyll, cōmeth oute
after at the noſe, the Grekes cal this
cauitie 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Latyn men infuſorium,
or infundibulum, we haue no proper
name for it: howe be it it maye be
called a droppyng pan. Next vndernethe
be the iawes, furnyſhed wyth
xxxii. teeth: the foure formoſt of eche
ſyde be called deuiders, bycauſe they
teare the meate: the next of eche ſyde
be called dogteeth, bycauſe they be
lyke tuſkes: all the reſt inlatyn be called
Genuini, or Molares, which we cal
gūmes: and they haue two rootes at
the leeſt, where as the other haue but
one: with thoſe teeth the mouth is cō
                  paſſed
rounde aboute, and defended:
wherein as a precyous Iew
                     •
                  ll in a
ſtronge towre or fortreſſe, is 
                     ••
                  cloſed
the tungue, whyche is ma
                     ••
                   of very
ſoft and rawe fleſh, full of 
                     ••
                  les and

full of pulſes, veynes and ſynowes:
full of ſynowes, to the intent it maye
moue dyuerſelye, and alſo feale and
taſte: full of pulſes or arteryes, bycauſe
it hath great neade of ſpyryte,
and naturall heate, seinge it hath ſo
manye dynerſe mouynges: and it is
full of veynes, that it maye be well
nouryſhed. There is alſo added to it
a certayne moyſture, leſt it ſhoulde
waxe drye, bycauſe it is moued dayly:
aboue ye tunge, is a pype, whych
the Grecyans vſe to cal 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and
the Latyniſtes call it Gulam, the vnlearned
or ignoraunt call it the weſaunt,
and it is a longe pype, hauynge
two ſkynnes or cootes, the
whych drawe downe the meate and
drynke into the mawe or bagge, and
the vtter cote helpeth the ſtomacke
to vomyte.
               
                  
There is alſo in the former parte of
the neck an other pype, which (to the
intent that nothyng ſhoulde go that
waye, but only ayer) is couered with
the roote of the tunge, and it is made
of harde graſſels, ioyned togyther
lyke rynges, and doeth conduct onelye
ayer and ſpirite to the lyghtes,
and herte, being nothyng ſo long as
the other, which draweth meate and
drynke, downe to the ſtomacke or
mawe, and it hath a great knobbe al
mooſte at the ende, nexte the iawe,
which the Grekes cal 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in latyn
Nodus gutturis, which in Englyſh is
the knotte of the throte, and whenſoeuer
we ſwalowe any thyng, it goth
vp aboue the iawe. The wynde pipe
is the formooſt parte of the necke, to
the intent it maye take ayer and ſpyryte
the eaſelyer. And the weſaunt or
meate pype (for why ſhoulde we be

aſhamed of theſe names, ſeynge we
haue no better) is put farre whythin
the necke, becauſe it ſhulde haue the
more heat, howebeit we wyl omytte
to ſpeke of it vntyl ſuche tyme as the
lyghtes and hearte, wyth all that is
contayned in the breaſte, whyche the
Phiſitions call the myddle bellye, be
declared ſo well as my ſimple wytte
and learnyng wyll gyue me leaue.
               To the loweſte parte of the wynde
pype, (for it is as well the inſtrumēt
of brethynge, as of ſpeakyng) be faſtned
the lyghtes, whych beyng made
of lyght, and moſte ſubtyle and fyne
fleſhe, not vnlyke the fome of choleryke
blood congeled, hath the fygure
of an oxe houfe, clouen in to .ii. partes,
and doth compaſſe the hart, roūd
about with .v. globes .iii. on the right
ſyde, and .ii. on the lyfte.
               And loke as the pulſes doth conſerre

and kepe temperat the natural heat,
thoroweout the hole body, ſo ye lightes
preſerue the hearte from choking
by the receyuynge of externall ayer,
whyche leaſt it ſhulde hurte the hart
wyth colde commyng ſodeynly vpon
it, is tempered ther before, ſo that I
can neuer wonder ynough at ye hygh
and diuine prouidence of god, which
foreſeyng al theſe thynges, hath conſtitute
ſuche an order in mannes bodye,
as I dare ſaye was neuer in any
publyke weale. For what publycke
weale, eyther is there, or hathe bene,
ſyns the worlde beganne, in whiche
the subiectes haue bene founde euer
obedient wythout all grudgynge to
theyr lorde and prince, were he neuer
ſo noble or valiaūt? yet in mans bodye
though there be infinite ſubiects
ther can be founde no diſobedience to
theyr lorde and gouerner, whyche is

the hearte: for yf anye poyſon be gathered
there wythin the bodye: or otherwyſe,
whyche wyth hys venym,
wolde pearſe the heart, I praye you
is not euery parte readye to defende
him? though it be to the vtter deſtruction
of them al for euer? and to ſay
truthe, he is worthy to haue no leſſe
homage or ſeruyce, ſeyng he is auctor
of lyfe to al the reſt, helpyng his ſubiectes
& ſeruauntes, at al ſuch tymes
as they be in daunger.
               And to the entent that no one parte,
myght be deſtitute more of help then
another, by reaſon of the diſtance betwene
hym and his gouernour, Nature
hath prouyded the hart to be ſet
ſo egallye in the middeſt of the breſt,
as is poſſyble to be deuyſed, by al the
mathematikes in the worlde, whych
is compaſſed aboute wyth a cote, the

whych Galen calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
it is made of ſynowes ſo thycke, and
ſo ſtrong, that it is ſofter than a bone
and yet it is ſufficient to defende the
hearte, it is tyed to the ſkynne which
couereth the rybbes, and to the mydryfe,
and the heart ſtrynges, conteynynge
a lytle quantitie of water that
neuer dryeth vp, vntyll ſuch tyme as
lyfe and all naturall heat is departed
from the bodye: There is alſo a lytle
fatte, leaſte the hearte thorough hys
contynual mouynge, ſhulde be dryed
vp: wythin thys foreſayde cote, incloſed
as a mooſte precious iuell, the
heart, hauynge .ii. chambres, one on
the ryght ſyde, & an other on the lefte.
To the chambre on the right ſide, the
great mayſter vayne, whiche groweth
on the lyuer, doth brynge blood,
that is diſtributed in to .iii. partes, ye
ſubtyleſt and mooſt choleryke, to the

nutrimente of lyghtes: The ſeconde
parte, is caryed in to the chambre of
the lyfte ſyde, where by the vertue of
the heart, it is formed in to vytal ſpirite,
the thyrde and laſt parte is reſerued
to the nouryſſhement of the hole
bodye, after that it hath receyued of
the hearte bothe vitall heat and ſpirite.
And lyke as from the chamber
of the ryght ſyde, the greate mayſter
vayne, bryngeth blood thorough the
hole bodye, ſo from the leaſt chamber
the maſter pulſe bryngeth vitall ſpirite,
of the whyche the lyuer taketh
hys power, and facultye, wherby he
nouryſheth the body & brayn, by his
vertue, by whych he gyueth bothe felyng
and mouyng to the ſame.
               I wolde not nowe that any manne
ſhulde thynke, that I do defende the
errour of Ariſtotle, whyche thought
that the hert, as he is author of lyfe,

ſo to be the gyuer bothe of felynge &
mouynge, to the hole bodye: for that
the ſynowes growe of the brayne, euery
man hauyng hys ſyghte, maye
perceyue eaſelye, and that they gyue
bothe felynge and mouyng to the bodye:
ye may knowe if ye take a dogge
and tye bothe hys pulſes and veynes
and let hym go, & he ſhal both feele &
runne, ſo long as ye animal ſpirit laſteth,
whych is all redy in hys ſynowes,
but in caſe ye tye hys ſynowes,
he ſhall not be able to ſtyre one foote.
Thys is a very manyfeſt profe, that
the hearte gyueth not ſence and mouynge,
to the bodye, yet as I ſayde
before, bothe the brayne, and alſo the
lyuer, take theyr power of the heart,
for after that the hearte hath engendered
vytall ſpirite, parte is caryed
to the lyuer, and parte to the brayne.

The lyuer of hys, engendreth newe
ſpirites, called naturall, the whiche
he doeth diſtribute by hys veynes,
thoroghout the bodye ſo the nuryſhement
of the ſame.
               The brayne alſo tourneth thoſe ſpirites
whyche he receyued of the hart,
in to other ſpirites, called animall &
theſe beynge diſperſed amongeſt the
ſynowes, is cauſe bothe of mouyng
and feelyng.
               Sythens that I haue accordyng to
my promyſe made before, declared
by what meanes the brayne gyueth
ſence and mouynge to the bodye, I
wyll as bryefelye as I can deſcrybe
the reſidue of the partes, whyche I
thynke moſt neceſſarye to be knowen
begynnynge there, where as I lefte
wyth the hearte, whyche beſyde hys
chambres, hath alſo twoo eares, the

whiche be graſſels made of ſynowes
beynge full of wrynkles and foldynges,
and they be alſo called the ſelles
or butteries of the hearte.
               I promyſed before to declare as nere
as I coulde, thoſe partes yt the breſt
whyche is called the myddle bellye,
doth conteyne, and I haue al redy ſo
to my lytle power, deſcrybed both ye
hearte, the lyghtes & the inſtrumentes
of the voyce, and brethyng wyth
the partes & couerynges, of the ſame
therefore nowe there remayneth the
mydryfe, whyche in latyne is called
Mediaſtinus. and the ſkinne, that compaſſeth
the rybbes, whyche in Greke
is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & the heart ſtrynges,
whyche in greke is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
The mydryfe doth deuyde the breaſt

                     〈◊〉
                   in lengthe, and maketh .ii. chābers
one on the ryghte ſyde, and an other
on the lefte ſyde: And becauſe it is a

very ſtronge ſkynne, it doth faſhyon
both veynes, pulſes and ſynowes to
the breſt, and it is tyed before to the
breſtbone, and behynde to the ioyntes
of the backebone. The ſeconde
ſkynne is that, that is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
which couereth the rybbes on the inſyde,
and the muſcles alſo that be betwyxt
the rybbes. Next vndernethe
this is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which the Latyne
men call Trauſuerſum ſeptū, or p̄cordia:
we may cal it an ouerthwart bridge
or the hertſtrynges, it is made of ſynowes
& fleſhe, couered with .ii. fyne
rymes, made to moue the lyghtes, &
alſo to drawe in and let out ayer, and
to ſeparate the loweſt belly from the
mydle bely, vnderneth the hertſtrynges,
ſomwhat toward the ryghtſide
the mawe or paunche, whiche before
we called the loweſt bellye, beinge
rounde, with a greate bottome, and

somthyng narowe towarde the left
ſyde is faſtened to the .xiii. ioynte of
the backe bone, and in the ſame place
the weſaūt that before we called the
ſtomake, is tyed to the mawe, whych
hath .ii. mouthes, one at the loweſt
parte of the weſaunt, and the other
in the ryght ſyde of ye mawe or pāche
The mouth by the which the meate
is receyued into the mawe, doth ſhut
the nether parte of the weſaunt, and
is called, the hyther mouthe of the
mawe: the mouthe that letteth oute
the meate, ſhytteth the nether parte
of the mawe, and is called in Greke

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in Latyne Iauitor, in our tung
a portar or a keper of the gate, and
bothe theſe mouthes (to the intente
that the meate and drynke maye not
fall oute at any tyme vnconcocte) be
ſet in the ſyde of the belly or pauche,
which be faſt ſhutte as ſoone as euer

the bellye hath receyued meate, and
therby naturall heate is very moche
encreaſed wythin the mawe, beynge
made of ſynowes and of fleſſhe, and
it hath alſo two cootes, of the whych
the innermooſt, hath more ſynowes
then fleſſhe, and it is very thycke and
rough, ful of wryncles, by the which
the meate is drawen downe and retayned.
The vtter cote is more fleſh,
and ſerueth onely to expell that, that
the bely refuſeth and hath done wtal.
The temperature of the belly is cold
and drye, accordyng to the nature of
ſynowes, wherof it hath abūdaunce
that it may be delyted wt ſuch thīges
as be cōueniēt & mete for it, and may
abhorre ſuche as be noyful & hurtful
vnto it. I haue ſpoken ſomewhat
brefely of the bellye and mawe, but
before we deſcrybe the liuer, I wyll
firſt reherſe .ii. cotes or coueringes of

the bely, which (nature by her diuine
and hygh ſapiēce) hath prouyded for
the defence of the belly and entrailes
The fyrſt coueryng is called iu latyn
Omentū, ye Grecians do cal it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
our bouchers call it the kell, and it is
wouen lyke a nette, of veynes, pulſes
and ſenowes, beinge couered with a
great deale of fatte, to the intent that
it maye holde in, the naturall heate,
which is in the mawe and guttes, for
it couereth all the belly from the top
to the too, the next cote or couerynge
the Grekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whiche couereth
not onelye the bellye, but alſo
the liuer, mylte, and reynes, & it groweth
of the bladder, being thycker in
ſome place then in ſome, it tyeth the
loweſt partes of the belly to ye backe,
and doth ſuſtayne the muſcles of the
belly, which the Latyn men cal Muſculos
abdominis, vpon the which muſcules

is a great deale of fatte, & then
the ſkynne that couereth the whole
body. Next vnto the mawe, immediatly
downewarde be the guttes and
entrayles, the whiche although they
be all one whole and continual body
yet they maye be decerned bothe by
theyr figure, ſituation, and action.
               The fyrſt, whyche is faſtened to the
nether mouth of the mawe, is called
Duodenum, bycauſe it is .xii. ynches
longe, and it is in the ryght ſyde, in
the region of the lyuer. Nexte vnto
Duodenum is I eiunium, whiche is ſo
called bycauſe it is alwayes emptye.
For to this gutte there cōmeth moch
choler from the lyuer, and bycauſe it
of all the reſt is nexte the liuer: therfore
the lyuer draweth from it verye
quycklye by hys ſmall veynes, ſuche
iuiſe as came from the ſtomake before.
And from this gutte there commeth

choler into the reſt, to expell the
excrementes. The nexte is called of
Galene 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whyche hath manye
circuites and boughtes, bycauſe it
ſhulde retayne the iuyce longer, and
it doth farre paſſe all the reſt: ioyned
vnto thys, is the gutte called Cecum,
whych doth receyue the excrementes
and it is called Saccus, bycauſe it is
the wydeſt of all. Then foloweth

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  ▪ beynge two cubytes of length,
hauyng dyuerſe boughtes▪ and compaſſynges,
leſt the excrement ſhulde
fall ſtrayte out: and in this gutte the
excrement taketh hys coloure. The
laſt gutte whiche we call the fundament
begynneth vnder the left reyne
and is ſtretched downe euen to the
very hole in the tayle: it is tyed to the
great back bone, being large & wyde
to the intent that the excrement may
go down more at eaſe. Sith I haue

deſcrybed the guttes & entrayles, I
wyll adde ſomthyng as cōcernyng ye
matter that they be made of. They be
made of fleſh & ſinowes, hauīg brode
ſtrīges, by ye which they expel the excrementes.
There is a certayne ſkyn
mixt amongeſt the guttes, which is
no gutte but a fortreſſe or a ſtay for ye
ſmal veynes which come frō ye lyuer
and it is called in Greke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &
thervpon al the ſmall veynes be called
Meſaraice, and it is a fyne and ſubtyle
ſkyn, made of very ſmal veynes
gathered on an heape togyther, amō
                  geſt
the whyche there is a lumpe of
fleſhe, lyke vnto a kernell, whiche we
call the ſwyt bread. Underneth ye baſtard
ribbes in ye rightſide of ye maw or
ſtomake is ye liuer, whoſe ſubſtāce
is red fleſh, not moch vnlike cōgeled
blood beinge repleniſhed wt veynes,
which be ye braūches of ye great maſter

veynes, yt is of ye veyne which is
called Porta, & alſo of yt, that is called
Caua vena, we haue no names in our
tungue whych be propre or peculier
to them onely, but muſte be fayne to
call them maſter veynes, and in dede
ſo that we vnderſtande the thynge,
it ſhall make but lytle matter for names:
howbeit Gallen ſayth, that the
one is called Porta, bycauſe that the
iuyce commeth through it, from the
ſtomake to the liuer: and the other
I thynke is called Caua, bycauſe it is
a great hollowe veyne, well what ſo
euer it be called, it groweth of the liuer,
and carieth blood from the liuer
to the hert, and thoughe it to be byg:
yet there groweth many fyne & ſmal
veynes, both of it, and of the other,
whych be diſperſed throughout the
whole body of the liuer, to the intent
that the iuice maye more eaſelye be

turned into blood: for the very dutye
and office of the lyuer, is to engendre
blood, for the nouryſhmente of ye bodye,
and therfore it is hote and moyſt
accordynge to the nature of blood.
               Moreouer it is the very fleſhe of the
lyuer, whyche doth change the iuyce
in to blood, makyng it redde lyke vnto
it ſelfe. Althogh that ſūme thynke
the harte to be the well, and original
ſprynge of blood, notwythſtandyng
I had rather ſaye as Galene ſayeth,
that it is the fleſhe of the liuer, which
engendreth blood, althogh the lyuer
receyue both vytall heat, and ſpiryte
of the hearte, and therefore from the
great maſter pulſe, whyche in greke
is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , there commeth manye
lytle pulſes to the lyuer, bryngynge
wt them vitall ſpirite, but ſo ſone as
ye iuyce is concocte, it is made blood,
and purified in ye middes of the lyuer

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
receyueth choler, of the ſmal veynes,
in the middes of the lyuer, whyle the
blood is purifyinge and cleanſynge,
whyche conduyte or waye, yf it fortune
to be ſtopped, by anye maner of
chaunce, ſo that the choler can not be
ſeperate from the bloode, then there
foloweth hote fyeuers, or els the yelowe
Iandies.
               On the lyfte ſide, the ſplene or mylte
enbraſeth the ſtomacke, which being
blacke of colour, is made of ſubtyle &
rare fleſſhe, and is the ſame, whyche
before is called the receptacle of melancholie,
it is tyed vnto the backe aboute
the myddes of the baſtard ryb
and doth drawe vnto it melancholye
or blacke choler, by a veyne whyche
commeth from the lyuer, receyuyng
heat of the heart, to digeſt the forſaid
blacke choler, by certayne pulſes annexed
vnto it. From the mylte alſo

there is a conduyt to the vppermoſte
mouthe of the ſtomacke, bryngynge
melancholye thyther, partly to draw
togyther the mouthe of the ſtomake,
and partlye to prouoke appetyte.
               There be .ii. kydneys that be called in
latyne. Renes, of the whych one is ſet
vnderneth the lyuer toward ye backe
and the other is ſet on the other ſyde,
ryght agaynſt ye mylte, they be made
of ſoude and thycke fleſſhe, leaſt they
ſhulde be diſſolued of the water, that
they drawe dayly from the blood, by
two veynes, whyche be called Mulgentes,
and in oure tongue, ſuckynge
veynes, there is drawen alſo, beſyde
the water, ſūme blood to the noryſhment
of the reynes or kydneis, in the
myddes of the whyche there is as it
were a lytle pāne, into the which the
forſayde kydnies doe ſweat oute the
water, whych they receyued of ye ſuckynge

veynes, and in thys panne the
vryne taketh his colour, from whēs
it is brought doune, after the concoction
had therbefore, by certayne conduites
that be called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in greke
and in latyne, Vrinarii, we maye calle
them the conduytes of the vryne, frō
the raynes to the bladdar. The bladdar
in man ioyneth to the taylegutte
or fundiment, from whens the necke
of it recheth to the yarde, but in wemen
it is ſet vpon the mouth of theyr
woumbe, & therfore they haue bothe
ſhorter and wyder necked bladdars
than men haue, and alſo be leſſe diſeſed
wt ſtone in that place, It is made
of ſkynnye ſynowes, and there cummeth
to it, bothe veynes and pulſes.
the necke onely is of fleſſhe, and hath
certayne turnynges and boughtes,
that it maye houlde the water more

eaſely, there is added a muſcle to the
mouth of the bladder, to the entent yt
we maye eyther letout or retayne the
water, at our owne wyll & pleaſure.
But howe ſmal and fine the holes be
by the whyche the water is receyued
into the bladder maye eaſelye be perceyued,
becauſe that whan it is taken
out of any dede bodye, that there appeareth
none at all, more than that,
whiche is in the necke, to let oute the
vrine or water.
               Manne ſurelye hath great profitte of
the bladar, for if that ſame ſuperfluouſe
water, ſhoulde not be caryed awaye,
but be permitted to runne to
gyther in the vaynes, with the blood
after that the bodye were ones fulle,
mooſte parte of the membres ſhulde
cracke, and breake and man ſhoulde
be ſuffocated or choked.
               
                  
Therefore the bladder is made for
thys pourpoſe, to receyue the ſuperfluous
watry ſubſtance of the blood
and reteyne it ſo longe, vntyl the due
tyme of lettynge of it out, be come.
               Nowe I haue deſcrybed all ye partes
of the loweſt bellye, ſo well as I
coulde, ſauyng the priuy partes both
of man and woman, whyche for dyuers
cauſes I wylle omytte at thys
tyme, fyrſte becauſe I wyll gyue no
occaſion to youth of wantōnes, and
then that I wyll offende no honeſte
eares, in deſcrybynge them playnlye
and ſeyng my promyſe was to tuche
but certayne partes, I thinke I may
as wel omyt them, as a great many
that I haue ſpoken nothyng of.
            
            
               The .vi. Chapiter.
               ¶Of veynes, pulſes, and ſynowes.
               
                  
VEynes be cōdytes with thinne
cotes, which caryeth the thyckeſt
blood, throughout the body,
wherwith it is nouryſhed, & they
growe all of the liuer, for the maſter
veyne (which paſſeth all the other in
largeneſſe and wydeneſſe) commeth
from thence. Ariſtotel thought ye hert
to be the authour and begynner of ye
veynes, but Hypocrates thought otherwiſe
and Galen alſo (whom we
folowe) hath euidently confuted Ariſtotels
opinion. Pulſes, or arteryes,
be conduytes that growe of the hert,
and do carye vitall ſpiryte, and ſome
parte alſo of the fyneſt bloode, therfore
it was neceſſary that they ſhuld
be both thycker and ſtronger, then ye
veynes, leſt the ſpirite being ſo fyne
of ſubſtaūce, myght breake out, wherfore
nature hath encloſed it in .ii. cotes
of the whiche the inner is .v. tymes

as thyck as the vtter, and yet is
it as thicke as any cote of ye veynes, yt
encloseth ye groſſe and thickeſt blood:
Veynes, & pulſes be so nygh coſyns,
yt there is no veyne in any part of the
body, without his pulſe: nor no pulse
without his veyne, to the intent that
the veynes may miniſter nouriſhmēt
to the spyrites. And agayne the spyrites
may refreſh the blood wt lyuely
heate: and as ye ſe in a lāpe, ye flame
to be nouryſhed wt oyle or waxe, so ye
ſpirit plucketh to him blood out of ye
veynes, with the which he is fed wt.
And here (as me thinke) nature hath
ſhewed vs a marueylous notable example
of doinge one for an other, in
this ciuile lyfe. Synowes growe of
the brayne, & alſo of the marye of the
backe bone. From whence they bring
sense and voluntary mouynge to all
partes of the body. There hath bene

moche to do amongeſt the olde Phiſitions,
whether the ſynowes haue
any holowneſſe or cōcauitie in thē, to
receyue the animal ſpirit, wherwith
they gyue mouyng & fealing to ye body,
or els whether they take their power
of the ſpirit, as the lute or harpe
ſtrynge doth of the fynger: howbeit,
it is now cōcluded, yt ther is none holowe,
but only .ii. which bring ſpirit
to ye eyes, & be called Optici, and yt the
reſt do take their power of ye ſpirites
There grow of ye brayne .vii. paire of
ſynowes, of ye which, ſom be diſtributed
to ye sēses, & ſome to other partes:
as to ye ſtomake or maw, and thoſe yt
growe of ye brayne be moche fyner &
ſofter thā thoſe yt grow of the backe,
which be not only ye inſtrumēt of ſēſe
but alſo of volūtary mouyng, & there
be of thē .xxx. paire, which be diſperſed
euery where through all ye body.
            
            
               
               The .vii. Chapter.
               ¶Of humours.
               
                  ALthough that the ſpryng &
well of humours maye then
beſt be perceyued, when the
maner and waye how to nouriſh the
body is delared, yet bycauſe we be
styll occupyed, in descrybynge ye partes
of the body, I am not wyllyng to
omytte the differences of humours,
which be .viii. in numbre .iiii. natural
and .iiii. vnnaturall. The naturall is
blood, fleume, yellowe coloure, and
blacke, & the vnnatural is the ſame alſo,
turned by putrifaction, or els ſom
otherwyſe, from theyr owne natyue
qualities. As concernynge the generation
of the naturall humours, I
haue ſome deale mentioned before,
wherfore I wyll omyt at this tyme
to ſpeake or reaſō any further in that
matter, ſauyng ye I put you in remē
                  braunce,

that the ſame foode whych
is receyued by the wesaunt into the
ſtomake, for the preſeruynge of the
bodye, is the matter and ſubſtaunce,
whereby, by the vertue of the liuer,
they be made and engendred.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapter.
               ¶Of bloode.
               
                  BLood is hotte and moyſt,
and the greateſt parte of yt
that nouryſheth the body.
For notwythſtandynge,
that other humours be caryed togyther
with the blood to nouryſſhe the
body, as blood delayed with fleume,
both greatly nouryſh ſuche partes yt
be colde, and moyſte, as the brayne:
and coleryke bloode the lyghtes, and
melancholycke blood the bones, and
ſplen: yet the eſpeciall part of the noryſhment,
is that that is properlye

called bloode. For the nouryſhmente
ought to be ſwete, or els delayed wt
ſwete iuice, and ſuche is the blood.
            
            
               The .ix. Chapter.
               ¶Of fleume.
               
                  FLeume is a watryſh humour
colde and moyſt, which is begone
to be altered into blood,
and is not yet throughly cōcoct, therfore
it is whyte, thynne, and vnſauery:
not fatte, nor coloured like blood,
it serueth to mittigate the outragyous
heate of the bloude, and nouryſheth
the blood, making it thinne and
beinge myngled with the blood, conforteth
ſuche partes as be flegmatik.
            
            
               The .x. Chapter.
               ¶Of choler.
               CHoler is the fome or floure of ye
blood, which is made of the hotteſt
and drieſt partes of ye blood
or iuice, after that it is boyled, wherfore

it is alſo hote and drye, and of a
bytter taſte, & therfore it is called of
Galen 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which in latyn is Amarꝰ
and in Englyſh bytter. Natural choler
is as wel red as yelowe, & whē it
is mixt wt the blood, it openeth ye veynes,
& doth noryſh cholerike partes,
as the lightes: nor it is not caryed al
with the blood, but the more part of
it is reſerued in the bladder, vnder ye
mydle globe of the liuer, to clenſe the
loweſt bellye, or entrayles: ye maye,
(and ye wyll) call them guttes.
            
            
               The .xi. chapter.
               ¶Of melancholye or blacke choler.
               BLacke choler or melancholie is a
thycke terreſtrial humour that in
the blood falleth downe to ye botome,
verye lyke vnto olde red wyne,
that is thicke and blacke, & it is colde
and drye: part of it is caryed with the
blood, both to make it thycker & alſo

to helpe, and encreaſe the power retē
                  tyue,
in the veynes and other places
where it cōmeth, and alſo to nouryſh
the melancholyke partes, as the bones
and ſplen.
            
            
               The .xii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the vnnaturall humours.
               
                  NOughty humours be called
vnnaturall: & they be made
nought, or corrupted eche of
them two maner of wayes, eyther
bycauſe the ſubſtaunce of them without
the admixtiō of any other, doth
degenerate: or elles, that they be
myngled, with ſuche as be alreadye
putrifyed and corrupted: bloode is
made nought, and goeth from hys
kynde when he putrifieth in the veynes,
bycauſe the pores be ſhurt, or els
when he is myngled wt ſome other
euil humour, as in the dropſy, where
he is myxt wyth water.
            
            
               
               The .xiii. Chapter.
               ¶Of noughty flegme or vnnaturall.
               VNnaturall flegme is a rawe
wateryſhe humour, colde and
moyſte, redoundynge in that
body, where as is a weake concoction,
and it is ſumtyme muche thinner
than ſpyttle, that falleth from the
mouthe or noſe. There is an other
kynde of naughtye and vnnaturall
flegme, whyche is ſalte in taſte, that
commeth of the mixture of choler wt
flegme, whyche is plentiful in ſuche
bodyes, as feede for the moſte parte
of ſalte meates.
            
            
               The xiiii. Chapiter.
               ¶Of vnnaturall yelowe choler.
               
                  YElowe choler, degenerateth
from hys nature, whan it is
bourned blacke, and is made
thycke and bytynge, or whan ſumother

humour is mixt wyth it as watrye
flegme, and this is called citrine
choler, Galene calleth it pale choler,
becauſe it is of the colour of leade.
But yf it be thicke flegme wherwith
it is myngled, than it is called of ye latynes,
Uitilina bilis bycauſe it is lyke
in coloure, to the yolke of an egge, &
of thys kynde of choler, for the moſt
parte are engendred all fyeuers tertian.
            
            
               The .xv, chapter.
               ¶Melancholy, or blacke choler
vnnaturall.
               
                  MElancholye or blacke choler,
is made vnnaturalle,
whan other humoures, or
elles it ſelfe, is burned as
drye as a
                     ••
                  hes. For Hypocrates ſaith
that bothe blood and red choler wyl
be turned ſoone into Melancholye,

whan for lacke of ayre, they be ſmothered
in the veynes, & the ſtoppyng
alſo of the pores, doth make a bodye
whyche all redye is ſanguine or cholerycke
of nature, melancholye. And
hereof commeth ſo manye kyndes of
madneſſe. For yf Melancholy, be delayed
wyth a lytle blood, it maketh
a manne merye madde, yf it be mixte
wyth a great deale of red choler, thā
it maketh hym ſtarke woode, as Hercules
& Aiax was. But yf it be mixte
with flegme it maketh hym ſlothfull
wythout all meane or meaſure.
               If melancholye it ſelfe, wythout the
admixtion of other humours be burned,
than it maketh hym ſad and ſolitarye,
as Bellerophon, whyche as
Homer ſayeth, beyng full of ſorowe
and care, forſoke all companye, and
wandered in deſolate feyldes ſolitarye
al alone.
               
                  
Howe be it the ſame humoures hath
not lyke effecte in euery bodye, for in
ſumme they are not ſo outeragious,
as in ſumme: Homer hym ſelfe dyed
for ſorow, that he coulde not diſſolue
a certayne hard queſtion which was
propounded vnto hym: and the olde
philoſofer Haracletus, beyng borne
an Epheſian, dyd alwayes lamente
wyth wepynge, the manyfolde miſeries
of mannes lyfe, whych as Theophraſtus
ſayth, was of nature melancholye,
becauſe he lyued ſolitarye
alone, and wrote confuſed & obſcure
thynges, wel at the laſt thorow hys
fylthy and vnclene lyuing, he caught
the dropſie, wherfore truſtyng to dry
vp the water that was betwyxt his
ſkynne and fleſſhe, commaunded hys
bodye to be annoynted wyth doung
of oxen, and layde abrode in the hote
ſunne, from whence he was brought

dead. Yet Democritus madnes was
sōmewhat more pleaſaunte, whyche
laughed alwayes at mennes folyſhnes,
whereby he prolonged hys lyfe
an hole hundred yeres.
               Empedocles was ſo outeragious
madde, that he lepte alyue in to the
burnynge fyer of the hyl Ethna, but
Sophocles madnes was much ſweter,
the whyche dyd eaſe the incommodities
of olde age, wyth makyng
of verses. Marius whan he was
madde, fantaſied nothyng but fyghtynge.
But Lucullus beyng madde,
was mery, full of game and ſporte.
            
            
               The .xvi. Chapiter.
               ¶Of Spirites
               
                  SPirite is a ſubtyle vapour
of the blood, whyche by the
vertue of the hearte, gyueth
power to the body, to doe all maner

of workes and actions, and althogh
there is but one well or ſpryng of all
ſpirites, yet they be diſerned by their
places. Vitall ſpirite is a flambe in
the heart, made of blood, carying vital
heat to ye other partes: the pulſes
be made to carye this ſpirite, whoſe
dignitie and worthines may be eſtemed
herof, that euery part of the bodye
hath nede of vitall & lyuely heat,
to ye conſeruation of theyr ſubſtaūce
And thys vitall or lyuelye blood, is
preſerued & kepte, by that ſame lytle
ſparc
                     •
                  e of vitall ſpirit, whiche in olde
tyme wiſe men dyd ſo moche maruel
at, that ſūme thought it to be mānes
ſoule, and ſumme the inſtrumente of
mans ſoule. And Ariſtotle ſayth that
death is nothyng but the quenching
and puttynge forth of lyuelye heate,
and therof it commeth that ſo manye
preceptes be gyuen of the phiſitions

for the conſeruation and inſtauratiō
of ſpirites, the whyche doubtles be
corrupted and extincte, eyther wyth
euyll dyet, orels wyth diſeaſe, & ſicknes,
or with the weaknes of ye hart,
in mouynge affections, or finallye
with immoderate labour.
            
            
               The .xvii. Chapiter.
               ¶Of animall ſpirites.
               
                  SPirite animall, is a ſpirite
that by vertue of the brayne,
is made bryghter and conuenient
to the woorkes of the ſenſes, &
alſo to moue and ſtyrre the ſinowes.
For I houlde well wyth them, that
affyrme conſtantly, the hart to be the
fyrſte authoure and begynner of ſpirite,
and afterwarde, to take a newe
nature of the brayne.
               
                  
And in dede there appereth a certeyn
affinitie betwene the vital & animall
ſpirite: For loke with what ſpirites
the heart is beſte tempered, the ſame
in the brayne, brynge forth moſt noble
and excellent affectes, how be it
for all yt there is differences betwene
them, becauſe they haue dyuers offyces
and effectes. For the vitall ſpirit
miniſtreth heate to the bodye, the
animall ſpirit ſtyrreth vp the ſenſes,
& moueth the ſynowes. S
                     •
                  me adde
vnto theſe another kynde of ſpirite,
called naturall, whyche nouryſheth
the blood in the lyuer: But Galene
douteth of it, ſayeng, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
id eſt Si ſpiritus naturalis eſt aliquid,
whiche is as muche to ſaye, as
yf the naturall ſpirit be any thynge.
For althoughe it can not be choſen,
but that there muſte be ſpirite in the
lyuer, yet it is brought thyther by ye
                  
pulces, which is a token that it commeth
from the hert, but I wyl determyne
or conſtitute nothynge of thys
matter: leauynge euery man to hys
owne iudgement.
            
         
         
            The .ii. booke.
            
               ¶The fyrſt chapter.
               ¶Of naturall powers or actions.
               
                  WHosoeuer wyl perfytely
know, how
many natural powers
is in euerye
bodye, he muſt dyligently
ſerche out
the naturall workes
of the ſame body, for euery worke
cōmeth of ſome action, and alſo euery
action of ſome cauſe, for whyles ye
infant is within his mothers wōbe,
as yet vnperfyte) all hys partes is

but one naturall worke, procedynge
of a natural action called generation
but after that it is brought forth, an
other natural worke is to bryng the
ſame to their ful groweth, whiche is
done by the facultie called auction, &
that they maye long cōtinue and endure,
nutrition onely doth make and
bryng to paſſe. Howbeit, generation
is not one ſimple naturall action, as
the other be, but rather cōpounde, of
alteration and formation. For howe
coulde eyther bene, ſynowe or veyne
be made without anye alteration of
theyr ſubſtaunce: or how coulde they
be well figured or proporcioned, except
they were firſt out of all faſſyon,
and ordre. Auction is an amplification
or encreaſemēt, in lēgth, bredth,
and depeneſſe, of al partes of ye body,
and ye childe, whyles he is in his mothers
wombe, is deſtitute neither of

this, nor of nutrition: yet generation
hath thā ye chefe rule and dominion, &
the other be as handmaydes vnto it:
but after it is delyuered (vntyl ſuche
time as it com to ye ful growth) auction
hath gouernaunce, & alteration &
nutrition, be but inferioure powers.
Then as I ſayde before, it apperteyneth
only to the power or vertue called
auctiō, to encreſe in lēght, bredth
& depenes, al ſuch partes as by helpe
of generatiō hath alredy their due figure
& faſſion. But how euery part is
made bygger, it cā not better be knowē,
then by an exāple: childrē be wōt
to take the bladders of oxen & ſwyne
and blowe them full of ſpirite, rubbyng
them very moche before ye fyre,
that they maye take heate wythoute
any burnynge or harme otherwyſe:
and whē they haue ſtretched or drawen
them out aboundauntlye, they

blowe them full of ſpiryte agayne,
ſtretchynge them out more then they
dyd before: and after they rub them,
and chafe them ſtyl as is aforeſayde
vntyll ſuche tyme as they thynke thē
large ynough, but in this chyldyſſhe
worke, loke how moche the inſyde of
the forſayd bladders is made wyder
ſo moche the bladder is thynner, and
yf that were not, I myght well ſaye
that chyldren coulde make (as well
as nature) lytle bladders, greate.
               Howbeit, the wyſeſt man in ye world
can not do that: ſo moch the leſſe children:
For that is onelye propre vnto
nature. Wherfore it is very euydent
that nothynge can be encreaſed as it
ought to be, without nouryſhment:
and they onelye be made longer, broder
and deper at one tyme, whyche
growe naturallye: or els yf they be
ſtretched along, they decay in bredth

nor there is any thyng in the worlde
without breakyng, may be ſtretched
forth euerye waye at one tyme. For
that pertayneth to nature alone: and
therfore auction is ſuche a thyng as
can not poſſibly be without nouryſhment:
whereof nowe by gods grace,
we entende to ſpeake.
            
            
               The, ii. Chapter.
               ¶Of nutrition.
               
                  NUtrition is the makynge
lyke of that which nouryſheth,
to that, that is nouryſſhed:
and in nutrition,
there is alteration, but not lyke as
was in generation. For in generatiō
that is made fleſſhe, whyche before
was none: but in nutrition, the meat
or nouryſhment is made lyke to that
that is nouryſſhed: therfore the one
may be called (& not without a cauſe)
generation, and the other aſſimulation:

but bycauſe we haue ſpokē ſuffyciētly
of theſe .iii. natural faculties
and bycauſe no lyuyng creature neadeth
any other hauyng how he may
be encreaſed, and alſo hauyng, howe
he may long cōtinue, it ſhal not nede
to rehearſe any mo natural powers.
But agayne, yf a mā caſt in his mind
ſaying to hym ſelfe, he hath mentioned
as yet, no action of the ſtomake,
entrailes, liuer, nor of any other part
of the bodye, he ſhal thynke this, but
the begynnynge and Proheme, of
more profytable and better learning.
Generation, auction, and nutrition,
be the fyrſte fountaynes or ſprynges
all the naturall workes: and yet they
are ſo perfyte of them ſelues, that
wythout externall helpe of other, or
(at the leeſt amongeſt them ſelues)
mutuall ſeruyce, they can almooſte
do nothynge. And as concernynge

what generatiō and auction de nede
we haue ſpoken before: but what is
requyred vnto nutrition, we entende
now to declare: for I ſhalbe thought
about to ſhewe (as well the very inſtrumentes
prepared for concoction
of the nouryſhment) as alſo the powers
and facultie in thē, to be made
for the ſame purpoſe. For ſeing that
aſſimulation is the onelye action of
nutrition, and ſeinge that nothynge
can be made lyke, whyche in qualitie
differeth, or be cōtrary. Therfore euery
lyuing creature can not be nouryſſhed
with euerye meate, neyther can
be nouryſhed incontinent, with ſuche
as afterwarde at more leyſure, peraduenture
he maye: and by reaſon of
this neceſſitie (not onelye man) but
brute beaſtes alſo, endued with lyfe,
haue neade of meane inſtrumentes,
to the alteryng of the nouryſhment.

for that yelowe maye be made red,
or red yelowe, one ſymple alteration
or chaunge, is ſuffycient: but ye white
may be made blacke, or black whyte:
all the alterations or chaungynges
whych be betwyxte blacke & whyte:
be requyred before, ſo that yt is ſofteſt
can not be made at the fyrſt hardeſt:
neyther that that is hardeſt, fofteſt.
Then if this be true, how ſhal a bone
be made of blood, excepte the blood
fyrſt be made thycke, and afterwarde
whyte, or how ſhal blood be made of
bread, except the bread chaunge hys
colour before, from white to red. For
it is no great matter, to make fleſſhe
of bloode: for ſo ſoone as it is ones
made ſo thycke, that it can not rūne,
it is by and by fleſſhe, but that the
ſame maye be made a boue, it muſte
both haue long tyme, and moche alteration,
and this is one cauſe why

there be many inſtrumentes prouyded
of nature, for the alteryng of the
meate: another cauſe is the nature of
the excrementes. For as we can not
be nouryſhed wyth graſſe, although
beſtes are nouryſhed wyth it, ſo we
maye be nouryſhed wyth rootes, but
nothing ſo well as wyth fleſſhe.
               For our nature maye chaunge, or alter
it eaſely in to good blood, but in a
roote, that that is conuenient to noryſſhe
the bodye, and maye be changed
though very hardely & not wyth
out great concoction, is but a verye
lytle, for the moſte parte of it, is full
of excrementes, and doeth paſſe the
inſtrumētes of concoction, wherfore
there is but a ſmal portion of it drawen
vp in to the veynes, of ye which
al is not profitable, for ye body, wherfore
nature dyd lacke another ſeparation
of ſuche excrementes as be in ye
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
that nature hath ordeyned onlye for
nutrition, whyche as I ſayd before,
is the aſſimilation or makynge lyke
of that that noryſheth, to that which
is nouryſhed, the whyche to be done
as there muſt nedes go before, agglutination
or adheſiō, ſo before agglutination,
there muſt of neceſſitie, be appoſition,
or puttynge to of the nouryſhment,
to that that is noryſhed.
               For after that the iuyce is fallen out
of the veynes, fyrſt it is diſperſed abrode,
and by and by, it is ioyned or
put vnto that parte, whyche ſhall be
noryſhed, and afterwarde faſtened,
or glued to the ſame, & laſt of al made
lyke. And than it maye verye well be
called nouryſhment, and not before,
But yt there is difference betwene aſſimulation
and agglutination, it is
verye euident in that kynde of ſcurfe,
whyche of the Latyns is called viti,

ligo, we call it the Morphewe.
               And alſo yt kynde of dropſie whiche
in greke is named 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   declare
a certayne difference betwene admixtion
and agglutination. For thys
kinde of dropſie, cūmeth not for lacke
of humiditie, as conſumptions doe,
ſeyng that theyr fleſhe whych is troubled
wyth thys dropſie, is as weete,
as yf it hadde be ſwylled in water,
whyche cauſeth that the noryſhment
can not cleue, bycauſe it can neyther
be made dry ynough nor thycke lyke
glue, whyche commeth onely, of naturall
heat.
               In the Morphewe, whyche in greke
is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and in latyne Vitiligo,
there is agglutination, but there lacketh
aſſimulation, wherfore it is verye
euident, that as we ſayde before
in nutrition, there muſte fyrſte be adiunction,
and then agglutination, &

fynallye aſſimilation: and properlye
that is named nutrimcutum and in our
tonge, nouryſhment whych hath noryſhed
all ready, wherfore that ſame
that is in the morphew, or that that
is in the dropeſie, can not wel be called
noryſſhment, becauſe they haue
not noryſhed as yet, and of thys faſſhyon
that that is in the veynes, and
alſo that whyche is in the ſtomacke,
yea and all good meates may be called
nutrimenta, or in englyſh noryſſhementes,
becauſe they wyll nouryſhe
at the lengthe, yf they be well digeſted,
and hereof it is that Hyppocrates
ſayeth in hys booke, that he writeth
of dyete. Nutrimentum quod nutrit
Nutrimentum quod eſt, veluti nutrimentum,
nutrimentum, quod eſt nutriturum.
whyche is as muche to ſaye as nouryſſhement
that doeth nouryſſhe altedye,
and noryſſhmente that is lyke

ryſſhement, and noryſſhement, that
hereafter wyll noryſhe.
               For that that alreadye is made lyke,
Hyppocrates doeth call nutrimente,
but that whyche is but put vnto, or
that whyche is faſtened onelye, and
not made lyke, he nameth it to be like
nutriment, and all that whyche is in
the veynes or mawe, he calleth nutrimente
in tyme to come, bycauſe yf
it be well digeſted, it wyll noryſſhe
hereafter. Wherfore nowe I thinke
it verye euydentlye proued, that noryſhment
is the makyng lyke of that
that nouryſſheth, to that whyche is
nouryſſhed.
            
            
               The thyrde chapter.
               ¶Of ſuche faculties or vertues, as
nature hath furnyſhed euery
parte wyth, ſeruyng to
nutrition.
               
                  
                  THere be .iiii. powers of faculties,
ye maye yf ye wyl
call them vertues, whyche
is in euerye parte, that is
eyther nouryſſhed it ſelfe, or ſerueth
for the nouryſſhment of other, of the
whyche the fyrſt is named attracti
                     •
                  e
the ſeconde retentyue, the thyrd concoctyue,
and the fowerth and laſt ex pulſyue.
If nature had not endued
euer ſins the begynnynge, al the nutrityue
partes of euery lyuyng creature,
wyth theſe .iiii. vertues: it had
not be poſſible eyther for men or beaſtes,
to haue cōtinued alyue .x. dayes.
For yf neyther God, nor nature toke
care of vs, and yf we were alſo deſtitute
of all arte and prouidens, being
ruled with the ſodayne momentes of
oure ſubſtance onely, hauynge no facultye
or vertue, that coulde drawe
ſuche thynges vnto it as ſhoulde be

mete for it, nor any that coulde put awaye
or expell thynges noyfull, or
ſuche as were hurtful vnto it, or that
coulde altre and faſſyon, or glewe,
ſuche as ſhulde nouryſh it, I can not
thinke, but we ſhuld be thought foolyſh,
yf we ſhulde deſpute of any naturall
action, and moche foolyſher yf
we ſpeke of anye animall action, yea
or of our hole lyfe, eyther. For it ſhall
not be poſſyble for any creature that
hath ſo many dyuers partes, ſette ſo
farre one from an other, to lyue or cō
                  tinue
a very ſhort tyme: yf he lacke ye
powers aforeſayde. For fyrſte, yf the
attractyue vertue were not, there
coulde be no admixtion: yf ther could
be no admixtion, there coulde enſue
no agglutination, and without agglutination,
there coulde neuer be any
aſſimulation, without the which
nutritiō can not be had, and whether

anything coulde lyue not nouriſhed,
that I leaue to your iudgement.
            
            
               The .iiii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the power or vertue attractiue.
               THe power attractiue is a vertue
which being in euery parte, ſeruyng
for nutrition, doth drawe
vnto it thynges of lyke qualities, &
ſuche as be mete and conuenient for
it, as the adamāt ſtone draweth yrō,
the iette ſtone chaffe, or ſtrawe. How
be it, peraduenture ſome defendynge
the Epicure and his trayne, wyl ſaye
and conſtauntlye affyrme, that there
is no ſuche power in ſtones, attributynge
the drawynge vp of the yron,
or chaffe vnto other cauſes, as the
Epicure dydde to hys lyttle mottes.
The whyche opinyon, bycauſe it is

very foolyſſhe, and hath bene confuted
of dyuers noble Philoſophers,
but eſpeciallye of Galene the mooſte
excellent Phiſitiō and Philoſopher,
(I except alwayes Hipocrates) that
euer was, I wyll not ones touche or
meddle with all: partlye, bycauſe I
can ſaye nothyng in it, whiche is not
ſayde before of them, but chefely that
I wyll not be ſo arrogant or proude
to meddle with it after Ariſtotle and
Galene (as who ſhoulde ſaye) I truſtynge
ouermoche in my ſelfe, coulde
fynde ſomethynge to ſaye agaynſte
the Epicure, more then they coulde.
               Therfore whoſo delyteth to knowe
parſytely the Epicures opinyon, let
hym go to Galenes fyrſt boke of naturall
facultyes, and there he ſhall
be ſatiſfyed. Yet thys I darre ſaye,
that the Epicure wyth all hys adherentes,
is ſhamefullye deceyued.
               
                  
For, not onely ſtones haue power to
drawe thynges of lyke qualities, but
alſo medicines, inſomoche that ſome
wyl drawe out thornes, which haue
lyen .iii. or .iiii. dayes within the fleſh
and ſome (which is moche to be maruayled
at) wyll drawe the poyſon
of a ſnake onelye, and other ſome the
poyſon of a tode, and in ſuch men as
haue ſhort neckes, and wyde throtes
we ſe oftentymes the meate drawen
from theyr iawes, before it be halfe
chawed: what is it that draweth the
meate ſo greadelye? yf there be no power
attractyue? neyther in the mawe
nor in the weſaunt: and howe coulde
the watrye ſubſtaunce be ſeperated
from the bloode, yf there were no attractyue
power in the reynes or kidneys,
or yf there were no attractyue
power in ye bladder, or the gall, why
ſhoulde it not be fylled rather wyth

water then wyth choler? ſeinge that
water, is more fyne aud ſubtyle then
choler is. Wherfore I dare conclude
with Galen, that no parte of any lyuyng
creature, being nouriſhed, doth
lack this power or vertue named attractyue.
            
            
               The .v. Chapter.
               ¶Of the power or vertue retentyue.
               THe power retentyue is a vertue
whiche retayneth that, that the
facultie attractyue hath drawē.
For yf that iuice that is already drawen,
ſhulde not reſt there, whyther it
is drawen: but ſhoulde be caryed to
ſome other parte, ſtyll chaungynge
his place, it were not poſſyble yt there
myght enſue eyther agglutination or
aſſimulation, which is the very ende
wherfore nature hath endued euerye
body with this power or vertue, that
of the verye action or offyce, is called

in Latyne Retentiua virtus, and in
our tung retention, or els ye vertue retētyue
which in ſome partes of ye body
is ſo euydent, yt it nedeth no demō
                  ſtration,
for it maye be perceyued by
ſenee: and in other ſome it may better
be knowen by reaſon and cogitation
then by ſence, as in a woman, howe
is the infant retayned .ix. monethes,
in her wombe, yf there be no vertue
retentyue there, and that the meate,
is retayned in the ſtomake or mawe,
vntyl ſuche tyme as it is altered & cō
                  cocted,
euery man may know yt wyl
take a dog, or any other brute beaſt,
& fede him, & thā after he hath reſt an
houre, ryp his mawe, for loke what
ye fedde him wt, ye ſhal fynde it there
vnconcoct, which is an euident profe
that ther is ſom vertue there yt reteineth
it. But peaduenture ſome wyll
ſay that it is reteyned bycauſe the nether

mouthe of the ſtomacke is verye
narowe. Then how fortuneth it that
the ſtomake doth not onelye retayne
meate, but drynke alſo, which for his
ſlypperneſſe and ſubtillitie, wolde
paſſe throughout a very lytle hole, &
not drynke onely, but alſo all maner
of decoctions & ſorbitions, as myſke
wyne, meath, with ſuche other. And
in ſuche mens ſtomakes as be weake
and feble, all decoctions and liquyde
thynges (for ye mooſt part) do ſwym
longe aboue in the hygher mouth of
the ſtomacke, ſo moche the leſſe they
paſſe throughe ſtreyght waye, after
they be receyued and taken. And that
this is true, eueryman may know by
ye belches & crying in theyr bellyes after
drinke or any like thing: ye ſame is
alſo manifeſtlye proued by theyr vomyting
.ii. houres, yea ſomtyme hole
vi. after they haue eaten, or dronken.
            
            
               
               The .vi. Chapter.
               ¶Of concoction, or the vertue concoctiue.
               COncoction is a mutation or an
alteration of the meate, into his
ſubſtaunce that is nouryſhed.
               And this kynde of concoctyng, dyffereth
as moche from the alteration of
the meate into the iuice, as nutrition
from the chaungyng of the iuice into
blood. For there be manye kyndes of
concoctions, and the fyrſte is in the
mawe or ſtomake, where as ye meate
is altered, and tourned into iuice, the
nexte is in the lyuer, where as it is
made of iuice, blood. The thyrd is in
the veynes, where as ye blood is prepared,
for the nouryſſhmente of the
whole bodye. The fourth and laſt, is
in the partes, where as it is made
fleſſhe, or at leeſt lyke vnto that, that
is nouryſhed. And mānes body may
very well be compared to a Prynces

houſe, wher as is kepte dayly a gret
manye of tables, at dyuers tymes of
the daye, ſo in mans bodye, all be not
fedde at ones, but ſumme wayte tyll
the other haue done, as the ſtomacke
lyuer and hearte, be fyrſte fedde, and
than the vaynes, after the whyche, euery
parte, as he is beſt able, ſo he is
ſerued before the other, for as it is a
common ſaying, he that worſt maye
ſhall holde the candell, ſo in mannes
bodye the weakeſte parte goeth euer
to the worſt, yet it chaunſeth ſumme
tyme that the weaker plucketh from
the ſtronger as the ſtomake from the
lyuer, whan the lyuer is ful of meate
and the ſtomacke is empty and hath
none. For it is no matter for a boy,
to take apples or nuttes from a man
whyche hath more than he can holde
in hys handes: But yf they be bothe
loded a lyke, than I thynke it vnpoſſyble

for the weaker to take any thīg
from the ſtronger, by violence. And
looke as the weakeſt hath leſte parte
of yt that is good, ſo he hath ynough
of excrementes, and of that that is
nought, and therof it cummeth that
the vtter ſkynne of our bodye doeth
receyue all the excrementes whyche
afterwarde breaketh forthe in byles
or ſcabbes, for yf the vertue expulſiue
were as ſtronge in it, as in other
partes, why ſhulde it be more laded
wyth excrementes, then the reſte be? howe
be it nature hath made it a receptacle
for the excrementes of al the
hole bodye, therefore it hath neyther
animall nor vitall action, but onelye
ſerueth to the vſe before ſayed.
            
            
               The vii. chapiter.
               ¶Of the vertue expulſyue.
               
                  
                  EUen as the attractyue vertue
draweth vnto it thynges
conuenient, euen ſo ye
power expulſyue, expulſeth
from it thynges noyfull or hurtfull,
and thys maye be euidently perceyued
in the example aforeſayde of
the woman goynge wyth chylde, for
ſo longe as euerye thynge aboute the
chylde frameth well, ſo longe the power
expulſiue reſteth, as there were
none ſuche. But in caſe any thyng be
amiſſe, ſo that nature diſpayreth to
brynge it to good paſſe or effect, then
forth wyth all it is expelled, whyche
the vertue expulſiue onely doth, and
none other.
               Yf this be not ſufficiente, to proue
that there is a facultye or power in euery
parte, which doth expell from it
thinges hurtfull, I wold ye told me

what it is, that in the mawe parteth
the excrement from the good iuyce, or
in the liuer, the water from the blood.
Wherefore I maye iustelye thynke,
that nature paſſeth all the artifycers
in the world. For Praxitiles or Phideas,
which in theyr tyme were moſt
excellent, dyd but trym theyr ymages
onlye wythout, leuyng the innersyde
very rawe & rude, wythout al worke
manſhyppe, becauſe they coulde not
come to euery parte of it. But nature
whyche dothe extende to euery parte
of the bodye, trimmeth the innerſide
more gorgious than the outſyde makynge
euery parte of bone, bone: and
euery parte of fleſhe, fleſſhe: kepyng
in euery parte, due and iuſt proportion,
and furnyſhyng them wyth moſt
noble and excelent vertues, faculties
and powers. Moreouer neyther Phideas
nor Praxitiles, no nor yet Apelles

coulde make of waxe, Iuerye or
golde, nor of golde waxe. For euerye
one of theſe, tarying euer ſins his firſt
generation, in his owne fygure, and
ſhape, ſauyng for the workemanſhip
that he hath on the vtterſide is made
an ymage, wher as nature is alway
full of varietie, or els all the partes
of mannes bodye, ſhoulde be onelye
blood.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapiter.
               ¶Of the prouokyng of
appetyte.
               
                  APpetite is prouoked in the
hygher mouthe of the maw,
whan the partes beynge verye
mouche waſted, doth lacke nouryſhement,
and endeuoreth to drawe
of the veynes, the veynes of the liuer
and the lyuer of ye ſtomake or mawe,
the mawe of hys ouer mouth, which
is drawen togyther, and vehemently

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
deſyreth meate. This drawyng to
gyther commeth of the melancholye.
which is brought thyther by a veyne
comming from the milte, and of this
faſſhyon hunger or appetyte is ſtyrred
vppe and prouoked, yf it be longe
vnſlaked, it maye turne to farther in
conuenience. For in ſuch caſe alwaye
the lyuer fylleth the ſtomake, with excrementes,
and thereof it cummeth
that many mēnes ſtomakes, be good
aboute .viii. of the clocke in the morand
at ten or .xi. though they be ſtyll
faſtynge, haue luſte to eat nothynge.
Summe thynke that hunger cōmeth
not as I haue deſcrybed, but yt there
is a peculyer power in the nutrityue
partes, as in the ſtomacke and lyuer
whyche doo prouoke it, as in fyſſhes
that be called pykes, whan they folowe
theyr praye, ſumwhat gredely,
they be ſo mooued by verye feruente

deſyre, to ouertake it, that theyr ſtomacke
ryſeth vp to theyr mouthe, in
the whyche example, the nature of
gluttons is verye well paynted as I
thyncke, and trulye for the moſt part
they be rauenars, and great eaters,
whych hath ſhorte neckes and wyde
mouthes.
            
            
               The, ix. Chapter.
               ¶Of the diuersitie of meates
and drynkes.
               
                  IT is very profitable,
for euery man,
as well for them
that be hole, as for
thoſe, that be ſicke
to knowe ye dyuerſite of meates and
drynckes. For ſuche as be whole,

to the ende that they, knowynge the
ryghte vſe of them, maye kepe theyr
healthe ſtylle. and ſuche as be ſycke,
maye recouer agayne theyr priſtinat
eſtate and ſanitye.
               Wherefore I entende to declare, as
bryeflye as I canne, what difference
I haue (by longe obſeruation, and
partelye by myne owne experyence)
marked in meates, and drynckes.
               Fyrſte ye ſhall vnderſtande, that all
breade corne, is of greate power and
ſtrengthe: I call that ſtrongeſt, that
nouryſſheth moſte. Alſo all .iiii. footed
beſtes that be brought vp tame,
in the houſe, and be daylye vſed for
mente, and euery great beſt, as gootes,
hartes, ſwyne, oxen, and ſheepe,
and alſo euery great byrde or fowle,
as gooſe, ſwanne, pecocke and crane
and moreouer honye and cheſe, how
muche leſſe it is to be marueyled at,

yf that kynde of bread, that the olde
auncient Romaynes vſed, were of
great nouryſhmēt, ſeing that it was
made of wheate, fatte, hony, & cheſe.
Howbeit in the myddle fourme, and
in a lower degree of nouryſhmentes
be numbred, all thoſe herbes, of the
whych we eate the rootes, and of .iiii
footed beaſtes, the conye and hare: &
all wylde foule, exceptynge neyther
hennes nor capons. Alſo all fyſhes yt
can not well ſuffre ſalte, nor can be
bryned hole. In the loweſt kynde or
fourme of nouryſhmentes, is reckened
all maner of ſallettes, & whatſoeuer
groweth in a litle ſtauke, as cucūmers,
gourdes, or capers, and ſuch
lyke: and apples, olyues, and alſo cokles.
But although we haue diſtributed
the whole kyndes in .iii. partes,
yet ſome that be of one kynde, dyffer
verye moche one from an other. For

one is eyther ſtronger or weaker thā
an other. For there is more nouryſhment
in fleſh, then in any other meat
and wheate is ſtronger, and nouryſſheth
more then myll, and myll more
then barly: and of whete, the ſtrōgeſt
and hartyeſt is that, yt we call rye: in
latin it is called Siligo next in ſtrēgth
is the mele, hauyng nothynge taken
from it: weakeſt of all is fyne wheat
floure, and beanes alſo be of ſtrōger
nouryſhment then peaſe. And of rootes,
the rape rootes nouriſheth more
then eyther the paſnepe, or radyſſhe.
And of herbes, beetes be moche ſtrō
                  ger
then lettuſe: and offrute, grapes
fygges, and nuttes, be ſtronger thā
suche as properly be called apples: &
alſo of thoſe byrdes whych be of the
myddle ordre: they be ſtronger that
ſeke theyr meate on theyr feete, then
they that flye abrode, and of ſuche as
flye continually abrode, the byggeſt

be the ſtrongeſt nouryſhmente, and
theyr fleſh is lyghter that lyue in the
water, thā they that lyue in the land.
But amōgeſt the .iiii. footed beaſtes,
hoggeſ fleſſhe is lyghteſt, and beaffe
hardeſt: and alſo of wylde beaſtes, ye
byggeſt be of the ſtrongeſt nutrimēt
Of thoſe fyſſhes that be in the myddel
ordre, the ſtrongeſt is lynge, and
ſuche as be ſalted, then tenche, carpe,
hadocke, codlynges, and whytinges
after theſe, gurnardes, pikes, roches
dace, perches, & gudginges. And ther
is not onely difference in ye kyndes of
beaſtes, but alſo in them ſelues, as in
their age & certayn partes, & in ye tē
                  perature
of ye wether, & coūtrie wher
they be brought vp & bred: For euery
ſucking beaſt of .iiii. feet, nouriſheth
leſſe thā ſuche as ſucke not: alſo fyſh
in the mydle age, which be not come
as yet to their ful bigneſſe, noriſheth
not ſo moch as they yt be ful growen.

And of lambe, or kydde, the purtenaunce,
is of leſſe ſtrēgth, then the other
partes be: and therfore they may
be put in the myddle ordre. Of byrdes,
the neckes & wynges, be of lyghteſt
nouryſhment as concernyng the
grounde: that wheate is better that
groweth on an hyll, then that yt groweth
abrode in the felde, and fyſſhe
bredde amongeſt the ſtones, is lyghter
nouryſhment then that yt is bred
in the ſande: and in the ſande, lyghter
thā in the mudde. And therfore ſuche
as be breedde in fennes and ſtanding
pooles be harder of digeſtion, then ye
ſame bredde in rūnyng waters, or amōgeſt
ſtones: and yt is lighter & eaſlyer
of cōcoction, which lyueth in the
depe, thā yt that lyueth in ye ſhallowe.
And wilde beſtes be of lyghter fleſh,
then tame: & that yt is bred in moyſte
wether, is lighter, thā that yt is bred

in drie wether. And morouer ſuch as
be fatte, be better thā ſuch as be lene:
though they be of one kynde: & they
that be freſh, be eaſelyer of digeſtyon
then they that be ſalte: and newe be
better thā ſtale or olde: and that that
is ſodden better then that that is eyther
roſted or fryed. Harde egges be
of a very ſtronge nouryſhment, and
ſofte and rere, very weake. Of drynkes,
ale is the ſtrōgeſt feder: and thā
mylke: and wyne that is made of the
mulberye, and all olde wynes: And
therfore ſuch as be of weake natures
ſhulde neuer drynke any olde wyne:
and of all drynke, water nouryſheth
leeſt: and that is ſtrongeſt ale, which
is made of ſtrōgeſt malte: and thoſe
wynes, whoſe grapes grow in fatte
grounde, are of moche ſtronger nouryſhment
then the wyne of ſuche as
growe in leane. Of waters, the lighteſt,

is rayne water, and next vnto it
is the water of a fayre ſpryng or foū
                  tayne,
then of a runnyng floude, and
after of a welle, then ſnowewater, &
worſe then ſnowewater is froſē water:
and worſe then froſen water is
the water of a ſtāding poole: & worſt
of all is fennewater, and for ſuch as
be diligēt ſerchers, it is eaſy to know
the nature of waters, for the beſt is
lyghteſt, and yf there be two lyke in
weyght, the fyneſt and beſt is that, yt
wyl ſoneſt be hotte, and ſoneſt colde.
And for the mooſte parte, this is alwayes
trewe, that euery thynge, as
it is of ſtrongeſt ſubſtaunce, ſo it is
hardeſt to be digeſted, or altered into
good iuice, but where it can be altered,
it nouryſſheth more then that,
that is moche fyner. Therfore, there
muſte be an ordre obſerued in theſe
meates, and drynkes aforeſayde.
               
                  
As he that hath all his naturall powers
and actions luſty, and is hymſelfe
of a ſtronge and harde complexion,
leadynge hys lyfe in greate labour,
maye ſafelye eate the ſtrongeſt
meates: but he that is of a weake body,
and lyueth ydelye, muſt be fed wt
the weakeſt meate, and with that, yt
is eaſye of digeſtion, and wyll ſoneſt
be turned into good iuyce and blood.
            
            
               The .x. chapter.
               ¶Of the dyuerſe qualities in meates
               
                  NEither be theſe only the differences,
for ſome meates
breede euyll iuice, and ſome
good, and ſome make moche groſſer
fleume then other ſome do, and other
ſome be more mete for the ſtomake,
then other ſome be: and ſome be full
of winde, and other ſome be not, and
ſome engender heate: and agayne,
there be other ſome breede colde.
               
                  
Som putrifieth eaſely in ye ſtomake,
and ſome wyl not putrify at al: ſome
make leuſe the belye, & ſome bynde ye
ſame: ſome prouoke vryne: and ſome
reſtrayneth it: ſome cauſeth ſleape, &
ſome, ſtyrryng vp the ſenſes, prouoketh
watche. The whyche, all ought
to be knowen, bycauſe one profyteth
the body, or the health, more then an
other doth.
            
            
               The .xi. Chapter.
               ¶What thynges haue good iuice.
               
                  WHeate, rye, & wheat broth,
and ryeſſe, be of good iuice
and be gentle, & very mete
for the ſtomake, makynge
it moderately hotte: barly broth, ſom
call it pryſane, mylke, and ſofte cheſe,
and all byrdes of the myddle ordre,
with ſome of the bygger, as feyſaūt,
pecocke, curlewe, and capon, breede
or engendre very good iuyce, and of

fyſſhes, ſuche as be betwyxt tender,
and harde, as mullettes, pykes, gurnardes
and perches. And of herbes,
as lettuce, mallowes, cucumers, and
gourdes: of egges, ſuche as be reere
and ſofte: of fructe, all that be ſwete
and alſo ſwete wine, and to conclude
all fatte or chammye fleſſhe.
            
            
               The .xii. Chapiter.
               ¶What thynges haue euel iuyce.
               
                  MIll, barlye, and all poudered
fleſſhe, and alſo all ſalte fyſhe,
and olde cheſe, and the grayne
lyke peaſe, called fytches, certayn rotes
alſo, as rapes and radyſſhe, and
moreouer, beetes, thyme, onyons,
garlyke, hyſope, rue, fenell, cumyue,
dyll, muſterd? ſeede, lyekes, and alſo
myltes, kydneys, and entrayles almoſt
of euery great beaſt, bredeth euell
iuyce & noughty blood, furthermore
all ſower and tarte fruyte, and

to be brefe al thinges that be ſharpe,
tarte, or bytter, and almoſt all fyſſhe
that lyue in fennes, lakes, or muddye
pondes, or ſuche as we cal ouergrowen
fyſſhe.
            
            
               The .xiii. chapter.
               ¶What thinges of theyr nature be
gentle, and mylde, and agayn
what be keene & ſharpe.
               
                  SUppynges, brothes, ptiſans
bothe of barley, and alſo of
wheate, and all fatte fleſſhe,
and clammye, the whyche almoſt is
in euerye beaſt yt is tame, & brought
vp wythin the houſe, but eſpecilly in
pygges and calues feete, and in lambes,
kyddes or calues heades, & alſo
the braynes of the ſame, as wel as
of byrdes, be gentle and mylde, but
all thynges that be ſower, or bytter,
and all that be ſalte, alſo garlyke, onions,
rue, leekes, cucumers, beetes

and all herbes, for the moſte parte be
ſharpe and keene.
            
            
               ¶The xiiii. chapter.
               ¶What meates make thycke fleume,
and what maketh thinne.
               REere egges, ptiſanes of wheat
riſe, and ptiſanes of barley, and
mylke, and all clammye meates
make thycke fleume, and al ſalte meates,
ſharpe meates, and tarte meates
engender thynne fleume.
            
            
               The .xv. Chapiter.
               ¶What meates be good for the
ſtomacke.
               ALl ſharpe and rarte meates, &
ſuche alſo as be lyghtely poudered,
be very mete and holſome
for the ſtomacke, and beſydes theſe,
vnleuened bread, and ryſe, or ptiſans
and all wyldefowle, hauyng whyte
fleſhe, & of domeſtical beaſtes, beaffe
hath no felowe.
               
                  
Of other beaſtes, the leane is better
for the ſtomacke then the fatte: and
beſyde theſe, ſwynes feete and eares
and the woumbes of barrayn beſte.
Of herbes, lettuce, paſneppes, and
ſodden cucumers. Of fruyte cheries
mulberies, tender peares, orenges,
and quynces, beſyde theſe ſteped grapes,
reere egges, pineapples, whyte
olyues ſoked in ſharpe vinegre, orels
blacke: that wer not gathered before
they were thorowe rype, or els haue
bene kepte in ſweete wyne, be verye
meete & conuenient for the ſtomacke.
            
            
               ¶The xvi. chapter.
               ¶What be euel for the ſtomake.
               
                  All hote meates, all ſalte meates,
all manner of potages,
and al thynges, that be very
ſwete, and all fattye meates, all ſuppynges,
and leuened breade and alſo
oyle that is made of myll or barley,

and ſalades yt be ſaweſed wyth ſalte
and oyle: moreouer almaner of theſe
mylke, greene fygges, and drye, and
finallye all that engender wynde, do
greatlye hurte the ſtomacke. Here it
maye be perceyued, that all meates
whyche engender good iuyce, be not
good for the ſtomacke, no nor yt that
is good for the ſtomake, therfore bredeth
good iuyce bycauſe it is holſom
for the ſtomake.
            
            
               The .xvii. Chapter.
               ¶What meates make the bellye
ſwell, and what delaye the
ſame.
               
                  AL maner of corne, and all maner
of ſwete meates, and fatte
meates, and potages and new
wynes alſo, make the bellye ſwell, &
of herbes, garlyke, onions and lekes,
and all maner of rootes, except paſnepes,
and read carretes, alſo bothe

drye and grene fygges, but of bothe
the grene by ye worſe, morouer grene
grapes, & al maner of nuttes, mylke
alſo and cheſe, and all meate that is
eaten rawe, prouoketh the ſwellyng
of the bellye. Byrdes yt haue whyte
fleſſhe, and all maner of venerie, and
all fyſſhe of the myddle order, and al
maner of ſhel fyſhe, and beſyde theſe
rere or ſofte egges, & olde wyne make
no maner of ſwellynge in the bellye,
Where note that fenelle ſeede and anyſe
ſeed, do greatlye eaſe and helpe
the ſwellynge of the bellye.
            
            
               The .xviii. chapter.
               ¶What thynges engender eyther
heate or colde,
               PEper, ſalte, fleſſhe ſodden in pottage,
garlyke, onyons, drye fygges,
ſalte fyſſhe, and wyne, doo
engender heat, lettuce, and the moſte

parte of herbes eaten rawe, as ſucorye,
endyue, borage, violet leues, mā
dragon and pople. Alſo coriander, cucumers,
and gourdes ſodden. Of frutes,
mulberies, cheries, ſoure apples
and tender peares, and ſpecially vine
egre, taken eyther as meat or drynke
doo augment colde.
            
            
               The .xix. chapter.
               ¶What thynges putrifye eaſelye
in the mawe, and what
do not.
               
                  LEuened bread, ye and
all maner, of bread, yt
is not made of wheat
and mylke, and hony,
and all maner of cheſe
and wynes, eyther yt
be ouer ſwete, orels ouer thynne, doe
eaſely putrify in ye maw or ſtomacke

Howebe it vnleuened bread, and all
wylde fowle, of the myddle order,
beoffe alſo, and all harde and leane
fleſſhe, and all ſalte meates, & ſharpe
wynes, wyll continue long wythout
any putrefaction.
            
            
               The .xix. chapiter.
               ¶What thinges do leuſe the belly.
               VNleuened barly bread, lettuce,
purſlane, dyl, onions, garlyke,
mallowes, beetes, cucumers,
cheries, mulberies, rayſins, dry fygges,
oyſters, muſcles, and all maner
of ſhell fyſſhe, but eſpeciallye, broth
made with them, alſo yong and tender
fyſſhe, and fatte fleſhe in potage,
or elles boyled, or ſuche byrdes as
ſwymme, and beſydes theſe, mylke,
rawe hony, ſwete wyne, and al that
that is dronke luke warme, and all
fatte or ſwete meates, doe make the
bellye laxatyue.
            
            
               
               The .xx. Chapter.
               ¶What thynges bynde the bellye.
               RYe bread vnleauened, harde roſted
egges, litle birdes, but eſpecyally
ſuch as be tame brought
vp in the houſe, and vſeth not to flye
abrode: alſo crane, hare, and gootes
fleſſhe: and beſyde theſe, beaffe, and
harde cheſe, and hony, yt hath ſodden
longe on the fyre, peres alſo that be
not rype, and ſpecially ſuch as be called
rollyng peres. Alſo orynges and
quynces, whyte olyues, and wyne yt
is tart and ſharpe: and finally al thī
                  ges
yt be harde, leane, tart, or ſharpe,
and of fleſſhe that yt is roſted, ſooner
thā that that is ſodden, haue power
to bynde the belly.
            
            
               The .xxi. Chapter.
               ¶What thinges prouoke vryne.
               
                  
                  AL thinges (for ye mooſt
parte) that ſmel fragātlye,
helpe to prouoke vrine:
mynt alſo and rue,
dyll, anyſſeede, parcelye
ſeede, and fenellſeede, beſydes theſe,
tyme, coriandre, onyons, and wormwood,
thynne wynes alſo, and both
rounde and longe pepper, alſo muſterd
ſeede, and pyneapples.
            
            
               The. xxii. chapter.
               ¶What thynges prouoke ſlepe.
and what cauſe watche.
               LEttuce, pople, mandragon, mulberyes,
and garlyke, prouoke
ſlepe. Tyme, rue, hyſope and vnyons
ſtyre vp the ſenſes, whereby
they cauſe watche.
            
            The ende of the. ii. boke.
         
         
            
            ¶The. iij. boke,
            
               ¶The fyrſt Chapter.
               ¶Of exercyſe.
               
                  EXercyſe is neceſſary
for ii. cauſes, the
one to pourge the
body of excrementes,
and the other
to chaūge it from
a worſe ſtate to a
better. For ſeinge that euery laboure
is not an exercice, but onely that ye is
vehemēnt, theſe. iii. muſt nedes cōſequētly
folow exerciſe. Hardneſſe of ye
limes, or of ſuche partes as be exerciſed,
encreſe of natural heat, & ſwifter
mouing of ye ſpirites. Theſe profites
exercyſe bringeth wt him, of neceſſity
beſyde a great many other yt come of
theſe, as of ye hardnes of ye partes the
bodye is made bothe apte to endure

moch labour wtout payne, & alſo quicker,
redier, & finally ſtrōger to ye ſame
Of ye encreaſe of natural heate, ye power
or vertue attractiue is quickned
in all partes ſeruynge to nutrition, &
moreouer the alteration, or concoctiō
in the ſame is made moche ſtronger,
by reaſon wherof the body is nouryſhed
moche better, and more luckely,
then it ſhoulde haue bene: and euerye
parte alſo ſprynkled, wyth a ſwete
moyſture or dewe, that maketh ſuch
membres as be harde, ſofte: and alſo
mollifying the pores or fyne holes of
the ſkynne, do open the ſame, which
by reaſon of the ſtrong and oftē mouing
of the ſpirites be cleane purged
of all theyr excrementes and filthes,
and alſo the excrementes of the hole
body be had awaye. Now yf al theſe
come of exercyſe, as no doubte they
do, peraduenture it is an harde matter

to ſhew the due & ſeaſonable time
of takyng it: for bycauſe it helpeth ye
concoction throughout the whole body,
there may be no quātitie of rawe
iuice, neyther in the mawe, nor in the
ſmall veynes about the liuer, leſt the
ſame be ſnatched into euery parte of
the bodye, before it be made mete or
profitable to the ſame by concoxion.
Therfore bycauſe it doth clenſe and
purge the lytle pores, and alſo expel
the experimentes, it maye well be
taken before meate. For Hypocrates
ſayth: Yf thou nouryſhe vncleane bodyes,
and ſuche as be ful of excremē
                  tes,
thou ſhalt do them more harme,
then good. Wherfore it is verye euydēt
that the beſt and meteſt tyme for
excercyſe is when yeſterdayes meate
is concoted, bothe in the ſtomacke
and alſo in the veynes. For if it be taken
at anye other tyme, eyther before

or after, it muſt eyther fyll the bodye
full of crude and rawe humours, or
els augment pale, and citrine choler.
Doubtleſſe, the true marke of thys
tyme is takē of the vrine. For whyte
water betokeneth cruditie, readde,
ouermoche concoction, and that, that
is ſomewhat pale, and a lytle turned
to yelowe, is a token that the ſecond
concoction is nowe alreadye downe:
and ſo longe as the water or vryne
is not infected wyth choler, it is ſtyll
whyte: and when it hathe taken to
moche of choler, then it is red. Therfore
when it is betwyxte readde and
whyte, then it is tyme to begynne exercyſe,
fyrſt eaſynge the bodye of the
excrementes, of the guttes or entrailes,
as well as of the vryne or water,
in the bladder, leſt ſome parte of the
foreſayde excrementes, be eyther
chaunged into the habyte of the bodye,

or els (throughe the vyolence of
the greate heate, whych exercyſe and
the vehemēt exagitation cauſeth) do
putrifye, whereof there maye enſue
moche inconuenience. Therfore ſeing
that exercyſe (as we ſayd before)
is a vehement mouynge, it is verye
mete and neceſſary to ſhew for what
bodyes exercyſe is mooſte conuenyent
and holeſoome: for Hypocrates
counſayleth them, whoſe bodyes excede
in heate, to beware of all vyolent
and vehement mouinges. Then
ſhall ſuche bodyes lyue in ydleneſſe,
wythout exercyſe? or any mouynge?
no. For althogh Hypocrates forbyd
ſuche to vſe any exercyſe that is vyolent:
yet neuertheleſſe he forbyddeth
them ydleneſſe, commaundyng them
to vſe thoſe kyndes of exerciſe which
be not vehement, as walkynge & rydinge:
but ſuch as be colde of nature,

or at the leeſt excede not in heate, and
eſpecially they that haue many waſt
and ſuperſluous humours, may ſafe
lye vſe the vehement excerſyces that
be, in caſe they obſerue the tyme beforeſayde,
and do not ſodeynlye, and
at the fyrſt brunt, excercyſe thē ſelfes
as vehementlye as afterwarde. For
as ye ſe lute or harpeſtringes, if they
be ſodeynely and vehementlye ſtretched,
be put in great daunger of breauynge,
ſo the ſynowes, and the fyne
ſmall veynes, yf they be vehemently
plucked anye waye with any ſodden
mouynge of the bodye, be in no leſſe
daunger then of breakyng. Therfore
whoſoeuer wyll excercyſe hym ſelfe
vehemently, euen at the fyrſt, let hym
after he hath put of his clothes, chafe
his lymmes ſoftly, vntyll they waxe
redde, and be moderatelye hotte, and
then annoynt hys ioyntes with oyle

& after let hym not ſpare to excerciſe
hym ſelfe ſūme what vehementlye,
but ſuche as may take their excerciſe
at theyr owne wyll and pleaſure, let
them begyn ſoftely encreſynge theyr
labowre, ſtyll more and more, vntyll
ſuche tyme as theyr fleſhe be throghlye
ſwelled, and begyn to ſweat, but
then it is tyme to leaue, leſt ſuch humours
as be good, and profitable to
the nouryſhment of the bodye be expelled,
as well as they yt be noughte
And alſo immoderate excerſiſe, dryeth
vp the bodye, and conſumeth as
well the natural heat, as the natural
moyſture, whereby the ſpirits decay
whiche ſhortneth lyfe, and haſteneth
olde age.
               There be many kyndes of exerſyſes,
whyche maye all well be alowed: as
ſhotynge, dyggynge wyth a ſpade or
mattocke, bowelynge, eyther in the

fyelde or in the alley, haukynge, huntynge,
daunſyng, runnyng, leapyng,
tennes, and footebal, but of theſe, or
els of other, whych is not rehearſed,
the beſte be they that excerſyſe al partes
egally, as ſhotynge and tennyſe,
for dyggyng doth excerſiſe the backe
to muche, and runnyng or daunſing,
the legges. Wherfore they be not ſo
well to be alowed, as the reſt, which
exercyſeth all partes a lyke.
            
            
               The .ii. Chapter.
               ¶Of dyner or eatynge tyme.
               DIogenes beynge aſked whan it
was beſte for a man to be refreſſhed
wyth meate, aunſwered on
this faſſhyon ſayeng, a ryche manne
whan he wyll, & a poore man whan
he maye. As I do well alowe that a
poore manne ſhall not eate before he
haue meate, ſo I doo vtterlye condemne
that a ryche manne ſhall eate

whan he wyll. For meat taken eyther
out of tyme, or to much in quantitye,
is cauſe of many euyls and maladies,
to the bodye.
               It is taken out of tyme, eyther whā
the accuſtomed houre of eatynge is
broken, as to deferre dyner tyll .iii. of
the clocke at after noone, orels whan
that tyme is ſpente in eatyng, which
is ordeyned for an other pourpoſe as
to eat in the nyght, whyche is ordeyned
for ſlepe, and it maye be taken to
muche in quantitie, many wayes.
               For ſumme man eatynge but .iii. bittes,
of beaffe, ſhall ſurfet as ſore of it
as ſūme other that peraduenture be
ſyde other meates, deuowreth foure
grotes woorthe of beaffe.
               And he alſo taketh to muche whyche
ceaſſeth not from eatynge, ſo longe
as he is able to eate or ſwalowe any

more as well as he yt eateth ſo much
that hys belly is harde wythal.
               Of theſe kyndes of repletion, commeth
eyther ſodayne death by breakyng
of the ſkynne, called Peritoneum,
or elles a continuall laſke, called
Lienteria, whych alwayes bringeth
wyth it, a conſumption, wyth many
other diſeaſes, of the whyche. I entende
nat to ſpeake of, at thys tyme.
wherfore it is good, and holſome for
euery man to leaue eatyng, wyth an
appetyte, and not to eate ſo muche at
one meale, as myght well ſuffice nature,
iiii. & alſo to feade of ſuch meates,
as is moſte holſom for his body.
If he be cholerycke, and ſtrong of nature
ledynge a labourſūme life, than
he may fede of groſſe and ſtrong meates,
as beaffe and ſuche meates, as
is put in the fyrſte order, but yf he be
flenmatyke, and of a weake nature,

than lette hym take heede of groſſe
meates, and fede of ſuche as be in the
myddle order, of the whyche repletion
is nothynge ſo daungerous, as of
the other.
               As concernynge the tyme of eatyng,
euery man whan he is hungred, if he
maye haue it, yet one tyme is better
than another, and the very beſt tyme
is after excerſyce. For then the bodye
is clere pourged of all excrementes,
and naturall heate is encreaſed, and
made muche ſtronger. And the next
tyme is at .xi. of the clocke before dyner,
and agayne at .vi. a clocke of the
nyght. Howebeit children and ſuche
as be not yet at theyr fulle groweth,
and olde men whyche be weake and
feble, had nede to eat oftener, ſo that
they take the leſſe at ones, and putte
fower houres, at the leaſt, betwene
euerye meale. 
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
and alſo of the ſynnowes, whyche be
the inſtrumentes of mouynge, and
that the foreſayde vapours whythe
doo fume vp to the brayne maye not
be crude or rawe, the hearte plucketh
in to it bothe the blood and naturall
heat, that is in the vtter partes. And
thys ſame reſt is good for .iii. cauſes,
fyrſt to moyſter the brayne, and then
to the generation of ſpirites, & laſte
of all, to make an ende of the concoction
bothe in the ſtomake and liuer.
The materiall cauſe of ſleepe, are the
ſweete vapours, the whyche whan
they be made moyſt, ſtyllyng doune,
do ſtoppe the cōduytes of the ſenſis.
For they be not clāmye or groſſe humours,
ſuch as hurte the brayne, but
they be ſwete fumes, the whiche after
they be aſcended, be made thycke
by the coldenes of the brayne, & rūne
downe, ſprinkelyng the brayne with

moyſture. Therfore Ariſtotle doeth
compare the ſame motiō of vapours
to the floude Euripus, bycauſe in
theyr goinge vp they turne backe agayne,
and other folowe, and come
after, but the efficient cauſe is ſomewhat
more darke and obſcure. For it
is certayne that the heat and blood of
the vtter partes, is (as Hypocrates
ſayeth) drawenin to the hearte, and
though the body then be hotter with
in, it is colde without: therfore when
we ſlepe, we haue nede of manye clothes.
The heate and blood is drawē
in bycauſe that when the concoction
is begone, the vapours do fume vp,
naturally: and whē they be diſolued
they come downe fulbut on ye heate
of the herte, which dryueth thē backe
to the vtter partes: and thus ye heate
is dryuen ſtyll more and more to the
herte: the whyche heate gathered togyther

doth make an ende of cōcoction,
that the vapours which aſcende
to the brayne, may both be more plē
                  tifull
and alſo ſweter. But I thynke
that the heate is drawen into ye hert,
not ſomoche for the cōmyng downe
of vapours, as that the vitall and animall
powers be ſociate and cowpled
togyther by the diuyne prouydence
of god. For what parte ſoeuer
be diſeaſed, the herte, ſtreyght lyke a
naturall Prince or gouernour, endeuoureth
all that he can to helpe it, &
therfore he callethe in his heate, that
he may helpe ye neceſſary action, both
of the ſtomacke and lyuer. And whē
the vtter partes of the body be at reſt
then the hert laboureth mooſte, drawynge
vnto hym bothe heate and
blood: of the whych he enhendreth vitall
ſpyrytes. And trulye I ſe not a
ſuffycyent cauſe, why ſo moche heate

ſhoulde be called in, except this ſame
ſocietie of the powers were ordeyned
of God, that as ſoone as the vtter
partes were at reſt, the hert either
for hys owne cauſe, or elles for the
ſtomacke or liuer, myght drawe vnto
hym more plentiful heate to helpe
the innermore actions, whych be neceſſarye
for the conſeruation of nature,
and as euery man is mooſt greued,
and afrayed of his owne iepardye,
and doth couete fyrſt to defende
hym ſelfe: ſo euerye parte of the bodye
fyrſt prouydeth for him ſelfe, and
thys naturall inclination is gyuen
to all maner of creatures, to coueyte
fyrſte to ſaue them ſelues. And therfore
the herte eſpecially for his owne
cauſe, draweth to hym ſelfe heate,
bycauſe he hath neade of bloode, and
bycauſe his ſpirites be almoſt ſpent.
And therefore he alſo healpeth the

well of the blood, which is the liuer,
that it maye cheryſh it ſelfe, & bryng
forth, newe, and freſſhe ſpirites, and
moreouer the brayne beinge werye
and deſyryng reſt, leueth mouyng of
the vtter partes, and whenſoeuer the
body hath nede of recreation or quyetneſſe,
the actions of al the vertues
be agreed by and by. And this ſame
conſent or agrement, god hath gyuē
to all the partes, that after defatigation
or weryneſſe, they may be refreſhed
wyth reſt and quyetneſſe. The
finall cauſes be great benefytes, the
whych ſlepe gyueth to euery vertue
or power, one by one: it helpeth nutrition
bycauſe it maketh an ende of
concoction, and there is nothynge
more certayne thā that the crudities
whych come for lacke of ſleape is vncurable,
bycauſe not onely the meate
is left vndigeſted, but alſo the vertue

of the ſtomake, is vtterly deſtroyed,
partly by the burthē and weyght of
of the crude and rawe meate, & partlye
bycauſe the ſynowes be hurte by
the wekenes of ye brayne that cōmeth
for lacke of ſlepe, as Hypocrates ſpeking
generally, ſayth that ouermoch
watche bryngeth mooſt cruell crampes,
and there haue ben many which
for lacke of ſlepe haue felt often crampes
in theyr neckes, and the palſye in
theyr legges, and alſo a great imbecillitie
and weakeneſſe in theyr ſtomake.
And byſyde theſe the naturall
heate, throughoute the whole bodye
decayeth ſore, bycauſe it is not cheryſhed
with vitall ſpirit. And hereof it
maye be perceyued, how moche nede
we haue of ſlepe, to the conſeruation
of nutrition. For when the concoctiō
is done well, and as it ſhoulde be,
there is nouryſhment diſtributed to

euery parte of the body, wherwt they
be cheryſhed: and there is alſo ſpyrites
engendred, whyche myniſtreth
newe ſtrength to the bodye, and yet
the boylyng heate of the body is mittigated
with takyng reſt, and the bodye
it ſelfe is ſprynkled with a ſwete
dewe, that cōmeth from the brayne:
and the brayne alſo taketh ſtrength
wherwith ye fynowes be made more
luſtye. It helpeth the vitall power,
bycauſe the herte drawynge to hym
heate, doth brynge forth great plentye
of ſpyrites, the whych be made ſo
moche more brighter how moche the
bloode is purer. And agayne it helpeth
the animall powers (for whoſe
conſeruation it is ordeyned of God)
bycauſe ye vertue both of the brayne &
ſynowes ſhulde be deſtroyed cleane,
wyth ouermoche dryneſſe, excepte yt
it were cheryſſhed, wyth ſlepe, in the

whyche the brayne is made moyſte,
gatherynge to hym agayne his priſtinate
ſtrength. How acceptable alſo
is ſleape in diſeaſes, and ſorowes,
the which many tymes it onely healeth,
to mannes great profyte & eaſe.
            
            
               The .v. Chapter.
               ¶Of ſlepyng tyme, and of the holeſome
lying in bedde.
               
                  SLepe ought to be taken in
the begynnyng of ye night
and there ought to be but
a litle ſpace betwyxt ſupper
and ſleape, therfore after a lytle
ſoft walkynge, to the entent that the
meate may go downe into the maw,
and alſo that the vpper mouth of the
mawe, may be ſhutte. I wolde counſel
euery man to take reſt, lying hym
downe firſt on ye right ſide, leſt wt lying

on ye lefte ſyde, he open the vpper
mouth of his ſtomake, howbeit after
hys fyrſte ſleape, he maye ſafelye lye
on the left ſyde: and whoſoeuer hath
a weake ſtomake, let hym lye grouelyng
vpon hys face, for it helpeth cō
                  coction,
and letteth the generation of
fleume, encreaſing natural heate, by
reaſon wherof euil and noughty humours
be degeſted and concocted.
               And no man that is wyſe, ſlepe vpō
hys backe: for therof commeth many
ſore diſeaſes. It is very holeſome to
ſlepe, the ſhulders and heed lying on
hye: for ſo the heate is eaſelye gathered
togyther, whych maketh concoction
perfyte, and deſtroyeth all crudities
and rawneſſe, concernyng alſo
natural heate, engēdreth good blood
wherof the body taketh both strēgth
and lyuely coloure.
            
            
               The .vi. Chapter.
               ¶What cummeth of longe
watchynge.
               
                  
                  WIthout doubte, there is no
thynge that decayeth the
ſtrengthe more, eyther of
the bodye, or of the wytte,
then to watche long after ſupper, becauſe
there foloweth not onely cruditie;
but alſo naturall heate is diſperſed
abrode, and the vertue of the ſtomacke
faynteth & decayeth, & noughtye
and vncleane blood is engendred
whyche is cauſe that the body is fylled
wyth euell humours, wherof cō
                  meth
an euell habyte, as paleneſſe or
leaneneſſe, and the troublynge of the
ſpirites wyth greate infirmitie and
weakenes of the brayne.
               Wherefore youth ought to be accuſtomed
and vſed to omytte ſtudye in
the begynnynge of the nyght, and ſo
muche the leſſe to haunt banketynge

and drynkynge tyl mydnyght no nor
to ſpend the tyme in exitious labour
whyche god hath ordeyned for euery
creature to reſte in. I haue hearde in
thys matter, the diligence of manye
noble menne, whyche beynge trowebled
wyth matters of the common
wealthe, haue euer obserued this cuſtome,
that after ſupper, they wente
ſtrayght to bed, and in the mornynges
they dyd alwayes diſpatch their
buſines. Sener wryteth that Aſinius
woulde not ſo much as vnſeale a
letter at after ſupper, ſo muche the
leſſe reade one, to the entente that he
might go to bed with a quiet mynde.
And yf thou wylte ſlepe ſwetely (as
Homer ſayeth) thou muſte take hede
of cruditie in thy ſtomacke, and alſo
haue a quyet mynde.
               
                  
For the ſorowe and penſifnes, of the
hearte, alſo the boylynge and greate
heate of the blood and ſpirites, and
earneſt angre, diſtempereth ye brayn
wyth vnquyetnes, and wyll not ſuffre
the hart to go about any naturall
action, and beſydes theſe, thynke ye
that it is no ſinne before god: to punyſhe
ſo cruellye and corrupte the nature
of our bodyes? ſeyng that holy
ſcrypture, commaundeth to gyue honour
and reuerence to the bodye.
               Therefore we oughte to gyue dylygence
that (as muche as we maye)
we vſe well thys reſte and quietnes
ordeyned of god, by the whyche we
are warned of oure reſurrection after
the mortyfyenge of our bodyes.
As thys reſte whych we call ſlepe is
ordeyned of God, that in it oure lyfe
maye be renued, becauſe there is then
a great number of ſpirits engendred,

ſo let vs thynke that deathe is not eternall
miſerie, to the faythefull, but
a lytle ſpace, in the whiche, it is mete
and conuenient for vs, to be borne agayne,
to a better lyfe.
            
            
               The .vii. chapiter.
               ¶Of dreames.
               ALthough the queſtion of dreames
pertayneth to the inner ſē
                  ſes,
yet I wyll ſpeake of them
euen nowe. For I pourpoſe not to
proſecute the longe circumſtances of
the naturall philoſophers, whych endeuoure
to ſhewe a naturall cauſe of
euery dreame. Homer the olde and
auncient poet ieſteth excedynge featlye
of the .ii. gates of dreames, of the
whiche gates, the one is the waye or

entranſe of vayne dreames, and the
other of ſuche as do ſignifye ſumme
thinge. A dreame is nothynge, but
an ymagination made in the ſleape,
whan that dyuers ſpirites meete togyther
in the brayne, whyche beyng
the inſtrument of our thoughtes, do
make dyuers ymages.
               Furthermore in ſleepe, the inner ſenſes
be a great deale more at lybertye
than the vtter be.
            
            
               The .viii. Chapter.
               ¶Of dreames naturall.
               
                  THe fyrſte kynde of dreames,
be cōmon to euery
manne, therefore
they maye well be called
naturall. Theſe
dreames be, whan we

fanſie ſuche thynges in the nyght as
we thought on, whan we were wakynge,
whervpon Claudian the poet
ſayeth, iudges dreame of ſtryfe, and
controuerſies of the lawe, & carters
dreame of theyr cartes, orels whan
our dreames, anſwere dyrectelye to
certayne humours, the redowndyng
or mouyng, of the whych doth moue
our imagination, or ſpirites.
               As they that haue plentie of fleume,
dreame of ſwymmyng or drownyng
& of this faſhyon nyght mares trouble
vs in our ſlepe, whanſo euer anye
thycke or groſſe humour is eyther in
the brayne or breſte, lettyng the breſt
to moue, the whyche mooueth
our ymagination, that
it thinketh our breſt
be preſſed downe
of ſumme
other.
            
            
               
               The. ix. Chapiter.
               ¶Of that kynde of dreames
that foreſeeth thynges
to come.
               
                  THe ſeconde kynde of dreames,
foreſeeth thynges to
cumme, but not be any diuine
power for euery man
as he hath a good tempered bodye &
as he hath peculier gyftes, and properties
of nature, before other men:
as one man is better ſkylled, in muſycke
then an other, & an other more
nimble to clyme than he, ſo many by
a peculyar gyfte of nature, haue dreames
that declare thynges to come
by allegories and prouerbes: Such
were the dreames of Scilla, & Lucullus.
And Auguſtus Ceſers Phiſition
called Muſa, dremed that Auguſtus
hys owne tente was taken of
hys enemyes.
               Wherefore Auguſtus warned of it,

departed from thence, and euen as
the phiſition had dreamed, it chaunſed.
For that wynge where his tente
was beynge put to flyght, hys owne
tente, and tabernacle, was taken, of
hys enemyes.
               Tullye the eloquent romayne, reherſeth
manye lyke examples, & he hym
ſelfe dreamed, that Octauius ſhulde
be emperour of Rome, longe before
he knewe hym. And Pontanus writeth
of a certayne manne of warre,
which dreamed yt he was deuoured
of a ſerpent, wherfore whā other of
hys felowes toke ſhyppyng to fyght
agaynſt their enemies, he only taried
at home, and it chaunced that there
was a fraye in the citie yt daye where
it fortuned hym to be ſlayne, wyth a
gunſtoone, whyche in theyr tongue
was called a ſerpent.
               Gallen alſo wryteth of a certayne

man that dreamed himſelfe to be bathed
in his owne blood, and the next
daye when he opened hys dreame to
the Phiſitions, they ſaid that he had
ouermuche blood: wherfore contrary
to Galenes counſayl, they let him
blood, ſo he being deſtitute of ſtrēgth
dyed as he had dreamed before, bathed
and waſhed in his owne blood.
Of theſe kyndes of dreames there is
no euident cauſe, neyther in the mouynge
of humours, nor yet in theyr
quantitie or qualitie, but that there
be certayne natures that foreſeeth
thynges to come, whyche haue dreames
oftentymes that ſignifye ſomethynge.
Nor I wyll not be agaynſte
them that thynke this propertye to
come of the excellent temperature of
the bodye, as the Aſtronomers doo:
but I thynke them not wyſe whyche
gyue preceptes of the interpretation

of dreames, attributynge the cauſe
                     •
                  
to the motion of humours, ſeinge
that one man hath not alwayes lyke
dreames.
            
            
               The. x. chapter.
               ¶Of that kynde of dreames the which
prophecieth of thynges to come, by
diuine power.
               
                  THe thyrde kynde of
dreames is godlye,
which god worketh
in mens myndes, eyther
by hym ſelfe, or
elles by his aungels,
ſuche were the prophecies of Iacob,
Ioſeph, and Daniel, and other lyke,
which holy ſcripture doth affirme to
come from god, & not of lyght or tryflyng
matters, but of Chriſte, and of
the gouerning of the churche, & king
domes, & of theyr ordre. This kynde
of dremes ought well to be decerned

from the other: for in the other there
is no truthe. And this one kynde of
dreames is verye certayne and true,
as it ſhall appeare better hereafter.
            
            
               The. xi. chapiter.
               ¶What kynde of dreames is deuilyſh.
               
                  THe fourth kynde of dreames is
diuylyſh, as when wytches and
coniurers do dreame of feaſtes,
and playes. And the deuyl hym ſelfe
alſo oftētimes ſheweth horrible ſpectacles
to men in theyr ſlepe, as Valerius
wryteth of the Romayn Caſſius.
And there was a certayne Romayne
called Latinus, whiche was
cōmaunded in his ſlepe to remēbre ye
conſul, of certayne thynges as cōcerning
the ſtage playes, the which bycauſe
he had not done, the deuyl kylled
his ſonne. Here bothe the cauſe &
the effecte alſo doth declare, that the
dreame was deuylyſſhe.
               
                  
For the deuyl alwayes endeuoureth
to ſtabliſh ſuche cuſtomes as be wicked,
and noughtye, and he is delyted
wyth vniuſt death: there hath chaū
                  ced
manye lyke vnto this in the olde
tyme, no leſſe ſuperſtitious. And we
haue hearde nowe of late dayes, the
vayne dreames of the Anabaptiſtes,
commaundyng ſynne, or confirmyng
errours, and hereſyes: the whyche
doubtleſſe may be perceyued and iudged
of godlye and wyſe men.
            
            
               The. x. chapter.
               ¶To what kynde of dreames we
ought onely to gyue credite.
               
                  I Haue reherſed .iiii
kyndes of dremes
the why
                     •
                  h yf they
be well 
                     •
                  onſydred
and loked vpon, it
ſhall be eaſye to
iudge of this commune

queſtion, that is: whether any
thynge maye be coniectured of dreames,
or no: and whether anye man
ought to gyue credite or to truſte to
dreames or no. One kynde of dreames
is true and certayne: wherfore
euery man ought to gyue credite vnto
it, whiche is the ſame kynde, that
prophecyeth of thynges to come, by
reuelation from God, inſomoch that
they whyche haue ſuche dreames,
knowe that they come from God.
Iacob and Ioſeph knewe that their
dreames came from God, and therfore
they knewe the ſignification of
them. Also god doth adde a noble teſtimony
of this vnto the profite Daniel,
whē Nabuchodonozor had forgotten
hys dreame, god ſhewed it agayne
vnto Daniel, that it ſhoulde
be knowen, that it came from hym.
Therfore this kynde of dreames is

except from that rule which forbyddeth
vs to giue credite vnto dreames
For when they come from God, and
when God teſtifyeth that he is the
authour of them, then it is neceſſary
to beleue them: of the other dreames
there ought nothyng to be affirmed.
And as concernyng the .iiii. kynde of
dreames, it is vtterly to be abhorred.
Dreames of the ſeconde kynde, although
theybe coniectures, yet there
ought to be no affirmation of them:
wherfore we ought to gyue no credit
vnto them, and for the mooſte parte,
they be full of ambiguitie. Therfore
manye kynges and capitaynes haue
bene deceyued with ſuche dreames.
The laſt battayle which Pompeius
fought with Ceſar, he was moued
to it with a dreame, which promyſed
hym victorye, bycauſe he had dremed
yt he was in his royal ſeate at Rome:

and thought the people reioyſyng in
hym, clapped theyr handes for ioye:
but Pompeius was deceyued in the
interpretation. For that ſame reioyſynge
with the handes of the people,
dyd not pretende victorie, but rather
the encouragementes annd prouokementes
of Domitius Lentulus and
Labienus, whyche the morowe after
hys dreame, counſayled hym to
fyght, promyſyng hym victorie, and
ſettyng his mynde on fyre wt vayne
hope. Darius alſo dreamed, that he
ſawe the hoſte of the Macedonians
to go through Aſia burnīg, & to come
to Babilō, and there Alexander him
ſelfe hauyng a Percians robe, to go
into the churche, and ſtreyght to vanyſh
out of ſyght. Therfore Darius
thought that the ſtames of fyre dyd
p
                     •••
                  ende death to Alexanders army,
and that Alexander ſhoulde become

captyue, bycauſe he was decked after
his countrie faſſyon: but by ye fyre
was fignifyed the great haſt of Alexander,
and his victoryes, & hys garmēt
betokened that he ſhuld be kyng
and lorde ouer the whole dominion,
and empire of the Pertians. Hamilcar
capitayne of the Carthageneans
dreamed that he ſupped in Siracuſa
therfore the next daye purpoſyng to
take the towne, made battlement to
the walles, where it fortuned him to
be taken by reaſon of a tumult in his
owne armye: ſo beinge a captyue he
ſupped in the cytye, as he had dreamed
before. Wherfore we oughte to
gyue no credite to this kynde of dreames:
ſeinge they be ſo varyable and
deceytfull. Therfore let them be as
coniectures, which ſomtyme chaūce
or happen. But I wolde that everye
man ſhulde thynke, that they be both

deceytfull coniectures, and alſo vncertayne,
as many mo be. Let ſuperſtition
be ſet aſyde, and let vs remē
                  ber
the ſayinge of Salomon: where
manye dreames be, there is moche
vanitie and errour.
            
            
               The. xiii. chapter.
               ¶Of Venus or bodelye pleaſure.
               
                  HIppocrates ſayth
that Venus or bodely
luſt, is a parte
of the fallyng euel
Therfore it is not
to be deſyred, ouer
gredely, nor yet vtterlye
to be abhorred, ſeyng that the
kynde of al lyuyng rreatures, is conſerued
by generation, and as Celſus
ſayeth: If it be vſed but ſeldome, it
maketh the bodye to growe, and vſed
often, it doeth not onelye drye the
bodye, but alſo it diſſolueth it, vtterly

bycauſe bothe vitall, animal, and
natural ſpirit is waſted wyth the immoderate
vſe of it, and the bodye is
begyled alſo of hys nouryſhement.
               Howebeit whan there foloweth neither
greyfe nor ſorowe after it, there
can comme no great harme of it, and
the vſe of it, is worſe in ſummer, and
in autumne, then eyther in the wynter
or in the ſpryng, and it is holſommer
in the nyghte, then in the daye, &
alſo it is better full, then emptye, and
all maner of labour after it, is vtterlye
pernicious.
            
            
               The. xiiii. Chapter.
               ¶Of the tymes of the yere.
               
                  THe holſemeſt tyme of the yere
is the ſprynge, and nexte vnto
it is wynter, ſūmer is not ſo
good, and autumne is extreme perilous.

For they be beſt, whych be moſt
temperate and egal, whether they be
hotte or colde. Therefore autumne is
verye daungerous becauſe it is hote
then about noone, the mornynge and
euenyng bothe beyng colde, therof it
cōmeth that the body reſolued wt the
heat at noone, is made ſtarke, wt the
ſodayn colde of the euenyng, whych
cauſeth manye diſeaſes. And in the
ſpring, where as is equalitie (if there
be anye in the yere) the fayreſt dayes
be moſte holſome, and raynye dayes
be better than clowdye wtout rayne,
and in wynter thoſe dayes are beſte,
that be not wyndye, and in ſummer,
whan the weſterne wynde bloweth.
               Summe peraduenture wyll loke
that I ſhulde haue writte of bathes
ſeynge that there is nothyng that is
more medicinable than they be: But
foraſmuche as we englyſhmen haue

no vſe of them, and alſo ſeynge that
there are dyuers, whyche haue wryt
of them verye well in Englyſſhe, I
thought I had no nede to entermedle
wyth them, yet yf anye man
wylle vſe them, lette hym
bathe hym in warme
water, before
meat, and
after
meate, in colde, and he ſhal
not greatlye erre
in the takyng
of them.
            
         
         Finis.
      
      
         
            
            ¶The contentes of
thys booke.
            
               ¶The fyrſte booke.
               ¶An exhortation of Phiſicke to her miniſters. Fol. iiii.
               ¶The diuerſitie of ſectes in phiſike. Fol. vi.
               ¶Of the Elementes. Fol. xii.
               ¶The dyfference of temperatures. Fol. xiii.
               ¶The generation of the liuer, of the heart, and
of the brayne. Fol. xix.
               ¶The ſections of the eſpeciall partes of the
bodye. Fol. xxiii.
               ¶Of veynes, pulſes, and ſinowes. Fol. xl.
               ¶Of humours. Fol. xlii.
               ¶Of blood. Fol. xliii.
               ¶Of fleume. Fol. eodem.
               ¶Of choler. Fol. eodem.
               ¶Of melancholie, or blacke choler. Fol. xliiii.
               ¶Of vnnaturall humours. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of vnnaturall fleume. Fol. xlv.
               ¶Of vnnaturall yelowe choler. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of melancholy vnnaturall. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of Spirites. Fol. xlvii.
               ¶Of animall ſpirites. Fol. xlviii.
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde booke.
               ¶Of natural powers and actions. Fol. xlix.
               ¶Of nutrition. Fol. li.
               ¶Of the faculties or vertues, with whyche nature
hath furniſſhed euery parte, ſeruynge to
nutrition. Fol. lvi.
               
                  
¶Of the power or vertue attractiue. Fo. lvll.
               ¶Of the vertue retentiue. Fol. lix.
               ¶Of concoction. Fol. lx.
               ¶Of the vertue expulſiue. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of the prouoking of appetite. Fo. lxiii.
               ¶Of the diuerſitie of foode. Fol. lxiiii.
               ¶Of diuers qualities of meates. Fol. lxxiii
               ¶Meates of good iuyce. Fol. eod.
               ¶Meates of euill iuyce. Fol. liix.
               ¶Of meates that be mylde and gentle of Nature,
and of the contrary. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of meates engendring fleume. Fol. lxx.
               ¶Meates good for the ſtomacke. Fol. lxx.
               ¶Euel meates for the ſtomacke. Fol. eod
               ¶Of meates that make the belly to ſwelle, and
what delaye the ſame Fol. lxxi.
               ¶Of thynges engendring heat or cold. fo. eod.
               ¶Of meates that putrifye in the mawe, and other
that do not. Fol. lxxii.
               ¶Of thinges that leuſe the body. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of thinges byndyng the belly. Fol. lxxil.
               ¶Of thinges prouokynge vrine. Fol. eod.
               ¶Of thynges prouokyng ſlepe, and other that
cauſe watche. Fol. eodem.
            
            
               ¶The thyrde booke.
               ¶Of excerciſe. Fol. lxxiiii.
               ¶Of dyner or eatynge tyme. Fol. lxxvii
               ¶Of reſte after meate. Fol. lxxix.
               ¶Of Slepe. Fol. lxxx.
               ¶Of Slepynge tyme & of the wholſom lyinge
in bedde. Fol. lxxxiiii.
               ¶Of longe watchynge. Fol. lxxxv.
               ¶Of the diuerſitie of dreames. Fol. lxxxvi.
               ¶Of Venus. Fol. xciii.
               ¶Of the tymes of the yere Fol. xciiii.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               Fol. 4. Pagi. i. Line. 4. rede Tipheus.
               Fol. 6. pag. i. line. 12. rede to perceiue.
               Fol. 6. pag. ii. line. 15. rede gathering.
               Fol. 14. pag. i. lin. 69. rede diſtributiuā.
               Fol. 15. pag. i. line. 17. reade 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Fol. 27. pag. ii. line. 22. rede rare.
               Fol. 35. pag. ii. line. 14. rede Ieiunum.
               Fol. 69. pag. i. lin. 8. rede clammye.
               Fol. 79. pag. i. line. 14. rede noone.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Edwarde Whytchurche.
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
ſolum.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   