
      
         
            
            
            THE
FAVOVRITES
CHRONICLE.
               *⁎*
            
            Printed according to the French Copie.
M.DC.XXI.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
FAVOVRITES
CHRONICLE.
            
               CVrious Gentlemen, that ſpend your time
and take pleaſure to recreate your ſpirits
with the conſideration of the Tragedies
that are acted vpon the Theater of this
World; I cannot be perſwaded but that
you haue heretofore read that which
learned Aeſope rehearſeth in his Fables, of certain Hares,
who running away when they heard the hounds open,
by chance paſt along by the ſide of a ditch, where there
were great ſtore of frogs vpon the graſſe, who as ſoone
as they ſaw the hares, leapt as faſt as they could into the
water. This action being noted by the timorous hares,
did in ſuch maner encourage them, that the ſame onely
ſufficed to make them ſtay their running any further; at
which time, one of them (who it may be had ſtudied the
French eloquence, practiſed by Maſter William du Vair)
told them, that from thence forward it behoued them to
eſteeme more of their valours then euer they had done
before; that it was a ſhame for them alwayes to haue bin
held & eſteemed to be fearfull, and a ſigne of reprochfull
daſtardlineſſe vnto their aunceſtors, continually to haue
vſed to runne away, and neuer durſt looke in their enemies
faces, ſeeing they were capable to ouercome and ſubdue
others, as they might well perceiue by experience of
theſe croaking frogs, whoſe onely preſence had put them

               
                  〈◊…〉
               , without any ſtroke given.
            
               
                  〈◊…〉
                his notable oration, (as plauſibly pronounced, as that
which my Lord Conſtable made to thoſe of Thoulonze)
ſo much encouraged his companions, that preſently they
reſolved, not to ſet vpon Montaubon, but in time to come
to ſhew themſelues more valiant, and to magnifie and exalt
their generoſitie, and from thenceforward determined
to act ſome glorious enterpriſe againſt thoſe accurſed
hounds, and to turne their faces againſt their enemies
to aſſaile them: which counſell put in execution, tooke
ſo bad effect, and fell out ſo vnfortunately for the authors
thereof, that thereby they were not onely taken, but torne
in peeces, to ſerve for a prey unto their enemies, and a
jeſt unto other more judicious and ſubtill beaſts.
            This fable, in my opinion, may properly be applied unto
the levying of armes at this time, whereinto ſo improvidently
we have bin led by the plauſible inducements of
certaine prating companions, that have ſo much advanced
and magnified the Favourite Hares, that they have
made them to buſie their braines about the ambitious
reach of their prowd fortunes.
            Every man knowes what diſcontentment the great
perſonages of this Realme have had, to beholde the
Crowne of France within theſe foure yeares to be as it
were beſieged by Luynes and his brethren; who to the
great prejudice of the Kings affaires and the Commonwealth,
abſolutely diſpoſed both of the ordinarie and caſuall
matters of State, to the great deſolation of the whole
monarchie: which to oppoſe and prevent, the greateſt
part of the Princes and principall Officers of the Realme
in Anno 1620. made a kinde of league. But the number of
the Leaguers being extreme great, the buſineſſe could not
be ſo ſecurely managed as the caſe required: whereupon
it fell out ſo, that it was preſently diſcovered, by the infidelitie
of certaine perſons that betrayed them. In purſuite
whereof, the vanquiſhers had the victorie without

combat, and the vanquiſhed ouerthrew themſelues.
            Now appropriating the ſence of this fable to my preſent
diſcourſe, I muſt tell you that my Maſters the Favorite
Hares, the laſt yeare being made afraid and abaſhed
with the apprehenſion that they conceived of ſo many
yong Princes that ſought to overthrow and croſſe their
inſolent fortune, they were conſtrained to abandon the
delights of the Court, to ſeeke and finde out ſome meanes
to ſhadow and cover themſelves from the great tempeſt
which as then ſeemed to menace them. And ſo ſhaking
and trembling with feare, they went into Normandie,
where by good fortune they met with certaine people,
that like true frogs, hid themſelves in the reedes, at the
noiſe of their horſes feete. Which made the Favorites ſet
up their eares, and from that time forwards to conceive
a wonderfull opinion of their affaires. But when they entred
into the medowes in Angers, and perceived that at
their onely preſence, the frogs of Pont de See ſlipt downe
from off the bridge of Pont to hide themſelves in the water,
they did then begin upon that occaſion to conceive
ſo great an opinion of their valours, that they were of
the minde preſently in a maner to ſet forward to fight
againſt the great Turke, without once ſtaying till the
Duke de Nevers veſſels were made readie, or the new
Knights of the Chriſtian warre were prepared to fight,
imagining themſelves to be three Caeſars, able to overcome
and rule over all men, whereupon they reſolved to
lay hold vpon all occaſions, and to command all, and ſo
farre, as to preſume to make, not onely the Princes of the
blood, but alſo the Regall authoritie, to ſerve them for a
footſtoole or a ſtep unto their greatneſſe.
            Whereupon our neighbours (hauing Argus eyes) being
alwayes vigilant, and neuer ſleepe, and with their ſpectacles
continually beholding our proceedings, to draw
ſome profit from thence, accommodating them to the
intereſt of their affaires, perceiving the haughty deſeignes

of the Favorite Hares; and that the pride which they conceived
in their hearts of thoſe ridiculous victories, was
available to thruſt them forward and embarke them into
ſome great enterpriſe, how dangerous ſoever it were, ſo
the perill that ſhould be miniſtred were well gilded over:
they adviſed with themſelves that a civill warre in France
would fall out well to the purpoſe, to be a meanes for
them to attaine to the end of the Germane revolts, and
of the vſurpation which they pretended to make vpon
the Palatinate, Inlliers and Valtolina.
            
            And to make them the more eagerly and eaſily to catch
at the baite, they practiſed to re-aſſemble all the old rags
and peeces of the holy league, therewith to make a faire
cloake of religion, finely ſowed by the fathers of the Ieſuiticall
ſocietie, and thereof to make a rich preſent unto
the eldeſt Favorite, ſhewing him what a glorie it would
be vnto him to weare the ſame, as in times paſt a certaine
Duke of Guiſe had done; and that the onely way for him,
without any trouble to attaine the Conſtables office, was
to gild the ſcabberd of his ſword with the ſpoiles of the
fooliſh hare-braind heretickes, without ſpeaking of the
great ſummes of mony that he might by that meanes levie
of the people, vnder pretence of ſo pious a quarrell,
as that of religion would be; beſides the hazard that he
incurred to be canonized, according to the ordinarie maner,
with the Cardinals de Ioyenſe, and the Earle de Fieſque.
            
            This glorious advice, preſented with as plauſible words
as thoſe of father Cotton, moved our new warriers to a
deſire and great appetite to be doing ſomewhat: and their
deſeigne was preſently confirmed by the Archbiſhop of
Sens, and the Keeper of the Seales, to whom were ſhewed
red Hats, woven by the hand of an Archangell, with a
letter written by Pontchartrain, containing an aſſurance
that thoſe Hats were for them: for the which the Cardinals
de la Rochefoucault and de Rets were ſureties, upon

the certificate of father Berule, and of the Marquis de
Maignelay.
            
            Touching the execution of the ruin of the heretickes,
it was ſolemnly ſworne by a Catholick Councell holden
in Fontainebleau by divers great perſons of the Realme,
where the future Conſtable ſat as Preſident, apparelled
like another Alexander, holding a ſword of damaske of
Genes in his hand, about the which was graven, He that
kils with the ſword, ſhall die by the ſheath. Now with more
eaſe to bring this enterpriſe to effect, Luynes like an expert
falconer, eſteemed it requifite for him to haue a Duke
to draw the ſimpler ſort of birds to the lure: and for that
certaine yeares together he had fixed both his eyes upon
the office of Conſtable, although long before hee had
made an offer thereof to the Duke de Leſdiguieres, to ſee
what the great perſonages would ſay to the reeſtabliſhment
of that office; he purpoſed to renew that propoſition
unto him againe, and cauſed him to come to the
Court, not with an intent to honour him with that dignitie,
but on the contrary, to make him deſiſt from it, for
his owne advantage, and ciuilly to hold him as a priſoner,
by his wives meanes, who vnder pretence of ſome particular
profit, hath expoſed her husbands honour to the
open view of the world. Thus the ſaid Lord Marſhall being
fallen into the nets that were laid abroad for him, preſently
father Arnoux was ſeene to ſweate water & blood,
to procure the converſion of the poore Huguenots; who
paying him well, he did happily bring into the lap of the
Church, thereby to warme and encourage the ſpirits of
thoſe that were zealous, and to animate them with more
crueltie againſt the heretickes. While the Earle de Schomberg
had commiſſion given unto him to furniſh a maſſe
of treaſure, to defray the charges which ſhould be convenient
(at what price ſoever it ſhould coſt) to ſeeke both
on hils and in valleys for the band which in times paſt
had ſo often and victoriouſly bin borne againſt the Saracins,

that it might once againe be diſplayed in ſo holy
a warre. And becauſe it could not be found, what diligent
ſearch ſoeuer the fathers made, they were forced to
have recourſe unto ſome other expedient thing, agreeable
to the greatneſſe of that enterpriſe. And behold, for want
of the banner, unexpectedly the Conſtables ſword roſe up,
which Luynes had long time hidden in the breaſts of the
Dukes de Guiſe, and de Mayenne, and de Leſdiguieres,
from whence he puld it artificially, to lay hold on it. And
it is to be noted, that the firſt time that he hung it by his
ſide, he held it a while naked in his hand, admiring his
owne valour, eſteeming it equall unto that of Caeſar; and
without further conſideration of the difficulties of that
warre, cried out for joy, and ſaid like another Alexander,
Nodos virtute reſolvo, and then put the ſword into the
ſcabberd, from whence it neuer came out againe, by the
advice of Cadnet and de Branthe, that they might not be
reproched, that one of them was more valiant then the
other. In the meane time, it was reſolved to go directly
to Saumur, there to do homage for that warlike ſword,
to our good Ladie de Ardvilliers, for the firſt fruites of his
militarie actions, to ſacrifice vnto her the breaking vp of
blinde Monſieur du Pleſſis Mornays Librarie, who for that
he was as ill ſighted as the Counteſſe de Moret, was deceived
by the interceſſion of Villarnoud his ſonne in law; ſo
it may well be ſaid, that it was the firſt match that ſet fire,
not onely in the Temples of the Huguenots, du Pleſſis
and les Touers, but alſo in all the Cantons of the Realme,
for that upon the good ſucceſſe of the yeelding up of that
place, the Favorite Hares reſolved to adde the conqueſt of
S. Iohn d' Angely unto their triumphs, into the which
Towne they had ſent Lo
                     •
                  drieres to betray his companions,
and in recompence thereof they promiſed to diſcharge
him of 1000 crownes yearely rent that he ought
to the Treaſurer Moran, beſides 15000 crownes which
they gaue him in ready mony. Thus from place to place

their conqueſts extended ſo farre, till they came before
Montauban, which my Lord Conſtable thought to take
as eaſily as hee could take up his Ladies ſmocke, as hee
made knowne by his letters ſent to diuers places, by the
which he aſſured his friends, that he had ſowed ſo good
corne in that accurſed place, as he made no doubt but
that it would take roote. That was the cauſe that Te
Deum was ſung in Boulogne, Lyons and many other places
for the yeelding up thereof, grounding upon the infallible
aſſurance yt ſome men had, that he would take it,
becauſe he tooke all other places but onely Montauban.
But therein he was not to be blamed, for he had ſent Sauuage
into the Towne, who had promiſed to deliuer that
Towne into his hands, as he had done Clerac: but the
traitor deceiued my Lord Conſtable, and ſtanding on the
walls, mockt him.
            This device failing, divers batteries were erected, ſuppoſing
by that meanes to put the inhabitants thereof in
ſome feare. Trenches were caſt up, and furious skirmiſhes
were made. Father Arnoux to encourage the ſouldiers, aſſured
them by his part of Paradiſe, that all thoſe that died
in ſo holy a quarrell, ſhould neuer go into Purgatorie.
Whereupon euery man ſought and ſtrove to ſhew forth
his valour. Branthe and Cadnet made a goodly ſhew with
their great plumes of fethers, a great many of brave gentlemen
were kild, and every day more and more were
ſlaine.
            The report of this ſiege was ſpread abroad throughout
all Europe; and the late deceaſed King Henrie the fourth
had newes thereof caried unto him in the Elizian fields:
ſo that as when he liued he did tenderly and fatherly loue
and nouriſh France; the care of the quietneſſe, together
with the deſire he had to know the ſtate thereof continually
vexed his ſoule. For which cauſe he ſent meſſengers
into every place, to diſcover whether any French men had
paſt over the river of Styx. The late Baron de Villeroy
               
brought him newes, that by chance he had met with a
Spaniard of his old acquaintance, who had told him for
certaine, that the Conſtable of France had begun a glorious
warre againſt the heretickes, wherein he had proceeded
ſo happily, that in leſſe then two moneths he had
reduced threeſcore Townes vnder his obedience, battered,
taken and unwalled S. Iohn, Pont Nerac, Bergerac and
Clerac, and that as then he lay before Montauban with
fortie great peeces of cannon. That the Marquis de Villars
and divers others had bin burnt before it, though they
were no heretickes. That the Marquis de Themines and
the Duke de Mayenne alſo had bin ſlaine there, beſides
400 gentlemen of name and qualitie, and aboue 15000
ſouldiers kild. That touching the raiſing up of the ſiege,
he could ſay nothing, for that the reverend father Dominique
de Ieſus Maria had there loſt the ſubtiltie of his revelations;
and that there was none but the Duke de Branthe,
the Duke de Cadmet, and the Duke de Luynes that
were capable to take it: but they were not men to expoſe
their bodies in all enterpriſes, becauſe of the importance
of their perſons.
            Are they Spaniards? ſaid the King. They are, ſaid Villeroy,
the onely faithfull Counſellers to the King your ſon,
by whoſe advice all the Realme is governed. Wherewith
King Henrie the fourth ſcratching his head, ſtood as if
he had bin in a dreame, and ſtaying a great while without
ſpeaking a word, at laſt ſighing with a ſad countenance
and ſorrowfull voice, he ſaid: Alas, now I ſee well
that theſe men by litle and litle will vndoe my ſonne,
and that that which my enemies could not do while I lived,
they will enforce themſelues to effect it in his life
time, by the meanes of thoſe three petie Kings. Let ſearch
be made in every place, to kuow if there be any of my
old ſervants to be found, among all thoſe that have bin
kild before S. Iohn, Clerac and Montauban, that I may
diſcourſe with them touching thoſe lamentable things

that are done in my poore countrey of France.
            
            Truly, ſaid the Chancellor de Belieure, euen now I ſaw
almoſt 20000 perſons of all ſorts and qualities, which
ſtand on the other ſide of the river of Stix, deſiring to
paſſe over; but the Boate-man Caron refuſed them all, vntill
they have bin purged in the 
                  〈◊〉
                of Purgatorie. They
maintaining and conſtantly aff
                  ••…
               ing, that they were exempted
from it, becauſe they ha
                  •…
                
               
                  •
               oſt their lives before the
heretiks forts, according to the aſſurance given them in
the other world, by the Ieſuites 
                  •
               f Thoulouſe and Bourdeaux,
and namely by father Ruſſelay.
            
            That grieves me much, ſaid the King, I could be content
to haue given 100000 crownes to marry the Nunnes
in Paris, vpon condition that this contention were ended,
I haue ſo great a deſire to ſee ſome one Frenchman or other,
that might eaſe me of my care, for the apprehenſion
that I haue conceived of the troubles of the King my ſon,
of the Queene my wife, and of my children.
            Therewith the Baron de Liencourt ſtept forth and ſaid
to the King: Sir, your Grace is much troubled to know
the truth of the affaires in the other world, you need but
direct your ſelfe vnto ſome Ieſuites, for they haue letters
from all places. I came but now from ſpeaking with father
Gontrie, hee cannot chuſe but know ſomething; if
you will haue me enquire of him, it may be my wife hath
written him a word or two thereof. No, no, ſaid Samet,
thoſe kind of people are too craftie and ſubtill, the truth
neuer comes directly out of their mouthes, you ſhal know
nothing that way; I know a better way, Caron the boatman
is my friend, he and I haue many times dranke together,
I will deale ſo well with him, that for my ſake
he ſhall not make difficultie to ſuffer ſome Frenchmen
(upon my recommendation) to paſſe over, or elſe let me
go over to them, to heare what they can ſay touching
your Graces deſire. Venture S. Gry, ſaid the King, your
invention is very good. Wherewith M. Guilliaume,
               
who in the meane time ſtood attentively to heare that diſcourſe,
began to ſay unto the King: My Lord, if you
thinke it good, I will gladly beare Sebaſtian Zamet companie,
and will aide him finely to paſſe over, as the ſuccours
did into Montauban, while he ſtands ſpeaking with
old Caron, and then I will ſpeedily make a journey to
Louviers, to know how 
                  •
               ll fares there, and whether the
Normands are well co
                  ••…
               t to be bowles of Quillibeuf,
in recompence of their ſervice. I will not have you
ſtirre from thence, ſaid the King, you ſhall ſtand ſentinell
on the South ſide, and onely marke when the Archduke
Albertus ſhall leane off his Monks cowle. Zamet diſpatched
away, went to the river ſide, where being arived,
he heard newes that the Cardinall de Guiſe was come thither
with buls, to cauſe all thoſe to paſſe over, that died
as he did in that holy warre, but that there was ſome diſpute
happened among thoſe that ſtayed to paſſe over; for
which cauſe Caron would not let them paſſe, for feare leſt
they ſhould fight together while they were in his boate.
Thereupon Zamet to further the buſineſſe, gaue his advice,
that it was convenient to ſprinkle all thoſe that quarelled
together, with water of oblivion, before they entred
into the boate, that ſo forgetting their quarels, they might
paſſe over peaceably. This counſell was inſtantly followed;
but as things are full of croſſes, another controverſie
hapned after that, betweene the ſaid Cardinall and the
Duke de Mayenne, who ſhould firſt go into the boate. The
ſtrife was long, which much diſpleaſed Zamet, becauſe it
ſtaid him from returning backe unto the King. The diſpute
was maintained by reaſons on either ſide. The Cardinall
ſaid, he died firſt, and by conſequence yt he ought
to go firſt. The Duke denied not that, but ſaid, hee was
to be preferred before him, becauſe he had bin ſlaine in
the Kings ſervice, and that the Cardinal died onely of ſicknes.
The Cardinall replied, that for Gods ſake he had abandoned
both wife and children; and to proue it, deſired

no other witnes but the Duke de Nevers; and that he had
not done ſo. At laſt they ſtood vpon the difference of
their degrees and qualities; and for that the Church alwayes
hath the preheminence, it was iudged that the Cardinall
ſhould enter firſt into the boate, as alſo becauſe he
had brought the buls to free them to paſſe over the river,
without going into Purgatorie; and ſo all of them paſt over
with this decree, that thoſe who thereafter ſhould come
from the ſiege of Montauban, ſhould enioy the like priviledge.
            When they were ſet on ſhore on the banks of the Elizian
fields, Zamet recived and ſaluted them, with both his arms
about their middles, jeſting and ſporting with them, and
aſſuring them that King Henrie the great would be exceeding
glad to ſee them, becauſe of the deſire he had to
vnderſtand the ſtate of the affaires of France.
            
            The impatience that troubled the ſpirit of that good
Prince, had moved him to walke with the greateſt part of
his old ſervitors to the ſide of the riuer, to meete with Zamet
the late Baron de la Guiche, becauſe he was very tall,
was he that firſt afarre off diſcouered that French troupe,
and ſaid to the King S. Fiacre: Sir, I thinke theſe are the
men of Montauban before vs, they are a great number, I
wonder how ſo many brave men have ſuffred themſelves
to be made neſtle-birds; you will ſay, that it is a great armie,
and I marvell that your Majeſtie doth not ſee the
foule duſt which they cauſe to riſe up into the aire with
their feete. I perceive it well, ſaid the King, let us ſtay
here for them; in the meane time take your proſpective
glaſſe (as the Conſtable did at Piquerox) the better to
know them afarre off.
            And as the King walked ſomewhat aſide, the Marſhall
d' Aumont ſaid: Sir, we ſhall ſpeedily heare ſome newes,
for I ſee a carrabin among the mirtle trees, that runs as
faſt as he can, to get before his fellowes; he ſeemes to be
ſome harbinger or quarter maſter, that ſeekes to come to

the campe before the reſt, that he may take vp the beſt
lodging: but coming nearer, they knew him to be a Ieſuite,
that was ſent in great haſte by his Generall, to perſwade
the King, not to beleeue all that ſhould be told him
touching the lamentable ſtate whereinto the affaires of
France are now reduced: and he was no ſooner come to
the King, but on the other ſide Hautefontaine ſuddenly was
at his heeles, who had ſlipt out of the company, that he
might excuſe himſelfe touching the miſerable diſorder
hapned in S. Iohn d' Angely. And as ſoone as he ſpied the
Ieſuite, he ſuddenly cried out, and ſaid: What doth this
Ianniſarie here? doth it not ſuffice his Societie to haue
ſupported the authors of the diuiſion between the mother
and the ſonne, but muſt he come hither alſo, to trouble
and diſturbe the peace of the bleſſed? What noiſe is that
which I heare, ſaid the King? Varenne made anſwer: It
is Hautefontaine that quarrels with this good father which
even now came to your Majeſtie. Hautefontaine, ſaid the
King, bid him come hither that I may ſpeake with him.
Who coming to the King-preſence, he asked him, who
had ſent him into theſe quarters? By the Lord, Sir, (excuſe
me, ſaid he, if I do not ſweare as the Huguenots do,
for I am angrie) I am not come hither for mine owne
pleaſure, it is true that I make no account of my life, but
I am halfe mad to ſee this Spaniſh Ianniſarie preſume to
ſpeake unto you, after they have dealt with you as they
have done, and Catholikly ſet fire in the foure quarters
of your ſonnes Realme. Why do you call them Ianniſaries,
ſaid the King? Do not you know, ſaid Hautefontaine,
yt the Turks Ianiſaries haue neither father nor native
country, acknowledging no Lord but the great Turke:
ſo the Ieſuites neither reſpect their country nor their parents,
but onely bend their mindes and all their ſtudies to
accompliſh the will and deſire of Yo el Rey, their Soveraigne
Lord; and the better to effect his will and pleaſure
they haue troubled all Chriſtendome, and are the cauſe

of the death of all theſe brave Knights which are now
coming hither to your Majeſtie.
            The King looking backe ſaw all thoſe that had paſt
over the river, who all together began to kneele downe.
Are theſe moale-catchers or takers of Montauban, ſaid the
late Admiral d' Anvile? The King therwith ſharply reproved
him, ſaying, Hold you your peace, this is no ſpectacle
to be laught at; and therewith his heart was ſo much grieved,
that he could hardly ſpeake, yet he refrained not to
entertain them friendly; and then particularly embracing
the Cardinall de Guiſe, the Duke de Mayenne, and the reſt
of the Lords, he prayed them to go and reſt themſelves;
and hauing eaſed their bodies awhile, he would conferre
with them at leiſure; and therewith he commanded Zamet
to entertain them wel, and ſo drew himſelf aſide with
his moſt confident friends untill the next day. While the
King ſpake unto them, Hautefontaine ſtood talking with
Beringhen touching the motives of the ſecret myſteries of
Bearn, and entred into ſo profound a diſcourſe with him,
that they paſt over a great part of the night therein. At laſt
the King deſiring to take ſome reſt, asked for Beringhen;
and anſwer being made, That he was without, walking
with Hautefontaine. He commanded that they ſhould
both come to him. And turning to Hautefonte, he asked
him, what occaſions had moved them to rebell againſt the
King his ſonne? ſaying hide nothing from me, but ſpeake
boldly like a true Huguenot. Sir ſaid he, if I ſhould die
once againe by a musket ſhot at me from the wall by a
falſe brother of the companie, I will tell you our affaires
truly how they paſt, and wil not lie in any point. It is long
time ſince we perceived that the Spaniard doubting the
end of the truce betweene him and the Hollanders, and
that for the good of his affairs he ſought to trouble France
by ſome civill warre, finding no better meanes then to
make us wrangle among our ſelves with blowes of Pater
noſters and Clement Marots Pſalms, his device from yt time

effected what it could; and to give us matter and ſubject
to enter into the field, many things which your Majeſtie
had formerly granted unto us by your Edicts, were denied
us. The affaires of Bearn were brought in queſtion,
as a countrey neare bordering upon Spaine; his principall
agents there diſperſed a certaine quantitie of Medales, for
marks of Catholikes, on the backe ſide having Iulius ſecundus.
            
            The Marquis d' Ancre was no ſooner ſlaine, but du Vair
Keeper of the Seales, author of the aſſembly of ſpeciall
perſons, holden in Roane in the beginning of an. 1618.
cauſed that notable decree of the privie Councell for the
reſtoring of the temporall goods and lands unto the ſpirituall
perſons in Bearn to be pronounced; but the great
difficulties touching this reſtitution, cauſed the execution
thereof to be delayed. The Spaniard, that ſtil ſought to ſet
fire on France, cauſed the Biſhop to trot up and downe
Paris, to have an end and order of their ſuite. Thereupon
our Miniſters made a generall aſſembly in Loudun, in the
meane time we were undermined by all the malcontents
in the Realme, but yet they could not win us in any ſort
to eſtrange our ſelves from the fidelitie which we owe
unto our King. Luynes and his brethren fearing leſt we
ſhould make a ſcape, promiſed us in the Kings name, that
within ſix moneths the ſpeciall points of our complaints
ſhould be anſwered, and that in the meane time nothing
ſhould be innovated in the country of Bearn. Vpon this
aſſurāce we brake up our aſſembly, with promiſe by word
of mouth that we ſhould have leave to reaſſemble if that
were not performed within the ſaid time which was promiſed
unto us. But that word was not held with us, but
on the contrary we were mockt; and without ſtaying till
the ſix moneths were expired, your old ſervant de la Salle
was driven out of Navarrens and at the ſame 
                  ••
               me the Ieſuites
were eſtabliſhed in P
                     〈◊…〉
                  
                hereupon w
                  •
                preſented
our moſt humble ſupplications to the King your ſonne,

and in ſtead of an anſwer thereunto, we had a flat deniall.
Whereupon wee aſſembled the Deputies to renew our
complaint, but without giuing them audience, we were
proclaimed Traitors. Then we ſaw all the Tranſmontaine
faction to ariſe; and the better to diſguiſe the action, in
ſtead of ſpeaking openly againſt the heretickes, becauſe
that would have ſavoured too much of the old league, it
was reported in all places that we were not good common
wealths men, and that we had called the virgin Marie, la
Guimbard, thereby to move all the Catholicks vnder that
pretence to ſeeke revenge againſt all thoſe that aided you
againſt the leaguers. And in truth, Sir, your Majeſtie may
well note and perceive, and ſo may all good Frenchmen
likewiſe, that they have aſſailed and ſpoiled none but thoſe
Townes which in time paſt ſerved your Majeſtie for a retraict
in the time of your greateſt troubles, witnes S. Iohn,
Nerac, Clerac, and the Towne Burbon de Montauban,
which beares the name of your houſe, to ſhew how much
they that cauſed it to be built, were affected to your blood.
This in few words, Sir, is the hiſtory of France and Spaine.
            
            I haue heard you well, ſaid the King, but who thruſt
Luynes forward to deſtroy that which I haue made? A
deſigne to make himſelfe great by our ruines, and the
decay of your ſtate, ſaid Hautefontaine. There is a great
apparence thereof, ſaid the King; call Vair unto me, ſaid
he, let me heare his reaſons; Beaulide-ruze go you and
ſeeke him out. That's to no end, ſaid the Marſhall d' Ornano,
for I haue heard that he is out of his wits for griefe
that he had to have bin ſo unfortunate, that he could not
be at the funerall of the Chancellor de Sillery. Let that
Stoick ſchool-maſter to Veron alone, you have all theſe
Lords and Gentlemen here, Sir, who will truly and plainly
tell you the truth of the deſolations of France, to morrow
in the morning, ſaluting your Grace, they will let you
know more, then you would know. You ſay true, ſaid
the King. The next day the Marquis de Termes was the

firſt that ſhewed himſelfe when the King came out of his
chamber, who with a ſmiling countenance bad him welcome,
and then asked him for Monſieur le Grand, and
what Lords and gentlemen had paſt over the river with
the Duke de Mayenne, as alſo how many men were ſlaine
in thoſe brave enterpriſes made by the bucklers of France.
            Sir, ſaid the Marquis, my brother hath alwayes bin a
moſt humble ſervant to your Majeſtie, and ſo he is ſtill
unto the King your ſonne, and to all the blood Royall▪
               Luynes hath put him backe from deling with the affaires
of the State, and therefore he meddles not therewith.
Touching thoſe that came with the Duke de Mayenne,
they are 400 gentlemen of good qualitie, and about
2000 ſouldiers.
            Shew me particularly the originall of ſo many miſchiefes?
Sir, ſaid he, the pride of three Falconers, whom
you placed about your ſonne upon the recommendation
of Varenne, who ſtands there behind you, are and will be
the cauſe of the diſſipation of your Crowne, they haue
won the King your ſonnes fauour, they do not tell him
of the affaires of his Realmes, but cleane contrary, and as
they would have him know it; they have cleane altered the
whole Court; the Court is filled with their brethren, brothers
and ſiſters in law, nephewes, nieces, couſins and allies,
and all ſorts of raſcals, having driven out all your old
ſervitors, and thoſe of the Queene mother, it being moſt
true, that no man (what, or whoſoeuer) can haue acceſſe
to his Maieſtie, but onely by their meanes; they keepe the
Prince brother to the King your ſonne, as their ſervant;
they haue laid hold upon the forces of the State, drawne
the treaſures thereof cleane drie, and in a word they governe
all. What, ſaid the King, doe not the Councell
ſpeake againſt thoſe diſorders? In truth, Sir, ſaid de Termes,
they have changed both the Councel and the Counſellors.
Doth my wife endure that? why doth ſhe not
oppoſe her ſelfe againſt it? ſaid the King. Oppoſe againſt

it, ſaid the Marquis; if ſhe ſhould but once opē her mouth
to ſpeake againſt it, they would preſently clap her up in
hold, like the Deſcomans. You ieſt, ſaid the King; if I
were ſhe, I would let them know that I am the Queenemother.
Alas, Sir, ſaid the Marquis, if you knew how
they have uſed her within theſe foure yeares and a halfe,
there is no ſlave but wold rather enjoy his condition then
hers; they have driven her ſhamefully out of Paris, they
limited her two yeares together to ſtay in the caſtle of
Blois, they purſued her by force of armes, they haue made
her follow their armie like a Lanceknights wife; to conclude,
they haue in ſuch maner made her ſubiect to their
dominion, that ſhe dares not once complain of the rigor
which they vſe againſt her. Doth the King my ſonne
know that? ſaid the King. No, Sir, ſaid the Marquis, they
are warie enough to let him know it; on the contrary, they
ſeeke all the meanes they can to divert from her all the
good affection that the King beares unto her, ſtill whiſpering
him in the eare, that ſhe hates him, that ſhe ſeekes
to make his brother King, that ſhe is an Italian, and other
diabolicall inventions to feare him, without once putting
him in minde that ſhe is his mother, or what love ſhe doth
beare unto him in that reſpect. Thoſe are three villanies,
ſaid the King, I would that Rapin had them under his
hands in the place of execution: but I wonder why the
Pope doth not take on him to ſtop the courſes of ſuch ſowers
of diuiſion betweene the mother and the ſonne; it
would be a great good for Chriſtendome, and an honour
unto him. It is hard, ſaid the Marquis, to make an anſwer
thereunto, Sir; yet I wil ſhew you what I have heard from
father Raude a Charterux Monke, a great friend to our
houſe, your Maieſtie ſhall underſtand, if it pleaſe you, that
at ſuch time as thoſe three brethren uſurped upon the authoritie
Royall, they alſo ioyned with the body of the Societie
of the name of Ieſus for two cauſes, and the Ieſuites
for two cauſes entred into league with them. Luynes uſeth

their helpe, to get in the mony belonging to the Marquis
d' Ancre, which was in the Mount de Prete in Rome, and in
requitall thereof he promiſed to reeſtabliſh them in their
colledge in Paris, in deſpight of the Court of Parliament,
as he hath done; and further he hath ſent the Marquis de
Quemere Ambaſſadour to Rome, in the Kings name, to ſolicite
their reeſtabliſhment in Venice. The Ieſuites in recompence
promiſed him, that they would aide him in all
things and in every place, and that they would in ſuch ſort
obtaine his Holineſſe good will towards them, that hee
ſhould be favourable unto them during their uſurpation;
and that neither the Pope nor they would exclame in any
ſort againſt the bad dealing which they ſhould offer unto
the Queene mother: and it is certaine that his Holineſſe
never wrote any thing thereof, neither makes any
complant againſt the inſolencies of thoſe Favorites. On
the contrary, the Nuncius Bentivole reſident in Paris, is
wholy for Luynes, who hath made him Cardinall, and
Comprotector of the French nation in Rome, to the prejudice
of the Prince Cardinall of Savoy, to whom the King
had given that protection. Thus Luynes is upholden on
that ſide. And to the end that the King of Spaine ſhould
not be offended to ſee the Queene his ſiſter governed by
Luynes and his wife, he hath conſented to let him lay
hold upon the Griſons, the Palatinate and Iuliers, which is
under the protection of France, and which the Queene
mother following your deſigne, hath kept out of the Spaniards
clawes; whereas on the contrary, that villaine ſuffers
ſo important a country bordering upon the Realme, to be
loſt. He hath alienated 120000 crowns yearely rent of the
Church, whereof he hath imburſed 200000 crownes for
his part: of your ſonnes revenues, he and his brethren
poſſeſſe at the leaſt 500000 franks yearely rent, without
disburſing one penie for it.
            How this diſcourſe grieves me, ſaid the King, I would
you had neuer ſpoken to me thereof, let us leave for this

time; here comes the Duke de Mayenne, and a great number
of Noblemen to viſit me. All theſe, ſaid the Marquis
de Termes, will confirme that which I have ſaid unto
your Majeſtie, and you may know of them what hath
paſt ſince I left them at Clerac.
            
            The Duke de Mayenne coming neare with all his companie,
made humble obeyſance to the King; and his Majeſtie
bowing his head, welcomed them with teares in his
eyes: Couſin, ſaid the King, and all you my faithfull ſervants,
it grieves me that you have bin deceived by three
villaines, who, as I heare, untill this time have abuſed the
favour and bountie of my ſonne, and generally your free
ſpirits. The Duke ſpeaking for them all, ſaid, Sir, I
know not who hath made your Grace ſo wel acquainted
with the pride of thoſe three Falconers, that have uſed all
the meanes they can, to put all men both great and meane
out of the King your ſonnes favour by their devices, ſold
all France by their covetouſnes, and brought all the realm
into diſorder by their monſtrous ambition. All men know
how litle cauſe I have to ſpeake wel of the Marquis d' Ancre,
but I may well ſay, that he was an Angell in reſpect
of theſe three divels incarnate, enemies both to men and
all valour, and ſuch as never employed them but to their
overthrow: all they that have paſt over the river with me,
know what they are; beſides that for mine owne part I
have every way tried and proved their divelliſh malice
in that reſpect. It is true, that Marquis d' Ancre was wicked
as wel as they, but yet he had ſome humanitie in him,
he did good to many, hee was a man of his word, if hee
croſt ſome great perſons, he made much of others: but
theſe three plagiaries have bin a ſcourge to them all,
thinking it a glory by their diſſembling ſalutations to deceive
all the world with brazen faces. I will not trouble
your Majeſtie with the rehearſall of their deteſtable actions,
nor put you in minde of the rude dealing that they
have ſhewed to the Queene your wife, neither how they

have ſcorned my Lord the Prince, nor of their ingratitude
againſt my Lady the Counteſſe, nor what trickes
they have played with all the Nobilitie: it ſuffiſeth, Sir,
that you generally know their proud proceedings, they
have fully gotten the government of the King your ſon
and of the authoritie royall into their hands, making him
beleeve, that they three onely held the Crowne upon his
head, as if thoſe of his blood had conſpired the uſurpation
thereof. For the ſpace of foure yeares they have cauſed all
the affaires of importance to paſſe under their hands; they
have made the King march with them in all places for
their owne particular intereſt; vpon the frontiers of the
Realme Luynes hath bin ſo proud as to make his entrie into
townes, accompanied with a Prince of the blood, and
in rhe preſence of the King his Soveraigne; he ſent his
brother Cadnet into Flanders, under pretence to go ſeeke
his wife, where he ſpake with Marquis Spinola; and after
that, with a moſt incomparable pride, covered with precious
ſtones appertaining to the Crowne, he hath bene in
England, not one of the Kings Councell knowing the ſecret
of his embaſſage; after that voyage he undertooke to
make himſelfe Duke of Britaigne; and it is not knowne
whether ſince he hath bin keeper of the Seales, hee hath
diſpatched letters patents for the ſame. In favour of Caſtille
he hath neglected all ancient alliances of the Crown;
he hath ſuffered the Palatinate and the Griſons to be loſt,
to make the Spaniard favourable to him. The Queene mother
preſerved Iuliers, under the protection of the King
your ſonnes forces, and thoſe three villaines have ſuffered
it to be beſieged by Spinola. To the diſgrace of your glorious
memorie, Branthe a meane fellow, that never had
200 franks yearely rent, hath bin ſo audacious as to raviſh
the heire of Luxeburg, and to force that yong Princeſſe
being but eleuen yeares old, and at ſuch a time when all
France was in armes by their meanes; and if the raviſhing
of a maide be puniſhable, as it is, her action in all circumſtances

is much more puniſhable. Luynes hath expoſed
the King and the Prince his brother into the inconveniences
of a long voyage, and into the perils of the bad aire
in the armie, in ſuch maner that the Prince was there ſick
and like to die, and yet he would not ſuffer him to be carried
out of the infections of the campe: he hath reſolved
upon the warre againſt the Huguenots, without taking,
yea and againſt the advice of your old Councellers: hee
hath bin ſo audacious as to keepe the Kings ſeales in his
hands, to promiſe them to many, but gives them to no
man, buſying himſelfe during the dangers of the ſiege before
Montauban, with ſealing expeditions, in ſtead of going
to the warre, for which cauſe the ſouldiers made
theſe foure verſes of him:

                  What ſhall we of this valiant Warrier ſay,
                  That vſeth vs like ſlaves both night and day?
                  He that in peace the Conſtables office hie,
                  And in warre doth the Chancellers place ſupplie.
               
In ſuch maner, that if there be any capitall crime that may
be objected againſt a bad ſervant, that is one of the moſt
notorious and greateſt. All the mony appointed for paying
of the ſouldiers in the armie, he ſtayed in Blayes, in
ſuch ſort, that more ſouldiers have died of want and neceſſitie,
then of wounds, for want of reliefe. To be ſhort,
their covetouſnes and villanies are the cauſe of all the bad
ſucceſſe hapned as wel during that ſiege as in other publicke
affaires. That which I finde to be moſt ſtrange,
ſaid Balagny, is, that not one of them hath bin hurt in any
of the exploits of their conqueſts. I will ſhew you
a pertinent reaſon for that, ſaid the Duke, it is becauſe
they neuer ſought after blowes, and blowes never met
with them; and that is it which Luynes Surgeon wrote to
his wife, that was in doubt leſt her husband was ſlaine in
the armie: Wife, take no care for me, but be quiet, & feare
nothing, for I incurre no danger, my Lord Conſtable
doth me that honour to affect me much, and to keep ſtill

neare unto his perſon. Thus you ſee how thoſe gallants
are miraculouſly preſerved and kept out of the danger of
blowes, while they cauſe others to loſe their lives.
            Our poſteritie, ſaid the King, will hardly beleeue, that
men of no degree, and voide of all valour, ſhould in ſo
ſhort a time lay hold upon the government of France.
Sir, ſaid Pluninel, I did neuer ſo eaſily with bit and bridle
manage your Graces great horſes in the ſtable, (without
compariſon) as I have ſeene them manage all the Princes
of your Realme.
            What, ſaid the Marſhall de Briſac, was not Cadnet ſo
bold as to threaten the Prince, that he ſhould not go out
of Bois de Vincennes, if he did not conſent to give him
the Princeſſe of Orange to be his wife, who died for griefe
thereof? You ieſt, ſaid the King. He hath done more
then that, ſaid he, for he was ſo preſumptuous as to preſſe
the Earle de Soyſſons to give over the office of high Steward
unto him. The late Earle taking the word out of
his mouth, ſaid, If my ſonne had bin wiſe, he ſhould have
cauſed him to be well beaten for his impudencie. You
haue reaſon, ſaid old Courtenay, if he had Rambure, or
ſuch another Knight as he for his governer, but he hath
a blocke to be his ſchoole-maſter, that knowes not what
belongs to honour and courage; and therefore thoſe companions
know with whom they have to do.
            Let us enter into ſome other diſcourſe, ſaid the King;
as I remember, one of you told me, that during all theſe
buſineſſes, Luynes and his brethren carried their wives
with them unto the warre, and that they were with them
during the important ſiege of Montauban; if it were ſo, it
is very likely that their intent was no other but onely to
make their battery under curtains. At that word M. William
gave a nod, and ſaid to the King, Indeed my Lord,
you have often bin told, that they play the Kings, and that
I acknowledge, they have heretofore ſitting by the fire
heard how you in times paſt rid upon the League, and

thoſe gallants would imitate you, and thinke by riding
their wives, to ride upon the Huguenots: but thoſe wicked
heretickes have knaviſhly ridden upon them before
Montauban. Whereat all of them began to laugh. But
the King enquired of the miracle of the Spie, and much
deſired to know it, and ſpeaking thereof, askt, why, after
he had eſcaped in ſuch maner, he was not ſent into the
Towne, to convert the inhabitants. Faith of a gentleman,
ſaid de Loppe, that had bin no ſafetie for him, for ſo
the people might have hangd him up in good earneſt.
God is ſtrong every where, ſaid the King, and can defend
thoſe that are his, at all times and in all places: but tell me
who ſent father Dominicke de Ieſus Maria into France?
what maner of man is he? And it pleaſe your Majeſtie,
ſaid the Earle de Fiefque, he is a holy man, I yet have a
portatiſe cloake that he gave me; your Majeſtie will not
beleeve what honour the Pariſians did unto him, and yet
know not wherefore; every woman cut off a peece of his
gowne; and he came thither onely to ſhew us that all the
Spaniards are not Saracins, and that there are ſome holy
men among them. If I had bin of the Kings Councell,
ſaid the Abbot du Bois, I would in counter-change have
ſent father Berule to Madril, I am ſure that the women
of Castile would alſo have cut his fuſtian. That were
good, ſaid the Marſhall de Fervaques, if French cloth
were as fine as Spaniſh cloth; but if I were of the Councell,
as the Cardinall de Rets is, and as forward as the Earle
de Chomberg, (who is capable to redreſſe all Luynes faults,
ſo that he doth not joyne with forreine faction) I would
make the Spaniard know, that he is not a better Catholik
then I my ſelfe am, and would keepe him from having
ſecret intelligences with our Favorites, to the great detriment
of the Kings ſervice and the Realme, which goes
to decay, if remedy be not ſpeedily had therein.
            I confeſſe, ſaid the King, that ſince I have heard of all
the bad and perfidious practiſes which that gallant and his

brethren have done and performed, my ſon never knowing
thereof, my ſpirit hath bin in continuall perplexitie,
fearing leſt they ſhould deſtroy their good maiſter and
great benefactor. Sir, ſaid the Marquis de Villars, the
earth never bare more traiterous and ambitious villaines
then they are; they have bin ſo bold the laſt yeare to
cauſe a Maske to be made in Burbon hall, wherein they
preſented divers myſticall figures, and among the reſt, a
great Lady and divers Giants chained, whom Luynes apparelled
like Phebus, drew after him, whereof the greateſt
reſembled the Duke de Mayenne, upon whoſe head Luynes
ſet his foote, for a ſigne of ſervitude. Truly, ſaid the
Baron de Plancy, he made another more impudent in the
Caſtle of Piquerox, for there perceiving the King to be
grieved for the loſſe he had received by the death of the
Duke de Mayenne, he deviſed a litle Comedie to make his
Majeſtie merrie, wherein hee preſented a great Moore
making divers ſtrange jeſtures; and for that he reſembled
the Duke de Mayenne, the King commanded them to leave
and act no more. Why? ſaid Luynes. Becauſe, ſaid the
King, that this man in all reſpects reſembles the Duke de
Mayenne; I cannot endure to ſee it. Truly Sir, ſaid he,
his death needs not miniſter cauſe of ſadneſſe to your
Majeſtie, for he was a turbulent fellow, that troubled all
your affaires; you were no King as long as he lived; we
haue diſcovered and found out that he made a third partie,
and ſince his death we have found all his practiſes.
            Thus this villaine alwayes ſought to divert all the good
opinion that his Majeſtie had of his ſervants, and of all
thoſe of his blood. He did another matter, ſaid the Secretarie
of State for the Seales, he was ſo impudent as to
write vnto the Pope, that the Queen mother was the cauſe
that Montauban was not taken, thereby thinking to cover
his owne cowardlineſſe; from whence it may be conjectured
how many falſe reports he hath made to the king
your ſonne, ſeeing he was ſo bold to ſend ſuch a meſſage

to his Holineſſe. You ſhall never have done Sir, ſaid the
Earle de Lude, if you will hearken unto all their arrogant
actions, who knowes them better then my ſelfe that
brought them up? as long as any of that race are neare about
the King your ſonne, they will ſpoile all, there being
no kind of wickednes whereof they are not capable: and
aboue all things beleeve it, Sir, my Lord the Prince may
well offer a great candle unto God when he ſhall eſcape
out of their hands; your Majeſtie muſt foreſee theſe
things.
            As the King was diſcourſing with the Lords touching
the ſorrowfull ſtate of the affaires of France, and about the
meanes to remedie the ſame, all the aſſiſtants partaking
with the griefe of that good Prince, on a ſudden Monſieur
de Vury breaking through the preaſe came to his Majeſtie,
and to comfort him, ſaid, Corbien Sir, you have
ſufficiently lamented the miſeries of the time, I muſt now
make you merry a while, by telling you that which I preſently
ſaw: as I was hawking after a partridge along by
the river ſide, by chance I came to as merrie a combat as
ever was acted upon the Theater de Tabarim in the place
Dauphine. Betweene whom ſaid the King. Your Majeſtie
muſt know, ſaid Vitry, that Marſhall d' Ancre walking
along by the river ſide with Dole, when Charon ſet on
ſhore the new Conſtable of France, with his ſword of ſay.
            What, ſaid the King, is he here? Corbien ſaid he, he is
there, I aſſure your Grace, I haue ſeene him, and when I
ſaw him, I laught for ioy, he hath the countenance of as
notable a raſcall as ever I ſaw. But before I proceed further,
I muſt tell you of the pleaſant ſalutation of theſe
two combattants: Marſhall d' Ancre walking as I ſaid before,
ſtood ſtill to contemplate the proud geſtvre of that
new come gueſt, and beholding his face, he knew it was
Luynes; wherewith ſuddenly the blood roſe in his face,
and he ſaid to Dole, Behold the traitor that cauſed me to
be kild, I will now kill him; and without ſpeaking any

more words, caſting his cloake over his face, went to meet
with him; and as ſoone as he got to him, he gave him a
great bob on the noſe, ſaying, Traitor, now Ile make thee
pay for thy villanie. The Conſtable abaſht thereat, ſaid,
You are deceived, you miſtake me for another, I underſtand
no Italian. Pardieus, I undeſtand French well. Lay
hand on thy ſword, ſaid the Marquis. Are not ſingle
combats forbidden here, ſaid the Conſtable? Villaine,
ſaid the Marquis, thou art afraid; and ſaying ſo, he fell
upon the Conſtable, and gave him divers great blowes
with the flat ſide of his ſword, in ſuch maner, that never
any curtall jade was ſo well beaten. The Archbiſhop of
Sens that ſtood hard by them, had a great deſire to helpe
him, but he durſt not go betweene them, ſtill remembring
the blowes with ſpits which were given him in Tours by
the Marquis de Noirmontiers cookes, when he was Soliciter
of his houſe; and ſo for want of aide, the villanous
Conſtable was as well beaten as ever was Dieret Chiury,
when he imagined that the blowes with a cudgell which
were given him, were piſtols ſhot: for Marquis d' Ancre
ſtill laid on like Rovillac, and Luynes cried out as loud as
he could, like Ronſſelay. at S. Germains Fayre: which was
the cauſe that Radamanthus Lackeys ran thither, and laid
hold upon thoſe two champions, intending to carry them
before the ludge to be puniſhed for their inſolencies.
            Marquis d' Ancre alledged that he was not the man that
firſt brake the peace, and ſpake them ſo faire, that they let
him go; in the meane time du Travail came thither, who
fiercely laid hold on the Conſtables coller, in ſuch maner
that I thought he would have ſtrangled him; but when he
had ſet his foote vpon his belly, and taken his ſword from
him, he ran away, leaving him there in a maner halfe dead,
ſaying nothing to him, but onely, Remember thy ſelfe
Provinciall. I that tooke pitie to ſee that Rodomond favorite
ſo hardly uſed, found the meanes, that without taking
the advice of de Modenne or de Contade, I puld him

ſlily out of their clawes, and brought the gallant hither
to make your Maieſtie ſome ſport. Truly, ſaid the King,
you have done me good ſervice, let him come in, that we
may ſee that great Warrier and great Statesman all in one.
Whereupon Colonell Galatis with a das tich Gods ſacrament,
cauſed the preaſe to open, and therewith Vitry
brought him in, every man as well as he could fixing
their eyes upon him to behold his phyſiognomie. The
Poet Deſportes at his entring, giving him a welcome according
to his Art, and ſpeaking aloud, ſaid:

                  Give place, give place to this companion,
                  Who while he liv'd was like a great Monarchus:
                  But being borne in Champianion,
                  In Poiteiou he was cut off by Parcus.
               
Being in the middle of the companie, all of them began
to crie, ſaying, The fox, the fox, wherewith you never ſaw
villaine more aſhamed; and after ſilence was made, the
King askt him, who he was, I am, ſaid he, the Conſtable
of France, your moſt humble ſubiect and ſervant. Conſtable?
ſaid the King; by what title got you that office? it
is not aboue foure yeares ſince you were but a Falconer,
and in ſo ſhort a time have you attained to ſo high a degree?
you have made great haſte. You muſt not muſe
thereat, Sir, ſaid Haeren, if hee had not put me out of
countenance, I had had as good fortune as he. Hold
your tongue, ſaid the King. Parmafe, and it pleaſe your
Maieſtie, ſaid M. William, I could be well content to pay
his breech with a whip full of points to be revenged on
him for the penſion that he tooke from me, to give it unto
de Mons his brother in law. Truly M. William, ſaid
Saroque, you are miſinformed to beleeve ſuch things,
my Lord Conſtable was not ſo fooliſh to imagine that he
could make that ſmall matter of Province greater then it
is, notwithſtanding that he is the moſt valiant man of
them all, for he alone tooke Montauban, or elſe they of
Montauban tooke him. What extravagant words are

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
theſe, ſaid the King? give us leave quietly to hearken unto
the myſticall diſcourſe of this new conquerour.
Sir, ſaid the Duke de Mayenne, he will but abuſe you with
words, he is a perfect lyer, command him to go directly
to the matter, otherwiſe I cannot abſtain from giving him
a blow on the lips at the firſt lie he makes. With that
the King turning to the champion, ſaid briefly unto him,
Heare you my Lord Conſtable made in haſte, abuſe not
my leiſure, tell me all your notable proceedings, without
diſſimulation, if you deſire to finde mercie at my hands
for your miſdeeds: all theſe gentlemen know your actions,
and the Earle de Lude that ſtands here, is wholy acquainted
with your life, go directly to worke, otherwiſe
you ſhall finde Lugoly ready to give you your hire.
            Sir, ſaid Luynes, now I perceive well that I am undone,
In manus tuas commendo ſpiritum meum, my proceſſe is
made, and further all theſe noble gentlemen that are here,
will never pardon me, for that as many Lords as are here
about your Majeſty, are as many witneſſes to convince me
of all the perfidious actions that I have committed both
againſt the one and the other, and the worſt is, that I
haue not the authoritie Royall to cover my faults any
more, nor to ſupport my inſolencies; I muſt needs confeſſe,
that I haue offended God, the King my maſter, and
all men, and that there is no puniſhment great enough
to recompence my deſerts: but I will gladly ſay with Caeſar,
Si violandum eſt ius, regnandi cauſa; all that I haue
done, was not effected by any wicked inclination that
was in me, but onely by a generous ambition to raigne. I
knew how eaſily Marquis d' Ancre obtained the government
of the State, I beleeved and was verily perſwaded,
that in that point I could doe more then a ſtranger, that
onely had a woman to ſupport him, and that I poſſeſſing
the Kings heart, was the more able to diſpoſſeſſe all men,
and to poſſeſſe all things: for my deſigne was to ſurmount
that Italian; and if any of my good friends ſought

to divert me from that generous enterpriſe, preſently du
Agent, Contade and Ronſſelay, cried out in mine eares, ſaying,
What are you afraid of? If Marquis d' Ancre could
make the Frenchmen cullions, why ſhould not you being
a great Falconer take them for birds? Audaces fortuna
invat, ſaid my father in law; we muſt draw water when
we are at the well ſide, ſaid my wife; we are of the ſame
kind of wood whereof men make Princes, ſaid my brethren;
and I ſaid Modene, of the ſame that the Marſhals of
France are made. All theſe motions encouraged me, and
in truth my firſt bringing up to fowling taught me ſo
well to flie, that in foure yeares ſpace I ſurpaſt all thoſe
that medled with the affaires of State before me.
            I cauſed Marquis d' Ancre to be kild, to haue his place;
I vrged the Parliament to put his wife to death, that I
might haue his goods. I kept the Queene mother as much
as I could from the preſence and favour of the King her
ſonne, that I might onely enioy it. I kept the Prince of
Conde priſoner, and let him not come forth, but then
when I thought he could no more hurt me, and that he
might ſerve my turne. I vſed charmes to trouble the ſpirit
of the King and of the Queene, employing Boiſgandrie
to that effect, whom I cauſed to be committed priſoner
in the Baſtile, becauſe he would have diſcloſed me. I ſet
diviſion among the Princes, and eſtranged them all from
the Kings favour. I abuſed all thoſe that had any thing
to do with me, with promiſes and faire words. All places
that were voide, I got into my hands. With the Kings
mony I bought all the governments that I could get;
and conſtrained ſome to yeeld theirs unto me. I had whole
Provinces under my obedience; there is no part of the
Realme, but therein I have townes. I have drawne France
drie of mony. The greateſt part of the Kings domaines is
mine, or my brethrens. I did abſolutely diſpoſe of the ſale
of offices; and as I diſanulled the annuall right, I alſo eſtabliſhed
it. I made all mine enemies ſtoupe, and as much

as I could, I made all the world know what power I had
over the genius of the King, that men might addreſſe
themſelves vnto me, and be perſwaded that the King
could do nothing without me. This, Sir, is that whereof
I may be accuſed: but he that will conſider of that which
reſteth, without paſſion, he ſhall finde that theſe are not
actions of a dull ſpirit, but of a brave courage, which rather
deſerve commendation then blame, and for the
which I was never reproved by my Confeſſor.
            Marquis d' Ancre could never equalize himſelfe with me
in this reſpect; his deſignes were baſe in regard of mine;
he could not attaine to any degree, but onely to be Marſhall
of France, and I for my part made at leaſt twelve
Marſhals. He could neither make himſelfe Knight of the
Order of the holy Ghoſt, nor Duke; and all you my Lords
that are here know well, that I gaue that Order to whom
I would, and that I made more Dukes then there are
ſparrow-hawkes in the Kings Mewes, and ſo many, that
the Parliament of Paris was forced to ſay, it was too
much. But thoſe foure cornerd caps know not, that my
intent was to extirpe the heretickes; and that for ſo dangerous
a warre I had need of many Dukes, Marſhals and
Knights, to honour the Conſtables ſword which I reſerved
for my ſelfe, by the Ieſuites counſel, and his Holineſſe
himſelfe, who aſſured me by his Nuncius, that if I undertooke
that Catholicke deſigne, that heauen would reſerve
the diademe and the purple for me, as in effect I wanted
not the latter; and if I had not bin conſtrained to leaue
the ſiege before that curſed towne of Montauban, the accompliſhment
of deſtinie had given me the Scepter.
            I doubt not, Sir, but you haue bin entertained with a
thouſand ieſts touching the impertinent proceedings of
my militarie exploits, and ſpecially upon the ſubiect of
my approches made before ville Burbon. I take not upon
me to defend my ſelfe againſt bad ſpeeches, it ſufficeth
me that my actions ſeemed to be heroicall, and my deſignes

haughtie. Further, I care li
                  ••…
               e what the world can
ſay, and that is it which I wrote for an anſwer to a letter
ſent us by our moſt deare vncle the Duke de Modene
in France, touching the ſlanders that were publiſhed in
Toulouſe againſt me and my qualitie; I could eaſily haue
reſtrained and puniſhed the libertie of ſuch tongues, but
like an old Courtier, I uſe not to be afraid of reports, as
I made it well appeare in the ſtrongeſt aſſaults of the ſiege
before that filthy towne, where I refrained not from ſleeping
ſweetly in my bed, notwithſtanding the roaring of
the cannons, upon the aſſurance that I had that they
could not hurt me. Did not the ſouldiers call my quarter,
the place of villanie? but for all that I never made leſſe
cheare. They alſo mockt my wife as often as ſhe came to
viſit me in the campe, in mockery ſaying, that ſhe went
oftener to combat with me, then I did with the enemie:
but ſuch reproches moved me not, ſeeing that my wife
and I had no other intent but to do well, as we alwayes
did well, thankes be to God; and beleeue me, Sir, that
thoſe malicious evill ſpeakers ſpake but of envie, as grieved
to ſee us take our pleaſures, while they were at blowes,
and by the eares together in the trenches like raſcals, ſuffering
themſelves to be beaten, which made them vomit
out their rage, not onely againſt me, but alſo againſt my
brethren and their wives, who like true Amazons never
fainted in all the combats wherein they happened to be,
encouraged thereunto by the wiſe diſcourſes of Madame
de Guimbarde and of my ſiſter du Vernet the true mirrour
of chaſtitie, of whom I learned never to be angry for that
which men ſaid, ſo I do well. This alſo that I ſhew you,
Sir, is not to give you cauſe to thinke that ſuch things
grieved me not much, but onely to make my great patience,
my exceeding bountie, the force of my ſpirit, and
the gentleneſſe of my courage apparent. Who but my
ſelfe (except the Duke de Vzes) would not haue ſunke
under the burthen of the continual watchings and paines

which I endured in the conduction of this warre? Like
another Atlas, I was forced to beare all the burthen of the
Realme vpon my ſhoulders, ordaine all, provide for all,
reſolve upon all, and beſides that was charged not onely
with the affaires of the Realme, but alſo with Gods cauſe,
which particularly was to be reſpected in that holy enterpriſe,
as father Arnoux aſſured me, and the holy Earle
of Fiaſque that ſtands there, who oftentimes told me in
my eares, that it was revealed unto him when hee was a
Capucin, which was the cauſe that made him leave the habit,
once againe to employ his ſword, and weare temporal
apparell, and for my particuler that was the cauſe that
made me imbarke my ſelfe therein, with ſo much more
zeale as I ſaw the ſucceſſe to be eaſie, the conqueſt glorious,
and the ſpoiles profitable for my glorie.
            What better beginning could your Maieſtie have wiſhed,
then the firſt progreſſe of our victories? Blinde Morney
at our firſt arrivall did obedience unto us; we did rigorouſly
puniſh the rebellion of thoſe of S. Iohn; we powred
our curſe upon Pons; we caſt the arrowes of our anger
upon Clerac, where we had that good lucke to rid our
ſelves of that brave Marquis de Termes, upon which ſubiect
father Arnoux and I wrote two comfortable letters
to Monſieur le Grand in moſt eloquent maner. In every
place they brought us the keyes of the townes. They of
Toulonze came in great haſte to offer us their armes and
their lives, with a good ſumme of money, to move us in
all haſte to beſiege that execrable towne of Montauban,
which at my firſt arivall I thought to take with a lure, like
a hungrie ſparrow-hawke; and I wil confidently tell your
Maieſtie, that I had determined to have erected it in a Duchie
for my ſonne, as to ſeale the letters patents my ſelfe,
with an addition of the Earledomes of Armagnac and Albert;
that was the cauſe that I could not conſent to the
ruine of the brave fortifications of that place, deſiring to
make uſe of them for my ſelfe. And to miniſter ſome

comfort to thoſe of Toulouſe for their mony which I had
ſent to the Caſtle of Blaye, I and my brethren had deviſed
to take the Hugonet throne out of their feete, and to
place another Catholicke therein, which we had happily
done, if thoſe of Montauban would have beleeved us, or
at leaſt have ſuffered us to do as la Faydeau.
            
            To conclude, Sir, what have I not done to have an
honorable iſſue of that miſerable ſiege, all the inventions
in the world were there put in practiſe. What have I not
promiſed to the third and fourth? What can men reproch
me of, but onely that I was not at the trenches? Alas, it
was my onely deſire not to ſtirre; but theſe gentlemen
here preſent know, that it ws impoſſible for me, in reſpect
of the continuall employments that I had about the
Seales. I truſted touching the warre, to the generoſitie of
this valiant Duke de Mayenne, whom we have thereby
cauſed to ſee the ioyes of Paradiſe, and in recompence
thereof he hath made us heires of that hee left in the
camp.
            It is true, that to lure the world like a hawke, we cauſed
the government of Guyenne to fall into the Prince the
Kings brothers hands, but I would never ſeale his letters
patents for the ſame, that he might ſtill be like Lent, and
my brother Branthe like Shrovetide, that is, Lent taking
her beginning. Thus we made our profit a thouſand ways,
by the hurt and diſgrace of others. If we had a care of our
owne lives, we had no leſſe of the ſoldiers; having ſought
as much as poſſibly we might, all gentle meanes and practiſes
to overcome thoſe rebels, before we would proceed
unto extremities.
            Did not I with great care and diligence cauſe father
Dominicke de Ieſus Maria to come into the armie, beleeving
that his holy prayers would make the taking of that
place the more eaſie, and that he would make a ſecond
S. Bartholmewes day of the Huguenots in Paris. And if he
hath thought much to doe as much for France before

               Montauban, as he did for Spaine before Prague, I could
not do withall; I did the beſt I could to keep him there,
that his preſence might animate the ſouldiers, and convert
thoſe headſtrong heretickes, which father Arnoux a
true ſpirituall mirror did not well like of, alledging that it
was ſufficient to have one Charlatan in the Court, in the
meane time all is laid upon me, although I am innocent
of the unfortunate ſucceſſe of the ſiege.
            What ſhall I ſay more, did I not invent a ſubtill ſtratageme,
therewith to mollifie the hearts of thoſe rebels,
that is the miraculous hanging of that villanous ſpie, that
brake the rope three times upon the gallowes? nevertheles
they within the towne, as alſo a great part of the armie,
would not beleeve that miracle, becauſe he rather commended
himſelfe to our Lady of Monferrat in Spaine, then
to the good Lady de Lieſſe in France. Further, my brethren
and I made proviſion of a great number of inviſible regiments,
but it was reported that we would put them into
our owne purſes, whereas our deſigne was to ſerve our
turnes with them, to caſt them inviſibly into the towne,
thereby to take it the eaſier. And if we failed therein, I am
no more the cauſe thereof, then of the raine and ſickneſſe
which continually troubled the ſoldiers, and which made
an end of ſetting us forth. No, Sir, I cannot warrant men
againſt the works of God, no more then I can from thoſe
which are imputed unto me, by meanes of my ambition
and villanie; but if I had lived a litle longer, I would
haue made all the world ſee and perceiue that I intended
to be a ſouldier.
            I confeſſe that I was but a new beginner in the Art,
when I made my ſelfe Conſtable, and that I had never
ſeene ſiege nor battell, but I was reſolved this Winter to
learne the military Art with all perfection, in ſtead of practiſing
to dance. The Baron de Caban, otherwiſe called de
Maine, having promiſed me in three moneths ſpace to
make me as good a Captain as himſelf, who of a Muſition

in two yeares became a great warrier, whatſoever the
Marſhall de Roquelauere ſaid, who in deſpight that I employed
him in the ſiege of Monheur, ſware, cap de Bions,
that he would not go to the warre with a Muſition: and
being taught by ſo good a maiſter, this Spring time I wold
have paid thoſe of Montauban, but God did prevent me
in all my deſignes.
            Truly, ſaid the King, your diſcourſes are notable, but
your actions are not much worth, ſuch men as you are
alwayes puniſhed by the hand of God; get you away out
of my preſence, and let me ſee you no more.
            After that, the King taking the advice of his old ſervants,
ordained, that as Luynes had plaid with great perſonages
in his life time, he would haue him ſerve to make
them ſport after his death, and therefore appointed him
to carrie fourmes every time that they ran at the Ring, or
with their Lances; and to begin his prentiſeſhip, that he
ſhould be delivered into the hands of the Duke de Mayennes
pages.
            According to this decree he was preſently laid hold on,
who then ſpeaking to the Cardinall de Guiſe, ſhewed him
that he died without confeſſion and receiving of the Sacrament,
praying him to give him abſolution for his ſins.
            To whom do you ſpeake, ſaid the Cardinall? do you not
know that I am no Prieſt? Then he turned to the Biſhop
of Marſelles, to whom he made the like requeſt.
And he made him the like anſwer that the Cardinall had
done, adding further & ſaying, Before you went out of
the other world you ſhould have cauſed your ſelfe to be
abſolved by the Cardinall de Rets your creature, or rather
by the Biſhop of Luſſon your kinſman, hee would never
have denied you his bleſſing, notwithſtanding that you
put him beſide the Cardinals hat, ſo you had promiſed
him upon the ſecuritie of Marillac and le Seq. to abſtaine
from making pernicious reports unto the King, thereby
to alienate the good will which his Maieſtie beareth to

the Queene his mother; as for me, I cannot helpe you,
ſave your ſelfe as well as you can. With that the late
Marſhall de Rets went to Luynes, and ſpeaking unto him
in his eare, ſaid, Alas poore foole, thou ſhouldſt have
pluckt the gooſe without crying like me; if with humilitie
thou haſt honored the great perſonages, they would
have upholden thee, and thou hadſt enioyed thy fortunes
with ſecuritie. Then turning his head here and there
about him, hee perceived the late Earle de Lude, which
three times he called his good maiſter, of whom hee aſked
pardon for the ducale perfidiouſnes which he offered
unto him being in Touraine. Then he ſaid to the Biſhop
of Carcaſſone, Monſieur my good benefactor, if ever you
tooke pitie on the affliction of a miſerable perſon, I coniure
you to take the paines to advertiſe my brethren to
take example by me, that they may governe themſelves
more wiſely then I have done, if they deſire to eſcape the
ſhipwracke that I have endured, and before all things that
they ſuffer not my bodie to paſſe through Paris, leſt it
ſhould receive the ſame entertainment that the body of
the Marquis d' Ancre had.
            As he ſpake thoſe laſt words, Loſieres Themines ſonne
came unto him, and ſaid, Comfort your ſelfe in your miſfortunes,
your brethren labour for their conſervation,
they yeeld not themſelves, I bring you great ſtore of news,
you are not the Keeper of the Seales, Monſieur de Virg
hath your place: all ſhall go well, it ſeemes that he & his
are in ſome ſort bound to ſupport your houſe; but if the
chance ſhould turne, I adviſe you in good time that I will
be ſuretie no longer. Further, ſince your departure, the
King hath benignely entertained all his friends, and looketh
on his ſervants with a kinde countenance; there is
free acceſſe unto his Maieſtie, he goes every day to ſit with
the Councell; I could tell you more, but I muſt go to ſalute
the King; farewell, and remember that for want of
balme they have your body with long barks of trees.
            
               
The Pages that as then layd hold on the necke and
breeches of their apprentice, would ſuffer him to ſpeake
no more, every one of them teaching him a leſſon as they
thought good. The Pariſians never tooke greater pleaſure
to ſee the Marquis d' Ancres body drawne about the citie,
then all the ſpirits in the Elizian fields had to ſee that
brave Conſtable ſo inſtructed and taught by thoſe good
ſchoole-maſters, who in leſſe then an houres ſpace made
him a martyr at leaſt twentie times, and yet kild him not.
To conclude, du Bourdet brought him a writing to ſet
vpon his backe, containing theſe words:

                  Long be this apprentice lived,
                  Whoſe ſpirit hath not deceived
                  The hope of our progenitors:
                  He is fit for a Porter, without doubt,
                  And in ſhort time it will fall out,
                  He will be capable to teach his brothers.
               
            
            The iudgement given, all the Lords tooke their leave
of the King, and as they returned with Zamet their guide,
the Marquis de Termes eſpied a man that ſate writing vnder
a great olive tree: wherewith hee asked, if in that
country there were any Sollicitors or Attourneys, that lived
by pleading other mens cauſes. None at all, ſaid Zamet.
What then, ſaid he, doth this writer here? And going
neare unto him, they knew it was Marſhall de Beron,
who was ſo earneſtly ſtudying, that he thought upon nothing
elſe. De Termes ſeeing him to be in that humour,
went ſoftly behind him, after the maner of great perſonages
in the Court, and laid his hand upon his ſhoulder.
Wherewith the Marſhall in great choler, ſaid, What is he
that toucheth me? and looking backe, ſaw the Marquis.
Wherewith changing his choler into gladneſſe, he embraced
him friendly, asking him, if he were one of thoſe
gentlemen of Montauban. No, ſaid de Termes, I am of
Clerac. What in Gods name make you here? ſaid the
Marſhall. And what goodly paſſion, ſaid de Termes, raviſheth

you into ſuch an extaſie? Cap de Bions, ſaid he,
I was in a deepe humour of Poetrie, and was ſtudying to
make verſes for an Epitaph to be ſet vpon your tombes.
            What, are you a Poet, ſaid de Termes? No, ſaid Biron,
but there being no warre in this country, ſometimes I have
a conceit to paſſe the time in Poetry, like my Lady de Roſau.
I pray you then, ſaid de Termes, let us ſee ſomething
of your doing, as well as my Lady d'Entragues. Pardions
I am content, ſaid the Marſhall, I was but beginning; ſee
here is that which I have done; I pray you tell me truly
whether I have done it fitly or no, and heare it without
paſſion.
            
               Here lieth a company of fooles, in reſpect of warriers brave,
               That in the middle of their foes did loſe their lives,
               While three cowards, authors of the warre we have,
               Meerly paſt the time in riding of their wives.
            
            Truly, ſaid de Termes, you uſe us unworthily. Morbions,
ſaid the Marſhall, what, do I not ſay the truth? Are you not
great fooles, that ſuffered your ſelves to be ſlaine for a
companie of daſtards that ſerve their owne turnes, under
pretence of religion, to eſtabliſh their future greatneſſe
at your coſts and charges. Cap de Bions, what blowes with
my ſword would I have laid about their eares, if I had bin
in their places. Monſieur d'Eſpernon is a ſubtill Catholik,
he beſieged Rochell afarre off, and upon Pont neuf there
were more overthrowes given by him, then by any other
in France; but tell me, I pray you, are not the Ieſuites
aſhamed that they preacht againſt him during the league,
in their pulpits calling him Aſtarot and Arch-hereticke,
and yet in the meane time they muſt confeſſe, that at this
day he is one of the pilars of the faith, although he be
the ſame that he was, were they exclaimed againſt his perſon,
onely that in thoſe times he was none of the companie,
as he is at this preſent. Mafoy, ſaid the Marquis,
I muſt confeſſe that Mouſieur d'Eſpernon is a Mathos, and
one that can manage his affaires better then any other

in the Court; it is true that Luynes hath given him many
bad nights, but the fathers have recompenced all that.
            While theſe things paſt, the King withdrew himſelfe
into his chamber, where having wept long time for the
griefe that he had for the miſeries of France, praying unto
God to divert the ſtormes thereof from it; he calld for
his moſt confident ſervants, with whom he conferred
touching the diſorders of the Realme, and then ſaid with
a loud voice, God helpe the bountie of my ſonne, and
give him grace ſpeedily to roote out the pernicious factions
of ſuch Favorites. Now I am truly informed of the
lamentable affaires, into the extremitie whereof his
Crowne is plunged, I can ſpeake pertinently with the
experience that I have of things paſt.
            This then is that which me thinkes the King my ſonne
ſhould do, as well for his owne preſervation, as for the
tranquillitie of his ſubiects. Firſt, he ought to reſpect thoſe
that give him good counſell, which is the ſoule of every
monarchie. I am not of opinion, that he ſhould give my
wife the ſole direction of his affaires; neither that my nephew
the Prince of Cende ſhould have it, in that reſpect
he ought to ſhun iealouſie: it is requiſite that euery one,
as neare as may be, ſhould participate both in the honors
and in the care, and that every one in generall ſhould contribute
towards the relieving of the Flowers de Lis.
            
            My iudgement, to prevent and withſtand the continual
diſorders that have troubled France ſince my death, is,
That my ſonne ſhould make a Councell, not of Favorites,
but of thoſe who by blood and affection have a particular
intereſt in the preſervation of his perſon and of his State.
That he commit part of the managing of the State affairs,
to the Queene his mother. That he ſhall hold her in good
correſpondence with himſelfe, and my nephewes de Conde
and de Soiſſons neare unto him. That he ſhould manage
all things by order of the Councell, and with pluralitie of
voices. That he ſhall referre himſelfe to the prudent advice

of the old 
                  〈◊…〉
                and officers of the Crowne, that
ſerved me. That he ſhall commit the ordering of his conſcience
to ſome good Doctor. That he ſhould embrace
the ancient Sorbonites, and put the new Tranſmontaine
Theologians from him. That by litle & litle he ſhall leſſen
his great charges. That he ſhall protect thoſe of his blood.
That he ſhall not neglect his Parliaments. That he ſhall
take Luynes lands and goods to ſupply his neceſſities, and
for the comfort of the poore people. That he ſhall cauſe
the citadell of Amiens to be opened on that ſide towards
the Town, to prevent the inconveniences which one day
that fort may cauſe, and take an Inventorie of the great
riches which are in that place, as alſo in La Fere, Calais,
and Blaye. That he ſhall give all the governments which
the three brethren have, unto his old & faithful ſervants.
That he ſhall drive all their kindred from the Court. That
he ſhall by abſolute authoritie hold and maintaine the Edicts
of Parliament. That he ſhall conſerve the ancient alliances
of the Crowne. That he ſhall ſtop his eares againſt
factious ſtrangers. That he ſhal call to mind the dangerous
publick happened within theſe foure yeares within Paris,
as ſignes ſent by God to warne us of the ſcourges that
threaten France. That he ſhall take heed of, and ſhun civil
warre, which cannot chuſe but procure the ruine of his
affaires and of his people, while his neighbour ſeeks all the
meanes he can to preiudice his Realme. That he muſt call
to minde the Ambaſſage of Baſſompiere in Spaine, and of
the breach of promiſe made touching Valtolina. That he
muſt have an eye unto the deſignes of ſtrangers, who under
pretence of religion, aſpire unto the diſſipation of his
ſtate. That he ſhall procure peace unto his people. That
he muſt recompence thoſe that deſerve it, and puniſh
thoſe that are wicked. And doing ſo, God will bleſſe him,
the Crowne ſhall flouriſh, his country will be enriched,
his friends will love him, his ſubiects ſerve him, and his
neigbours feare him.
            
               
               There's nothing in the world that perfe
                     •••…
                  
               
               For if 'twere ſo, nothing would be amiſſe:
               This booke is not ſo perfect as 'tis true,
               Which you ſhall finde, if you give it the due.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   