
      
         
            
            
            The coppy of a Letter written by the Lord of Themines, Seneſchall of Quercy: to the Lord Marſhall Matignon, the Kinges Lieuetenant Generall in Guyenne, concerning the battaile at Villemure, and the victory atchieued againſt the ennemies of his Maieſty.
            Alſo, A Decree of the Court of Parliament ſittinge at Chaalons, againſt a reſcript in forme of a Bull, directed to the Cardinall of Plaiſance, and publiſhed by the Rebels in Paris, in October laſt.
            
               Faithfully done into Engliſh by E. A.
            Heereunto are adioyned, the reportes of certaine letters, of Newes out of France, and Sauoya.
            
               fleur de lis
            
            LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe.
            1593.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE COPIE OF A LETTER WRITTEN by the Lord of Themines Seneſchall of Quercy, to the Lord Marſhall Matignon, the kinges Lieutenant generall in Guyenne concerning the battaille at Villemure, & the victory atchiued againſt the ennemies of his Maieſtie.
            
               MY Lord, I accompt it my duety to aduertize you, of ſuch occurrences as haue paſſed before Villemure, together with ye occaſion that I entered therinto. Which was this: Beeing arriued in the towne of Montauban, I founde the affaires in ſo bad eſtate, and the ſaid place of Villemure without ſpeedy ſuccour in ſuch daunger of loſſe: beſides all not ſeeing wherewith to take the fielde, I determined to goe thether with a hundred of my companions, and three hundred footemen. Hereof my Lord did I firſt giue you notice, as alſo of ſuch meanes as I made accompt off to come to relieue me with a ſentinell: for I foreſaw that the los of the ſaid Villemure was of very great importance concerning the kinges ſeruice, and the good of your gouernement: which (that beeing taken) all the townes here about with in Quercy would haue forſaken. This neceſſity would not giue me leyſure to attend your permiſſion, accordinge to my duety, and therefore it may pleaſe you my Lord to accept this reaſon for my excuſe.
            I will not ſtand to diſcourſe vnto you, the combats and ſallyes perfourmed in one moneth, the time that I was beſieged, as alſo yt in our ſallies, we got great aduantage of the ennemies, beſides the taking of their enſignes, and forcinge of their trenches: for ſeeing themſelues

thus moleſted, they were forced to make fortes at all the corners of their campe. In the meane time the Lord of Montmorency, ſent the Lord of Leques, of Chambault and of Montoiſon to ſuccour the ſaid Villemure, who after eight daies purpoſed to approach towarde the ennemy by a forte that they made ſhewe to aſſaile: but the place was by the ennemies army ſo ſuccoured, that without farther endaungeringe of anye thing, they returned to attend ſome of my frendes: among others the Lord of Meſſillac, whome I had imployed, and the Lord Giſcart, alſo the Lord of la Land, whome I had left to gather the forces of the Countrey. Upon their arriual, they approched the ennemies vpon Monday the nineteenth of this moneth, and them aſſailed at the very trenches, which, not finding all their horſemen in guarde, were forced. This aduauntage loſt, the ennemy grewe into ſuche feare as not yeelding ſuch battaile as I expected namely of their ſtrangers, they were ouerthrowne, and the moſt part drowned, namely the Lord of Ioyeuſe, their artillery was taken, whereof were fiue Cannons or Culueringes, There were alſo found thoſe of the towne of Montaubon, that were taken from the regimente of the Lorde of Eſpernon, where I was preſente with twelue horſe, and that in good time, for the ſauinge of a Cannon, which they had abandoned. All the ſaide ennemies Enſignes were taken, alſo all the leaders of their footemen, either dead or taken. To bee briefe my Lord: It was a very great ouerthrow. There be dead betwene twelue and fifteene hundred men, and about a hundred priſoners. It may pleaſe you my Lorde in your packet to his Maieſtie ſo farre to honour me as to geue

him to vnderſtand of my duety perfourmed in effecting this ſeruice, as alſo if you pleaſe to honor me, as to giue him to vnderſtand of my duety perfourmed in effecting this ſeruice, as alſo if you pleaſe to honor me with your commanndements.
            
               From Villemure 
                  the twentieth of October 1592.
               
            
         
         
            A Decree of the Court of Parliament, ſitting at Chaalons, againſt a reſcript in forme of a Bull, directed to the Cardinall of Plaiſance, and publiſhed by the Rebels of Paris in the moneth of October laſt paſt.
            
               IN as much as the Kinges Atturney general, hath declared vnto this court that the Rebels and ſeditious perſons to the end to execute ſuch wicked and wretched purpoſes, as they haue long ſince forecaſt, for the vſurpinge of this crowne, againſt the true and lawfull ſucceſſors of the ſame: not content with repleniſhing the Realme with murther, maſſacre, robbery, and ſpoyle, alſo with bringing in the Spanyard, a moſt cruell and moſt pernitious ennemy to the Realme of Fraunce, but alſo perceiuing that the inhabitantes of the rebellious townes, began as it were out of a long lethargy and ſwounde, to recouer, and to enter the path of Obedience, whereto, by God and nature they are bound to their lawfull King: to the ende vtterly to quenche and ſtop vp all prickes and pointes of charity towarde their countrey, which in them began to ſhoote and waken, and to reduce the Realme into greater trouble and diuiſion then before, doe frame themſelues to proceede to the election

of a new king, for a pretence whereof, they haue procured the publiſhing of a certaine writing in forme of a Bull, importing power and commaundement to the Cardinall of Playſance to aſſiſt and auctorize the ſaid pretended election. Wherein the ſaid rebells and ſeditious perſons doe openly reueale that which hitherto they had concealed, namely that they haue taken the pretence of religion to couer their wretched and damnable enterprize & conſpiracy: A matter which euery good Frenchman and Catholicke ought to deteſt and abhorre, as being directly repugnant to Gods word, al holy decrees, all counſels and the liberty of the french Church, which alſo openeth a gate to the vtter ruine & ſubuertion of al policyes & humaine ſocietyes inſtituted by God, namely of this ſo famous and flouriſhinge Monarchy, the foundamentall lawe whereof doth principally conſiſt in the order of lawfull ſucceſſion of kinges, for the preſeruation whereof euery good man and trew frenchman is to hazard his life rather then to ſuffer it to bee altered or violated, beeing the henge wherevpon the certainty and peace of the eſtate doth torne. Deſiring prouiſion for the ſame.
            The Court admitting the requeſt made by the kings Atturney generall, hath receiued and doth receiue it, appealing as of abuſe from the graunt and purchaſe of the ſaide Bull, and the power thereof, therein contayninge the publication and execution of the ſame, and whatſoeuer els hath enſued, it hath holden and doth hold to be well relieued: doth decree that Philip of the title of Saint Onuphrius, Cardinall of Playſance, ſhall therein be ſommoned, in defence of the ſaid appeale, and whatſoeuer the exploites, performed in this towne of

               Chaalons, by publike cry, ſhall be of force, and in effecte and valour, as if they were performed vppon his owne perſon, or habitation. In the meane time the ſaide Court exhorteth all Prelates, Biſhops, Princes, Lords Gentlemen, Officers and the kinges ſubiectes, of what eſtate, condition or callinge ſo euer, not to ſuffer themſelues, to be led or wonne with the poyſon or charmes of ſuch rebels, and ſeditious perſons, but to perſiſte in the duety of good and naturall French-men, and ſtill to retaine that affection and charity, which they owe to their king and countrey, neither to cleaue to the ſubtelties of thoſe who vnder the coulor of religion, doe ſeeke to inuade the eſtate, and to bringe in the barbarous Spanyardes, and other vſurpers. It doth alſo expreſly inhibite and forbidde all perſons, not to retaine or keepe the ſaid Bull, neither to publiſh the ſame, or therwith to helpe themſelues: neither to fauour the rebells, or to tranſporte themſelues into any ſuch townes or places as may be appointed for the ſaid pretended election. Under paine to the noble men to be diſgraded of all nobilite and to be denounced Infamous and Peaſants, they and their poſterity: to the clergy to bee depryued from the poſſeſſion of their benefices, and puniſhed together with other the offenders, as guilty of treaſon and deſturbers of publike peace, forſakers and traitors to their Country: without hope for euer hereafter to obtayne pardon, remiſſion or abolition. It alſo inhibiteth all townes not to receiue the ſaid rebells or ſeditious perſons to make their ſaid aſſembly, neither to lodge, foſter or harbour them. The ſaid court alſo decreeth that the place where ſuch deliberation ſhall haue beene taken, together with the towne wher

the ſaid aſſembly ſhall bee made, ſhall bee razed topſy turuy, without hope of euer beeing reedified, in perpetuall remembraunce to the poſterity of their treaſon, trechery and falſhood: It alſo enioyneth all men at the allarum bell to ouer-runne all ſuch as ſhall tranſport themſelues into any ſuch towne, to aſſiſt the ſaid aſſembly. Alſo there ſhalbe Commiſſion deliuered to the ſaide Atturney generall, to enforme againſt thoſe that haue bene the authors and promooters of ſuch conſpiracies and monopoles, practiſed againſt the ſtate, and all ſuch as haue ayded or fauored them. And this decree, to bee publiſhed with the ſounde of the trompet, and common cry, in all the quarters of this towne, and ſent to all the ſeas of this reſort, there to be read, publiſhed and enrolled with all diligence, by the ſubſtitutes of the ſaid Atturney generall. Whereof they ſhall certifye the Courte, within the ſpace of one moneth, under paine of ſuſpenſion from their Offices.
            
               Done in the Parliament the 18. of Nouember 1592. at Chaalons.
               
               Saigcot.
            
         
         
            By Letters of good credite, receiued this moneth of Ianuary 1593.
            
            
               
                  THe Duke of Florence hath ſente ſuccour by Sea, to the Frenche Kinge, the which ſuccour hath beene incountered by king Philip his Gallies, but the Florentines haue giuen them the ouerthrowe, and are arriued ſafe to Diepe.
            
            
               
They of the League, haue created Lieuetenant generall for king Philip in the kingdome of France, a Spaniſh Cardinall which is in Paris.
            
            The Parliamentes of France which doe hold for the king, haue a ſtatute, by the which it is ordained, that all them which doe, and ſhall adhere to the League, are declared conuinced of high treaſon, and that therfore, they and their goods are confiſcated to the king, and if any Common-wealth, doe adhere therevnto, it is ordayned that the ſame ſhall leeſe all their priuiledges and libertyes, and that (the walls of the ſame being beaten downe) it ſhall be left like a baren villadge.
            They of Paris are in greate extreamity, ſo that the Crochetors, and other of the common ſort, were riſen againſt the better ſort: but they haue appeaſed them, by encreaſing their ordinary: and ſo they keepe them nowe quiet.
            The Duke of Sauoy beeing in Piemount, to reſiſt the Lord des Diguieres, ſent to the Duke de Terra noua, gouernor of Myllan for helpe: who ſent him his owne ſon with many of the nobility of Myllan, very ſtrongly prouided, and they being ioyned with the Duke, did approach the Lord des Diguiers, who paſſing little for them all did take in their ſight a ſtronge caſtell, the which he had beſſieged neere Thurin, and after that, he fought with them a very ſore battaile in the which, the ſonne to the gouernor of Myllan was ſlaine. The Duke of Sauoy put to flight, and his whole army defeated, many of the Dukes men were ſlaine, and many were taken priſoners.
            The Duke of Lorraine hath fought lately againſt the Duke of Bullion, there were many of the Duke

of Lorraine his men ſlaine, and many were taken priſoners, amongeſt which were found about foure hundred Gentlemen.
            The king doth aeſſmble his armie about Chartres, to reſiſt the ennemie ſtranger, which is entered within France vnder the conducte of the Earle Charles Manſfield.
            
         
         
            By other Letters that came on the 20. of this moneth of Ianuary 1593.
            
            THe Duke of Eſpernon, hath taken Anthebe, and all the country about the ſame, ſo that all Prouence is now brought vnder the Kinges obedience.
            He hath ſent a hundred horſemen to the Lord des Diguieres in Prouence.
            
            The Lord des Diguieres hath broughte vnder the Kinges obedience, all the valley of Angroigne, and the countrey about it, and hath forced the Papiſtes of that countrey to contract with him, by which contract, they are bound to pay euery moneth, thirty thouſand french crownes, for the mainetenance of his army.
            The Duke of Florence, and the Venetians, haue leuied ſixe thouſand Switzers, to ayde the French Kinge, againſt his ennemies.
            The Mareſhall d'Aumont, hath taken the towne of Dynan in Britany.
            
         
         
            
            
               COPIE DE LA LETTRE DE MONSIeur de Themines Seneſchal de Quercy, enuoyée à Monſeigneur le Mareſchal de Matignon, Lieutenant gen eral du Roy en Guyen, concernant la bataille de Villemur, & victoire obtenue contre les ennemys de ſa Maieſté.
            
               MONSEIGNEVR, ie tiens de mon debuoir, de vous aduertir de ce, qui s'eſt paſſé deuant Villemur, & de l'occaſion, qui me fit ietter dedans: C'eſt, qu'eſtant arriué en la ville de Montauban, i'y trouuay les affaires en ſi mauuais eſtat, & ledict lieu de Villemur en tel dāger de ſe predre, s'il n'eſtoit promptement ſecouru, & ne voyant dequoy me mettre à la campaigne, ie me deliberay de m'y en aller auec cēt de mes compaignons, & trois cens hommes de pied. I'en donnay la nouuelle à vous premierement, Monſieur, & apres à tout ce que i'eſtimois auoir de moyens, pour me venir releuer de ſentinelle: car ie preuoyois que la perte dudict Villemur eſtoit tres-importante au ſeruice du Roy, & au bien de voſtre gouuernement: car celle-là prinſe, toutes les villes de ces enuirons, qui ſont dansle Quercy euſſent quitté. Ceſte neceſſité ne m'euſt peu donner loiſir d'attendre voſtre permiſſion: car c'eſtoit ce que ie deuois. Vous receurez en ce ſubject, s'il vous plaiſt, Monſieur, mon excuſe. Ie ne m'arreſteray à vous diſcourir des combats & ſorties, qui ſe ſont faictes durant vn mois, que i'ay eſté aſſiegé, & que en noz ſorties nous auons gaigné grand aduantage ſur l'ennemy, prins des drappeaux, forcé des trenchées, tellement que ſe voyant trauaillez de ceſte ſorte, ils auroyent eſté contraints faire des forts à tous les coings de leur camp. Durant ce temps Monſieur de Mommorency enuoya Monſieur de Leques, de Chambault, & de Montoyſon pour ſecourir ledict

Villemur: & au bout de huict iours ils ſevoulurēt approcher des ennemis par vn fort, qu'ils firent ſemblant de vouloir attaquer, mais ce lieu fuſt ſecouru de l'armée deſdicts ennemis, tellement que ſans vouloir rien hazarder, ils s'en retournerent pour attendre de mes amis: entre autres Monſieur de Meſſillac, que i'auois employé, & leſieur Giſcart, & leſieur de la Lande, que i'auois laiſſé dehors pour aſſembler les forces du pays. Lors qu'ils ont eſté arriuez, ils s'en ſont venuz aux ennemis le lundy dixneufieſme de ce mois, & apres les auoir attaquez par le haut de leurs trenchées, & n'y trouuant toute leur caualerie en garde, ils ont eſté forcez. Ceſt aduantage perdu, l'armée ennemie ſe mit en tel effroy, que ſans rendre tant de combat, que ie croyois, meſmes des eſtrangers, ils ont eſté deffaicts, & la pluſpart noyez, meſmes monſieur de Ioyeuſe, l'artillerie prinſe, ou ily a cinq pieces de canon ou coleuurines, celles de la ville de Montauban y ont eſté trouuées qui auoyent eſté prinſes au regiment de Monſieur d'Eſpernō, ou ie me trouuay auec douze cheuaux, & bien à propos pour ſauuer vn canon, qu'ils auoyent abandonné, tous les drappeaux deſdits ennemis prins, tous les chefs de gens de pied morts ou prins. Bref, Monſieur, c'eſt vne treſ-grande deffaicte, il y a de morts, de douze à quinze cēs hommes, & enuiron de cent priſonniers. Vous me ferez bien l'honneur, s'il vous plaiſt, Monſieur, que lors que vous deſpecherez à ſa Majeſté, vous luy ferez entendre le debuoir, que i'ay rendu à l'effaict de ce ſeruice: & meferez auſſi, s'il vous plaiſt, l'honneur de me commander. De Villemur, le vingtieſme d'Octobre, mil cinq cens nonante deux.
         
         
            
            
               ARREST DELA COVR DE PARLEment ſeant a Chaalons contre le Reſcrit en forme de Bule, adreſſe au Cardinal de Plaiſance, publié par les rebelles de Paris, au mois a Octobre dernier.
            
            
               SVR ce que le Procureur general du Roy a remonſtré à la Cour, queles rebelles & ſeditieux pour executer les meſchans & malheureux deſſeings qu'ils ont de longue main proiettez pour vſurper ceſte Couronne ſur les vrais & legitimes ſucceſſeurs d'icelle, non contens d'auoir remply le Royaume de meurtres, maſſacres, brigandages, & pilleries, & auoir d'abondant introduit l'Eſpagnol treſcruel & treſpernicieux ennemy de la France, voyans que les habitans des villes rebelles cō
               mencoient comme d'vne longue lethargie & pamoiſon à retourner à ſoy & reprendre le chemin de l'obeiſſance dont Dieu & Nature les obligent enuers leur Roy legitime pour du tour amortir & reboucher les pointes & aigullions de la charité vers leur Patrie, qui ſe reueilloient en eux & remettrece Royaume en plus grand trouble & diuiſion que deuant, ſe diſpoſent de proceder à l'eſlection d'vn Roy. Pour à laquelle donner quelque couleur, ils ont fait publier certain eſcrit en forme de Bule portant pouuoir & mandement au Cardinal de Plaiſance d'aſſiſter & authoriſer ladite pretendue eſlection. En quoy leſdits rebelles & ſeditieux deſcouurent apertement ce qu'ils ont iuſques icy tenu cachè, & qu'ils n'ont fait que prendre le pretexte de la religion pour couurir leur malheureuſe & damnable enterpriſe & coniuration. Choſe que tout bon Francois & Catholique doit deteſter & abhorrer comme directement con traire ā la parole de Dieu, aux ſaincts decrets, conciles & libertez

de l'Egliſe Gallicane, & qui ouure la porte à l'entiere ruine & euerſion de toutes polices & ſocietez humaines inſtituees de Dieu, meſmement de ceſte tant renommee & floriſſante Monarchie, la loy fondamētale de laquelle conſiſte principalement en l'ordre de la ſucceſſion legitime de nos Rois, pour la conſeruation de laquelle tout homme de bien & vray François, doit expoſer ſavie pluſtoſt que ſouffrir qu'elle ſoit alteree & viollee, comme le gond ſur lequel tourne toute la certitude & repos de l'Eſtat requerant y eſtre pourueu.
            
               LA COVR en entherinant larequeſte faicte par le Procureur general du Roy, l'a receu & reçoit, appellant comme d'abus de l'octroy & impetration de ladicte Bule, & pouuoir y cō
                  tenu publication, execution d'icelle, & tout ce qui s'en eſt enſuiui, l'à tenu & tient pour bien releué, ordonne que Philippes du titre de S. Onuphre Cardinal de Plaiſance, ſer a aſsigné en icelle, pour defendre audit appel, & vaudrōt les exploits faits en ceſte ville de Chaalons, à cry public, & ſeront de tel effect & valeur comme ſi faits eſtoient à perſonne ou domicile. Et cependant exhorte ladicte Cout tous Prelats, Eueſques, Princes, Seigneurs, Gentilshommes, Officiers & ſubiets du Roy, de quelque eſtat, condition & qualité qu'ils ſoient, de ne ſe laiſſer aller ou gagner aux poiſons & enſorcellemens de tels rebelles & ſeditieux, ains demourer au deuoir de bons & naturels François, retenir touſiours l'affection & charité qu'ils doiuent à leur Roy & Patrie, ſans adherer aux artifices de ceulx qui ſoubs couleur de religiō veuillent enuahir l'Eſtat, & y introduire les barbares eſpagnols & autres vſurpateurs, faict treſexpreſſes inhibitions & deffences à toutes perſonnes, de te nir ny auoir chez ſoy ladite Bule, icelle publier, s'en aider, ou fauoriſer leſdits rebelles, ny ſe tranſporter aux villes & lieux qui pourroient eſtre aſsignez pour ladite pretēdue election, Sur peine

aux Nobles d'eſtre degradez de Nobleſſe, & declarez inſames & roturiers eux & leur poſterite, & aux Eccleſiaſtiques d'eſtre decheuz du poſſeſſoire de leurs benefices, & punis enſemble tous contreuenans, comme criminels de leze Maieſté, & perturbateurs du repos public, deſerteurs & traiſtres à leur pays, ſans eſperance de pouuoir obtenir à l'aduenir pardon, remiſsion ou abolition, & à toutes Villes de receuoir leſdits rebelles & ſeditieux, pour faire ladicte aſſemblee, les loger, retirer, ou heberger.
            
            
               Ordonne ladicte Cour que le lieu ou la deliberation aur a eſté priſe, enſemble la Ville ou ladicte aſſemblee ſe fera, ſeront raſez de fonds en comble, ſans eſperance d'eſtre redifiez, pour perpetuelle memoire à la poſterité de leur trahiſon, perfidie, & infidelité, enioinct à toutes perſonnes de courir ſus à ſon de toxain, contre ceux qui ſe tranſporteront en ladicte ville, pour aſsiſter à icelle aſſemblee, & ſera commiſsion deliuree audict Procureur general, pour informer contre ceux qui ont eſté autheurs & promotheurs de tels monopoles & coniurations faictes contre l'Eſtat, & qui leur ont aidé ou fauoriſé. Et ſera le preſent arreſt publié a ſon de trompe & cry public par les carefours de ceſt Ville, & envoyé par tous les ſieges de ce reſſort, pour y eſtre leu, publié, & enregiſtré à la diligence des ſubſtituds du Procureur general, dont ils certifieront la Cour dans vn mois, à peine de ſuſpenſion de leurs eſtats.
            
            
               Faict en Parlement le XVIII. Nouembre M. D. XCII. A Chaalons.
            
         
      
   