
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  〈1 page〉
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE 
                  〈…〉
               
Matrons and Mirrours of 
                  〈◊〉
               
gratious Lady Anne Dutches of Sommerset, 
                  〈◊〉
               
right honourable Lady Brigirt Countesse 
                  〈◊〉
               
Bedford, the right vvorshipfull Mis
                  •
               resse PHILIP PRYDEAVX,
Mistresse LVCE COTT
                  •
               N, and Mistresse
Mary VVatts, EPHRAIM PAGITT wisheth
the encrease of all spirituall graces meete
for this life, and a full assuraunce of
that honour whiche lasteth
for euer.
            
               I Haue not that libertye (most noble
Ladies and graue Matrons) in
this my Epistle, to set foorth the
praises either of you, or of the work
which I haue labored to send vnto
you in Englishe: But a
                  •
                enforced
as in an Apollogie, to defende my selfe, that
I a child of eleuen yeares of age haue dealt in a matter
of religion, and presumed to dedicate the same to
you. For the first I aunswere, there is no age freed,
nor exempted from the knowledge of God, and the
setting forth of his glorye, so farre as he hath en
                  ••
               
               bled
them, but as children are asson
                  •
                subiect
                  •
                to
death as the olde, so must they learne to dye and to
yeeld accompt of that one talent which th
                  •
                have

               
                  ••
               ether they haue emploied it to the vse of God, who

                  〈◊〉
                it them, or no. Besides that I was emploied in
it, by the appointment of those my frends, that in respect
of the interest they haue in me, the loue they
beare mee, the good they wish to come of this labour,
to suche step-parents and children in lawe,
which vnderstand not Latine, that I could not deny
them.
            For the second, it is not presumption, that hath
made me to dedicate it vnto you (right Honourable
Ladies and worthy Gentlewomen) but a desire to
yeeld thankes for the comfort which I, my brother
& Sisters (poore children) haue receiued by the
kindenes, which hath often come from you to vs &
our parents in our necessities. Therefore I beseeche
your H. and Wor. in good part to take this booke
which I with all humilitie do heere offer vnto you,
humbly praying that you widowes will receiue into
England, these good widowes, Naomie & Ruth,
come out of Moab, sent as excellent paterns of vertues
and godlynes, by the holy ghost to all christians,
described and lineated by the sermons of that worthie
Minister, Maister Lauaterus of Tygurine,
Like will to like, widowes come to widowes,
disdain thē not for their pouertye. Haue they
bene in trouble? so haue al you? Was Naomie a
soiourner in a straunge countrie, and lost there her
husband? so haue some of you. Did Ruth leaue her
countrie for religion? So haue some of you. Were
they disdayned, skoft and scorned at? so are you of

the worlde for your zeale in religion, and loue to th
                  •
               
glorious gospell of Iesus Christ. Of the other 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
are you come of noble birth? are you of honorable
calling? so was Naomie of the royall and kingly
tribe of Iudah, and Ruth was maried to Boaz, a
man that sate in the gates of Iudah, iudged Israel,
and was great grandfather to Dauid the king, end
so from these good women came kinges and princes
to rule Gods people, and at length, the hope, ioy and
comfort of all mankinde, our Sauiour Christ according
to the fleshe. Therefore Noble and Wor. matrons,
I pray you take it in good part, that I haue
bene so bold to ioyne you of seuerall estates togeather
in this short Epistle: but because yee are all in one
estate of widdow-hode, in one course of religion, in
like regarde of the weale of vs and our parentes,
I was so bolde to knitte you together, entreating you
that my childishnes, which in this I haue shewed, your
wonted vertues may beare out toward your selues,
and as a vaile to couer from others, till God giue
me more knowledg and vnderstanding to amend it.
And I humbly pray the Lord to grant you as much
comfort in your own children, and in your sonnes and
daughters in law, as euer Naomie had in Ruth.
And as they had rest after their traueils, and
ioy after their sorrowes, so the Lord geue
you peace of consciences heere, and
after this pilgrimage that euerlasting
rest which neuer shal
be taken from you.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE BOOKE OF
Ruth expounded in 28
Sermons.
            
               The first Sermon.
               
                  THIS Booke is named after
RVTH a most excellent woman:The 
                        〈◊〉
                      this 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
not for that she wrote it:
but because the historye is especially
made of her: for it maketh
mention that shee was a MOABITE,
and by what occasion she was conuerted
to the religion of ISRAELL and
what she did; likewise how she was maried
to BOAZ a man of great authority,
& was mother to OBED, DAVIDS
Grandfather. So the little booke ESTER
hath the name frō Queen ESTER
the principall person which is spoken of
in that booke. Also the bookes of SAMVEL
(that I may at this time speake
nothinge of others) are named of the
cheefe person. For though wee do willingly
graunt, that SAMVEL the Prophet

wrote the first booke vnto the 24.
chapter: yet it is certaine that he could
not proceede any further. For in the beginning
of the 25. chapter is his death
set downe, and the other six chapters to
the end of the book, do containe things
done after his death. The second book
which is also named after SAMVEL,
doth entreate onely of those thinges
which were done after his death, & therfore
could not be put in writing by him:
Yet it seemeth that it was therefore called
by the name of SAMVEL, because
it prosecuteth the historie of DAVID,
whome SAMVEL annoynted king by
the commaundement of God: and for
that it was written by some of his disciples,
as NATHAN or GAD, & put forth
vnder the name of their maister. Some
thinke that this little booke of RVTH
was written by SAMVEL, other some,
that it was gathered out of that great
book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
ISRAELL and IVDA: whereof there
is mention made oft times in the books
of the kinges: The which is lost without

the losse of doctrine necessary to saluatiō.
For that it is, not that book of the Chronicles
which is yet extát, I haue shewed
in my commentaries vpon that booke.
               But who gathered this history out
of that booke spoken of before, or
who wrotte the same, ESRA, or rather
some other Prophet, which florished in
the time of the Iudges or afterwards, I
cannot certainly tell, neither is it anye
great matter to know: how soeuer it was
this ought to satisfie vs, that this booke
by the agreement of al men, is nombred
amongest the canonicall bookes of holy
scriptures, which by the motiō of the
holy ghost are written of holy men, and
deliuered of God to his church, and so
wōderfully preserued through so manie
dangers, to our comfort and learning. If
thou hast a notable priuilege, confirmed
by the seale of some Emperour or king,
thou hast not regard of the name of the
writer, or of the penne which he vsed in
writing it: so sith it appeareth by the general
cōsent of al godly mē, that the holy
ghost is author of this book, we ought

not to vse muche labour to knowe the
instrument which he vsed in writing it.
               The argument or matter of this book,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
is this: ELIMELECH in the tyme of
a famine, went with his wife & his two
sonnes out of BETHLEHEM into the
land of MOAB. There the father dying,
the sonnes took them wiues of the MOABITISH
woman, who after certaine
yeares died thēselues out of their owne
coūtrie, leauing their mother and wiues
aliue. NAOMIE in the mean seasō being
certified that God had giuen plentie to
his people, consulted for her return into
her country. Both her daughters in law
do accópanie her, she doth exhort both
of thē, that they would tarry with their
kindred. ORPAH therefore doth returne
to her owne: But RVTH, when she could
not be drawne away from her, came
with her mother in law to Beth
                     •
                  ehem
in the beginning of haruest. The Bethlemites
marueiled what NAOMI ment by
her cōming. In the meane season RVTH,
went forth to gather eares, for to norish
her selfe and her mother in law, and it

was not without the prouidēce of God
that she came into the field of her kinseman
BOAZ. When he comming into
his field vnderstood of his bayly
what shee was, hee doth speake to her
courteously, and charge hys seruauntes
and reapers, that they hurt not her, she
thanking him, being laden by him went
home, and she tolde her mother in lawe
in order euery thing that befell to her.
She doth giue her counsell that shee
should goe priuily into BOAZ barne,
and that shee shoulde lye downe at his
feete being a sleepe, and require him to
be her husband according to the law of
God, which cōmandeth the brother or
kinsmā, to marry the wife of the brother
or kinsman, that is departed without a
son. RVTH doth obey her mother in law
she doth demaund marriage of BOAZ,
who doth aunswere, that there is another
who is neerer of kinne to her, then
he was: and if he would yeeld his 
                     •
                  ight,
he would marry her. And when on the
next day, that kinsmā renoūced his right
before the Iudges, BOAZ maried her, &

begat of her OBED DAVIDS grādfather.
               This whole historie,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      partes. seemeth especially,
to consist of two partes: The first in
the rehearsall of the miseries of NAOMI
& RVTH: The next in the change of the
estate of those women &c. namely how
God had made thé rich again, whom he
had throwne down into great pouertie.
               The scope and the especiall intent of
this history is,
                     
                        •
                     he scope. that the genealogie of
DAVID, and so of our Lord and Sauior
Iesus Christ might be shewed, who
was of his seede according to the fleshe.
Christ is the scope and end of the law &
prophetes. Also we shal heare hereafter,
that this matter befell when the Iudges
raigned ouer Israell, therfore it is well
placed after the booke of the Iudges.
               And though this booke is small, yet
it doth contain many notable things,The profite., &
yeeldeth great vse to all the parts of life,
and therefore it may be compared to
pretious stones, of which though many
are little, yet they haue certaine excellent
vertues. This commēdation of holy
scripture, which is written in the second

Epistle of Saint PAVLE to TIMOTHIE
and the 3. chapter, doth appertayn
to all holy bookes, and therfore to
this also. The whole scripture is giuē by the inspiration
of God, and is profitable to teache, to improue,
to correct & to instruct in righteousnes, that
the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect
vnto all good workes. And also in the 15.
chapter to the ROMAINES. For whatsoeuer
thinges are written afore time, are written
for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the scriptures might haue hope. That wee
may the better see the vse of this writing
let vs mark some principal heads, which
are propounded in it. Afterward euerie
thing shall follow more fully in theyr
places. First, as all holy bookes doe further
vs to the knowledge of god, so doth
thys also. For it doth teache that
Christ the sonne of GOD came of
the IEVVES, and of the GENTILES
which are sinners, and therefore appertaineth
to them both. It doth teache
that al thinges are gouerned by the prouidence
of the most excellent and great
God: and also that by hys direction mariages

are made betweene husb
                     •
                  ndes
and wiues. RVTH being willing to gather
eares of corn, that she might 
                     •
                  ether
liuing, fell into BO AZ fielde, whiche
was the occasion that shee b'ecan
                     •
                  e hys
wife and mother to OBED. We sh
                     •
                  ll
see how God doth alwayes exercise t
                     •
                  e
godly, with diuers afflictions, as pouertie,
barrennes, bannishment and hunger,
and bring theyr estate to that passe, so as
they may seeme vtterly to be vndone,
but if they be not ouerwhelmed with
aduersities, but beare al things patiently,
looking for his heauenly helpe, and calling
on him, oftentimes their afflictions
are chaunged into a notable estate: yea,
euen in this life.
               Moreouer, we shall learne out of this
history, howe God hath a care of the
GENTILES, and also that hee hath hys
chosen amongest them, as IETHRO,
NAAMAN the SIRIAN, the widow of
SAREPTA, and the NINEVITES, &c, Not
that we say that they were saued without
Christ. Also he would haue RAHAB
and RVTH ioyned to the seed O ABRAHAM,

that the MESSIAS might be born
of them in his appointed tyme. Wiues,
Mothers in lawe, daughters in lawe, widows,
fathers of housholds, seruaūts, labourers,
haue here notable examples to
follow. Let vs learne, that strangers and
poore men, our kinsmē and those which
are newly conuerted to true religion are
to be well handled, neither to be hurt in
wordes nor deedes. We haue a notable
exāple propounded to vs, how BOAZ
kept his fayth, also there are rewardes
ordained for our vertues in this life.
Therfore let not any man say, that it is
all one whether we doe well or euill.
               There are nine notable persons made
mention of in this little booke, ELIMELECH,
NAOMI, MAHLON, CHILION,
ORPAH, RVTH, BOAZ, his
bailiffe, and the kinseman that did yeeld
his right, by euery one of them, examples
of our dueties are propounded to
vs, which by Gods assistāce we wil mark
in theyr places. Let vs giue great thanks
for the vnspeakable gift of God, that he
would haue his holy scriptures to bee

written: and to be preserued through so
many sharpe tempestes, and read out of
those fountaines to his Churches, and
let vs be occupied in them both day and
night, and cast away those lying and vnprofitable
bookes in which fooles are
most exercised.
            
            
               CAP. 1
               
                  The 2. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        1 In the time that the Iudges ruled, there was
a dearth in the land, and a man of Bethlehem
Iudah went to soiorne in the countrie
of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sonnes.
                        2 And the name of the man was Elimelech,
and the name of his wife, Naomie: and the
names of his two sonnes, Mahlon, and Chilion,
Ephrathites of Bethlehem Iuda: and
when they came into the land of Moab, they
continued there.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe thinges that are especially
handled in this chapter are
these:The deuision of the chapter. ELIMELECH in the
time of famine went into the
land of MOAB, and there he dyed: hys
sonnes also when they had maried them
wiues of the daughters of MOAB departed

this life. NAOMI being left a widow,
returned to BETHLEHEM: both her
daughters in law do accōpany her som
part of the way. But ORPAH returned
by and by to her kindred. RVTH accō
                     panied
her mother in law, returning into
her countrey. All men marueiled at
NAOMIES comming. Lastly, is the tyme
noted when she returned home.
                  The first part, or first member of this
Chapter, doth shew how ELIMELECH
went with his wife and hys two sonnes,
out of BETHLEHEM into the land of
MOAB in the time of famine, and it
containeth many things in few words.
First, it sheweth when this history happened,
namely in the time of the Iudges
of ISRAEL. But vnder what Iudge,
(of which many are named) this befell,
it is doubtfull. Some doe report, this historie,
to be done in the time of EHVD:
some are of that opiniō, that it was done
in the time of DEBORA and BARACK, other
some say, it was done in the time of
IEPHTE, who after great mischiefes
which the MOABITES had done to

the Israelites, (from whence this famine
arose which is made mention of
heere) at length hee tamed them. If you
say ELIMELECH should not haue place
amongest the MOABITES, being ouerthrowne
by warre, but rather that hee
should haue bene torne in peeces of thē
at that time, they will aunswere that they
were so oppressed, and beaten downe
that they durst not hurt the Israelytes.
IEPHTE gouerned the people sixe yeers
his history is extant in the tenth eleuēth
and twelfth chapters of the IVDGES. IBSAN
succeeded him, whome the Hebrue
doctors wil haue to be BOHAZ DAVIDS
graundfather & to haue had two names.
This man gouerned ISRAELL seuen
yeeres as it is in the twelfth chapter of
the IVDGES. IOSEPHVS includeth this
history in the time of HELI: but LIRA
sheweth vppon the first chapter of this
booke, that that agreeth not with the
accompt of times. But it nothing auaileth
to our saluation to knowe the particuler
time wherein these were done, otherwise
the holy Ghost woulde not

haue let it passe. It is inough for vs generally
to knowe that this was done in
the time of the IVDGES.
                  The cause whiche doth moue this
man to leaue his countrey doth seeme
to be a famine,The 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      for the texte sayth that
there was a famine in the land of Israell. For oftentimes
holy fathers, will goe from one
place into another in the time of famine
that they may nourishe themselues and
their family more fitly. As in the 12.
chap. of GENESIS: ABRAHAM went into
AEGIPT in the time of famine, which
is called the barne of the worlde. So in
the 26. chapter ISAAKE when there was
a famine went vnto GERAR to ABIMELECH.
But God appearing to him in a
dreame warned him that he should not
goe to AEGYPT, but should keep himself
in those places which the Lord shoulde
shew him. Also the history is knowne of
IACOB or ISRAELL, how hee sent hys
sonnes for foode, into AEGIPT oftentimes.
Afterward the famine continuing
long he went himselfe and his houshold
to his sonne IOSEPH. Here also

may be added, the story of the SHVNAMITE,
whose sonne ELISHA raysed from
the dead, hee bad her goe into another
countrie, for God would bring vppon
the land a famine, which should endure
seuen yeeres, as it is in the second book
of the kinges and the 8. chapter: whiche
woman following the counsell of the
Prophet was preserued in the time of famine.
And for the same cause ELIMELECH
went together with his into the
land of MOAB, which peraduenture then
abounded with fruit: but the Hebrues
(as LIRA sayth) do imagine some other
cause. For they say that ELIMELECH
was a mightie and wealthie man, of
whom whē the famine raigned many of
his kinsmen and poore men did require
thinges needefull for them, and therefore
that he might be rid of his trouble,
and not spend his goods, left his countrie
and went into the land of MOAB
with hys housholde, where hee being
driuen vnto great pouerty, died with his
sonnes. If he trauailed for this cause, as
it sometimes appeareth some doe, hee

coulde not be excused, for it is in the
Prouerbes of SALOMON. 21. chapter. He
that stoppeth his eares at the crying of
the poore, shal also cry and not be heard
for there is a iust reuenger of the poore
and afflicted. It is knowne to all men
what happened to that riche man clothed
in Purple, mentioned in LVKE. 16.
But who can but maruell from whence
the HEBRVES haue these fantasies, they
doe bring in many monstrous fables in
the expounding of the holy Scriptures.
For whē they had cast away Iesus Christ
the light of the world, they wer worthy
to walke in darknesse. And the doctrine
of the Gospell being oppressed, and ouerwhelmed
Christians harkened to
monstrous lies.
                  As concerning famine,A famine. against the
Prophetes, it is numbred amongst the
foure plagues, with the which GOD
doth punishe men, and these are they:
the pestilence, famine, warre, and cruell
beastes. Howe grieuous the trouble of
famine is, may be gathered by this, that
it doth driue men oftentimes into bannishment.

Truly God doth send famine
for the sinnes of his people, where and
when he pleaseth.
                  It is not to be gathered that those that
be oppressed with famine are worse thē
others. For oftentimes godly men are
oppressed with famine, not because hee
would ouerthrow them, but that hee
might prooue them with this crosse,
and also stirre th
                        •
                     m vppe therewith as
by oth
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . They do prouide for
their thinge
                        •
                      by lawfull meanes, true religion
being kept safe, and they gouerne
themselu
                        •
                     s farre otherwise, then wicked
ones doe when they be in that case. The
HEBRVES saye that God punished the
ISRAELITES, with sharpe and cruell famine
because that after IOSHVA and the
ELDERS were dead, who had seene the
miracles of God, they were slack in keeping
hys commaundementes. For it appeareth
by the story of the IVDGES how
the Israelites forsaking the lawes turned
to Idols, and so they were afflicted
with diuers afflictions.
                  The sonnes of ELIMELECH are called

Ephrathites, of BETHLEHEM IVDA:
which is called so, that it may be distinguished
from another City of the same
name that is in GALILIE of the lott of
ZEBVLON. As it is in the 2. chapter of
MATTHEVV: The Priestes and Scribes
of the people, being demaunded of
HERODE where the Messias should bee
borne, aunswered in Bethlehem Iuda.
This Citie is also called Ephrata as it is
in the 35. chap, of Genesis, RAHEL died
of childbirth in the way to Ephrata that
is Bethlehem: and IACOB raised a
piller vppon her graue. For the Fathers
were woont to haue theyr graues
neere the high wayes, and that is testified
by many Epitaphes set vpp for trauelers.
As concerning the etimologie
of these names, Bethlehem doth signifie
the house of bread, that is after
the Hebrues aboundaunce of fruit: it
was situated in a good and a fruitfull
place.
                  Some wil haue Bethlehem to bee
called the house of bread, for that misterie
that Christ (who said in the 6. chapter

of IOHN, that hee was the bread of
life) shoulde bee borne there. But HIEROME
calleth EPHRATA KARPOPHORIAN
which signifieth plentifulnes. So
this Citie for the agreement of the signification
of the names is called both
Ephrata and Bethlehem. Some will
haue this Citie to be called EPHRATA
of EPHRATA CALEBS wife, but that
doth not please me, for that Citie was
called so long before. This Citie hath a
third name, for it is called the Citie of
DAVID, as it is in the second chapter
of LVKE. Ioseph went into the Citie
of DAVID which was called BethleHEM,
and afterward the Aungell sayd
vnto the Shepheards, this day a Sauiour
is borne vnto you in the Citie of DAVID
which is Christ the Lorde. It was
so called because it was DAVIDS countrie,
partly because he did reedifie it:
partly because Christ the sonne of Dauid
was borne there, who is also by the
Prophetes simply called DAVID.
                  ZVPH in the 1. of SAM. 1. chap. is
called an EPHRATHITE, because he

dwelled in mount EPHRAIM: these men
were called EPHRATHITES because
they dwelled in the country of Ephrata,
an EPHRATHITE and a Bethlemite
are both one. SO ISAI DAVIDS father
is called an Ephrathite: because he came
out of Bethlehem which was woont to
be called Ephrata: for it is written in
the 1. booke of SAMVELL the 17. chap.
Dauid was the sonne of an Ephrathite
of Bethlehem named Ishai, or peraduē
                     ture
those which haue bene of that familie,
are called Ephrathites: eyther
for some excellencie in them or by the
figure antonomasia: the Chalde interpreter
doth adde noble men.
                  It is accompted amongest the externall
goodes to be borne in a notable
countrie, and of noble parentes: who
haue descended of good and noble families,
let them take heede that they do
not any thing vnworthie of theyr parentes:
But they that come of base parentes:
let them vse diligence that they
excell their parentes in vertue. It was set
downe where they are borne, that it

shoulde not be thought, that they were
borne in the land of MOAB.
                  What did ELIMELECH when he
went with his out of the land of IVDA,
into the land of MOAB and dwelt there,
did hee well to depart from the habitation
of his auncestours into the land of
Moab? Of this deed it may be disputed
of in both partes. They which doe accuse
him maye vse these or some other
argumentes. First the Israelites were
forbidden the companie of that nation.
For in the 23. chapter of DEVTERONOMIE:
God made a law that the Ammonites
nor the Moabites should come into
the Church vntill the tenth generation:
not that he would forbid them from
the hearing of the word of God, or embrasing
of the true maner of worship,
but that they should not be put in anie
office in the church or common wealth,
and least they should haue anie voyce
in the elections or marry with the Hebrue
daughters: the Interpreters say
that the Hebrue phrases do signifie this.
There may be two reasons of that lawe,

the first is, because they denied their
brethren the Children of Israell passage
comming out of Aegypt: The other is
that the hired Balaam the false Prophet
to cursse the Israelites. NVM. 22. and 23.
chapter: and because they made them
sinne in BAALPEOR for the which cause
many of them fell, &c. Therefore because
Elimelech, went with his to that nation
which is an enemie to God it seemeth
a mater not to be praised: next to forsake
Israelll in afflictions againe they were
not his kinsemen.
                  For as they who doe forsake theirs in
the time of warre and pestilence, doe
seeme to offend: so they which forsake
theirs in the time of famine. Especiallie
when it may be gathered by the wordes
of NAOMI that he was riche. Men fleeing
out of theyr countrey are alwayes
badly spoken of. Who will not disalow
of their purpose nowe at this time, who
will get themselues in dangers amongst
the enemies of the Gospell. Also those
thinges seemed to fight with sayth: for
he thought that hee coulde auoyd the

punishment of God. The Israelite
                        •
                     
had the promises, that God would help
them in afflictions, and that they ought
to beleeue in him, and hang vppon hys
prouidence, and pray, and looke for a
good and happie end of the famine. For
God might aswell haue preserued him
in so fruitfull a ground as in the land of
Moab. For that which he doth is against
the fortitude and courage of the minde:
For hee shoulde rather haue borne anie
thing, then forsake the tabernacle and
worship of God, and goe to a prophane
people.
                  Further he casteth hys wife, and children
into daunger of idolatrie. For euery
bodie knoweth howe daungerous a
thing it is to dwell amongst Idolaters.
Amongst men of our own professiō we
are not without danger: what then if we
dwel amongst wicked men? Some of the
euent doth argue of his going that hee
did not wel, because hee was punished
for forsaking his countrey: for he fel into
extreame pouertie the which he fled,
and died with his sons in a strange land.

After this sort it fel out with IACOB and
IOSEPH and diuers of good men, so
that they may not iudge of the maners
and faith of a man, by things which befall
to him heere.
                  They who defēd this deed, may bring
in these arguments: first that that hee
did, he did not by wordly coūsell without
the cōmandement of God: but by
the examples of godly men recited aboue:
whome famine hath not once
constrained, but manie times to liue as
straungers. Next wee must not tempt
God: his promises maketh not vs slothfull,
and that hee ought to prouide for
himselfe and his, and hee left his countrie
without the hurt of his coūtrimen:
that hee might get foode for his owne
houshold. Further these thinges that he
did prospered well, by this the glory of
God was set forth, and the oracles fulfilled.
Although this argument may be
aunswered, that God often-times vseth
the falles of his to good, & in hys
goodnes cōuerteth those things which
are euill to a good end.
                  
                     
It is true, holy men doe fall, somtime
into great sinnes: But because we know
not whether he went to the MOABITES
in contempt of the lawes, or of couetousnes,
as the Hebrues will haue, or by
the commandemēt of God, or by some
speciall reuelation, or led by some other
necessary cause, nor how hee gouerned
himselfe in a straunge land: wee wil neyther
prayse his deedes nor condemne
him. When the scriptures doe not accuse
men let not vs accuse thē, especially
when the matters are doutful: we ought
rather to thinke the best of men. It may
be that they had the libertie of their religion.
Truely it appeareth that the
IEVVES kept their religion vnder the
ETHNICKE kinges, as they doe this
daye vnder the Christians. There was
not so great crueltie of those kinges against
the IEVVES, as there is now at
this daye of some Kinges and Princes
(which will haue themselues to be called
Christians) against the professors of
pure doctrine. In this place also may be
noted that it is written that ELIMELECH

was a straunger in the field of
Moab. Sometime it is said that NAOMI
returned out of the Field of Moab, the
Hebrue worde signifieth a field, also a
country, and the earth. Peraduenture he
would not dwell in the Cities but in
the fields that he might the lesse be corrupted.
In the Cities many occasions
are layd before vs to entrap vs: For this
cause it was that many dwelt in vilages
and desert places. IONADAB counselled
his sonnes the RECHABITES as it is in
the 35. chap. of Iere. that they shoulde
dwell in Tabernacles, and keepe sheep:
by which meanes they might serue God
best.
                  Generally we say out of the word of
God, that wee must not forsake those
places where the pure worde of God is
preached openly. For it is most daungerous
to dwell there, where the worde of
God hath no free passage. For if thou be
in those places where thou hast the pure
exercise of the word of God and then
thou art sometimes in cōpanie with thē
who doe not loue the trueth, although

thou doest heare some sermons yet by
little and little thy faith will be weakened:
what will be done then, where no
mentiō is made of Christ or of true religion
and where we haue so many things
before our eyes which may weaken our
fayth.
                  But if necessitie doth constraine vs to
dwell in those places, as it sometimes
doth where wickednesse doth raign, we
must take heede that wee doe not denie
Christ. IOSEPH liued holily in the courte
of Potiphar in Aegipt, at last being gouernour
of al Aegipt the called vnto him his
father and hys brethren for the greatnes
of famine to come to him. DAVID with
sixe hundred men went into the land of
Moab, great necessity driuing him therto:
though many interpreters finde fault
with this his flight. 1. SAM. 27. NEBVCHAD-NEZZAR
tooke Daniell, his
fellowes, and many others captiues: as
the Turke now hath in captiuitie flockes
of Christians in euerlasting bondage, &
to dwell amongest idolaters whether
they will or no. But they should endeuour,

to liue amongest wicked men vnblameably.
Ierem. 29. chap. hee doth
teach his people howe they should behaue
themselues in Babilon, vnder Nebuchad-nezzar.
There are some who
will say commonly: If thou beest at
Roome, liue after the maner of Roome.
They commaund to apply themselues
to the times. But Christ in the 10. chap.
of MATHEVV, doth require of his beleeuers
a confession of faith. They are
greatly to be reprooued who of theyr
own, will for gaine and such other light
causes forsake Ierusalem and goe into
Babilon.
                  We may learn by the example of the
Moabites to yeeld harbor to good men:
for though they were molested by the
Israelites: yet we read not they did annoy
ELIMELECH or anie of his. If thou
sayst that they were so oppressed of the
Israelites, that they did that against their
will: yet it is euident that they did yeeld
harbor to DAVIDS parentes when they
were olde, as it is in the 1. SAMVEL. 22.
chap. So the Aegiptians yeelded harbor

to Christ & his mother. God doth oftentimes
commend vnto vs the state of
straungers. Men are banished for manie
causes, wee cannot alwaies stay in our
own countrey, though we would most
willingly there liue, let vs not shew our
selues in this part worse than Gentiles.
Aduise with thy self that the auncestors
were not alwaies in their owne country
but were straungers and pilgrimes: and
consider the wonderfull conuersions
which are of things, and the dayly changing
of Empires, so that greeuous warrs
may easily arise, by whiche many men
are shutt out of their seates, and possessions,
and being mindful of the changes
of worldly thinges, let vs deale wel one
with an other. ELIMELECH is constrayned
to depart with his. But if thou sayst
that he was wicked, and that hee went
with his will and no necessite driuing
him: yet it is euident that there haue
bene many godly and good men in all
ages, which haue forsaken their countrie
and left their houses against their willes.
God doth in ISAI. 16. chap. threaten the

Moabites that hee will pull them out of
their nestes, and yeeldeth this reason,
because they do not harbour the Israelites
that flee in the time of warre, or if
they do receiue them they betray them
to their enimies.
                  Also women haue a notable example
of NAOMI, who followed her husband
into a straunge countrie. SARA also did
not forsake ABRAHAM for his troublesome
estate, though she did suffer great
daunger not onely once for his sake and
fault. And also other godly matrons
haue with their husbandes, borne bannishment
and other troubles patiently.
But if men are despisers of true Religion
and go into a place, in which godly men
cannot be conuersant with a safe conscience,
they ought not to cast themselues
into open daunger. What doest thou
thinke of those women which will shew
themselues hard to goe with theyr husbandes
from one street to another? what
doe ye thinke say I, of those women, if
theyr husbandes should take great iournies
with great daungers and labours?

Truely it is a troublesome thing to dwel
amongest straungers▪ but necessitie that
sharpe darte, doth oftentimes pricke vs.
               
               
                  The 3. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        3 Then Elimelech the husband of Naomie
died, and shee remayned, with her two sonnes.
                        4 Which tooke them wiues of the Moabites:
the ones name was Orpah, and the name of the
other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten
yeares.
                        5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both
twaine: So the woman was left destitute of her
two sonnes, and of her husband▪
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     IF any man wil be conuersant
in the reading of the holye
scripture with profite, first he
must marke the sence & scope
of euery place, next euerie thing must
be referred, to the confirmation of faith,
and the amending of manners, as to
the especiall end. As concerning these
fewe wordes, our writer saith ELIMELECH
departed out of this life, leauing
NAOMI, and her two sonnes whiche

married them wiues of the Moabites: as
it is noted after in the fourth chapter.
MAHLON maried RVTH: CHILION
maryed ORPAH: & they taryed ten
yeares out of their owne countrie. Afterwards
they both died, NAOMI was
left aliue destitute of her husband and
her two sonnes.
                  The Hebrues say, that this RVTH
was the daughter of EGLON King of
Moab, whom EHVD (who is also called
A
                        •
                     OTH) thrust through with a dagger,
IVDG. 3. whome some Christian interpreters
doe follow: but it is not probable,
that that king woulde marry hys
daughter, to a Hebrue, a poore man, and
a man dwelling out of his countrie: or
suffer her, to liue in pouertie: neither
semeth it to agree with the accompt of
the times. But the Iewes are woont to
vaunt much of theyr countrie men, and
ambitiously to counterfait, I know not
what nobilitie, according to the maner
of them which being poorer then Co
                        •
                     
                     DRVS
and of no estimation, yet somtime
they doe falsly brag of great riches, and

nobilitie of their familie when they are
amongest straungers.
                  Here this question may be asked,
whether did these two, being Israelites,
born in Bethlehē, wel in marrying Moabitish
womē? For God had made a law,
that such marriages shuld not be made.
NVMB. 25. chap. The women of Amm
                        •
                     n
did entise the Israelites to fornication
and Idolatrie, and of this it arose,
that they ought not to marry or make a
league with the Ammonites or Moabites.
EXODVS 23. So it is not lawfull
for the Iewes to marry with any other
Infidels, for the same danger. EXOD. 34.
least thou shouldest take of their daughters
to thy sonnes, & they should commit
fornication after their Gods: and also
entise thy sonnes to commit fornication
after their Gods. Idolatrie (that I
may note it by the way) is euery where
in the scripture figured out by whoredome.
For God doth espouse to hym,
as a wife, not onely his whole Church,
but euery member of the same. And
therefore they ought onely to depend

vpon him: but if they doe allowe other
Gods and forsake him, they commit adulterie.
This Metaphore doth expresse
notably the disposition of Idolaters. For
adulteresses and adulterers, doe thinke
night and day of their filthy loues: neglecting
the care of houshold affaires, and
spending their goods vpon adulteresses
and adulterers: They doe excuse the vices
of adulteresses and adulterers: they
cannot be brought from the loue one
of another, they canne abide no warning.
                  DEVTER. 7. Thou shalt not ioyne in
affinitie with them (the seuen nations
spoken of before) giue not thy daughter
vnto his sonne, nor take his daughter
vnto thy sonne. For she will cause thy
sonne to turne away from me, and to
serue other Gods: then will the wrathe
of the Lord waxe hote against you and
destroy you sodenly. IOSHVA doth repeate
the same in the 23. chap. in those
great assemblies, which he called a little
before his death: so likewise in the 3.
chap. of the IVDGES, and 1. booke of the

KINGES the 11. chap. And that those
lawes, are not to be vnderstood onely of
those seuen nations spoken of before:
but of other also, it is vnderstoode of
the generall reason, whiche is ioyned
to the lawe: for hee saith it will come to
passe, that they will be called back from
the embracing of the true GOD: the
which daunger they doe runne into,
which doe marrie Idolaters. EZRA in the
9. and 10. Chap. and also NEHEMIAH in
the 13. chap. are angrie with them because
they did breake the law of GOD,
who did marrie the women of Moab
and Ammon. The like is read in the 2.
chap. of ZEPHANIAH. Neither is there
want of examples, which doe shew, how
vnprosperous those vnequall marriages
are. SALOMON married many straunge
women against the kingly law wrote in
DEVTER. 17. amongest whom, the scripture
maketh mention of the Ammonites
and the Moabites. 1. booke of the
KINGES the 11. chap. to whom he graūted,
that they shuld build them temples
to their Gods, neither is it to be doubted,

but that he had many probable reasons
for the defence of his deedes: but
hee threwe both himselfe and his into
great daungers. Hee had REHOBOAM of
his wife which was a Moabitish woman,
who was a most wicked man, and a great
cause of the deuision of the kingdome.
IEHOSAPHAT ioyned affinitie with the
wicked familie of ACHAB: For hee gaue
ATHALIA the daughter of ACHAB for
wife to his sonne IORAM: the whiche
without doubt he seemed to himselfe &
others to haue done of a wise forecast,
who had perswaded themselues that by
this meanes that kingdom whiche was
cut and deuided, might be made whole:
but there wanted but little, but that the
whole familie of Iehosaphat was almost
ouerthrowne by this marriage. 2. Chronicles,
21. chap. It is said that IORAM the
sonne of IEHOSAPHAT liued no otherwise
then AHAB did, the cause is shewed
because he married AHABS daughter:
wicked women doe not onely entise
theyr husbandes to Idolatrie, but they
instill the same into their children with

their milke. But these thinges are not so
to be taken, as if it were not lawfull by
anie meanes for the Israelites to marrie
straungers, though they had bene conuerted
to the truth. For there is a lawe
extant in the 21. chap. of DEVTER. that
a woman taken captiue might vpon certaine
conditions be married with an
Hebrue. SALMA who is also called SALMON,
a Prince of the tribe of Iuda, married
RAHAB a Cananite. BOAZ married
this RVTH, which women are placed in
the genealogie of Christ, MATTH. 1.
DAVID married MAACHAM the daughter
of the King of GESVR. Neyther is
it to be thought, that those marriages
were vnlawfull.
                  That we may come nearer to the matter,
whether did these two brethren wel
or no, in marrying wiues of the Moabites,
there can be no certainty said of it.
They who say that they did euil, do vrge
this, that the Scripture sayth, they did
take to themselues wiues of the Moabites,
saying that theyr Mother dyd
not geue those wiues to them: but

it may bee as easily aunswered that they
tooke their wiues with the consent of
their mother. Next that they had no
children of them, which was had in reproche
amongst the Israelites: and God
doth threaten barrennes to them which
do breake the law of marriage. MALAC.
2. chap. also for that they died a sodain
death, which is numbred amongest the
punishments of sinners. But these arguments
are weake, I will rather hold with
them, which say, that they sinned in
that, that they tooke them wiues of the
Moabites, not yet conuerted to the true
faith and worshippe of the onely God.
For I do gather that although ORPAH
was daily in companye with the faithfull,
yet shee was not turned to the true
fayth, then that shee returned to her
countrie Gods. Also RVTH was not
fully conuerted to the true religion, I
gather of that, that LIRA sayth in the
last chapter of this booke: that NAOMI
doth perswade her to return also: which
she would not haue done, if she had bin
conuerted before, because shee would

not perswade her to returne, from the
fayth and worshippe of the onely true
God: but of this we will speake at other
tymes. But God would not haue them
that they should marrie with the Moabites
and Ammonites, not onely because
they were Idolaters, but also for
other causes, set downe in EXOD. 23
Chap. But NAOMIE doth confesse afterward,
that both these, did shew their
mariage fayth to their husbands. Those
two sonnes ought to haue returned into
their country & married wiues there:
For they were not ignorant that by the
law the Israelites were forbidden marriage
with straungers, and this lawe was
repeated oftener thē once. But it is most
daunger when the Israelitishe virgins
do marry the Moabites, and other strangers.
Also in the new testament, marriages
with Idolaters are disalowed of. 2.
COR. 6. chap. PAVLE sayth, thou must
not drawe the yoke with vnbeleeuers,
which doth chiefly belong to marriage.
For this word Wedlocke is taken amongst
the Latines from a yoke: for that maried

folkes are as if it were bound vnder one
yoke. But though thou doest vnderstand
these wordes of PAVLE generally, that
we must not keepe companie with vnbeleeuers:
yet hereof it may be inferred
that muche rather wee must not marrie
with them. 1. COR. 7. chap. when the
Apostle saith, that the faithfull must not
forsake the vnfaithfull wife (hee doth
speake of marriage contracted) and not
to be contracted. Therefore wee must
take heede, least we marry with the wicked,
for wealth, for power, or for other
temporall profites. Yet at least some regard
ought to be had of these Children,
which comming of vnequall matrimony,
are commonly badly brought vp: In
GEN. 6. chap. the sonnes of the holy Fathers
did marry wiues of the daughters
of CAIN, because they were bewtifull,
and of them they had Giantes, that is
despisers and contemners of religion.
Superstitious mothers do corrupt their
children with false opinions, which they
do hold obstinately, and that they may
doe very easily, sith they are dayly conuersant

with them, and they doe refuse
no labor that they may do these things.
IVDG. 3. chap. there is an other example
of the Israelites which did marry Idolaters.
And there may manie newe examples
be brought of them, who this way
haue cast both themselues and theyr
children into great daunger of wealth,
estimation, and the soule. Therefore let
the parentes being mindefull of these
daungers, beware least they giue theyr
sonnes to wicked women, much lesse to
giue their daughters to wicked husbandes,
in which there is greatest daunger:
let not children choose them suche
wiues, thier parents being against them.
Although many say that they can turne
their wiues to the truth, yet they know
that they are not wiser then SALOMON:
who did hope (without doubt) that he
could do the same, but by the flatteries,
of women he forsooke God, and so forward.
                  Of that that it is sayd that ELIMELECH
died, and both his sonnes, wee
must call to mind that all men must die.

HEB. 9. this is called the way of all flesh
in the scriptures, in which they may not
linger at their pleasure. As many as were
before vs are dead. In the booke of GENESIS
the 5. chap. wherein those fathers
which liued long, are numbred,
who florished before the floud, & of euery
of them it is said, they re dead. All other
daungers may be auoyded by some
meanes, but the daunger of death cannot
be shunned. For he must die whom
order doth require, whether he will or
no: if that another woulde dye in his
place, that would not be graūted. Euerie
body doth depart sooner for the moste
part then they thinke them selues. Not
onely old men but also young men doe
sometime dye sodenly. Who woulde
thinke that NAOMI should haue out liued
her sonnes? wee knowe not when,
where, or how we shall dye.
                  These thinges ought to stirre vs vp,
the fatall hower being at hand: for who
will not willingly die, hauing so many
companions in this iourney? who is so
bold to aske of God that he might liue

alone? If thy friendes dye, thou shouldest
thinke that they goe before thee: &
that thou shalt followe by and by. For
there are farre better comfortes in the
scriptures, but these are not to be despised.
If thou art troubled with diuers &
greeuous afflictiōs, thou shouldest think
that thou shalt dye, and that shortly: do
not therefore lay thy hand vppon thy
self, but wait for it patiently. Next when
we heare that we must looke for death,
let vs furnish our selues with necessarie
thinges, as men doe when they are going
a iourney, wee must beware of wickednes,
we must followe after godlines
and innocencie of life. They are to be
reprooued whiche are troubled when
they heare any mention of death. For
who will hope to haue helpe in war of
him who doth feare a sheathed sword
in peace? daunger is not ouercome by
despising.
                  And sith NAOMI being compassed
with many euils, did not despaire: wee
also being cast of God into greeuous
troubles and miseries, let vs not dispaire

or accuse him. A woman for this onely
canse or name that shee is a widdow, is
miserable. For the husband in the scripture
is called the head of his wife: for
the body without the head is not a man
but a stocke. Widowes are often times
despised of theyr friends: this euill is
somewhat mitigated, if their husbandes
do leaue behinde them sonnes, to bee a
comfort and helpe, to their mother ae
widdow: But the death of her sonnes
followed the death of her husband ELIMELECH:
so that shee seemed wholy
to be destitute of mans ayde. To these
was added pouerty, for the goods that
she had, were spent by little and little in
iourneis and other causes, which are not
knowne to vs. For what is more despised
than a poore widow? Adde to these
that she was now olde, and such cannot
well nourishe themselues, because they
are froward, and subiect to many diseases.
And old age is a disease by it self.
Olde women as the common people
say, are vnworthy of life, and they are
mocked with many reproches.
                  
                     
To this heape of troubles is added
that they were straungers amongest the
Moabites a nation noysome, cruell to
Israelites and superstitious. If her husband
and children had died in theyr
countrey, she had her kinsmen and men
of affinitie to comfort her: if she had
bene a straunger amongest people of
of her own nation, it would haue bene
greeuous, how muche more amongest
these? But if as some thinke she went into
the land of Moab against the word of
God, she felt then the bites and stinges
of conscience, she remembred that those
troubles befel to her for her own sinne:
yet for all these heapes of troubles,
NAOMI did not dispaire, for shee knewe
that this is the lotte of the sainctes in
this world, that they are exercised with
many and great afflictions.
                  We must thinke in great afflictions
that they are not sent vs by chaunce, but
of God a moste mercifull father to ou
                        •
                     
profite, and also that hee will mittigate
those troubles and take them away by
and by if it be for our profite: we must

thinke what wee haue deserued by our
sinnes: for God is wont to cast his own
children oftentimes into great troubles,
that hee may make them reioyce the
more afterwardes. Furthermore others
haue also their burthens. Let vs not say
that neuerman was so oppressed with so
many troubles: for as PAVLE sayth wee
haue not withstoode as yet to bloud.
God doth tame vs with great troubles,
that wee may seeke for eternall life, in
which we shall be freed from all trobles.
There are also other endes of troubles
which God doth send. Sathan doth endeuoure
to perswade vs in troubles that
God doth hate vs, and therefore that it
is needefull that wee prouide for our
selues, but we must patiently looke for
helpe from God, who also in his good
time did mercifully at the length deliuer
out of great troubles.
               
               
                  The 4. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        6 Then she arose with her daughters in lawe
and returned from the countrey of Moab. For
she had heard say in the countrey of Moab
                           
that the Lorde had visited his people, and
geuen them bread.
                        7 Wherfore she departed out of the place where
she was and her two daughters in law with her,
and they went on their way to return vnto the
land of Iudah.
                        
                        8 Then Naomie sayd vnto her two daughters
in law, goe returne eche of you vnto her own
mothers house: the Lord shew fauour vnto you
as ye haue done with the dead and with me.
                        9 The Lord graunt you, that you may finds
rest, either of you in the house of her husband.
And when she kissed them, they lift up theyr
voyce and wept.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOW hee entreateth of the return
of NAOMIE into her coū
                     try.
In the first place is shewed
how as soon as she heard that
the Lorde hadde giuen plentie to the
Israelites, she presently betooke her selfe
to her iourny, that she might return into
her countrey. Both her daughters in
lawe kept her companie and followed
her a little way as it seemed of no other
purpose then to leaue their owne countrie,
and to goe with her into the land of
Moab.
                  
                     
We doe learne out of this place from
whence aboundance of thinges doe
come. For the scripture saith, God visited
(which worde is taken both in the
good part and euill) his people and gaue
them bread: that is, fruit, corne, and other
thinges necessary for the sustenance
of life. All which amongest the Hebrues
is called bread, as also in that petition,
Giue vs this day our dayly bread:: GOD
therefore doth giue vs all things necessarie.
But as God in his mercy doth giue
vs aboundance: so of his iustice doth he
giue vs scarcetie: He worketh by second
causes, yet hee is not bound to them.
Therefore let vs pray that hee deale not
with vs according to our desertes, but
according to his great mercie.
                  But here is a notable example to be
followed of NAOMIE. For she by and
by assoone as the famine ceased, went
out of the idolatrous nation to the people
of God, as if it were to a hauē: so let
vs also as often as occasiō is offred flie to
that place, where we may serue God
with a pure conscience, let vs embrace

him with both handes especially if the
word of God be preached publikely in
our owne countrey. DAVID in bannishment
did first complaine of this, that hee
could not be present in the holy assemblies,
and as the Hart doth earnestly desire
the riuers of waters, after that he is
chased of the hunters, so his soule thirsted
after the Lord. 2. SAMVEL. 2 chap.
DAVID hearing that Saule was dead, by
and by he consulted with the Lorde, if
he should goe vnto ZICLAG into some
Citie of the tribe of IVDAH esteeming
nothing more then to returne home
with speede, hee being commanded of
God without delay went with his wife
and fellow souldiers to Hebron. If wee
liue in those places, where religion is
freely exercised wee can scarse containe
our selues in our callinges, what then
will become of vs, there where no mention
is made of the word of God, and so
many wicked examples are dayly set before
our eyes? Wherefore if thou fallest
by some necessity amongst wicked men,
assoone as thou canst commodiously,

chaung thy place: For there is a greater
care to be had of our eternal safetye thē
of all other thinges. Those Israelites are
euill spoken of, and also deseruedly,
which did not accept the allowance of
CIRVS, and would not return into their
countrie, but rather die in Babilon, than
leaue their nestes.
                  It is said in the 18. APOCA. allegoricallie,
that wee must leaue Babilon and
Moab, that is idolatrie and wickednes.
                  NAOMIE doth exhort her daughters
in law, that ech of them should go home
to their mothers house, she doth call it
their mothers house not because theyr
fathers were dead, for afterwardes in the
3. chap. BOAZ doth prayse RVTH because
she did leaue her father and mother
and came into the land of Israell:
but because children and especiallie
daughters are most conuersant with the
mothers and moste familiar with them.
GENESIS. 24. REBECCA doth call it the
house of her mother and not of her father.
Of what purpose she did perswade
them not to come into the land of Iudah

we will speake in place conuenient.
                  She doth pray for their prosperitie,
first that God would blesse them: next
that God would be mercifull vnto thē,
as they were to the dead and her. The
worde chaes
                           •
                        d signifieth godlines, mercifulnes,
benignitie, and bountifulnes, not
after a certaine maner but whiche doth
proceede from an ardent affection, that
speech is oftentimes found in the scriptures
& this word EMETH is added, that
is, truth or fayth. GEN. 24. ABRAHAMES
seruaunt saith if ye now consult to deale
mercifully with my maister, shew it that
is if ye will doe him a good turne and
deserue well of him, giue your daughter
to wife for his sonne. 1. SAM. 15. It is sayd
of the Cenites, that they did shew mercy
to all the children of Israell when
they came out of Aegipt, that is that they
gaue them benefites: therefore they
were preserued when the Amalekites
were destroyed.
                  2. SAM. 3. chap. ABNER saith to ISHBOSHETH
I haue dealt mercifully with thy
house, that is, I haue bestowed benefites

vpon it. chap. 10. DAVID said I wil deale
mercifully with HANON the sonne of
NOHAS as his father dealt mercifully
with me, sending Embassadours who
shoulde comfort him after his fathers
death. And because he had receaued benefites
of them, his will was to giue
them thankes. &c.
                  What did these widowes? they did
loue theyr husbandes when they were
aliue, and they did serue them withall
kinde of honest dueties so farre as it became
honest wiues, they did speake honourably
of the dead, and they did so
lead theyr liues that the dead shoulde
not be euill spoken of for theyr causes.
Furthermore for their husbandes fakes
they did helpe theyr mother in-law, being
left alone, so they did shew mercy to
the dead. But no man ought to thinke
that of any preposterous zeale, they did
offer I know not what sacrifices, or mū
                     ble
vpp some prayers for them whiche
were departed. For without doubt
RVTH knew that those soules which are
departed in the faith of the Messias are in

rest. &c. The Masse Priestes doe exhort
men that they shew mercy to the dead,
that is, hier Masses to be said for the forgiuenesse
of sinnes, and that they should
prouide to celebrate the seuenth daies
the moneths daies and yeare daies. &c.
that their soules might be freed out of
purgatory. But sith that God hath appointed
so many kindes of sacrifices yet
(as PETER MARTER obserueth) it is not
read that hee did appoynt any at all for
them that are tormented in purgatorie,
which he would haue done if our soules
shuld suffer any torments in purgatory.
It is euident by the holy scriptures that
there are onely two places for soules to
be in, namely a place of rest and a place
of torments, the third place which is called
purgatory is inuented of man. If any
man wil do good to the dead, let him
bestow it on the widdow and his Children
and friendes: also let him declare
the noble deeds done by the dead man,
neither let him do this, as at the request
of the man when he was aliue. &c.
                  The other thing is that NAOMI doth

pray for her daughters in law, that they
may each of them find rest in their husbandes
house, that is, she doth wish for
their happy estates and peaceable marryages,
she prayeth for good husbandes
and tractable with whom they may lead
their liues prosperously without pouerty
(which is a common burthen of marriage)
and without stroakes and blowes.
Afterwards in the 3. Cap: NAOMI said
to RVTH, I do seeke thee rest, that thou
mayest bee well, that is, I doe seeke
that thou mayest haue a good husband.
She did not think that marriage did lack
all troubles. For marriage hath her troubles
as diuers diseases, troublesome childbyrthes,
faults, burialles, and other heauie
lottes of children and many more of
this kinde, but God as NAOMI knew
will be present at godly matches & mitigate
their troubles. But it is manyfest
that such husbandes as NAOMIE wisheth
for her daughters in law are giuen of
God. Let not young men, nor virgins
enquire by superstitious oracles what
wiues or husbandes they shall haue, but

let them rather praye to God that hee
would prosper them in that matter and
let them depend vpon his prouidence.
We gather of this wish or praier of NAOMIE,
that she beleeued that God had
a care of mortall thinges, and that hee
doth reward good deeds with rewardes
and punisheth euill deeds with punishmentes.
                  Next we do learne what things to desire
and praye for, for others and especially
for them which haue done vs good,
namely all those thinges which pertaine
to the leading of our life in godlynes.
The Apostles also do beginne their Epistles
with prayers for grace and peace
from God. The Satiricall Poet doth
somewhere reproue the foolish desires
of those parents which do wish riches,
and beautie for their childrē, and other
such like things: not those things which
are of great importaunce. Truly externall
goodes without the goodes of the
minde do profite vs little. Furthermore
they do make bad prouision both for
them selues & their children which do

cursse them as we do see them commonly
doe. If thou doest blesse them, yet
they are almost without any good, what
then will become of them whome thou
doest cursse? Furthermore see what wee
are to looke for of them which do deale
well and rightly with others, loue, fayth
and other vertues are rewarded of God.
If thou doest nourish thy parents when
they are old, and do to them all the dueties
of a sonne thou shalt find the like to
be done for thee of thy sons, but if thou
doest trouble them, thou shalt looke for
the same of thy sonnes towardes thee,
and whether thou wilt or no thou wilt
say or at least think I am wel dealt with,
for that I haue dealt wickedly with my
parents, the same will bee sayd of others
towards whom we haue not bene mercyfull.
                  Also the office of married people is
heere to be obserued. NAOMIE doth
praise her daughters in law because they
shewed al the duties of humanity to her
sonnes, let other women performe the
same towardes their husbandes if they

gouerne themselues wel they may haue
good husbandes and tractable for the
most part: but if otherwise, they procure
to themselues & others, great troubles:
she doth wishe them rest, that is peaceable
marriage. For maried people ought
not to braule and fight amongst themselues
but liue peaceably, for peace and
concord is especially praysed in matrymony.
Many things are read of the offices
of maryed folkes in the epistles of
S. PAVLE and PETER which is not
needfull to be repeated in this place.
                  NAOMIE kissed her daughters in law
they shed teares plentifully which shalbe
spoken afterward in place conuenyent:
NAOMIE afterwardes in this book
did call her daughters in law, daughters,
who did loue her better then their coū
                     trye,
their parents and kinsemen. Good
Lorde how seldome at this day do mothers
in law and daughters in law agree?
for braules do oft arise amongest them
for light causes, many do wish their mothers
in law to be at the furthest side of
Garamantes. &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 5. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        10 And they sayd vnto her, surely we will return
with thee vnto the people.
                        11 But Naomie said, turne againe my daughters:
for what cause will ye go with me, are there
any mo sonnes in my wombe, that they may be
your husbandes?
                        12 Turne agayne my daughters, go your way: for
I am too old to haue an husbād. If I should say
I haue hope, & if I had an husband this night
yea if I had borne sonnes:
                        13 Would ye tarie for them till they were of age?
would ye be deferred for them from taking of
husbandes? nay my daughters, for it greeueth
me much for your sakes, that the hande of the
Lord is gone out against me.
                     
                  
                  
                     WHen NAOMI wenton her
iorney towards her country,
both her daughters in law accompanied
her a little waye
not only for curtesie, but they purposed
to accompanye her into the land of Iudah.
But she disswaded them from their
purpose, and bid them returne again to
their houses, shewing these causes, for
shee saith, shee is now farther striken in
age then to determine to marry againe

and to haue sonnes who according to
the law of Mosis may marry them and
rayse vp seede to their brothers. NAOMI
had not offended if she had bin married
to another though she wer old. For Matrimonie
is not onely instituted for the
auoyding of filthy lustes, and procreation
of Children, but also for the helpe
and co
                        ••
                     ort of ech other. For God sayd
it is 
                        〈◊〉
                      good for man to be alone, let
vs 
                        〈◊〉
                      therefore a help, &c. Manie
widowes d
                        •
                     e marry other husbandes
that they may 
                        〈◊〉
                      their liuing more easily.
But if she being striken in age should
marrie anie young man, she might haue
bene accused of wantonnes and lightnes.
An olde widowe ought rather to
thinke of another life, than of the delightes
of this life and newe marriages,
and prepare themselues for heauen, and
they may do that better, if they remaine
sole, then if they were married.
                  Old folkes may learne by this exāple
to be mindefull of theyr olde age, and
forsake theyr nuttes, as it is in the Prouerbes.
Next she saith if shee should be

fit for marriage, and determine to marry
and haue by and by a sonne by him, yet
it were not good for them to tarry vntil
they should come to age, and in the
meane season neglect the occasions of
marrying with others, who would marry
thē. Sometimes maydens doe wayt
vntill those whome they will marrie do
come to age, which is not without danger,
as also that boyes and wenches are
ioyned together by their parentes in
some countries. Afterwards when they
be old, either they do not agree, or their
willes are easily changed. THAMAR the
daughter in law of IVDAH did wayt vntill
SELAH IVDAHS third sonne came to
age that he might raise vp seed to hys ii.
brothers which departed without sons.
GEN. 38. Shee doth adde that she is moued,
and very much greeued for theyr
troubles, and that her sorrowe did increase.
Or she would say this, it shoulde
greeue me more than you, if for my sake
you shoulde come into any hard case.
Because the hand of the Lorde is gone
out against me: that is, I am pressed of

him with pouertie and other troubles,
what will ye do with me, sith that I cannot
prouide for your profite. She is not
so minded as they, who when they are
oppressed with euill, doe wish all men to
be oppressed with the same troubles: &
do aduise for their own cōmoditie by other
mens troubles. Sometime manie
men can prouide for their daughters &
children good marriages, but they will
not because they shall lacke their seruice
and be at great charges. I wil speake nothing
of them who doe driue their children
to filthines, that they may in the
meane season pamper their paunches.
                  NAOMI acknowledged that she fell
into those daungers not by chance, but
she confessed that the hand of the Lord
was stretched out against her, for no afflictions
fall out to the godly, except
God decreed to exercise them with the
same, the consideration of the whiche
doth much auaile, to perswade to beare
all thinges patiently. But what shee preuailed
by this her speach we will shewe
hereafter.
                  
                     
But thou doest aske? wherefore shee
did driue backe both her daughters in
law, offering their companie so willingly?
Was it not profitable, that they
shoulde be brought from idolatrie to
true Religion: as if it were to be deliuered
out of burning fire? I aunswere that
NAOMIE earnestly desired her two
daughters to haue bin conuerted to the
worship of the true God, but she would
by her disswation trie their faith, peraduenture
she did sufficiently know theyr
mindes. For we may not trust their first
motions, especially being yong womē,
who will easely chaung their mindes &
yeeld some times to light temptations.
The wise woman feared least the matter
peraduenture should otherwise fall
out in a straunge land, then they immagined,
and they then should by and by
fall back to Idolatry: how often do wee
see men imbracing the Gospell, when
they doe not obtayne that which they
dreamed of, slide into errors to the great
offence of others? For it had bene better
for those Apostaties, as it is in the 2.

PETER 2. neuer to haue knowne the
truth, then when they know it to fall away
from that holy commaundement
which was giuen to thē &c. Christ him
selfe in the 14. chap of LVKE doth commaunde
them who will follow him, to
thinke what remaineth for them by two
similitudes. Also in the 9. chapter of
LVKE he sayth after the hand is laid to
the plowe, we must not looke backe to
thinges which are behind vs, and in the
17. chap. hee putteth vs in minde of
LOTS wife which was turned into a piller
of salt, they doe not well who will
driue others to Christian religion by
deuises or vayne policies. For if afterwardes
they vnderstand the matter to
be otherwise then they heard, they will
prosecute true religion with deadly hatred:
we must deale with them with such
arguments as are drawn out of the word
of God. How much then doe they offend,
who doe driue men to the profession
of false religion with promises, deceites,
threatninges and tormentes? 23.
MATT. Woe saith he be vnto you scribes

and Pharisies, for ye compasse sea and
land to make one of your profession,
and when he is made, ye make him two
fold more the childe of hel than you be.
Because they who were of their sect,
were instructed by thē to this, that they
shuld be cruell enemies to Christ. There
are some at this day who doe study to
bring the Iewes to their religion &, cast
thē into greater dangers, teaching thē against
the lawe prescribed to them of
God to worship Idols and beleeue in a
MESSIAS made of bread, &c. Also no
man is to be forced to those things from
whence he cannot returne. A young
man is not to be driuen vnwillingly to
take a wife, nor a Virgine to take a husband,
for consent is required in marriages.
Much lesse are they to be driuen to
liue alwayes sole, with entisementes, or
by craft, or by force or threatninges. If
NAOMIE should haue had sonnes, yet
shee woulde not haue her daughters in
law to tarry till they were men, for the
danger of the same: but now she wished
them good marriages, much lesse shee

would that they should vowe to liue alwaies
widdowes, being in their flower
of youth. In the counsell that was holden
at Cesaraugusta it is recorded
that Virgines were not to be accepted
if they hadde vowed to GOD, except it
could be prooued that they were 40.
yeeres old, &c. Afterwardes they were
taken in at 30. yeeres of age, all religion
being ouerthrowne, and at last all were
taken how young soeuer they were no
exception. The Apostle, 1. TIMOTHIE
5. chap. doth commaund widowes not
to be taken to the seruice of the poore
vntill they be 60. yeeres old, and young
widowes to marry and to haue children
and be house-keepers &c. At this day
snares are laid for children of tender
age. For many whiche were more fit for
marriage are thrust vnwillingly into
Monasteries, and of this are many monsterous
wickednesses begotten. It is not
onely a sinne in that, that simple young
ones are put in the Monasteries, but
this whole kinde of life as it is this day
in vse, is against the holy Scriptures.

Though men may see and vnderstand
this, yet doe they defend their inuentions
obstinately.
                  But if anie will contend that NAOMI
did therefore perswade them to returne
into theyr countrie, that they might
liue better amongest their acquaintance
than amongest straungers, not that shee
would trie their mindes. We aunswere
that she, if the matter was so, did sinne
no lesse than they which perswade thē,
which are willing to forsake their country
at this day, where they cannot worship
Christ as they desire, and exhort
them that they shoulde not doe so, but
beleeue in the heart what they list, it is
no matter what they doe beleue, so that
they beware of grosse crimes and obey
the Magistrates, and waite for better
times, &c. For Christ doth require a
publicke confession of them that beleue
in him. MATT. 10. chap. Wee ought to
further the kingdome of heauen & look
to winne others: yet wee must doe it
wisely and not rashly, and euery man
ought especially to apply, to instruct

theyr children and houshold rightly in
true Religion.
               
               
                  The 6. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        14 Then they lift vp their voyce and wept again,
& Orpah kissed her mother in law, but Ruth
abode still with her.
                        15 And Maomi said, behold thy sister in law is
gone back vnto her people and vnto her Gods:
returne thou after thy sister in law.
                     
                  
                  
                     NOwe afterwardes, here is declared,
what NAOMIE preuailed
by her speeche with her
daughters in lawe, or rather
what befell after she commanded them
to returne home. ORPAH returned to
her mothers house, but RVTH taryed
with her mother in law. Let vs heare
what maye bee gathered out of these
wordes for our edification. After NAOMIE
had exhorted them both, with many
reasons to returne home, they wept
agayne very much, which was a signe of
great sorrow which they tooke of thys,
that they were to part asunder. For sorrow
bringeth forth tears: as bloud springeth

out of the body if it be wounded:
so if the soule be wounded teares break
forth. Wherefore some do call teares
the bloud of the soule. As they offended
not in weeping, so neyther do they
at this day, which shed teares when they
are drawn from their good friends. The
Stoyckes say, that it becommeth not a
man of courage to weepe, for that it is a
signe of a weak & effeminate mind. But
the holy scriptures teach otherwise, for
in them there are many examples not
onely of women: but of most valiaunt
men who by teares haue testified theyr
sorrow, and are not yet accounted to
haue offended therein. IOSEPH wept
foure tymes when his brethren came to
him into Aegypt to buye corne. DAVID
who ouercame, and slew a Lyon, a Bear
& Gyants, when ZIGLAG was destroyed
he wept so much that his strength failed
him: his souldiours also did the like.
1. SAM. 30. & 2. SAM. 15. DAVID descending
the mount of Oliues wept. PETER
also wept aboundantly: PAVLE and all
they whome he had called to Mille
                        •
                     um

wept. ACT. 20. Our sauiour Christ himselfe
wept often, therefore that Stoicall
sencelesnesse is not approued of God.
Yet as in other thinges so also in weepeing
their must be kept a meane, neyther
must we weepe for euery cause. For all
kinde of weeping cannot bee excused.
SENECA although he was a Stoick himselfe,
yet hee sayth wee may weepe but
not howle out. But this makes greatlye
to our comfort, that in this little booke
it is written down twise, that these pore
women wept aboundantly, for heereby
we do gather, that God regardeth the
teares euen of them that be very poore.
DAVID in the PSAL. 56. 8. declareth
that God putteth their teares, and so the
teares of the godly into his bottle, and
and noteth them in hys regester. Good
Lorde how fewe daughters in lawe are
there at this day, who if theyr mothers
in law, should departe from them into
other countries or els out of this lyfe,
would shed teares for them, or if they do
shedd any they may bee called Crocadiles
teares:
                  
                     
ORPAH kissed her mother in law: kissing
was commonly vsed in Palestyne
and all Syria, and as at this day other nations
also do, so they entertained their
friendes and gesse, at their comming,
and bad them farewell with a kisse: in
like maner they saluted them whome
they met with a kisse. Christ in LVKE. 7.
reprooueth SIMON the Pharasie because
he intertained him not with a kisse. ORPAH
bidding her mother in-law farewel
kissed her. A kisse is a token of friendship,
and kindnes, and also of reuerence,
faith and obedience. PLVTARCH in the
life of CATO VTICENSIS writeth, that
when he departed out of his prouince,
the souldiers reuerently kissed his hand,
the which kinde of honour was at that
time onely giuen to Captaines or Emperours,
and that to very fewe of them.
POMPEIVS LETVS in his compendium
of the Romaine histories writeth thus,
The Emperours first reached out theyr
handes for theyr nobles to kisse, after
with their own hands they lift them vp
to kisse their mouthes: DIOCLETIANVS

by a decree appointed that all mē without
difference of degree shoulde fall
downe and kisse his feete, the which he
set foorth magnifically, adorning his
shooes, with gold, pearles and stones,
the whiche they doe record was done
before by C. CALIGVLA, &c. this sayth
he. Afterwardes the Romaine bishops
also, like vnto those tyrauntes whiche
sought to haue done vnto themselues
the honours due to God, offered to others
their feete to be kissed: the which
SIBILLA CVMANA foretold in the
8. Sermon: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
that is, there
shall be a king with a hoare head,
or a helmet, hauing a name neere vnto
the sea or bridge, regarding the
world, bestowing his giftes with an euil
foot, for they must thinke that he doth
them great honour whome he alloweth
to kisse his feete. S. PAVLE, 1. COR. 16.
sayth salute you one another with an
holy kisse excluding the sinnes of vnchastitie
and hipocrisie, and he doth not

in these wordes prescribe a lawe that all
nations shoulde receaue this custome
of kissing one another. 2. SAM. 20. IOAB
kissing AMASA slewe him. IVDAS with
a kisse betrayed the sonne of God. This
is too too common at this day that men
whome they kisse, that is whome they
flatter before their face, they do secretly
backbite. It is to be supposed that this
ORPAH kissed her mother in law of a
sincere mind, not as that sonne of whom
it is in the fable, who faining that hee
would kisse his mother when he was led
to execution, with his mouth bit off her
eare. It is said that shee returned to her
owne: If that shee had as it is very probable
some taste of true religion, shee is
a figure of them, whome the Lorde in
the Gospell, calleth 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      whiche
for a time professe the true faith, but do
afterwardes fall backe againe, eyther for
hope of prosperity or being discouraged
for feare of troubles. It is not sufficient
to lay some foundations of true religion
but it must be builded vp vntill that spirituall
building be perfected. It is not

inough to runne except we obtayne to
the goale. Who so perseuereth to the
end saith the Lord he shalbe saued and
not he that began well and goeth but a
little forward. LOTS wife is to vs an example,
who when she looked backe againe
was turned into a piller of Salt. If
this ORPAH had come into Iudea, it
doth not seem that she would haue perseuered.
But whether she perished in her
errors, or was afterwardes conuerted or
repented without the losse of the trueth
we know not: neither should there concerning
this or of others such like be anie
questions mooued which tend not
to edification.
                  RVTH tarried with her mother in law
and could not be drawn from her by any
perswations there is a like example.
IOH. 6. of Christes apostles, when many
fell away from him, he asked them whether
they would also go away: Therfore
SIMON PETER aunswered: to whome
shall we go Lord? Thou hast the word
of eternal life, and we beleeue and know
that thou art the Christ the sonne of the

lyuing God. We must pray to God that
he wil suffer vs neither by flattering perswations,
nor threatnings and terrors, to
be led away from true religion.
                  When ORPAH was departed, NAOMIE
agayne perswaded RVTH, that she
should also returne home, because her
sister was returned to her people & her
Gods. But what Gods did the Moabites
worship? besides others they had especially
BAALP
                        •
                     OR, as it is read. NVM. 25.
whōe some called PRIAPVS, as ISIDOR
and THEOPHELAT as Gradus de dijs gentium
witnesseth. Others call him SATVRNE, &
BAAL was the name of the God, & PIOR
of the mountaine or place where he
was worshiped. Or the idoll, PEOR was
so called because he was naked, for PAAR
signifieth to discouer, to make naked,
namely because that PRIAPVS, as the
author of a filthie verse sayth, had his secret
partes alwaies naked, and neuer couered
with anie garmentes.
                  The maner of the worship of this Idol
was so filthie, that in holy assemblies
it may not be spokē of for shame, wherby

we gather how far men fall away frō
God when the light of the truth is lost:
they also worshiped the God CHEMOS.
                  For it is sayd. 1. KINGS. 11. That SO.
LOMON built an alter to CHEMOSH the
abhomination of MOAB in the Mount
of Oliues. And that which is written in
IVD. 11. that CHEMOSH is the God of
the Ammonites, is not contrary to this
place, for it seemeth that both the nations
worshipped it. Who this CHA
                        •
                     
                     MOSH
was it is vncertaine. KAMAS signifieth
to hide, hereby some doe gather
that he was PLVTO the God of the hels,
or of thinges vnder the earth: GYRALDVS
seemeth to say that VENVS ASTART
was called CHEMOS, whiche in
the figure of a starre was worshipped of
the Sidonians and the Moabites. There
are some which will haue BAAL PEOR,
and CHEMOSH to haue bin one and the
same God, to whome I doe not assent
because it is certaine that the nations
worshipped manie Gods, some thinke
that CHEMOSH was that God of banquets
and drinkinges, who is called of

the Grecians, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , because that the
Greeke alludeth to the Hebrue worde.
The nations adioyning to them had also
their Gods or Idols. The Ammonites
had MELCHOM 4. KIN. 23. IER. 49.
which signifieth their king, peraduenture
hee was so called, because hee was
chiefe among manie Gods which 
                        〈◊〉
                     
worshipped for their defence. 
                        〈…〉
                     
11. The God of the Ammonites is called
MOLOCH, some thinke that hee was
Saturn
                        •
                      what if he and Molcome were
one? the Philistines had Astaroth, that
is Iuno or Venus. 1. SAM. 7. The Accaronites
had Belzebub, that is thei worshiped
the god of a flie. 4. KIN. This seemeth
to be the 
                        ••
                     me with that, which is called
of the Grecians 
                        〈◊〉
                     . PLINIE in his
29. Booke. 6. chap. ca
                        ••
                     eth it miodes, but
lib. 10. cap. 2. in the old edition he calleth
it achores. GREGORIVS NA
                        •
                     IANS: calleth
it ACARON. The God ACARON was
called so of ACARON a Citie of the
Philistines where hee was especially
worshipped. IVBITER also was called
Apo
                           ••
                        nios MVSCA
                        •
                     IVS, of driuing and

chasing away flies, for the multitude of
flies did great harme to the Phenetians,
therefore they sacrificed to that God &
prayed him to driue them away. The
Philistines also worshipped DAGON, of
whom there is mention made. IVD. 16. 1.
SAM. 5. The Hebrues say that he had the
vpper part of a man, and the nether part
of a fish as NEPTVNVS and SIRENE
                        •
                     
are paynted. Dag signifieth a fish: others
say the picture of a man set forth with a
womens face. The Grecians call him
derceto or derce. EVSEBIVS: lib. de praparatione
Euāgelica: sayth DAGO inuented
corne and the plow, and therefore IVPITER
was called arotrios amongest
the Phaenecians. This seemeth well to
agree with the Hebrue etimologie for
Dagan signifieth corne or wheat.
                  This was a great temptatiō to RVT▪
For no man will willingly forsake his
Countrey and friendes. Neither doth
piety perswade to do it, vnlesse waighty
and necessary matters doe enforce vs.
Our country doth allure vs to it, according
to that saying of OVID lib. 1. de ponts.
                     
                        
                        Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
                        Ducit, & immemores non sinit esse sui.
                     
                  
                  Next men are of this qualitie that
they can hardlye be drawne from their
countrie religion. God in I
                        •
                     REM. 2. cap
amplif
                        •
                     ing the sinne of his people being
fallen away, sayth if they should go thorow
the whole world, they should not
finde any nation, whiche will chaunge
their Gods with other Gods: yet, that
they haue chaunged his glorye with a
vayn thing, & with those which are not
treue Gods. All nations do straightly
keepe those Gods which they haue chosen.
Therfore it is a hard matter to turn
men from the worshippe of false Gods
to the worship of the true God. Wherefore
it had bene no maruel if RVTH had
worshipped straunge Gods, and refused
to imbrace a new religion. Furthermore
householde examples do much mooue
the mindes of men, for if they returne
to idolatrie whome we loue, especially
if they be great men and many, diuerse
men although they loue true religion

beginne to fall away. Therefore it had
bene no maruell if RVTH had returned
to hers, being shaken and weakened by
the perswations of their mother in law,
And it seemed that NAOMIE was not
of that minde to constrayne RVTH to
go backe, but to trie her fayth, and shee
had a care least it should bee sayd after
that shee was forced by her mother in
law to receaue the Israelitish religion.
                  In such like cases the minds of men
are to be confirmed by contrary examples
promises and threatninges drawne
out of the word of God. MAT. 10. sayth
the Lord: He that loueth father or mother
aboue me is not worthy of me, hee
that loueth sonne or daughter aboue
me is not worthy of me &c. So hee that
preferreth his countrey, his religion and
other thinges before Christ. Wee must
not looke what other men doe whether
they be many or fewe, but rather howe
well they doe it and what God doth require
of vs: and he is to be solicited with
dayly prayer, that he will confirme and
preserue vs by his spirit in true religion.
               
               
                  
                  The 7. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        16 And Ruth aunswered entreate me not to
leaue thee, nor to depart from thee, for whether
thou goest I will goe: and where thou dwellest
I will dwell: thy people shalbe my people and thy
God my God.
                        17 Where thou diest I will die, and there will I
be buried, the Lord doe so to me and more also,
if ought but death depart me and thee.
                        18 When she saw that she was steadfastly minded
to goe with her, she left speaking vnto her.
                     
                  
                  
                     RVTH coulde not be perswaded
by any meanes to leaue
her mother in law: but as hot
lime wherupon colde water
is poured, shee by disswasion becomes
more earnest and forward: and in many
wordes she declared that she would not
depart from her, but that she was ready
to suffer all estates with her, and that she
would embrace the Israelites religion,
and auoyd the superstition of the Gen
                     
                        ••
                     es:
as it appeareth by her wordes.
Entreat me not to leaue thee &c: or set
not against me nor trouble me with thy

disswasions, neither hinder me from going
with thee. Whether thou goest I wil
goe. I am ready to suffer all troubles
with thee: and because she had said ORPAH
was going to her countrey and her
Gods, she addeth thy people my people
(vnderstand is or shalbe) Thy God my
God. I will acknowledge no other God
nor other people but that God of Israel
whome thou doest worshippe and in
whome thou doest hope and beleeue:
neyther will I hereafter worshippe
BAAL PEOR or CHEMOS the Gods of
my nations, or of any other nations.
Where thou diest will I die, and there
will I be buried. This is the affection of
men that they woulde be buried in the
graues of them whome they loue dearlie,
and not be seperated from them
after they were dead. It it read. In
GENESIS. that ABRAHAM bought
ground of EPHRON the HITTITE wherin
there was a Caue whiche he conu
                        ••
                     
                     ted
to a buriall place for him and his:
first he was buried there, then ISAAKE,
then IACOB would not be buried in

Aegipt but bound IOSEPH by an othe,
that when he was dead hee would bury
him in the land of CANAAN in the Sepulcher
of his fathers. GEN. 47. 49. TO
                     
                        •
                     IAS
said vnto his sonne, I shall die, bury
me honourably, and honour thy mother,
and also bury her honourably by
me in my sepulcher.
                  MEZENTIVS although hee was a
wicked man yet in Virg: in the end of
the 10. Aeneid he entreateth Aeneas that
he might be buried in the sepulcher of
his sonne LANSVS, It is accounted as a
cursse to lacke the honor of buriall, and
not to be buried in the Sepulchers of
their fathers, contrariwise it is accounted
as a blessing to be buried honourably.
But true Religion being decayed,
superstitious men did thinke that pompous
burials profited the soules departed.
&c.
                  RVTH addeth an othe by the whiche
she confirmeth that shee will not leaue
her mother in-law. The Lord doe so to me and
more also, if ought but death depart mee and
thee. Shee doth not simplye sweare

but curseth her selfe if she keepe not her
promise. This kinde of swearing is often
times vsed in the scriptures.
                  The Lord doe so to me and more also.
But it is not expressed what euils they
do wish for themselues which vse those
words, or to what vengeance they yeeld
themselues if they falsifie their faith: For
the holy Ghost by these Aposiopeses
would teach vs, that we must deale warily
in swearing, and beware least that
our toong runne before our minde, for
here that saying ought especially to haue
place: Toong whether doest thou goe?
It is to be obserued that godly men oftentimes
vsed swearinges in the old and
newe Testament. Not in all causes but
onely in graue and waightie matters.
And the maner which they vsed is noted,
for all othes are not of one sorte.
This maner which RVTH vsed, sheweth
that all they should at length perish,
who prophane the name of God by violating
their othe, moreouer the sainctes
doe performe in deede, those thinges
which they promised by othe, as RVTH

also did. There are some who do enterpret
these words conditionally. The Lord
doe so to me: and so forward: if God giue
me power and abilitie as hee hath done
hitherto I will be constant: and so forward.
But the first sence, that it should
be the forme of an othe is more playne
and simple.
                  Here is a notable example in RVTH
propounded to vs, first her conuersion
to God, and confession of her faith, denying
her own nation and religion. She
doth confesse that she will ioyne her self
to the true God and his people. RAHAR
made the like confession In IOSVA. 2.
cap. for the Lord himselfe is your God
and so forward.
                  Next here is an example of loue to
God and our neighbour. Because without
doubt she had learned of her father
in law, of her mother in lawe, and husband,
and especially by the inspiration
of the holy Ghost: the God of Israell
to be the true God, and leauing BAAL
P
                        •
                     OR and other Gods, and Goddesses
of the nations, she hasteneth her selfe to

that land, where the true God is worshipped,
neyther doth shee suffer her
selfe to be hindered by any pleasures of
this life.
                  She might haue liued more pleasantly
amongest her friendes, and as it seemed
haue gotten her a husband more
easily. Yet she had rather (as it is sayd of
MOSES in the Epistle to the Hebrues)
to suffer trobles with the people of god,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sinne for
a season, esteeming the reproche of
Christ to be greater riches than the
treasures of MOAB: If she had bin without
fayth shee woulde haue returned
home to the Idolaters, for euery imagination
of a better marriage, of riches,
and such other commodities. She dyd
heare the word of God with profite, and
therefore she might be compared to the
tree well planted, and the house builded
on a rocke. MATT. 7. cap.
                  Here we haue also an example of loue
towardes our neighbour, hee is our
neighbour who wanteth our helpe, or
wealth or counsell. LVKE. 10. NAOMIE

being striken in age and care, did lacke
the helpe of others. Therefore RVTH
would not go away from her, who had
not receaued small giftes from her, and
though she also was destitute of necessary
thinges yet shee trusting in Gods
goodnes, would not forsake her mother
in law, whom shee esteemed as her own
mother. Good Lord how few are there
at this day, I say not daughters in-lawe
which will shew such friendship to their
mothers inlaw: but how fewe children
are there which will shew suche friendship
to their mothers inlaw or affection
to their parentes being olde? Many cannot
be perswaded by any reasons be
they neuer so great to be present, and to
serue their parents when they are diseased.
                  But when their parents are in good estate
they abhorre theyr company, if
they be somewhat seuere. They are very
rare who thinke that they cannot bestowe
so many benefites vpon their Parents
as they haue receiued from them:
yea they do oftentimes forsake them in

greatest daungers: and the cause of this
matter is, because they are destitute of
fayth and loue. In that that RVTH denied
her countrie religion, and embraced
the Israelites religion, the vocation of
the Gentiles is prefigured, who leauing
their superstitions, turned to the God of
ISRAEL.
                  At last NAOMIE seeing her daughter
in law fully purposed to go with her, she
would trouble her no more: but when
shee had sufficiently seene and tried her
constancy, shee willingly tooke her as a
companion of her iourney, she did wish
also the other to bee conuerted to true
religion. Without doubt shee reioyced
and did thanke God that he had prouided
her (being afflicted so many wayes)
so faithfull a daughter. For it should
haue bene a troblesome & a hard iourny
to her, to trauel so farre without a trusty
companion.
                  Shee doth teach vs by her example
that we must not be troblesome to thē,
who doe propound to themselues, to
do good things, we ought rather withstand

thē who do deuise wicked things,
that we may keep them back from their
purposes, and although they be verie
stubborne, yet we must at no hand giue
place vnto them.
                  Let men that are poore and afflicted gather
this comfort also, that God can stir
vp men to helpe and feede them. And
when they seeme moste forsaken, yet
let them not be driuen to desperation
by the enemy of mankinde.
               
               
                  The 8. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        19. So they went both vntill they came to Bethlehem
and when they were come to Bethlehem,
it was noysed of them through all the city, and
they sayd, is not this Naomie?
                        
                        20 And shee aunswered them, call me not Naomie,
but call mee Mara: for the almightie
hath geuen me much bitternes.
                        21 I went out full, and the Lord caused me to returne
emptie: why call yee mee Naomie seeing
the Lord hath humbled mee, and the allmightie
hath brough me vnto aduersitie.
                        22, So Naomie returned and Ruth the Moabitesse
her daughter in lawe with her, when she
came out of the coūtry of Moab: & they came
to Bethlehē in the beginning of barl
                              •
                           e haruest.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     IT is described in these fewe
wordes, how NAOMIE and
RVTH came out of the land
of Moab to Bethlehem, in the
land of Iudah, and what befell to them
and what time of the yeare they went
this iourney, which doth containe great
doctrine and comfort.
                  First, they say that both of them went
togither in their iourney, vntill they
came to Bethlehem. RVTH whiche was
the yonger, and therfore more light, did
not goe before her, being olde but wayted
on her, neither is it to be doubted
but that shee did lessen the griefe of her
mother in lawes iourney by pleasaunt
speches, & al other means that she could.
It is the duetie of young folkes when
they trauell with their elders to haue a
care of them, this phrase seemeth to declare
that they did not linger in theyr
iourney but went right to Bethlehem.
For it doth not become women to linger
in their way.
                  The whole Citie is mooued at their
comming. Him. in the coniugation Niphal

signifieth to make a tumult or a
noyse or a sound. 1. SAM. 4. Verse. 5. when
the arke was brought into the tentes, it
is said that the Israelites cried as though
the earth had shooke. The Septuagint
doe vse this word Cai echesen and it sounded,
as it is in this place also: 1. KINGS.
1. verse. 45. When the king was chosen
the Citie was in a tumult or was moued
with a noyse. MATT. 21. when Christ
went into Ierusalem the EVANGELIST
sayth that the Citie was moued. Also in
this place the Citie is moued that is:
                  They were astonied, they had diuers
speeches of the comming of the poore
women: they did flocke to see thē, as in
many Cities, they do sometimes behaue
themselues too too impudently, when
straungers come: they wonder at this
chaunge of thinges.
                  By this it appeareth that NAOMIE
was a woman of great renowne and ELIMELECH
her husband was a man of
some accompt. For at the comming of
poore men there is no great concourse
of people: They asked if this was NAOMIE?

that name signifieth plentifull
sweete and pleasaunt. The meaning is,
is not this that moste notable woman
which suffered so many trobles? or this
bewtiful woman? truely she aunswereth
not to her name. We haue bene Troians.
Good Lord how much is she changed!
For though some spake this of a
good minde, marueiling at so great a
chaunge, yet it is probable that some
laught her to scorne, because shee had
lost her beautie and her goods by seeking
for a better condition, according to
the maner of the common people. But
that doth greatly troble vs, when others
doe mocke vs, in our afflictions, and
doe not rather sorrowe with vs, we see
with such scoffes euen most valiant men
much troubled. By the way we doe also
learne that bewtie is a fraile thing which
perisheth by diseases, by olde age, by
euill vsage, and by many other meanes.
Therefore we must not haue too much
trust in beautie. There are excellent sentences
concerning this matter amongst
the Ethnickes.
                  
                     
Shee doth desire them to call her no
more NAOMIE but rather MARA, that is
they should call her bitter, sad and afflicted
because of the bitternes wherewith
God himselfe had touched her,
and that which shee had said in a worde
she afterwardes expresseth more fully: I
went out full, and the Lorde caused me
to returne emptie. I had a husband and
children and wealth, and nowe I am destitute
of all these, and therefore I doe
not aunswere to my name. My affaires
are no more in that estate wherein they
were when I was in flourishing age and
bewtie: God hath pressed and humbled
me with diuers troubles: therfore an other
name doth agree with my estate.
Wee learne by this, that godly men
wheresoeuer they be, whether at home
or abroad want not their crosses. When
NAOMIE returned into her country, she
was entertained with scoffes, no doubt.
But in the land of MOAB also, shee must
needes see & heare many things which
greatly greeued her mind. God doth
graunt a truce to his children for a time

but in the meane season he woulde they
should gather their wittes togither, and
prouide for the troubles to come. Wee
must not desire of God to liue without
a crosse, who doth chasten them whom
he doth loue. HEBRV. 12. 2. TIM. 3. all
that will liue godly must suffer persecutions.
ACTES 14. we must goe into the
kingdome of heauen through manie
troubles. Let vs not thinke then that it is
an argument that God is angry with vs,
when he doth afflict vs with diuers trobles.
Secondly here is to be seene how
NAOMIE gouerned her self, in that new
affliction and other trobles, wherewith
shee was greatly oppressed. She ouercame
all troubles with patience. She did
giue place to them that skorned her, so
that if it pleased them they might for
NAOMIE call her MARA. She spake nothing
impiously against god, or reprochfully
against man: the old woman might
easily haue found some thinges, with
the which shee might haue vpbraided
those which so entertained her, saying
how impudent are you? what meaneth

this concourse? did you neuer see poor
& afflicted women? haue ye nothing to
do at home? do you reioice at other mēs
troubles? Truely you doe shewe your
great foolishnes, or rather enuie. But she
vseth no suche wordes, shee doth deale
peaceably with them, and she doth confesse
freely, that her estate was in a hard
case. But how could she beare the reproches
of the people, and lightly beare so
many troubles, when all of vs by nature
are vnpatient? first she doth confesse that
these thinges fell not our by chaunce
but that GOD was the first author of
these troubles, who gouerning al things
well according to his good wil, doth iniurie
to no man. God hath brought me
back (saith she) he hath troubled me, he
hath afflicted me, shee doth not accuse
the Moabites nor her husband nor children
nor fortune, but attributeth al 
                        〈◊〉
                     
to God. If we beleeue that God who is
a most iust and mercifull father doth impose
the crosse vpon vs. Wee shalbe the
more patient. We haue an example of
IOSEPH, who said he was sent of God to

Aegipt: also DAVID who said that GOD
did commaund Shimei to cursse him.
We must not thinke what they are who
doe hurt vs, either in word or deede: but
what we are and with what sinnes wee
prouoke Gods wrathe against vs, what
we haue deserued, and let vs submit our
selues to him: if wee rest vppon second
causes, we shal neuer haue quiet minds.
Then shee doth acknowledge that God
did send her those troubles, for good &
and not to ouerthrow her: for shee sayd
he humbled her. This word signifieth to
humble, to afflict: for of trouble humilitie
doth follow. Trouble doth giue vnderstanding.
This NAOMIE was not
without her faultes. It may be shee did
not know before he was dead, how notable
a husband shee had, and the same
may be sayd of her children and wealth

                        ••
                     d health. &c. or els she had too much
delight in them, and trusted too muche
in them.
                  God doth take away those thinges
wherin wee put our hope & confidence
that our whole hart may depēd on him

alone. DAVID sayth in the Psalme: it is
good O Lorde that thou hast humbled
me. This profite of the Crosse is great
which ought to teache vs patience: for
god prepareth a way to thinges greater
by troubling vs. As if any man taketh
down an old house that he might build a
new house better thē the other. Further
she saith twise that shee is afflicted with
the almightie god, who can easily conuert
troubles into prosperitie. In all trobles
think that god is almightie, & therfore
it is not hard to him, if he will and
the good of his children do so require,
to deliuer thē out of their troubles. Hee
doth make the poore rich, he doth heale
the sicke, he doth raise vp from the dead
hee doth decke the despised with great
authoritie. Furthermore he doth sometime
bring his children into great aduersities
for this cause, that they may
afterwards acknowledge him their only
deliuerer, and giue him thankes.
                  In the last place it is noted what time
of the yeare she returned into her countrie,
namely in the spring time whē they

began to reape barly. About the feast of
the passeouer they began to reape barly.
The Chaldean interpreter saith that she
came the first day of the passeouer when
the Israelites began to reape the sheafe
or handfull of the first fruites whiche
was barely: LEVI. 23. ca: It is writtē that
the 15. day of the month of Nishan they
offered a handfull of eares of the first
fruites of their corne, this was barely as
the Hebrue interpreters do affirme: this
matter is mentioned for the historie of
the chap. following how RVTH went
to gather cares and came acquainted
with BOAZ.
                  NAOMIE doth teach vs by this example,
that we do not neglect occasion,
which is (as CICERO saith) atime which
hath in it selfe a dexteritie to doe somewhat,
or not to do: this in attempting &
performing matters is of great importance.
Thinges haue their time as SALOMON
saith in his preacher. PAVL
                        •
                     
to the EPHE. COLO. cōmaundeth to redeem
the time. The metaphor is borowed
of biers. Hee that letretth it slip afterwardes

cannot haue it againe. The olde
man in PLAVTVS sayth, when thou art
a young man, nowe that thy bloud is
sound, thou oughtest to giue diligence
to thy affaires. Let youthes when occasion
is offered learne their bookes and
true religion: let them not deferre it vnto
others times whiche will lesse agree
for the learning of these matters, Assone
as NAOMIE hoped that she could get any
liuing in the field, shee returned into
her own countrey, she doth not deferre
the matter vntil all corne was gathered.
SALOMON. 10. PRO. Who doth gather in
the sommer is a wise sonne. Cap. 20. The
slouthfull will not plowe because of
winter, therefore shall he begge in sommer,
but haue nothing.
               
            
            
               CAP. 2.
               
                  The 9. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        1 Then Naomies husband had a kinseman one
of great power of the familie of Elimelech &
his name was bohaz.
                        2 And Ruth the Moabitisse saied vnto Naomie,
I pray thee let me go to the fielde and gather

                           
                              •
                           ares of corne after him, in whose sight I
find fauor. And she answered: Go my daughter.
                        3 And she went & came, and gleaned in the field
after the reapers, and it came to passe, that she
met with the portiō of the field of Bohaz, who
was of the familie of Elimelech.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     IT is declared in the former
chapter, how RVTH was conuerted
to true religion, and
followed her mother in-law
into the land of Iudah: In this chapter is
shewed how she came acquainted with
BOHAZ. Besides a notable example of
gods prouidence: there are also in this
chapter propoūded by the holy ghoste,
examples of many good duties or vertues
in NAOMI & her daughter in-law,
in BOHAZ and his household.
                  First it sheweth how BOHAZ was kinsman
to ELIMELECH, and a man thus titled
Chail which word signifieth, forces,
strength, and wealth. He was as it doth
apeare, a wise man, strong and wealthy,
the which is heere recorded before, for
the historye folowing The Hebrue and
Chalde interpreters thinke, that this

BOAZ was IBZAN the Iudge. For that it
is said in the 12. chap. of the IVDGES,
that IBZAN of Bethlahem raigned after
IPHTAH. But as concerning this kindred
Bibliander in his bookes (gathered out
of the HEBRVE Chronicles) de demonstratione
euangelica, (not yet come to light)
doth note that ELIMELECH and NAAS
                     
                        •
                     ON,
but LIRA in his cōmentaries vpon
this booke the 2. 3. chap. doth note that
ELIMELECH, and SALMAN the father of
this BOAZ were brethren, wherof it shalbe
spoken afterwardes.
                  RVTH asked leaue of her mother in
law to go into the fields to gather eares.
The Grecians doe call gleaning Calamon
Sullogen to gather eares Calamasthi the
which is lawfull by the lawe, LEVIT. 19.
when ye reap the haruest of your groūd
ye shall not reape euery corner of your
fieldes, neyther shalt thou gather the
gleaning of the haruest. Thou shalt not
gather the grapes of the vineyard cleane
neyther euery grape of the vineyarde,
but thou shalt leaue them for the poore
& strāgers, for I am the Lord your god.

Afterward 23. chap. And when you
reape the haruest of your land, thou shal
not ridd cleane the corners of thy field
when thou reapest, neyther shalt thou
make any after gathering of thy haruest,
but shalt leaue them vnto the poore, and
to the stranger: I am the Lord thy god.
                  DEVTRO. 24. When thou doest mow
thy haruest in thy field, and hast forgotten
a sheafe in the fielde, thou shalt no
                        •
                     
goe againe to fet it, but it shalbe for the
straunger, for the fatherlesse, and for the
widow, that the Lord thy GOD may
blesse the in all the works of thy hands.
When thou beatest thyne Oliue tree,
thou shalt not goe ouer the boughes againe:
but it shalbe for the straunger fatherlesse,
and widowes. When thou
gatherest thy vineyard, thou shalt not
gather the grapes cleane after the: but
they shalbe for the straunger, for the fatherlesse,
and for the widowes. And remember
that thou wast a seruaūt in the
land of Aegipt, therefore I commaund
thee to doe this thing. Furthermore
LEVIT. 25. chap, hee doth commaund

that the seuenth yeare be a sabbaoth to
the Lord. They ought not to sowe, nor
plant vineyards, but those which grew
of themselues, should they leaue to the
straungers and poore. Likewise in the
yeare of Iubile. MATT. 12. The Pharisies
accused not Christes Disciples,
(whiche on the sabaoth daye did goe
through the corne, and gather eares,
and eate) of theft or spoyle, but of breaking
the Sabaoth. Although it was lawfull
for straungers, and widowes to gather
eares: yet RVTH woulde not doe it
without the aduise of her mother in
law. Daughters in law may learn by this
example, how to esteeme their mothers
in law, and how to honour them. This
woman did not contemne her mother
in law, though she had lost her husband
and had no children by him: moreouer
she is constrayned to nourish her, she loueth
her aswell as if shee had bene her
owne mother. The commaundement of
the Lord. Thou shalt honor thy parentes: doth
comprehend both mother in lawe and
fathers in law. Honour doth also consist

in this, that daughters in law doe aduise
with theyr mothers in lawe, when they
goe a iourney, or doe anie other things
whiche are of any moment. There are
now few daughters in lawe, or naturall
daughters whiche deale so modestly
with theyr parentes. If they shoulde
nourish theyr mothers in law as she did,
and should consult with them of things
to be done, good Lorde what brawles
would they moue? If theyr parentes of
naturall affection, or good will, whiche
they beare to their children, doe admonish
them what they should doe, or not
doe, how greeuously will they vpbraide
them? howe many children are there
which walke the streetes in the night against
their fathers willes? how manie
daughters which runne to all gasinges
and daunsinges? NAOMIE did aunswer
her friendly, (go my daughter) Let not
mothers in law being consulted with of
theyr daughters in law, mock them, nor
vpbraide them with bitter wordes: but
aunswere them courteously, that they
may thinke them selues to be esteemed

as naturall daughters. Againe shee calleth
her daughter, shee reprocheth her
not. It is profitable and comely for
straunge widowes (especially if they be
yong and bewtiful) to keep themselues
at home, and not to go alone, nor wander
into the streetes, least they be suspected
for vnhonest, or be rauished as wee
may read of DINAH the daughter of IACOB.
Necessitie which is the extreemest
and greatest dart, constrained her to go
out of her house, that she might get her
owne liuing, and her mother in lawes.
Let not parentes be too rigorous, but
graunt those thinges whiche are conuenient,
RVTH went into the fields to gather
eares. She did not like an idle huswife,
looke for foode from heauen, shee
did not steale other mens goodes, shee
did not lay out her body to sinne, to get
her thinges necessary, but shee applied
her selfe to honest labour, yea, and to
hard labor: for to reape corn, to gleane,
and to seeke eares through the fieldes in
the greatest heate of the sunne is a hard
and troublesome labor. Neither would

she be troblesome to anie bodie: for she
promiseth to goe into his fieldes in
whose fight shee found fauour, that was
to whome shee was acceptable, with
whose good wil she might gather eares.
She doth also obserue the time and occasion
of getting her liuing. She was not
vrged to labour as many must, but of
her owne good will, and diligently, she
did that which she shoulde doe. Godly
women ought to follow this notable
example of labor and humilitie. PAVLE
saith 4. chap. EPHE. who so doth steale
let him steale no more: but let him labour
and worke with his handes, the
thing which is good, that hee may bestow
vpon whome it is needfull. Not
that necessitie doth driue all men to
worke with theyr handes, but rather to
endure any extremities then to vse deceites,
fraudes, or other guiles, al which
are comprehended vnder this worde
steale. There is not one kinde of labour:
there is a labour which doth more require
the minde than the body, as to
giue iudgement, to gouerne a Churche

or schoole, to minister phisicke &c. For
who so thinketh that iudges, Ministers,
Shoolemaisters, and Phisitions do not
laboure, is no lesse foolishe, then they
which do thinke, that no body laboreth
in the 
                        •
                     hip, but the plumpers, and rowers,
& not they which do hold the stern.
Agayne, there is a laboure which doth
especially require the body, and this is
not of one kind: for ther are many crafts
and occupations. As euery member of
the body haue their function: so in the
body of the common wealth, euerye
man hath his peculiar labour, and it is
not profitable that euery man shoulde
vse one art. The apostle commaundeth
to worke To agathon that which is good &
honest. For there are mataiotechniai as
tumbling and iugling: there are some
deuelishe craftes, as engr
                        •
                     sers, vsurers,
baudes, which were better to doe nothing,
then so to exercise their labours.
There are some which do onely serue
mens pleasures. But God doth commaund
vs honest labours. God placed
ADAM before his fall in paradise, and

would not suffer him to bee idell, but to
dresse the garden, the which hee might
haue done without trouble: after his
fall his will was, that hee should get
his bread with the sweat of his browes,
and that hee should till the earth with
hard labour, which was curssed for hys
sinne. SOLOMON PROV. 6. doth stirre
vs vpp to laour by the example of the
Antes, and he immitateth and remembreth
the wordes of the sluggardes that
can scarse be drawn out of their beddes.
Also the wise men of the gentiles doe
commend laboure, and disprayse I dlenesse.
The Massilienses (as valerius Maximus
doth testifie) did shut out all them
which would seek to liue sluggishly vnder
the pretence of religion. If our auncestours
had done so, in some yeers past
we should not haue had so many orders
of Monkes: but euery man ought not
onely to do that which is good, in hys
calling, but in a lawful time, and not vppon
daies forbidden, and while strength
doth serue. Neither is there anye cause
why any man should tyre out himselfe

with immoderate laboures, and those
things which thou hast gotten by thy labours
are to be ascribed to the blessings
of God. The Appostle in the 1. THES.
4. and the 2. THES. 3. chapter, doth shew
the cause wherfore good men ought to
labour: namely, that they may help the
needy, and that they may haue thinges
necessary, and not be burdensome to others,
as straungers, Annabaptistes, & other
idle fellows are. It befell that without
any direction of man, shee came into
the field of BOHAZ, or it came to passe
or chaunced: this word Mikraeh, signyfieth
the successe, the issue, or chance. 1.
SAM. 6. verse. 9. of the ark it is sayd, if it go
to Bethshemesh, it is he that did vs al this
euill: but if not, we shall know then that
it is not his hand which touched vs: but
it was a chaunce that happened vs, &c.
If thou doest consider RVTHES will, it
was by chaunce that she went into that
fielde: if the purpose of God, he led her
as it were by the hand: those thinges
which seem to vs to be done by chaūce
are not done without the prouidēce of

God. We may haue an example out of
the law, where this matter is prooued:
EXOD. 21. and DEVT. 19. If two men fel
trees, and the axe slide out of the hand
of one of them and kill his neighbour:
he did this vnwillingly, and therefore he
was allowed a sanctuary: but as concerning
God, hee deliuered him ouer for
certayn causes. HIEROM on the 12. chapter
of IEREMI saith, that nothing falleth
out either good or euill, by chaunce, but
by Gods prouidence and iudgement: as
it is said in the Prouerbs of SALOMON:
Lots are gouerned of God. If a sparrow
cānot fall to the ground without Gods
wil? what can come by fortune in mans
affairs which doth not fall out by Gods
determinate councell? we see how God
doth direct and blesse those men which
take honest laboures in hand: of which
we will speake more afterwardes: but
shee was well accepted of BOHAZ and
his familie.
               
               
                  
                  The 10. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        4 And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem,
and said vnto the reapers. The Lorde be with
you: and they aunswered him, the Lord blesse
thee.
                        5 Then said Boaz vnto his seruant that was appointed
ouer the reapers, whose mayd is this?
                        6 And the seruaunt that was appointed ouer the
the reapers answered, and sayd, it is the Moabitishe
mayde, that came with Naomi out of
the countrey of Moab.
                        7 And she said vnto vs, I pray you let me gl
                              •
                           ane
and gather after the reapers, among the
Sheues: so shee came, and hath continued from
that time in the morning vntill now, saue shee
taried a little in the house.
                     
                  
                  
                     WE haue declared before that
RVTH hauing first gotten
leaue of her mother in lawe
to gather eares after the reapers,
came by fortune, or (that I may
speake more truely) by the prouidence
of God, into the field of BOAZ her kinsman:
but what befell to her there, the
holy Ghost doth diligently set downe,
in these wordes following. In the first
place here is shewed, howe BOAZ comming

from Bethlehem into the field, saluted
his reapers, who aunswered, the
Lord blesse thee. The worde blessing is
vsed in diuers places of the holy scriptures,
and hath diuers significations.
Sometime it signifieth to prayse & giue
thankes, as when DAVID saith to Abigall
in the 1. Booke of SAMVELL the 25.
chap. praysed be the Lorde God of Israell,
which sent thee to meet me this day.
Sometime it signifieth to pray for good
thinges: as in the 48. chap. of GENE. IACOB
the Patriarcke blessed his sonnes,
that is, he did wish wel vnto them. GEN.
the 37. chap. IACOB both at his comming
to the king, and at his going away
blessed him: that is, he saluted him,
& bid him farewell, he gaue him thanks
and wished him well. When it is attributed
to God, it signifieth to doe well,
for God by his worde doth worke. It is
sayd in the 10. chap. of the Prouerbes:
The blessing of god doth make mē rich,
that is, God doth increase and preserue
riches. What the simple vse of this word
is, we must consider by reading the holy

scriptures: as whē they say in this place.
The Lord blesse thee. The meaning is,
the Lord giue thee a fruitfull haruest, &
and all good thinges, as well for the body,
as for the soule.
                  We haue an example in this place of
salutation. The maner of salutation is
not onely olde, but moste profitable to
reconcile and confirme loue: which
our sauiour doth diligently commend
to all godly men. The Aungell saluted
GEDION as hee was threshing corne,
with these wordes. The Lorde be with
thee thou strong man. IVDGES 6. chap.
It is reckoned vp amongst the duetie of
the Priestes, to blesse the children of Israe
                        •
                     l.
There is a solemne blessing set
downe in the 6. chap. of numbers. Some
Anabaptistes, will not haue men saluted,
citing that which Christ in the 10.
chap. of LVKE sayd to his seuenty disciples:
salute no man by the way: but he
doth meane nothing els then vnder the
colour of salutation, to suffer themselues
to be called from their calling or if thou
wilt vnderstand it according to the letter,

it was a personall and speciall commaundement,
and not a generall. The
Aungell saluting the blessed virgin vsed
this same forme, which BOAZ doth in
this place. Also Christ saluted his Disciples
saying, peace be with you. The Apostle
PAVLE doth begin and ende hys
epistles with salutations. Hee putteth
downe their names whom he saluteth:
also the names of them which do salute
others. It is incredible to be spokē, how
much that will auaile to the getting of
good will, but we must take heede least
we doe it with an hypocrites minde. It
is a poynt both of curtesie and of humanitie
to salute others, and to pray for
them. If great and mightie men doe salute
poore men, they are marueilously
affected, seeing that they are not despised
of them. Neither was it to be doubted
but that this salutation of BOAZ
was moste acceptable to the reapers.
There are some who doe of enuie and
hatred disdaine to salute others, who
shouide remember that commaundement
of Christ, that wee must pray for

and wish well to our enemies. How oft
commeth it to passe that many who wil
not willingly salute one an other, after
they haue ben absent & asunder, would
desire nothing more, then to liue togither,
and to vse all dueties of humanitie
to eche other?
                  Here is an houshold example propounded
vnto vs, of a good housholder
he goeth to his reapers, he looketh what
is done in the field, for the presence of
the maister helpeth much in any worke.
PLINIE in his 8. booke 6. chap. the
elders haue said that the eye of the maister
is moste fruitfull for the ground. ARISTOTELL
in his 1. book of gouerning
a house doth write of a certaine man,
who being demaunded what dung was
the best: aunswered the steppes of the
maister. Although a man hath good and
trustie seruauntes and bayliffes, yet the
mayster being absent, they do all things
the more negligently and carelesly, TITVS
LIVIVS sayth elegātly, those things
doe not prosper which are ouerseene
by straungers. Read the prouerbes of

ERASMVS concerning this matter, the
forhead is better than the hinder part:
negligent housholders doe spoyle both
themselues and their seruauntes. These
sayinges may be applied to greater estates,
as to kings and Bishops, that they
doe not al things by other mens hands,
eyes, and eares, while they doe cocker
themselues with pleasures.
                  BOAZ asked his seruaunt which hee
had set ouer the reapers (IOSEPHVS calleth
him Agronomon) of RVTH, what shee
was, or whose wife, or daughter she was.
This he did not aske as some youthes
doe, that they might offer them some
villanie, but because he saw that she was
a straunger and painful: The Bayliffe answered,
shee is that Moabitesse, which
came of late with NAOMIE, and he gaue
her great prayse: hee little thought that
she should haue bene his wife, but see
how wonderfully GOD bringeth it to
passe.
                  As touching that BOAZ appointed a seruant
ouer the reapers, who shoulde prescribe
to euery one of thē their taskes, &

see that they did euery thing in order, &
without doubt an honest man, all housholders
ought to followe it. For vnlesse
that in great families, euery one knowe
what to do, or haue theyr ouerseers and
guides, they may haue theyr things very
negligently done: as order is required
in an armie: euen so in a houshold. That
seruaunt did marke RVTH so diligently,
that hee coulde aunswere his maister to
that hee did aske▪ so ought all seruants
to marke diligently euery thing that appertaineth
to them, that they may giue
an account of euery thing to theyr maisters.
                  This also must be noted diligently,
that he praysed RVTH. He doth not, as
the enuious, disprayse and lessen those
thinges which are praise worthy in her:
Neyther doth he hate her, because shee
is a stranger, nor reproch her for it. They
are to be praysed for their vertues, who
are worthie of prayse: vertue must not
be hated. Oftentimes the poore men
being commended to the rich by theyr
seruauntes, they receaue great commoditie

by them. This kinde of duetie is
required of vs, that if wee cannot helpe
the godly, by our owne riches or councell:
at least, let vs entreat others to doe
for them, which wee may doo without
our hurt.
                  But he doth shew two things of RVTH
which are worthie of prayse, and are to
bee followed of vs. The one that shee
did aske leaue of them to gather eares.
The law of MOSES doth graunt straungers
and widdowes by name to gather
eares: yet she would not by that warant
gather eares in the field without the owners
good will. There are many who against
the minde and wil of the owners,
and agaynst the law of God and man,
do go into other mens fieldes, and by
theft and rapine, take awaye their fruite
and destroy their hedges and doe them
great hurt.
                  The other thing for which she is commended,
is, that she was painfull and diligent
from the morning vntil this time,
namely, she plied her labour to the midday.
By and by: assoone as she had eaten,

she returned to her labour, sauing shee
tarried a litle in the house. MVNSTERVS
enterpreteth it, except she eased her selfe
in the house. The Tigurine translation
sayth, that she sat a while in the house.
Some doe vnderstand it, that she taried
in the house not a moment. The old interpreters
and Septuagintes wer of this
minde: Others doe think that she stood
still, and rested not, but when shee went
home, or taried in the tent, (which perhaps
they had in the field to take the
shadow, and to recreate them in) Those
Countries are very hote in the time of
haruest, shee was not of the number of
those women which walke idelly in the
streets, and look the whole day through
the windowes: but rather she was such
a one as SALOMON speaketh of in the
Prouerbes, of whome amongest other
thinges he saith, that she laboureth day
and night: this ought to be more accompted
of in women then bewtie.
There are this day fewe children, or hired
seruauntes, which will work so hard
as she did.
               
               
                  
                  The 11. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        8 Then sayd Bohaz vnto Ruth, hearest thou my
daughter? go to none other field to gather, neither
goe from hence, but abyde heere with my
maydens.
                        9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reape,
and go thou after the Maidens. Haue I not
charged the seruauntes that they touch thee
not? moreouer when thou art a thirst, go vnto
the vessels and drinks of that which the seruauntes
haue drawne.
                        10 Then shee fell on her face and bowed her selfe
to the ground, and sayd vnto him, how haue I
found fauoure in thine eyes, that thou shouldest
know me seeing I am a stranger?
                     
                  
                  
                     HOW BOHAZ did talke with
RVTH, and how shee behaued
herselfe towardes him is heere
declared. BOHAZ talketh with
her friendly, according to his age and
estate, hee calleth her daughter, for hee
was olde and one of the elders and gouerners.
Where the scripture commaundeth
sonnes and daughters to reuerence
their parents, it meaneth amongest others,
them that are yong, whose duety

it is to reuerence the elders and especyally
the magistrates. Next he commaundeth
her that shee go not into an other
field to gather eares. For peraduenture
least she should be troublesome to him,
shee would not onely gleane in his field
but in others also: but hee vnderstanding
that she was a notable woman, was
willing to do her a good turne, hee doth
not send her ouer to others, as some vse
to doe, which when they colde easilye
and ought to helpe their poor kinsmen,
cast this care from them. He doth commaund
her that she goe not out of that
place wherein she was to another, but
accompanye his maydens and followe
them: partly least shee should haue any
wrōng being alone in any of his groūds,
from the which his seruaunts might easily
defend her: partly if shee were with
those his seruauntes: shee might gather
eares with lesse trouble, which did without
doubt passe the time by pleasaunt
talke, sportes and songes. For it is profitable
that men, that are sad and troubled
be conuersant and talk with others, and

as muche as they can, let them auoyde
solitarines. Hearest thou my daughter?
to wit, that which I haue commaunded
thee, doe not gather in any other mans
field then mine. The Germaines do also
say, hast du es ghort? when as they do earnestly
commaund or giue any thing in
charge to others. Further he promiseth
her defence against his seruaunts, is not
this (saith he) most certain, I haue commaunded
my seruaunts that they touch
thee not? The Hebrues doe vtter by an
interrogation that which they woulde
vehemently affirme. Afterward, cap. 3.
vers. 5. My daughter doe not I seeke thy
rest that it may be well with thee? 1. SAMVEL.
10. chap. Is not the matter so as I
told thee, that god hath annointed thee
to be gouernour ouer his inheritance?
1. SAM. 23. The Ziphians, the traytors
sayd vnto SAVL, doth not DAVID dwel
with vs in the fortes and wood? So I vnderstand
that saying of the woman of
IOHN. 4. is not this the Christ? certainly
it is Christ.
                  In haruest and vintage great libertie

or rather licence is giuen to workemen,
for the ease of their labours, but sometime
they doe abuse theyr libertie, they
doe handle many shamefast and chaste
virgines very filthily, and doe many
thinges insolently: his seruauntes might
haue done the same, therefore hee doth
promise her that he wil admonish them
that they doe not hurt her. But it is the
duetie of housholders that they do not
onely preserue the chastitie of their own
maydes, but also of others, that no filthines
be spoken, whereby they might
be prouoked to lewdnes, let him shewe
them how filthie a thing whordome is,
and how harlots are defamed with publike
infamie. Let him call them backe
from all thinges, which may prouoke
them to lewdnes, especially if he see thē
gamesome or wāton, as from lewd talk,
from keeping companie with suspitious
men, from filthy shewes and daunsings
&c. There are some who say that it is but
in vaine to keepe them straightly, but
youthes doe oft amisse for want of vnderstanding.
But howe wicked are they

who offer their maydens (whose chastity
they ought to preserue, and be to thē
in stead of parentes) to others, or defile
them themselues? He ought also to beware,
least the body, fame, or goods, of
his neighbours or any others be hurt
by his seruauntes.
                  He must not onely keepe in order his
houshold seruauntes, but also his beasts
that they be not hurtfull to others, as
dogges, horses, oxen &c. It is said in the
law. If an oxe wer wont to strike in time
past, and it hath bene tolde his maister
and he hath not kept him in, and after
he killeth a man or a woman, the oxe
shalbe stoned and his owner shall dye
also, &c. Also if the fire breake forth and
burne corne, and take into the stackes
standing in the fieldes, hee shall restore
the losse, that did kindle the fire. If any
man shall digge a pitt and shall not couer
it, the owner shall restore the losse of
the cattell: The Lorde commaundeth
that those houses which are flatt should
be battelled least any man shoulde fall
downe.
                  
                     
He doth adde this, that if shee were a
thirst, she should goe to the vessels and
drinke of the water, which the seruants
haue drawne. There is great scarsitie of
water in those places, PALESTINE hath
her floudes riuers and springes, but yet
in many places the springes are dried vp
with those great heates, so that sometime
they fetched water a great way.
The which also befell in our country of
Heluetia (which aboundeth with 
                        ••
                     aters
in many places) in the yeare 1540.
In the 26. chap. of GEN
                        •
                     : ISAACKS seruauntes
digged pits which for quietnes
sake he yeelded to others. In EXOD. the
2. chap. Moses did helpe the daughters
of IETHRO which drew water for theyr
flockes, when the shepheardes withstoode
them, because there were no other
welles in those places. Therefore it
is a great benefite, that hee doth bid her
goe to take drinke out of the vessels, that
is flaggons or bottels.
                  As the latines doe vse very largely
this word arma (that I may note this by
the way) namely for instrumentes, for

euery arte, as armour for warre, for
schollers and for cookes &c. So KELIM
which is amongest the Hebrues vessels,
doth signifie instrumentes, weapons, ornamentes,
houshold-stuffe, and apparel.
This seemeth to haue some force that
he sayth, whiche my seruauntes haue
drawne: namely not without labour:
Although they say they haue drawne it
by theyr labour, & driue thee away: yet
I will that thou drinke, no man shall resist
thee: afterward he doth commaund
her to eate meate together with the reapers.
                  Here is set foorth to vs a notable example
of humanitie and kindnesse towardes
the poore, widowes, straungers,
and especially towardes them that are
newly conuerted to the truth, and how
they are to be handled, looke in the Epistle
to the ROMAINES the 14. and 15.
chap. BOAZ first did talke with RVTH
friendly, hee doth not looke that shee
should aske any thing of him, hee doth
promise her defence and drink, he doth
graunt her more than she durst ask him,

and that with a good will. But what was
the cause of this humanitie and good
will towardes RVTH, when hee did not
know that he should be coupled in marriage
vnto her? Because shee had the fauour
of God by faith, shee also had the
good will of men. God doth moue the
heartes of the enemies towardes those
whome he doth loue, as SALOMON saith
in hys prouerbes the 16. chap. Then hee
vnderstood by the speech of his Baylife,
that shee was indued with notable vertues,
and therefore that she was worthy
of fauour and good will. If hee had spoken
euill of her, peraduenture he would
haue conceiued some euill against her.
Furthermore she was indued with faith
which is the spring of good workes, and
he saw with his eyes the diligence of the
woman in gathering of eares.
                  This courtesie of BOHAZ is to be followed
of vs: the poore and straungers
are to be nourished and intreated friendly:
Nouices in the faith are to be defended
against those iniuries which they
are in daunger of. Next if we will haue

men kinde and friendly, we must especially
seeke to please God.
                  Secondly here is shewed how RVTH
behaued her selfe towardes him. First
she fell on her face, and bowed her selfe
to the ground. She sheweth her selfe as
one vnworthie, that BOAZ a noble man
should vse so courteously, shicah to bow,
to submit or fall downe in the forme
hithpaal hishtaueh to cast downe her self
to bow the head or the rest of the bodie
to fall downe at any mans feete. The
Grecians doe render it proscunein And
the latines expound it by the worde adoration:
EXOD. 20. in the second commaundement
which speaketh against
Images and Idols, it is said thou shalt
not adore them. The idolaters say that
they doe not worshippe them, and that
they are iniuried if these thinges be reported
of them, but truely they knowe
not or rather will not knowe what it is
to adore. The Hebrue worde signifieth
to bow and lie downe before th
                        •
                     m, but
will they deny that they doe this? Therfore
they cannot be excused from Idolatrie.

Amongest the latines also to adore,
doth signifie to bow the knees,
and to honor by falling downe &c. it
was the cōmon maner that they would
fall downe at the feete of them whome
they would honour, but wee doe not
bow our knees vnlesse we come before
Princes, before whome wee suppliently
fall on our knees.
                  Next shee doth wonder and make
great accompt of his courtesie, when
she being a straunger was so well accepted
of him, for the moste part bannished
men and poore men are despised
of the rich and mightie.
                  We haue a notable example in RVTH
of humilitie thankefulnes and shamefastnesse.
She doth shew her humilitie,
partly by her outward behauior, namely
by the gesture of the body, that is by
bowing & submission, partly by words,
for shee saith, Wherefore haue I found
grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest
know me, or that thou doest knowe me?
For it signifieth (as MARTINVS BORRAVS
the diligent and learned expounder

of gods word) no light acquaintāce

                        •
                     ut to acknowledge louingly and to
haue a regard of anie. She doth confesse
that shee is vnworthy of his benefites.
HVMILITIE is a notable vertue, whereunto
pride is opposite.
                  She doth declare her thankefulnesse
in this, that she doth not despise nor extenuate
this benefite bestowed vppon
her, shee doth not say, what is this that
thou doest bid me to gather eares? doth
not the lawe of God graunt this to the
poore? what is this that thou doest offer
me drinke when I am a thirst? water is
commonly to be vsed, wherefore doest
not thou giue me some notable gift sith
I am poore and thou riche? Truely the
benefite was not so great of it self, which
he did giue her, but because it came frō
a notable man and from a good will,
she made great accompt of it. The prouerbe
sayth, gifte of a friend is best, She
by her thankefulnes did prouoke BOAZ
to be more ready and prompt to relieue
her pouertie. Let them diligently obserue
this which doe want the helpe of

others: let them not be vnpatient if they
haue not all by and by which they desire:
let them not despise those thinges
that are bestowed on them let them, not
threaten that they wil wreast anie thing
by force. But let them rather think that
others haue theyr burdens, and that
they by their importunitie do hurt both
themselues and others. For vnthankfulnesse
stoppeth vpp the welspring of benefites.
                  The shamefastnesse of this woman
appeareth in this that she fell downe to
the ground, and did not impudently
look on BOAZ, shamefastnes is the greatest
prayse of women, for shamfastnes (as
CICERO saith) is the keeper of al vertue,
auoydeth vncomelinesse, and getteth
great prayse. Therefore this caused her
not to looke wantonly on BOAZ, nor to
speake long with him: both these vices
the Gentiles doe condemne in women
as the Satyrric̄all Poet saith. Shee is so
bolde that she can keepe company with
men. And she can talke with armed captaines
in the presence of her husband

without a blushing face and with stretched
out brestes. The prouerbe sayth
scilence doth adorne a woman, as it is
in this verse of Sophocles. gunaiza cosmon è
sige pherei Women which are desirous
to talke with men whome they do not
know, bring themselues into suspition.
               
               
                  The 12. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        11 And Boaz aunswered, aud said vnto her, all
tolde and shewed me that thou hast done vnto
thy mother in law, since the death of thinehusband,
and how thou hast felt thy father and thy
mother, and the land where thou wast borne,
and art come to a people, which thou knowest
not in times past.
                        12. The Lorde recompence thy worke, a full reward
be giuen the
                              •
                            of the Lord God of Israell,
vnder whose winges thou art come to trust.
                        13. Then she sayd, let me finde fauour in the sight
of my Lord: for thou hast comforted mee and
spoken comfortablie to thy mayd, though I bee
not like to one of thy maydes.
                     
                  
                  
                     RVTH marueleth howe it
should come to passe that
shee should be knowne and
accepted of BOAZ, and that

he should entreate her so louingly, shee
being a strunger: for the most part we
see it come to passe that straungers and
the poore are despised of the mightie &
the riche: now therefore he sheweth the
cause wherefore he did fauor her: namely
for the trust she had in the God of Israel,
& loue towards her mother in law.
                  That she was indued with true faith,
of this it is gathered, that she forsooke
her natiue countrie her parents her kinsfolks
and her country Gods and imbraced
the Israelitish religion. ABRAHAMS
fayth is commended, who being called
of God into a straunge land neglected
all thinges, and followed him without
delay, she doth shew indeede that shee
was the daughter of ABRAHAM. For she
had rather liue in other nations for the
truth then to liue in her own countrie.
It appeareth also by this that shee had
true sayth, that BOAZ said that she came
to hope vnder the winges of the Lorde,
that is, that shee might liue safelye
vnder his defence and patronage. As
many as put their trust in God cannot

perish: Howsoeuer the deuill doth rage
he cannot pull them out of his handes.
Here is a Metaphore borowed from
birdes and hennes whiche with theyr
winges doe couer theyr young, nourish
and defend them. DAVID doth often
vse this Metaphore in the Psalmes, that
he might shewe the care of God in preseruing
the godly. As a henne the kyte
besieging her doth cloke her chickens
and hide them vnder her wings, so doth
God defend the godly and call them
louingly vnto him. The Prophet sayth
in the 17. Psal. keepe me as the apple of
thine eie, & hide me vnder the shadow
of thy winges. PSAL. 36. how excellent
is thy mercy O God, therefore the children
of men trust vnder the shadowe of
thy winges. PSAL. 57. haue mercy on
me O God, haue mercy on me, for my
soule trusteth in thee, and in the shadow
of thy winges vntill my trobles be past,
PSAL. 61. I will dwell in thy tabernacle
for euer and my trust shall be vnder the
couering of thy winges 63. and my
mouth shall prayse thee with ioyful lips

when I remember thee on my bed, and
when I thinke on thee in the night watches.
Because thou hast bene my helper
therefore vnder the shadowe of thy
winges will I reioyce PSAL. 91. hee teacheth
that they are very happie whiche
commit themselues to the tuition and
the prouidence of God, hee will couer
thee (saith he) with his winges & vnder
his winges thou shalt be safe, hys trueth
shalbe thy shield and buckler.
                  ISAY 31. he sheweth that hee will defend
the Citie Ierusalem against the
force of the Assirians by a similitude
borrowed from birdes, or hennes, saying
as a bird that flieth, so shall the Lord
of hostes defend Ierusalē by defending
and deliuering, by passing through and
preseruing it. This similitude Christ vsed
in the 23. chap. of MATT. saying, how
often would I haue gathered thy children
together O Ierusalem, as a henne
doth her chickens vnder her wings, but
thou wouldest not? this worde ornis as
the Gramarians doe note, generally
doth signifie a bird, & specially a henne.

From whence had RV
                        •
                     H that fayth? S.
PAVLC in the 10. chap. to the Romaines
sayth, faith commeth by hearing, and
hearing by the worde of God. It is probable
that she had heard of her husbād,
of her mother in-law, and her father in
law, of the creation, fall and restitution
of man, & of the promised MESSIAS &c.
In the mean seasō god opened her hart,
that shee did vnderstand and yeeld consent
to those thinges which were tolde
her.
                  Also wee doe note by the way that
they which leaue Idolatrie and embrace
the true faith, doe carrye themselues as
it were into a hauen and sanctuarie: as
chickens wandering are as it were subiect
to be spoyled and prayed vpon, by
hawkes and other rauenous byrdes, but
they are defended vnder the winges of
theyr dammes: so they which doe leaue
the true religion, and seeke for helpe of
saluation other where, doe cast themselues
into manifest danger of the soule.
Also God doth exercise his faithfull

                        •
                     nes with diuers afflictions, but in the

meane season hee doth comfort them:
Many thinke that they shall fall into extreame
danger both of life & of their estate
if they should embrace the gospell,
therefore they doe retayne a false religion
against their conscience, and in the
meane season being vexed with the
stings of conscience, they doe lead an
vnpleasaunt and a miserable life.
                  The other thing that BOAZ did praise
in her is this, that shee did loue her mother
in law, though her husband departed
out of life, and left no childe by her,
and her mother in law was a straunger:
from whence it may be gathered easily
that she did loue her husband: she doth
by her example teache them that are
married mutually to loue togither, and
withall seek one to exceed the other in
all marriage dueties. It is knowne by experience
what great good doth arise of
good marriages, and what great euils
doe befall by euill marriages.
                  It is after added, that hee did pray for
the prosperitie of RVTH: hee sayth the
Lord recompence thy worke, and a full

reward bee geuen thee of God, that is,
the Lord reward the, both in this lyfe &
in the lyfe to come: wherof many examples
are euery where in the holy scriptures.
The papists do aleage this to shew
that we deserue the kingdome of heauen
by our good deedes. And they doe
not onely vnderstand by those good
works, those which are wrought by the
faythfull by the spirite of God according
to his worde, but the deuised and
chosen workes, which the foolishnes
and coutousnes of man hath inuented,
and they go so far that the works which
ar called supererogatory they do sel to others
for mony. Of this it came to passe
that they did put their hope and trust
in their deeds, and they atributed much
to their own forces, and so obscured the
doctrine of the merite of Christ. Therefore
it is profitable to know, how these
places are to be vnderstood where mention
is made of wages, rewardes and recompence
&c. The scripture teacheth
vs that God of his meer mercy through
faith for christs sake: doth forgiue sinnes

and giueth eternall life. There is a notable
place to the Ephes. 2. chap. It is the
gift of God &c. But he doth promise rewards
for good deeds: not for the worthynes
of them, but for the grace wherwith
God doth imbrace beleeuers. AVGVSTINE
writeth wel, God doth crown
in vs his owne gift, not our merites: for
first hee bestoweth vppon vs his grace
that wee maye doe that which is good.
Then of his meere grace, he doth adorn
with rewards that good which he hath
wrought in vs. Eternall life is called a
reward, but not properly, neyther doe
the godly looke for eternall life as 
                        •
                      reward
for their owne good deeds, but as
the free gift of God: wee do not denye
but that God rewardeth good deedes,
but we doe not by them deserue his so
great liberalitie. For this is the condition
on of a merite, first that we should geue
of our owne, and what haue we which
wee haue not receiued? the Lord doth
geue vs both will and abilitie to do wel.
Next it is required in a desert that wee
be not bound to any thing, but to do it

of our one accord and good will. And
we although wee haue done all thinges
yet we be vnprofitable seruaunts LVKE.
17. chapter. Also it is required that there
be some equalitie and proportion betweene
that which is geuen, and that
which is receiued. But what equalitie
can there be betweene our workes and
eternall life? If thou sayest we deserue
etern
                        •
                     ll damnation through sinnes, and
that therfore we deserue eternall life by
good works, it is not a good cōclusion.
For good thinges proceed from the spirite
of God, euill thinges from vs: euill
thinges are perfectly euill, but our good
workes are maymed and vnperfect. It
doth not so followe, this man can kill
himselfe, therefore he can geue himselfe
life. Then thou doest obiect: what do
good workes auayle? verye much, for
they do serue to the glory of our heauē
                     ly
father: he is glorified if they liue vprightly
which ar willing to be called his
people: they do make vs assured of our election,
and vocation, when we do finde
by their testimonie the vertue of Christ

to encrease more and more in vs, they
prouoke others to liue holylie. Concerning
also the outward duety, the hungry
are fed, the naked are clothed, the strangers
are receiued into hospitalitie, &c.
Furthermore they do testifie that we be
thankefull to God for the benefites receiued
of him.
                  And we gather out of this place that
good deedes are to bee praysed, to bee
well spoken of, and to be garnished with
rewardes. The Poet doth also say: vertue
being praysed doth encrease. ANTISTINES
beeing asked howe the common
wealth should bee preserued, hee
aunswered if rewardes were appoynted
for wel doers, and punishments for euil
doers: yet wee must not set our delight
in vertue to thend that we may be praised
but, for Gods commaundement,
though it commeth to passe that wee
are stirred vppe to vertue by rewardes.
How many are there this day who if
they should auoyd theyr country after
the example of RVTH that they may
publikely and freely heare and openly

professe the pure religion, would sette
themselues to be scorned at of others?
If any man doth loue his mother in-law
as his own mother they would call him
a foole. It commeth to passe so also in
other matters, but we ought to be content
in this vnthankefulnesse & corruption
of this world, with the iudgement
of a few good men. Principally this exāple
doth teach vs to pray to God that
hee will render to the godly for theyr
good deedes, that they may receaue a
full rewarde for their good deedes, as
he hath prayd.
                  Moreouer we gather, what wee must
looke for of God if we cast away Idolatrie
and serue him. For the prayers of
godly men are not in vaine, but they are
as it were promises. This praier doth agree
with the wordes of Christ in the
19. chap. of MATTHEVV verily I say vnto
you, whosoeuer shall forsake houses
or brothers or sisters, or father or mother
or wife or Children or landes for
my names sake, he shall receaue an hundred
fold more and shall inherite euerlasting

life. MARK. 10. chap. it is added
also in this life with trouble. The meaning
is that the godly should not be destituted
of the help and aide which they
looked for of theyr dearest friendes: Also
the Lord doth so bestow his grace on
them, that small goodes are to them in
stead of great riches, and truely the matter
is so amongest true Christians. IOVINIAN
and VALENTINIAN being created
Emperors, they who vnder IVLIAN the
Emperor held the profession of Christs
religion were put out of th
                        •
                     ir captainship:
But God euen in th
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      doth requite
their faith and theyr godlinesse
with a reward.
                  But the successe dothe declare that
this prayer of BOAZ was not in vaine.
For when RVTH forsooke all that shee
had for the God of Israell, she found an
hundreth folde more in this life. For she
was the wife of a noble man, and her
posteritie became kinges amongest the
people of God, and in the other world
she had eternall life through the MESSIAS
in whome she trusted.
                  
                     
It followeth after what maner RVTH
behaued her selfe towardes BOAZ, let me
finde fauor (saith she) in the sight of my
Lord, that is, let me be regarded and acceptable
to thee, let me be in estimation
with thee. This phrase is in the 33. 34.
and 47. cap. of GENE. and els where verie
often, it signifieth to fauor or to gratifie
some body. That thou hast cōforted
me. This worde mee hath a force
namely a widow, a woman, a poore woman,
a straunger and afflicted, for he did
stirre vp a
                        ••
                      recreate the sorrowfull woman
wit
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      speeches: this verse
of AESCHYLVS is here accompted
as a prouerbe. Orges nosous
                           •
                        s eisin iatroi logoi
that is, pleasaunt speeche is a phisition
for a heauie minde. And thou hast spoken
comfortably to the heart of thy
handmaide, that is thou hast spoken
friendly with me, and hast brought me
in good hope. GEN. 34. It is written that
SECHEM spake to the heart of DINAH
being rauished and des
                        •
                     oured of him:
where the latin translation hath, and he
did comfort the sorrowful woman with

his speeches, that is to say he promised
her marriage, and comforted her. GEN.
40. cap. IOSEPH sayd vnto his brethren,
be not afrayd I will nourish you & your
little ones, and he comforted them, hee
doth comfort them with pleasaunt talk.
RVTH doth not simply say, me, but thy
hand may den. So in the 1. SAM. 1. cap.
HANNAH saith to HELY the high priest,
doe not thou thinke that thy handmayd
is the daughter of BELIALL. the 1. book
of SAM. 25. ABIGALL sayd to DAVID
let me thy handmad speake in thy eares
and heare the worde of thy handmayd
&c. Also RVTH thinks her selfe vnworthy:
she doth not thinke her selfe a woman
worthy who should be accounted
with his maidens or numbred amongst
them, to wit because shee came of the
Gentiles.
                  Let vs learne to thinke humbly and
lowly of our selues: and not defraud
worthie men from theyr honor due vnto
them: she doth call BOAZ her Lord
and her selfe his handmaid. There are
some vnciuill men as certaine of the Anabaptistes

who say that the title of honor
is not to be geuen to anie body, sith
all of vs are of the ofspringe of ADAM
and haue one and the same redeemer.
                  Furthermore wee see sith the poore
take great cōfort, of the friendly speech,
of the riche, that the rich shall doe well
if they deale friendly with the poor and
especially with them that are bent to labour:
and let them see that they be not
despised of them. It is the duetie of all
men to stir vp and confirme, them who
are troubled with diseases and other
euils by comfortes gathered out of the
word of God.
               
               
                  The 13. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        14 And Boaz sayd vnto her, at the meale time
come thou hither, and eate of the bread and
dip thy morsell in the vineger. And shee sate
beside the reapers and hee reached her parched
corne: and shee did eate and was sufficed and
left thereof.
                        15 And when she arose to gleane, Boaz commanded
his seruaunts, saying, let her gather among
the sheaues and doe not rebuke her.
                        
                           
16 Also let fall some of the sheaues for her and let
it lye, that she may gather it vp, and rebuke her
not.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe holy Apostle and Euangelist
IOHN in the 1. Epist. the
3. cap. saith my little children
let vs not loue in word, neyther
in tongue onely, but in deede and
in truth. There haue bene alwaies men
and there are some yet, who doe promise
their helpe very largely to others,
but theyr deedes doe not aunswere to
theyr wordes. BOAZ was not of theyr
number. For when he had vnderstoode
of RVTH what she was, and what maner
of woman he prayeth to God to blesse
her and giue her his grace: and hee dyd
not onely promise to her his helpe in
words, but performed it indeede. For
he doth commaund her that she should
gleane in his fieldes, and should drinke
out of his vessels. And when he had perceaued
her to be modest and thankeful,
he commaundeth her to eate meat with
the reapers and dip her morsell in the

vineger, The Grecians do call it, Embamma
                           •
                        a
when we doe dip our bread or anie
other thinge in a vessell full of moyst
thinges: vineger is geuen to the reapers
because it is of great force in cooling. I
doe heare that it is also at this day vsed
in Italy, in the time of haruest when it is
very hott, & also they do vse wine mixt
with vineger and water, which the Grecians
doe call 
                        
                           •
                        xucraton vineger honnied,
or they doe call it honny vineger, some
say it is a small houshold wine, delayed
with water. CHRISTOPHORVS a VEGA
a Spanyard a moste learned man, in hys
second booke de arte med
                           •
                        ndi sayth, reapers
doe vse in stead of wine, vineger
mixed with a great deale of water, and
that is it▪ which they call houshold wine
delayed with water, in that order that it
may be drunke: to the which if thou
doest put oyle & bread thou shalt make
a cooling meat good for workmen and
trauellers in the heate of the sunne &c.
Some coue
                        •
                     ous man might haue sayde
vnto her, I haue not prouided these
thinges for thee but for mine owne seruaunts,

in the 1. booke of SAM. the 25.
chap. NABAL reiecting DAVIDS messengers
sayth reprochfully. Shall I take
my bread and my water and my fleshe
that I haue killed for my shearers, and
giue it vnto men whome I knowe not
whence they be? Also BOAZ commaunded
his seruauntes that they leaue some
corne in the field.
                  We ought to follow this example of
sincere loue, and though we fal amongst
many vnthankful men, yet we must not
forget our duetie. Of that, that BOAZ
gaue his reapers meate and drinke meet
for them, and in time conuenient as
bread, vineger, parched barly, water &c.
Let housholders and dames learne that
they giue theyr seruauntes and hirelings
meate enough. And God doth commaund
in his lawe that the mouth of
the oxe shoulde not be nusled which
doth tread out the corn. SALOMON saith
(in the praise of good womē the 31. cha.
amongest other) she doth rise whilest it
is yet night and prepareth meate for her
house &c. They which doe labor or much

doe neede the more meate. There are
some who will vrge theyr seruauntes to
labour, but they will not giue them so
much meate as can stay theyr hungrie
stomackes. Some doe not dresse the
meate well, neyther bring it forth to be
eaten in good time, but they had rather
it should be lost: There are some which
doe indeede set meate before them, but
they will take it in euill part, if theyr seruauntes
eat inough. They may be numbred
amongest them of whome SALOMON
speaketh in the 23. cap. of the prou.
hee sayth vnto thee eate and drinke, but
his minde is not with thee. But what
profite commeth of this? If maydes and
seruauntes see them to be so nigardly,
they deuoure many things priuily. Also
it falleth out oftētimes that those things
are deuoured of dogges and cats which
they will not giue to workemen.
                  But let seruaunts be contented if they
haue necessarie thinges geuen them, let
them not complaine, nor wish for dainties.
Workemen in the olde time were
content with frugall and meane foode:

neyther doest thou heare that they did
accuse theyr maister. The hire must be
liberally payed to workemen, and especially
to haruest men IAMES the 5. cap.
RVTH doth not refuse the benefite bestowed
on her, but doth take it with a
thankefull minde and modestly: and sitteth
downe by the side of the haruest
folks, not face to face, least she should be
gazed vpon, she doth not thrust her selfe
into the middle of the reapers, and her
hand first in the dish as belly-gods doe,
which do not take those thinges which
are sette before them, but where soeuer
they se more daintier, there their hands
are. She waited vntil either BOAZ or sōe
of his seruauntes would reach her some
portion. We must vse modestly a good
turne bestowed vpon vs by others, how
liberally so euer it commeth, contrary
to that which is commonly said, shamefastenes
is vnprofitable for the poore.
                  She did eate sufficient, yet some meat
was left, the which as we shal afterwards
heare she brought to her mother in law.
Shee doth teache vs to vse meate and

drinke sufficient, but in the meane season
we must not forget the poore. PAVLE
doth also admonishe the faythfull that
theyr plenty maye supplye other mens
neede. Let vs take heede of the desire of
gluttony and the filthie wasting of gods
gifts.
                  Hee doth write that BOAZ gaue her
parched corne. Kalie
                           •
                        
                      with aleph cali of kalah
hee parched or fried, it is barly meale
fried, the common interpreters do translate
it parched corne: they doe dry the
barly one night being soked with water
the next day they doe dry it, then they
grinde it in milles: Some men do sprinkle
that agayn with water which is ouermuch
dried, and drye it agayne before
they grind it. Some men do dresse new
barlye beeing beaten out of the greene
eares, and they do make it whilest it is
moyst into balles & being clensed they
do grinde it. It beeing so dressed with
twentie pound of barly, three pound of
linte seed, halfe a pound of coriander
seede and of salt, all these thinges being
dried before are mingled in a mille.

They who will keepe it any longer, doe
hide it in new earthen vessels with the
meale and his branne. Galenus de alimentorum
facult: lib. 1. sayth: that the parched
corne which is most commendable is
made of new barlye meanlye dried and
parched &c. And he sayth that of many
it is the manner in health to drinke the
same (with new wine, sweete wine, and
honied wine mixt to gether, & oftimes
also onelye sprinkeled with water) in
the sommer two or three houres before
they do goe into the bath, and they say,
that they feele themselues by this drink
to be freed from thirst. Thou hast an example
in BOHAS of ciuill behauiour at
the table: for he had not onely a care of
himselfe but hee doth also reache meate
to others, we haue a like example of our
sauiour: in the 24. chapter of LVKE.
                  After that RVTH had eaten her meat
she presentlye returned to her worke agayne,
and shee remayned at gleaning
vntil the euening, she doth not take the
shadow like an idle and a slouthfull huswife.
She is far vnlike them who when

they are full, do refuse labours. But this
diligence and carefulnes is greatly to be
praysed in this woman and all others.
                  BOHAZ being delighted with the modesty
of this woman, doth commaund
his seruauntes, that they suffer her to
gleane amongest the sheaues which other
wise is not graunted, some they
shuld leaue of purpose, othersome they
should scatter, neyther should they say
that this was for others, and so make her
ashamed, or blame her, but for this cause
that she should gather the more, and go
more chearefully to her mother in law.
                  Rich men do learne by this example,
that it is their duety to helpe the needie.
God doth geue great encrease, not
so much for the riche as for the poore.
Christ accompteth that as giuen to him
whatsoeuer thou shalt bestow vpon the
poore, MAT. 25. Furthermore hee blesseth
thy riches, if thou hast the poore in
estimation. There are manye kindes of
poore men, but those are especially to
be helped: whoe do willingly gette by
their labour thinges necessary for them

vnlesse great hardnes of dearth doth
hinder them. This example doth teache
vs how we must giue. He gaue RVTH
thinges necessary, not being desired, nor
commaunded, but willinglye and with
pleasure. For the Lord requireth a cherful
giuer:
he doth geue liberallie, for she
being sufficed, she reserued some for her
mother in-law: he might haue giuen her
some certaine measure of corne. But he
thinketh it shuld be more acceptable to
her, if she might gather it by her own labour,
therefore hee commaundeth hys
haruest folkes to leaue her some part as
they reaped and gathered. By the example
of this notable man, we also ought
sometime to giue to poore labourers,
more than is due to them by couenant:
and to doe good to them that want although
they know not of it, Arcesilaus
that he might help the want of his friend
that was poor & sick, but yet dissembling
his want, he put a bag of mony priuelye
vnder his pillow. Read the first epistle of
TIMOTHIE. 6. cap. of the dueties of rich
men. Now how wicked are they, which

doe vse the scarcetie of a dearth to this
purpose, that they may driue the poore
altogether out of their possessions? The
richer men at this daye are, so much almost
the couetouser are they: They do
deuise manye meanes, by which they
may excuse their couetousnes. Also the
poore may geue almes, wh
                        ••
                     h hey call
spiritual, namely when they do comfort
and teach other poore men.
               
               
                  The 14. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        17 So she gleaned in the field vntill euening, and
she threshed that shee had gathered, and it was
about an Ephah of barly.
                        18 And she tooke it vp and went into the City,
and her mother in lawe saw what shee had gathered:
Also shee tooke forth and gaue to her,
that which she had reserued when she was sufficed.
                        19 Then her mother in law sayd unto her, where
hast thou gleaned to day? and where wroughtest
thou? blessed bee hee that knewe thee.
And she shewed her mother in-law, with whom
shee had wrought, and sayed: the mans name
with whome I wrought to day is Boaz.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     RVTH is set before vs as a
clear glasse of many vertues:
& especially her diligence,
carefulnes, and paynefull
laboure is commended. She gleaned in
the field of BOHAZ, who commaunded
her to sit downe with his reapers. After
that this woman had eaten meat, and
was suff
                        ••
                     ed, she returned to her labour
from which she had ceased a while: now
is added, that shee applied her selfe to
worke vntill it was euening, then shee
threshed that which shee had gleaned,
namely with a staffe, and winnowed it.
There were two kindes of threshing in
times past, whereof mention is made in
the holy scriptures, one was with oxen,
the other with staues, wherewith they
did beat out the corne. PLINIE sayeth
in the 30. chap▪ of his 18. booke. H
                        •
                     ruest
is beaten forth somewhere with
cartes, somewhere with the treading of
mares, otherwhere with 
                        ••
                     ailes: cart (that
I may note this by the way) is a kinde of
carriage wherwith corn is beaten forth.
It is added, that she carried it, namely,

on her head, which was a great burden.
It is sayd in the latter ende of the chap.
that she did also gleane in the wheate
haruest, and euery day returned at night
vnto her mother in law. She doth teach
vs by her example, continuaunce in labour,
and so in euery good worke. It is
not inough to begin well, but wee must
goe forward chearefully. Wee must labour
whilest it is time, wee must not
neglect the oportunitie of time. There
are some who yeeld themselues to be
spoyled of slougthfulnes: or if they doe
applie themselues for a time to vertue,
they doe afterwardes fall away.
                  It is to be noted, that the holy Ghost
doth say, that she caried the burden her
selfe, and layd it not on a beast or a cart:
For it sheweth that God hath a care of
these thinges, the which ought to comfort
those laborious men, who by reason
of theyr pouerty are driuen to carry
great burdens vppon their heades or
shoulders. For if they doe that of fayth,
they doe a good and acceptable worke
vnto God. For God requireth these

common workes of them, and not that
they should for religiō sake appoint pilgrimages
and put on coules, &c.
                  But what profite had she of so great labour?
for there are many which say that
they labour in vayne, She did gather almost
an Ephah of barly. If it be accompted
after the measure of Tygurine it was
as THEODORVS BIBLIANDER doth
recken, three times nyne gallons. An Ephah
is a measure for drie things, and
containing three bushels, a bushell contayneth,
sixe cabs, a cab foure logs, a log
is the least measure of drie thinges and
moyst thinges, contayning sixe egges,
If these be multiplied, and that thou beginnest
at a log, a cab cōtaineth 24. eggs
a bushell 144. and an Ephah 432. egges.
And 10. Ephaphs doe make a homere
contayning. 4320. egges, which is the
greatest measure the Hebrues haue: as
MVNSTER noteth vpon the chap. 29. of
EXOD. And though RVTH could not gather
so much, vnlesse the haruest folkes
had left her part at BOAZ his commandement,
yet it is certain that indifferent

dilligence doth preuaile muche in any
businesse. A drop by often falling doth
break or make hollow most hard stones.
They who are diligent and carefull in
theyr work, do quickly heape vp a number
of necessary thinges. But wee must
pray to God, that hee will blesse our labours,
for vnlesse his blessing be with
vs, all our labors are in vayn which we
doe. S. IAMES sayth in his 4. chap. ye
fight and warre (a metaphore taken frō
warres) he speaketh of contentions and
brawles, wherewith they do greeue one
another) and get nothing, because ye
aske not, ye aske and receaue not because
ye aske amisse, that ye might consume
it on your lustes. Some complaine
that they cannot nourish themselues by
their artes, in the meane season they doe
not diminishe their lustes: they despise
God, not acknowledging him to be the
author of good thinges. SALOMON in
hys prouerbes sayth the dilligent haue
sufficient, & the slougthful are famished.
PROU. 14. verse. 23. In all labour there is
aboundance: but the talke of the lippes

bringeth onely wante. 19. vers. 24. The
slougthfull hideth his hand in his bosome,
and will not put it to his mouthe
againe, that is, he shall not haue to eate.
20. verse. 4. The slougthfull will not
plow, because of winter, therefore shall
he begge in the sommer, but haue nothing.
And the 13. verse, loue not sleepe,
least thou come vnto pouertie: open thy
eyes and thou shalt bee satisfied with
bread. 21. verse. 25. The desire of the
slougthfull slayeth him: for his handes
refuse to worke. If God doth sometime
afflict great labouring men with famine,
he doth it for certaine causes, which we
haue in other places made mention of.
                  It is added, that RVTH shewed her
mother in law those thinges which shee
had gleaned, also that she brought forth
and gaue her, that which she had left of
her fulnes. It appeareth that RVTH was
notably affected towardes her mother
in-law, for that she might make her merry,
she did not onely shew her mother
in-law part of it, & deuour the other priuelie,
but she sheweth her all which she

had gleaned that day, and brought her
meate also out of her bag, scrippe or bosome
which was left. Thou shalt easily
finde daughters in-law, which will geue
nothinge to their mothers in-law, yea
who will rather cast meat to the dogs,
or els eat more then will do them good,
then bring any thing to their mothers
in-law.
                  Let children learne to feede and to
chearishe their aged parentes. For the
word of honoring doth cōprehend this
amongest others, as the Lord himselfe
interpreteth it MATH. 15. wher he doth
reprooue the PHARISIES and SCRIBES
because they do make voyde the law of
God through their traditions. The gentiles
also do thinke it meete, that we norish
thē which haue nourished vs. Ofttimes
sonnes & daughters do cōplaine,
that pouertie doth hinder them that
they cannot performe that duety: but if
they should spend much at the wine, vpon
sumptuous apparell, and such other
vayn things, they would make no mention
of their pouertie. There are fewe

which haue regard of their parentes striken
in age, as becommeth them. In the
history of the gospell it is oftentimes
read, that parentes entreated the Lorde
for their children, that they might bee
deliuered from diseases, but there is no
such thinge recorded of children. The
most part would wish them dead, whether
they be poore or riche. If their parentes
be poore they are to be nourished
of them, and so they are a burden to
them, if they be riche they watch as rauenous
birds do for carcases. There are
also some who doe spoyle their parents
of whome (it is sayd) PROV. 28. verse.
24. He that robbeth his father and hys
mother, is the companion of a man that
destroyeth.
                  IOSEPHVS writeth that NAOMIE
brought forth some peeces of meate,
which her neighbours had brought her,
and the which she had kept for RVTH.
For the wordes in the text may bee vnderstood
both manner of waies: We do
therefore gather by this, how deare the
daughter in-law was vnto her mother

in-law, because she did not spend all, but
kept some for her that was absēt & at labour.
But it rather seemeth to agree, to
be vnderstoode of RVTH.
                  NAOMIE asked her daughter in-law,
where she had gleaned, shee aunswered
freely, and she shewed the name of the
man in whose field she was. Shee doth
teache parentes to haue a care and regard
of their children: peraduenture she
thought that it could not be, that shee
should gleane so much by her owne labour
in so short a time. If children doe
bring anie thing home, which they say
was giuen them, or that they found it,
let parentes diligently examine them,
for they come by these degrees to theft.
Let them take an accompt of their chilchildren,
where they haue bene, with
whome, what they did, if any thing be
suspicious in them, let them examine
them, if they be found in a lye, let them
chasten them: let them also prayse them
which doe well, and so stirre them vp to
the desire of vertue. Let maisters do the
same, and others to whome the care and

charge of the yonger sort is committed.
Neyther let them only take an accompt
of the yonger sort, but also diligently of
the elders. I doe not giue counsell that
ye shutt in youthes at home: but in the
meane season, let them haue a care that
if they goe abroad with leaue, that they
ioyne themselues with good companie,
by whose conuersation they may be the
better. RVTH doth willingly giue an account
to her mother in-law, shee doth
not aunswere her crookedly: shee doth
tel orderly what befel to her in the field.
Let children doe the like to theyr parentes,
and those that are set ouer them,
and let them gouern themselues so, that
they may without feare, make report of
those thinges which they haue done.
                  Before her mother in lawe heard the
name of BOAZ, shee sayd, blessed be hee
that hath knowne thee. The old translation,
hath who hath pittied thee. The
word of knowing is diuersly vnderstood
in the holy scriptures. Pro. 12. ver. 10. the
Iust man doth know the life of his beast
(although Salomon doth vse this word

                     Iada and our wrirer doth vse Nakar)
that is, hee hath a care and a regard
of his cattell, he doth giue them prouinder,
hee doth graunt them rest, or hee
hath mercy on his cattle: but the tender
affections of the wicked are cr
                        •
                     ell: that
is, they haue no care of them, they doe
handle thē vnmercifully. So in this place
who hath known thee, that is, who hath
done thee a good turn? She blessed him
because he had pitie on her. Truely God
will blesse them, who doe bestowe benefites
on widdowes and poore foolks.
               
               
                  The. 15. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        20 And Naomie sayd vnto her daughter in-law,
blessed be he of the Lord: for hee ceaseth
not to do good to the liuing and to the dead. Againe
Naomie sayd vnto her, the man is nere
vnto vs, and of our affinite.
                        21 And Ruth the Moabitesse sayd, he sayd also
certainly vnto me, thou shalt be with my seruants,
vntill they have ended all mine haruest.
                        22 And Naomie aunswered vnto Ruth her
daughter in law, it is best my daughter, that
thou goe out with his maydes, that they meete
thee not in another 
                              •
                           ielde.
                        23 Then she kept her by the maydes of Bohaz,
                           
to gather vnto the end of barly haruest, and of
wheat haruest, and dwelt with her mother in-lawe.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe talke which NAOMIE had
with RVTH, is partly pleasant,
and partly profitable: for it
contayneth manye thinges
which make not a little, both for our instruction
and comfort. Before NAOMIE
vnderstoode in whose fielde RVTH had
gleaned, shee sayth, blessed be hee who
hath knowne thee. And after shee had
heard his name, she vttered this blessing
in many wordes. Blessed be hee of the
Lorde: that is the Lorde rewarde hym
both in this world, and in the world to
come, or he is blessed that is, he is accepted
of the Lorde, his grace is with him.
The blessing of the Lord doth comprehend
the goods as well temporall as eternall:
Hee that doth blesse another,
praieth that God would take him to his
defēce (through the MESSIAS in whom
we are blessed) that he would release his
sinnes, that hee would defend him, and

giue him successe in all his affayres, and
keepe him from all euill. She doth shew
the cause, for he ceaseth not to do good
to the liuing and to the dead, that is hee
ceaseth not to loue them and to be beneficiall
vnto them. But how he was beneficial,
to the dead, I will shew you by
and by. She doth add that BOAZ (which
RVTH did not knowe) was their
nigh kinsman Goel signifieth a reuenger
and a kinsman, who ought by lawe to
defend their bloud, and seek the punishment
of hym who hath hurt them.
                  We doe gather out of these wordes,
what is the duetie of those that bee of
our kindred and affinitie, and of friends,
namely, that they loue mutually togither,
and that they striue in giuing benefites
amongest themselues (which are
not of one kinde) also that the riche doe
helpe the poore. BOAZ did prosecute his
friends (with loue) both dead and a liue,
and was beneficial vnto them. How did
he good to the dead? whē as long as ELIMELECH
and hys sonnes were aliue
he was beneficiall vnto them, and after

theyr deathes for their remembraunce
he did gratifie theyr widowes in as many
matters as he could▪ and hee would
haue done the same to theyr children, if
they had anie, and this is to shewe pitie
or mercie towardes the dead. NAOMIE
vsed this phrase before. Truely if the
dead shoulde knowe what thinges are
done vppon the earth, they woulde reioyce
at these dueties, not that thou
shouldest endeuoure to place them in
the place of Gods, and appoynt holye
daies for them, & make praiers to them.
&c. Manye haue little care of the widdows
and children of their dead friends,
or if they do any thing once or twise for
their sakes, afterwardes they doe leaue
to be mercifull, that is, they doe cast away
the care of them, and send them to
others: hee was constant in friendship.
For true friends do not turne with fortune.
PROV. 17. 17. A friend loueth at al
times, we haue some examples of such
friendes in the scriptures. The 2. SAM. 9
chaprer. DAVID hauing obtained the
whole kingdome, did aske if any remained

aliue of the family of SAVLE, with
whome he might deale mercifully for
Ionathans sake, that is, that he might be
beneficiall vnto him: and when MEPHIBOSHETH
the sonne of IONATHAN was
brought vnto him, hee gaue him the
landes and the goodes of his father, and
although hee was lame and one cast away,
yet he setteth him at his table. It is
sayd commonly, that the dead do lacke
friendes, but DAVID d
                        •
                     th account him
as his sonne, for the remembraunce of
his father. Therefore God doth also
stirre vp to him faythfull friends: for in
the conspiracie of ABSOLON, CHVSAI,
ITHAI and others followed DAVID, and
not his sonn, although they did see him
florishe. Those friends which forsake vs
in aduersitie, are not true friendes, but
maye bee compared vnto those birdes
which flie away in the winter, comming
and returning againe in sommer. A sure
friend is tried in doubtfull matters. It is
cōmon at this day, that men which are
greate friends do striue amongest themselues,
& for light causes: friends are not

to be despised & cast away, how poore
soeuer they be, for oftentimes they may
helpe much the riche and mightie with
their helpe, as in conspiracies, warres,
burnings, shipwrackes, diseases, and other
euils both publick and priuate. Furthermore
it is not only required of kinsmen
and friends, that they haue a regard
of the fatherlesse and wyddowes, but
of others whosoeuer they be. Therefore
howe much doe they offend, whoe for
small causes doe wrong to the children
and widdowes of them that are departed,
and when they could not hurt their
parents and husbands, they seeke to bee
reuenged of these?
                  That which NAOMIE reporteth of
BOAZ, we may say more rightly of God,
that hee doth not forsake them whiche
trust in him, whether they be dead or aliue:
Then breaking forth into heauenly
prayses, we must say, blessed be God
&c.
                  The other is howe wee must behaue
our selues towardes them, who haue
bene beneficiall vnto VS. NAOMIE acknowledgeth

the benefits bestowed vpon
her, and sheweth her selfe thankefull
to BOAZ and RVTH, she doth declare
this benefite both in wordes and deeds.
See doth blesse BOHAZ, not with a magicall
blessing, or with an inchauntment
but with a heauenly blessing. This wee
must immitate to pray for good things
through Christe for our benefactoures.
There are many poore folkes who haue
receiued a long time many and great benefites,
either of some of their kinsfolks
or others, if they doe once suffer the repulse,
they fret, they are angry, and they
do curse them: if any man bestow vpon
them as much as they can, they yet look
for greater thinges of him, (if they be
not satisfied, they by and by wax angry.
But we ought not onely to geue thanks
in words to them) who haue bene beneficiall
vnto vs, and pray to the Lord for
them, but to shew our selues thankful in
deede. That NAOMIE afterwardes prouided
a husband for RVTH, wee shall
heare in his place. Thirdly, wee gather
out of this place, that the benefites doe

not perish which wee bestowe on our
neighboures. For as NAOMIE praied to
God for a rewarde for BOHAZ her benefactor
he being ignorant of it: so there
shalbe some in all ages, who will prayse
and take acceptably those things, which
are bestowed on them, and will to God
in their prayers, commend the health of
them whose liberalitie they haue tryed:
nay, if they do not their duetie, yet the
worke it selfe if it proceede from fayth,
doth after a sort crie vnto the Lord.
                  IOB. 31. chap. purginge him selfe from
most heynous crimes, which were layd
agaynst him by his friendes, namelye
hipocrisie & vngodlines, making a narration
of his whole life beforespent, saieth
amongest other thinges: let these or other
thinges befall on mee, vnlesse their
sides do blesse me, that are hott with the
fleeces of my sheepe. Hee doth bring
in by Prosopop
                        •
                     ia the sides made whot
by him that they did pray for him: that
is, that such a benefite should come into
remembrance vnto the Lord, although
hee was vnthankefull who
                        •
                      receiued it.

This ought to stir vs vp to liberalytie towards
the poore. If thou doest compare
that which BOAZ gaue to these widows
with his wealth, it is not so glorious &
great: yet it was very profitable to them,
and God doth greatly recompence it.
Our sauiour sayth in the Gospell the 10
chap. of MATT. Who soeuer shall geue
to one of these little ones to drink a cup
of colde water onely, in the name of a
disciple, verily I say vnto you, hee shall
not loose his reward.
                  Fourthly wee haue also a forme of
blessing: what thinges, of whome, and
how we ought to pray for the good of
our benefactors, for the benefits which
they haue bestowed on vs and ours.
The worde blessing doth comprehend
the goodes both temporall and eternal,
as wee haue sayd aboue. These good
thinges NAOMIE prayed for her kinseman,
of the Lord, and she knoweth that
he can shew mercy to whome hee will,
and that he marketh and gouerneth our
wordes and deeds, as wel good as euil.
But those prayers and blessinges are not

in vaine, otherwise the sainctes woulde
not haue vsed them, neyther the scriptures
woulde teache vs to vse them.
As prayers are not vnprofitable: so neither
are those wishes which are nothing
els then certayne kindes of prayers.
                  RVTH going forward to commend the
courteousnes of BOAZ doth say, that he
commaunded her further, that she shuld
accompanie his seruauntes, vntill they
had made an end of haruest. But he said
that she should go forth with his maids.
There is no diuersitie in these wordes,
for the seruauntes and the maydes went
into the field together. For the scriptures
doe oftentimes note that afterwards
which should be set before, some
say that he sayd, Ioyne thy selfe with my
seruauntes, in ieste to try her: Namely
that she might get her a husband. NAOMIE
aunswered: It is good, it is an honest
thing, it doth please me my daughter,
that thou doest goe with his maydens.
She doth not perswade her to go
into another field the next day: and although
she did vnderstād that the good

wils of friendes are not to be abused:
yet she doth bid her to returne into the
ground of BOAZ: because he was theyr
kinsman, shee doth thinke that hee will
haue more care of her honestie, then
straungers and forrainers, for she might
easily come amongest some, who would
not defend her, if she were in daunger.
The olde translation hath, it is better to
goe with his maydes. The cause is added
that they meete thee not▪ Munster
translateth it, least they enforce
thee. This worde Phaga signifieth to
withstand, to resiste to meete, hereof
commeth paegara an euill chaunce or
successe, so also to aske, to pray, to enforce.
If thou shouldst gleane in another
field, some body may withstand thee,
and say that other poore haue licence
to glean there: and some wanton yong
men may force thee, as it sometime cō
                     meth
to passe in the haruest: If thou interpretest
it to aske, per aduenture this is
the meaning, that some body might
prouoke thee to whordom. It is sayd cō
                     mōly
she may be chast to whom no man

moueth the question. There are some
which will take anie payns to defile matrons
and virgins: but at length they are
punished for their vnpuritie. For theyr
children and wiues are often-times defiled
of others, by the iust punishment
of GOD, or they are so kindled
with ielousie towards theyr wiues, so
that they are miserably tormented both
day and night. Or at least RVTH might
haue bene suspected of vngodlines.
                  Let olde women, by the example of
NAOMIE, rightly teach the yonger, and
stirre them vp by prayse to the studye of
vertue, and commaund them to tarry at
home, and shunne all causes of oftending.
It is commonly sayd that the flaxe
must be taken from the fire least it be
burnt. NAOMIE had rather her daughter
in-law should stay at home: but because
necessitie droue her to runne into
the fieldes, shee commaundeth her to
ioyne her selfe in companie with mayds
not with men. Maidens cannot alwaies
stay at home, they are constrayned
sometimes to goe to markets, sometyme

to take long iournies, but they are to be
exhorted, that they doe not this alone,
but that they ioine themselues with honest
companie in their way: let them
shunne talke with wanton young men,
or drunkardes or suspicious places: especially
in the night, let them keepe
themselues at home: And let them not
onely flee from euill, but also from the
outward appearance of euill. For if they
fall into the suspition of whoredome or
adultery, they cannot easily clear themselues.
If they be accused of theft, the
theefe being taken, their innocency is
shewed to all men: but this is farre otherwise.
S. PAVLE in the 2. chap. to TITVS.
The elder women likewise (as hath
bene spoken before of olde men) that
they be in such behauiour, as becommeth
holinesse, not false accusers, not
geuen to much wine, but teachers of
honest thinges: that they may instruct
the yonge women to be sober minded
that they loue their husbands, that they
loue their children: that they be discreet
chaste, keeping at home, good and subiect

vnto their husbandes, that the word
of God be not euill spoken of. Hee saith
it is not inough for olde women to liue
well, but he cōmandeth them to frame
the youngers to vpright life both by
wordes, & also by the example of theyr
lyfe. There are some which talke with
men, resort to daunces and banquettes,
saying that by this meanes they may get
themselues husbands, but this is a dangerous
way, and not allowed of honest
and godly men.
                  RVTH regarding her chastity doth ioin
her self to the maidens, teaching daughters
by her example, to obey the good
counsels of their parentes: which many
doe not willingly, but because they are
hott, and are carried away with their affections,
they had rather hearken to flatterers:
afterwardes falling into manie
troubles, they repent, and doe bewayle
their lotte too late. But those which suffer
themselues to be gouerned of the elder,
they doe finde plentifull fruites
of theyr obedience. Shee kept companie
with them, vntill haruest was

done. Cōtinuance at one work is praise
worthy, and that a man may become
constant, it auaileth muche in young
yeares to bee accustomed to laboures.
They which shift from one labour to another,
do take paines for a little profit.
                  She returned vnto her mother in-law,
or was in companye with her euerye
night: for it becommeth mayds to be at
home at night, and no other where: she
would not that her mother in-law shuld
bee greeued for her. Let not children
through their night wandering, throwe
their parents into sorrow, whose sleepe
otherwise they do often breake: She remayned
with her seeking for noe other
host. At this day many will not willingly
bee with their mothers, much lesse
with their mothers in-law. What if they
should nourishe them▪ poore maydes
whiche will not remayne with theyr
kinsmen, but had rather liue more at lybertie
out of their sight, and to wander
whether their minde carries them, are
not well reported of. But let maydens
so behaue themselues, that their kinsefolkes

or they which are of their affinitie
shoulde haue no iust cause to forbid
them, or cast them out of their house.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The 16. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        1 Afterward Naomie her mother in-law said
vnto her, My daughter, shall not I seeke rest
for thee, that thou mayest prosper?
                        2 Nowe also is not Bohaz our kinseman, with
whose mayds thou wast? behold he winnoweth
barly to night in the floore.
                        3 Washe thy selfe therefore, and annoynt thee,
and put thy rayment vppon thee, and get thee
downe to the floore let not the man knowe of
thee, vntill he hath left eating and drinking.
                        4 And when he shall sleep, mark the place where
he layeth him downe, and go, and vncouer the
place of his feete, amd lay thee downe, and hee
shall tell thee what thou shalt do.
                     
                  
                  
                     THIS chapter doth consist of
three especiall partes. In the
first the councel is contained,
which NAOMIE gaue vnto
RVTH, how she should procure BOHAZ

to be her husbande: in the other is sette
downe, how RVTH obeyed her mother
in-law: and what she obtayned, how
she was accepted of BOHAZ and sent away.
in the third, how she returning vnto
her mother in law, shewed to her all
thinges orderly which befell vnto her.
Many things are contained in this chapter,
which pertayn to making of marriages,
in which the greatest pointes of our
happynes or vnhappines in this life are
contayned.
                  As concerning the councell of NAOMIE,
first shee did promise RVTH her
helpe, that she would prouide for her a
good marriage. I seeke rest (sayth shee)
for thee, for so shee doth call marriage.
She doth adde, that it may be well with
thee: the meaning is: I will ioyne thee
with a good and a meet husbande, that
thou mayest know where thou shalt tarrye,
and that thou mayest hereafter gett
thy liuing without so great labour. She
doth not promise her an idle life abounding
with delightes, shee doth not say
that she shalbe without all troubles, of

which this worlde is full, to the mitigating
of the whiche the Lorde hath appoynted
marryage. GEN. 2. The Lord
sayth it is not good for man to bee alone,
let vs make him a helpe. God will
that it be wel with them, and that they
haue rest. Yet many through their own
faultes do procure themselues great trobles,
as when they do norish suspicious
ielousies &c. Also marriage hath troubles
belōging to it, especialy wher there
be many childrē: yet they haue mo trobles
who dispising this institutution of
God, doe wallow in whoredomes and
addulteries. NAOMIE doth not aduife
her that she should liue a sole life. For it
was better, that a straunge widdowe
should marry with some one of the people
of God. Heere is an example of gratitude
propounded to vs in NAOMIE. In
the first chapter she doth wish for a happie
marriage for both her daughters inlaw,
now that occasion is offred, shee
omitteth nothing, that shee might prouide
a good husband for her, who had
deserued so well of her. There are some

which will be marueilous liberall onely
in promises, but they doe nothing indeed:
oftentimes when they may benefite
theyr friendes without troubling
themselues, they wil not doe it, but if others
doe it, they will enuy them.
                  Next let parentes learne, to prouide
husbandes for theyr daughters, and
wiues for their sonnes, for this care belongeth
to them. Children ought not
in this matter to follow theyr own wicked
affections, but to vse the counsell of
their parentes. Let not parentes tirannically
constraine theyr children to many
against theyr will. NAOMIE doth conferre
with RVTH her daughter in-law of
marriage. Marriages to which children
are vnwillingly driuen, haue seldome
happie endes.
                  The maner is after set downe, howe
NAOMIE procured this marriage: shee
doth giue her preceptes, she doth teach
her, what she shall do, & what she should
auoid: first she biddeth her to wash away
her sweate & spots least she should smel
ill. And those washinges were common

amongst those nations, and of thēselues
not vnlawfull. Next she doth bid her to
annoint her selfe: the which was also vsed
amongst the Estern people, as other
histories, aswell the Euangelical history
doth witnesse. Thirdly she doth bid her
to put on her apparell, to witt the best
she had. Fourthly to goe into the floore
and not suffer her self to be seen, before
that BOAZ had eaten and drunken. The
labourers seeme to haue better cheare
at the latter ende of haruest as at sheepshearing.
We doe make a feast in the latter
end of haruest and vintage: so we do
giue more meate and drink to threshers
of corne in the barne and winnowers.
She doth commaund her to marke hys
bed, or the place where he layeth hym
downe, and remouing the couerlit from
his feete should lye downe by stealth at
his feete, and signifie vnto him what
must be done, according to the lawe of
raysing vppe children to the brother or
kinsman deceased. For he sayd after that
there was one of nearer kindred, with
whome hee would first conferre about

this matter. The law which doth command
that the brother or kinsman shuld
marry the wife of the brother of kinseman
departed without a child, doth not
expresse by what way or meanes it shuld
be done, nor driueth any man vnwillingly
to marriage. Therefore NAOMII
did vse these deuises, that she might win
BOAZ the easier: and might obtayne of
him, that he should doe, that which the
lawe commaunded him to doe of hys
owne accord and free will. For cleanlines
in women doth please men wel: and
husbandes do oftentimes abhorre thei
                        •
                     
wiues for sluttishe apparell. Therefore
women doe combe and decke themselues.
The night also a man being alone
with a woman alone, doth make manie
marriages. Furthermore beyng well
drunke they do many things willingly,
which if they had bin sober they would
not haue done. LOT committed incest
with hys daughters 2. SAM. 11. CAP. DAVID
by drunkennes sought to ouerthrow
the constancie of VRIAH and to
enforce him to lye with his wife. OVI
                        •
                     
                     
sayth. Night loue and wine do nothing
moderately, the night is without shame
and loue is without feare.
                  It was meete that RVTH should bee
marryed to BOHAZ, but there were other
wayes and meanes, by the whiche
shee might haue dealt with him about
this mariage, they myght haue brought
BOHAZ in minde of the law by some honest
but peraduēture they thought
it to be no matter, when they were perswaded
that it was his duty according to
the law, to raise vp seede to the kinsman
deceased. But least anye man should abuse
this example and make marriages
in degrees forbidden, or defend baudry,
and excuse their faults by other errours
and faults of the saints, it is to be known
that ther is mention made, of four kinds
of examples of holye men in the scripture.
                  First certain deeds are described & proposed
to vs to folow, as fayth in ABRAHAM,
patience in IOBE, chastity in IOSEPH,
&c. the ardent prayers of DAVID
& others: all the holy scriptures are ful of

examples of vertue worthy to be had in
remēbrance. How many doth the holy
ghost propose vnto vs in this litle booke
in NAOMIE RVTH and BOHAZ. As gold
smithes, paynters and others do set artificial
works, before their schollers which
they should follow: so God doth put
before vs the examples of Godly men,
that hauing them alwayes in our sight,
we may immitate them in our life.
                  Next the deedes of the Saynts are
contayned in the holy scriptures which
are wicked, as the incest of LOT, the addultery
of DAVID, the disobedience of
IONAS, the pride of the apostles, the denial
of PETER, the vnbeleeuing of THOMAS,
& many other. These are not recited
of the holy ghost to the end that we
should folow them, but we may see that
though they be saynts, to be yet corrupted
in their nature: & in that they did excell
in so many rare vertues, that was by
the goodnesse of God. These thinges
should make vs beware, for if such excellent
men haue fallen, what may befall
vs, when we are not to be compared

with them? Next according to the admonition
of the Apostle: who so doth
thinke he doth stand, let hym beware
least he fall. And as they went not forward
in wickednesse but repented: so
let vs also repent, that God may forgiue
vs our sinnes and punishmentes due for
sins: also let vs receiue sinners which do
repent truely. But true repentance doth
acknowledge the heynousnes of sinne,
embraceth by fayth the mercy of God
proposed in his sonne, and doth afterwardes
abstayne from sinne.
                  Thirdly the sainctes in the olde testament
did certaine thinges well, whiche
at this day were most wicked to follow.
They did circumcise their children at
the eight day, whiche is not at this day,
lawfull: because baptisme is in the place
of circumcisiō. They did offer diuers sacrifices
to God, which at this day haue
no place. A brother ought to marry the
widdow of another brother, & rayse vp
seed to him, which at this day were a sin
worthy of death. The same may be said
also of other ceremoniall lawes whiche

are taken away by Christ, the same also
may be sayd of some part of the iudicialles.
These therefore are not to bee
drawne into example.
                  Fourthly, there are some singuler
deedes, as that ABRAHAM against that
generall law: Thou shalt not kill: would haue
slayne and offered his sonne ISAAKE:
That the Israelites did not restore, the
golden and siluer pottes and apparell
which they had borrowed of the Egiptians:
we must not follow these thinges
we haue no warrā't to do the same. Th
                        ••
                     
(1. SAM. 5.) IONATHAN and his armor
bearer, in an vnfit place set on the power
of the Philistines, was done notably &
heroycally, not proceeding from pride,
or couetousnes, but driuen vnto it by
the holy ghost: he looked vnto the promise
and glory of God, and the preseruation
of his countrey. If any body bee
not led by the like spirite, and yet would
take in hand the like matter, they may be
accompted rashe. I omitte other examples:
by these promises wee may iudge
more rightly of the deeds of NAOMIE

and RVTH. Therefore let vs say that this
is a peculiar fact, and we must not follow
it: Or those women were holy and
chast, yet they did offend in the manner:
neither are those thinges recited in
the scriptures that wee should followe
them, but eschew thē. And although the
successe was happy, yet it was not attributed
to the carefulnes of NAOMIE, but
rather to Gods mercy. Saynt PAVLE in
the first epistle to the THESSAL. 5. doth
bid vs to abstaine from the outward appearaunce
of euil. But she is commaunded
to do that, which hath the outward
appearaunce of euill. NAOMIE vseth
those artes whereby baudes doe entise
young women to wickednes, for they do
vse baths, sweet oyntments, and fine apparell
&c. Peraduenture the successe
would haue bene bad inough, if she had
not met with a godly man. If she could
not haue bene hid, but haue bene spied
of others, who would not haue thought
but that she came either for whordome
or theft? Furthermore who would haue
denied but that NAOMIE as much as

lay in her, cast her daughter in-law into
the danger of whordome: she which did
before please BOAZ might now displease
him by this deed: or if hee had bene enflamed
with wine might haue dealtwith
her, and that he might afterwards haue
put her away as a harlot. It is to be added
to this, that by the law she was not
due to BOAZ, but to a nearer kinsman:
who vnlesse he had giuen ouer his right,
she had done him an iniurie. I wil speake
nothing of this, that men ought to woe
their wiues, and not wiues husbandes.
And although BOAZ did afterward
prayse it, yet it is not to be supposed that
he did allowe of all the circumstances.
Therefore no man ought to abuse the
example of these poore women, & reason
thus, if it were lawful for them, it is
lawfull for vs. For the falles of the saints
ought to make vs more warie, and not
to allure vs to sinne.
                  There are olde women, who when
they hope that by this meanes, they can
make marriages betweene young men
and virgins, they call them to night banquettes,

talkes, and daunces, and sometime
exhort them, that they should goe
to bed together. There are also virgins
which doe entise youthes diuers wayes
to lye with them, saying that they did it
of a good purpose, namely, that they
might get a lawfull marriage: but marriages
are not to be made by this meanes,
we must hold on a right course, parents
& kinsfolkes are to be aduised with, before
honest mē must we cōtract marriages.
How oftē haue those priuate marriages
had a sorrowfull & lamentable end?
                  And those youthes are to be reprooued,
which, that they may get their pleasure
of some women, doe promise them
marriage, and being defiled they driue
them away reprochfully as wh
                        •
                     res, and
denie that euer they did make mention
of marriage. Honest youths wil not marrie
them which haue bene defiled by
them, yea they suspect that they haue
geuen theyr bodies to be abused before
of others, or wil doe it hereafter.
                  But what shal we iudge of them, who
being taken, doe geue as a cloke to their

whoredome the fauourable name of
mariage, when as they made no mentiō
                     of
it before? or what shall wee iudge of
those baudes men or women, who for
gaine doe match those persons together
whome they ought not?
                  Thou shalt also obserue by the way,
that she sayth that BOAZ winnowed the
floore of barly, that is the barly that was
in the floore. The Septuagintes haue
Licman that is to winnow, Licmos a fanne
or a vanne. It is added in the night. The
Chalde interpreter sayth, at the night
winde: peraduenture they coulde not
winnow it in the day for the heat. We
reade also of other holy fathers as ABRAHAH,
ISAAKE, IACOB and GEDION:
so also of the Romaine Senators and
Captaynes that they did apply themselues
to husbandry, not to idlenesse,
drunkennesse, or surfeiting. BOAZ had
many which he might haue committed
this labour vnto, but hee had rather doe
it himselfe, partly for that by the exercising
of his body, hee might be the more
healthy, partly least he yeelding to idlenesse,

should giue place to euill temptations,
partly that he might stirre vpp his
seruauntes to worke by his example, for
examples auayle much euery way.
               
               
                  The 17. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        5 And she aunswered, all that thou biddest mee
I will doo.
                        6 So she went downe, vnto the floore, and did according
to all that her mother in-law bad her.
                        7 And when Bohaz, had eaten and drunken
and cheared his heart, he went to lie downe at
the end of the heape of the corne, and she came
softly, and vncouered the place of this feet, and
lay downe.
                        8 And at midnight the man was afrayd, and
cought hold: and loe a woman lay at his fecte.
                        9 Then he sayd, who art thou? and she aunswered,
I am Ruth thine handmayde: spread
                              •
                           
therefore the winge of thy garment ouer thy
handmayd: for thou art the kinseman.
                     
                  
                  
                     HOW RVTH obeyed her mother
in lawe, and howe shee
was accepted of BOAZ is in
this place declared. She doth
promise her to doe all thinges, and shee
performed it in deede. In the whiche

thing shee is not to be accused. For peraduenture,
because she was newly conuerted
to the Iewish religiō, she thought
it to be the maner, that if she should demaund
the kinsman of the former husband
in marriage, this way she shuld attēpt
it: but if she offended, she offended
of ignorance, not that ignoraunce doth
altogether excuse her from sinne. It doth
onely lessen the fault, it doth not wholly
take it away, as good entent doth also, as
they call it. GEN. 38. THAMAR also vsed
a deceit that she might get IVDAH to be
her husband.
                  This is the duetie of children, that
they obey their parents, and them who
are contayned vnder this name: except
those thinges which they commaund
them to doe, be repugnant to the word
of God. As if they commaund theyr
children not to heare holy sermons, if
they bid thē to put on a Monkes coule,
or trauell into places where pure religion
is bannished. If they bid them to kill
or to hurt some, or robbe, or commit
whordome &c. in these and others they

must not obey their parentes. For the
lawes and commaundementes of God
are to be preferred before the commandementes
of our neerest friendes. Our
Sauiour sayth whosoeuer preferreth his
father and his mother before me, is not
worthy of me. IONATHAN SAVLES
sonne would not slaye DAVID beeing
commaunded of his father. 1. SAM. 17.
chapter. Although it seemed that hee
was bound to it by two bondes. First
because that SAVLE was king, and next
his father, who commaunded it him.
                  Next it is written that BOHAZ dyd
eat and drinke and cheared his heart. It
is also read that other holy fathers somtime
did refreshe themselues with a larger
portion of meate and drinke. GEN.
43. The scripture sayth of IOSEPH, and
of his brethren, that they did drinke and
were drunken with him. Wher the scipture
doth not speake of that luxurious
drunkenesse, whiche it doth so oft condempne,
but of more drinke wherwith
they are made merry. Saynt AVGVSTINE
and also HIEROME doth witnes,

that drunkenes is not vsed for excessiue
drinking, but for inough as PSAL. 35.
they are made drunken with the plentie
of thy house, that is they are ful &c.
God doth command to cast away heauines
in solempne feastes, and celebrate
his feastes with ioy: Vnder the gouernment
of SALOMON the Israelites came
togither in great numbers, eating drinking,
and reioysing. The which is to bee
noted for certaine Anabaptistes and hipocrites,
which do condemne pleasures
and ioyes which are permitted. GOD
doth giue vs wine, bread, flesh, fish, and
other thinges which wee are to vse for
meate and drinke. PSAL. 104. God doth
make the wine to encrease, which doth
make glad the heart of man: and especially
if they who labour hard doe reioice
at their meate and drinke, they are not
to be enuied IERE. 31. God doth promise
his people that they which should
returne into their countrye shoulde abound
with those thinges whiche pertayne
to honest pleasures. Yet wee must
beware least wee abounding with these

giftes of God, should forget him, but we
must giue diligence to vse his gifts well.
                  That BOAZ lay all night in the floore
and slept by the heape of corne: he did
so, eyther that hee might betimes in the
morning returne to his labour, or that
he might watch the corne, least theeues
should carry it away. It seemeth that the
floers or the barnes were in the fieldes
and not so fully fensed, but that euerie
bodie might come in. VARRO. lib. 1. cap.
51. wryteth that the flooer ought to
bee in the fielde, in a higher place so
that the wind might blow thorow, and
especially round, and in the middle a
litle a slope that if it doe rayn, the water
may not stay. &c.
                  He doth teache housholders, by hys
example to haue a care to keepe theyr
thinges, and to be present with theyr labouring
people, for oftentimes through
theyr owne negligence that is stolne frō
them which they haue gottē with great
labour. In the deepe of the night BOAZ
tourned himselfe from one side to another,
or bowed himself. laphath signifieth

to bow, to apprehend, to lye shrunk vp
together: some expound it to turn from
one side to an other. When he did turn
himselfe, and thrust his feet to the foot
of the bed, hee vnderstoode that something
laye there, and being afrayd, hee
boweth himselfe and by feeling (to witt
by the apparel) hee found it to bee
a woman, therefore hee asked who shee
was? It was no maruell that hee was afrayd,
hee might haue suspected some
euil spirit which had taken on it a body,
had lain at his feet. Alexāder of Alexandria
in the 2. booke chap. 9. writeth of a
certaine spirit, that as it seemed puttyng
away the bedd clothes, lay downe in a
bedd where a good man lay, and drawing
neere as if it would haue embraced
him: and the other when he was nowe
almost dead for feare, shranke to the side
of the bedd, and when it came neerer he
droue it away &c. Also looke in the 19.
chap, book. 4. I could also bring you many
other examples of this kinde.
                  And it is not to be doubted but that
BOAZ being amased with a sodayn feare

commended himselfe vnto the Lorde:
for godly men were woont to do so in
those soddaine terrours, when wicked
shapes and illusions of shaddowes appeared
to them. The olde fathers as it is
read oft times in theyr writinges doe
crosse themselues and so they driue awaye
deuils. Lactantius writeth of the
vertue of the crosse in the 4. booke. 27.

                        ••
                     ap. but we must not think that this ce
                     
                        ••
                     monie
of the crosse, doth driue away

                        •••
                     ils of it self, but because they belee
                     
                        •••
                     
that they were freed by the crosse
and benefite of Christ, from the power
of the deuils.
                  RVTH aunswered modestly that shee
was his handmaid and desired him, that
hee woulde couer her with the skirt of
hys garment: or throwe his winge ouer
her. Chanaph signifieth a wing, or a skirt
of a garment, also an end and a corner.
Lira noteth that the man contracting
marriage in those dayes layd his winge,
or the nethermost skirte of his garment
on the woman: So the meaning is betroth
me to thee: and marry me according

to the lawe of a kinseman, or that
whiche is better, hide me vnder thy
wings, take me into thy tuition and defend
me. A metaphor borrowed from
birdes, who doe couer and defend theyr
young ones with theyr winges.
                  But in this similitude, is by the way
set foorth the duetie of husbandes towardes
their wiues: namely that they
shield and defend them, feede and pro
                        ••
                     uide
necessary thinges for them. Good
Lord, howe manie husbandes are there
which doe neuer thinke of these things?
                  She doth shew the cause, wherefore
hee ought to take her into his defence:
because thou art the kinsman. Least hee
should thinke, that she was a bold and
vnshamefast woman to come into a
mans bed in the night vnknowne: shee
called to hys minde, the law of God of
marrying, the widowe of the brother or
co
                        •
                     in departed. Let not women abuse
this place in the defence of their filthinesse,
neyther let them come night nor
day to any mans bed, if he be not married
to them, especialy if he be wel drunken,

or otherwise cast themselues rashely
into danger: for the condition of those
times was farre otherwise, then at this
day it is.
               
               
                  The. 18. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        10 Then sayd hee, Blessed be thou of the Lorde
my daughter, thou hast shewed more goodnesse
in the latter end, then in the beginning, in asmuch
as thou followest not yong men were they
poore or riche.
                        11 And now my daughter, feare not: I will doe
to thee all thou requirest: for all the Citie
of my people doth know, that thou art a vertuous
woman.
                        12 And now it is true that I am they kinseman,
howbeit, there is a kinseman neerer then I.
                        13 Tarry to night and when morning is come, if
hee will do the duetie of a kinseman vnto thee,
well, let him do the kinsemans duty: but if he
                              •
                           
will not do the kinsemans part, then will I doe
the dutie of a kinseman, as the Lord liueth,
sleepe vntill the morning.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE notable woman RVTH
asked of BOHAZ here first husbands
kinsman, that he shuld
marry her, as it is immediately

before. Now hēceforward doth follow,
what BOAZ aunswered to her. Blessed
(saith he) thou art, or shalbe of God, or
frō god. my daughter. The septuagintes
do translate it, eulogemene suto curio theo. BOAZ
calleth her his daughter, who called
her selfe his handmayd: and he prayeth
to god the only giuer of al good things,
to blesse her both in bodie and soule. Or
he saith this, that she had receiued great
giftes of God, and was acceptable vnto
him. That kinde of salutation is other
where extant. 1. SAM. 15. SAVLE meeting
SAMVEL saluting him, sayed: Blessed be
thou of the Lord. In the new testament
LVK. 1. chapter. The Aungell GABRIEL
saluting the holy virgen, sayd: eulogement
suen gunaixi that is, blessed bee thou amongest
women, that is, thou art in fauour
with God: it is a great thing to be
in fauor with a prince, much more with
God. Thou art that happie and blessed
woman, whiche God chose out of all
womenkinde, that the messias might be
borne of thee: for vnder the name of
blessing, the Hebrues do vnderstand all

kinde of happinesse. Hee sayth that
her last pietie was greater then the first.
The first pietie or bountifulnesse was,
that shee did reuerence her husbande,
when he was aliue, and that shee loued
him, and also shee did not forsake her
mother in-law, her husbād being dead.
Her latter pietie was, that shee, being at
libertie from her husband, did not follow
lust, she did not seek for yong men,
were they rich or poor, but she did keep
her selfe safe vnto her husbandes kinsman,
that shee might haue seede according
to the law, and rayse vp the name
of the dead to their posterity. She might
haue had a young husband, eyther in
her owne country, or among the Israelites:
but shee had rather marry an olde
man, than doe against the law. Notable
deedes are to be praysed, both in men
and women. BOAZ did not alow the
maner which shee vsed in seeking a husband,
or at the least, he could not haue
praysed it in any other, which had not
the like cause. For that which shee did,
had an outward apearāce of euil, but he

doth not iudge according to the outward
appearaunce of this worke, but according
to RVTHES intent and purpose.
He thought that that which she did was
not of lightnes and lust, but at the commaundement
of her mother in law, that
there might be seede raysed vppe according
to the law to the former husband.
For he doth consider that she hath liued
hitherto well, and so behaued her selfe
toward her mother in-law, that she was
worthie of a notable husband.
                  And because BOAZ did so indifferently
iudge of that deede which had
an outward appearance of euill, & doth
take it in good part, truely, we ought not
to interprete in the worst parte those
thinges, which haue the appearaunce of
good, and are in their own nature good
& right: There are some who take in the
worsepart, the words & deeds of others,
through a certain corruption of nature,
being led by no probable reason. Sainct
PAVLE in the 1. to the COR. 13. chap.
sayth, loue doth not thinke euill, it beleeueth
al things, it hopeth for al things.

Wordes and deedes whiche are doubtfull
are to be well interpreted, but not
the euill. Looke howe muche the worse
a man is, so much the more suspitious is
he. It is commonly sayd, he that is euill
thinketh euill, and in this matter they
doe follow the nature of the deuill. But
who so will not be suspected of euill,
must keepe thēselues from these things,
which make men to be suspected of others.
Numb: 32. chap. MOSES suspected
the two tribes and an halfe, begging the
land beyond Iordaine, which was verie
fertill, that they woulde forsake theyr
brethren in daungers. But after they had
declared theyr purpose, they took away
that euill suspition out of his mind, and
out of the minds of the other Israelites:
2. SAM. 10. chap. DAVID sendeth Ambassadours
to the king of the Ammonites,
to comfort him after the death of
his father, but the king harkening vnto
flatterers, suspected them of treason,
whereof most cruell warre arose. Therefore
wee must not harken vnto backbiters,
and flatterers, who doe put euill

suspitions into mens mindes. Also in
matters of religion, all thinges are to be
set foorth openly and plainly, least greeuous
suspitions arise in the minds of the
simple. For there are some, who although
they vnderstand the state of religion,
yet they doe speake doubtfully
of many pointes of religion, least great
men shoulde be offended with them.
And the example of RVTH doth teache
vs, that we bee not ledde by our owne
affections, or doe that which is pleasant
to the flesh, neglecting the law of God.
RVTH coulde haue had a young husband,
but she married an old man, least
she should haue violated the lawe of the
Lord. There are widowes whiche may
easily haue riche husbandes, but either
they will not haue Idolaters, or they
will not forsake their fatherlesse childrē.
Also there are men with whome riche
wiues would marry, if they would goe
out of those places wherein pure religion
is embraced, into such places where
there is no mention made of it. Sometime
they do fauour theyr children, least

that if they marry wiues suche as they
would, it shoulde be worse with them,
the which, the children ought to bee
thankefull for.
                  BOAZ comforteth RVTH whome againe
he calleth louingly daughter, least
that she should be afrayd of him, but be
of good comfort. Peraduenture she feared
least shee should be accompted vnshamefast,
or, that hee, being not well
in temper, shoulde force her to commit
whoredome, or els be repulsed. He doth
add, that he would doe that which she
required, that is, he is ready to mary her,
for it is knowne to all the Citie that she
is a vertuous woman, worde by word it
is, euery gate knoweth, that is all the citie,
eyther because that iudgement was
executed in the gate, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the gate by Sinedoche
is put for the whole Citie.
                  First of al in contracting matrimonie,
thou must looke that the modest behauiour
and honesty of the woman, which
thou art about to marry, be knowne to
all men. But in our times, the first question
is of wealth, and the last of maners,

it is a good thing if a woman be not demed,
if it be knowne to all the citizens
that she behaued her selfe well from her
youth: it is very filthie on the contrarie
parte, if it bee knowne to bleare-eyd-men
and to barbers, that she hath bene
a woman desiled and vnshamefast.
                  He addeth a condition, vpon which
condition hee will marry her. I doe not
denie, sayth hee, that I am thy kinsman
(some doe thinke that BOAZ was ELIMELECHES
brother sonne) but there
is one of nearer affinitie to thee. I will
conferre with this man of this matter, if
he wil doe according to the law of consanguinitie,
and marry thee, it is well,
but if not, I wil marry thee, according to
the law of kindred. He had rather marry
her by and by, but he would not take away
the right of his kinsmā. If he would
haue married her, BOAZ had done hym
an iniurie, if he had married her, before
he had aduised with his kinsman. The
same reason is also to be hadde in other
matters. Iustice is that vertue, whiche
doth giue so euery man, his owne. We

ought to be so farre from withholding
those thinges which are another mans,
without his consent, that wee ought rather
to defēd his right from others. And
in that hee doth not by and by, bid her
come to him, and promise her mariage,
hee doth admonishe them which are about
to marry, not to make too muche
hast, or runne headlong by followyng
theyr owne affections. For we must beware
least any impedimentes be found.
For there are some things which do either
hinder marriages about to be contracted,
or do dissolue them whiche are
contracted, those verses are knowne.
                  
                     Error, conditio, votum, cognatio, crimen,
                     Cultus disparitas, vis, ordo, ligamen, honestas.
                     Si sis assinis, si forte coire nequibis:
                     Haec socianda vetant, connubia tuneta retraetant.
                  
                  The vow of virginity, vnder the pope
doth hinder marriage: and also orders,
as if any man be a clearke, of which
matters, there is no occasion that wee
shoulde vse many wordes in this place.
BOAZ first, concluded the matter with

his kinsman. We vse in other contractes
to consider of all things thorowly, there
is more neede of great care in marriage.
Also we must beware in contractes, that
we doe not anie thing deceitfully. And
it is good, after marriage is contracted
not to delai the mater ouer long, for many
dangers which may arise of the same,
but to confirme it openly. He affirmeth
by an othe, that he will marry her, if the
other refuse it. It is also read of other
Sainctes, that oftentimes being not required,
they vsed othes in weighty matters.
This is to be noted against them,
which doe altogether reiect an othe. He
sweareth, that hee might put her out of
doubt. But vnlesse there were a greater
religion of swearing in the old time, thē
is nowe, truely hee could not haue put
her out of doubt. For sometime euen
great Princes doe deceiue others thorowe
swearing, and oppresse them before
they be aware. That which BOAZ
promised he thorowly performed.
                  He commaunded her to sleepe vntill
morning: he would not haue her in the

night to wander in the streetes: It is the
part of women in the night time to stay
at home, for many dangers which may
befall them. Also it is very profitable for
youths, to be kept at home in the night,
for the night doth yeelde many occasions
of great euils. Let them spend their
time at home in reading, or other honest
exercises.
               
               
                  The. 19. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        14 And she lay at his feet vntill the morning:
and shee arose before one could know another:
for hee sayd let no man knowe that a woman
came into the floore.
                        15 Also he sayd, bring the sheet that thou hast
vpon thee and holde it, and when shee held it,
he measured six measures of barly, and layde
them on her, and she went into the Citie.
                        16 And when she came to her mother in-law, she
sayd, who art thou my daughter? And she told
her all that the man had done to her.
                        17 And sayd, these six measures of barly gaue be
me: for he said to me: Thou shalt not come emptie
vnto thy mother in-law.
                        18 Then sayd shee, my daughter, sit still, vntill

thou know how the thing will fall: for the man
will not bee in rest, vntill hee haue finished the
matter this same day.
                     
                  
                  
                     WE must diligently obserue
the course of this historie, for
the better vnderstanding of
this booke. Wee haue heard
in the former sermon, howe BOAZ taking
RVTH in the floore behaued himselfe
towardes her: nowe we shall heare
of her dimission, and returne to her mother
in-law. Yet first it is sayd, that shee
slept all night at his feet. After the talke
had betweene themselues of making
marriage, they contained themselues in
their places. If BOAZ had behaued himselfe
otherwise then hee should, truely
the holy Ghost, which did not passe ouer
with silence, the dronkennesse of
NOAH, the incest of LOTT, the adulterie
of DAVID, the deniall of PETER, and
the sinne of MAGDELEN, would not
haue passed ouer this. BOAZ doth not abuse
the occasion offered him, to fulfill
his lust.
                  
                     
He doth teache vs by his example
continencie and chastitie. Wee read in
prophane histories of great Emperours,
when they had vanquished Cities, they
would not see moste bewtifull matrons
and virgins, or haue them brought in
their sight, or being brought to them,
though they looked vppon them, yet
they did gouerne theyr lustes, and send
them backe againe vntouched, to theyr
parentes or husbandes, and so wanne
great fauour with thē. The great Alexander,
when he was biddē that he shuld
see the daughters of Darius king of the
Persians, which were prisoners and of
wonderfull beautie, woulde not goe,
saying, that it was not in him, that when
he had ouercome men, he should be ouercome
of women. But they were rather
shadowes of vertues, then vertues
amongest the Gentiles: for that which
they did came not of true fayth, but rather
of ambition. IOSEPH is worthie to
be praysed, who oftentimes being prouoked
by his mistresse, who was in loue
with his beauty, would not doe that iniurie

to his maister, nor violate the commaundement
of God (which was not
yet set downe in tables) GENE. 39. For
as a man ought to shunne other occasions
of euils, so also of adultery. And
though thou be alone with a woman,
yea in the night, yet the bridles of vnchastitie
are not to be let lose, we must
thinke of the commandement of God,
thou shalt not commit adulterie: wee
must thinke of the punishment of adulterie,
whoredome, and lust, we must not
iudge of sinnes according to the corrupt
iudgement of the worlde. Howe vnlike
are those young men, who eyther vnder
the pretence of mariage or by force,
doe defile mayds, or other mens wiues:
also some old men, which are decrepite
doe entise other mens wiues to adulterie
(as they did Susanna.) But what do I
speake of them, when Monkes, whiche
doe vowe chastitie, doe often-times defile
matrones and virgins: And it is euident
that for this purpose they doe vse
auriculare confessions, and sometimes
magicall artes: In the meane season if a

woman doe come into their monastery
they doe sweepe their pauement with
besomes. RVTH arose before one could
know another for darkenesse: that is, at
the dawning of the daye. For BOHAZ
sayde (as the olde translation hath) beware
least any bodie do know that thou
camest hyther: or he commaunded his
seruaunts (as some will haue it) lest they
should tell, that she was at the flowre in
the night, which doth not like me. That
is more alowable, that IOSEPHVS sayth,
that he badd her to be gone, before hee
raised vp his seruaunts: although he did
know that hee was not guiltie, neyther
that he had done any thing, whereof he
might worthely bee ashamed; yet hee
would not offēd others, nor lay a stumbling
blocke before them. It is knowne
out of the Gospell; what they are worthy
of, which do offend their neighbors
eyther in word or deede: he doth teach
vs to beware, not onely of the euill it
selfe, (as S. PAVLE warneth vs in the
1. THES. 5. chap.) but also he warneth vs
to beware of the appearaunce of euill.

There are many thinges wee may say or
do, with a good conscience, but we must
alwaies haue a regard of our neighbour,
and all our sayings and doings, must be
applied to the edyfiyng of others. If any
woman will not be accounted for an
harlot, let her beware, least she shew the
appearāce of an harlot, either in speach,
behauiour, apparell, and such other. We
must haue a care of our good name, according
to those common verses.
                  
                     Omnia si perdas, famam seruare memento.
                     Qua semel amissa, postea nullus eris.
                  
                  The losse of goods may easely be recouered,
by labour and diligence, but
if any body bee suspected of chastitie, it
is not so with it. Yet there are some wicked
men which take delight in wickednesse.
ISAY 3. chap. sayth of his people,
that they haue boasted of their sinnes as
the Sodomites: he addeth, he wil bring
euill on them. IEREM, 3. chap. doth disallow
his people, because they had the
foreheades of harlots, and would not
repent. How many are there now at this
day, which do boast of whordomes, of

adulteries, dronkennes, vnlawful vsuries
vniust slaughters, & other wickednesses
which shuld not be known that they did
it, if they thēselues held their peace? although
they which do hide their wickednes,
shal not escap their punishment. We
ought also to haue regard of other mens
good names and honestie. BOHAZ doth
diligently take heed, least any shuld suspect
that they had done euil. At her departure
be biddeth her to take her cloak
or sheete wherewith shee was couered,
and holde it with both her handes, and
he measureth out six measures of barly,
that is, six smale bushels or measures of
barly, Theodorus Bibliander (my most
reuerent maister) doth take it to bee an

                        
                           •
                        phah: and the garment being tied togeather
(as it seemed) with a knot, hee layd
it vpon her head. mitpaach is interpreted
a sheete, a cloake, others, a vaile or a linnen
cloath: how much barly there was,
if it be counted according to our measures,
it is hard to tell. It seemeth there
was somuch as shee coulde carie on her
head, he gaue her barly that shee might

carry it to her mother in-law which was
poore, and that shee might haue also to
eat, vntill she should be marryed to one
of them.
                  Let rich men learn, to vse their riches
well, and to bestowe them liberallye to
the vse of the poore. At this time thou
hast great occasion offered to thee of exercising
thy liberality, in so great perscutions
of the godly, and in such skarcetie
of corne. God will not haue them excused
which do seeke by this to defend
their couetousnesse, that they do not
know, who are worthy or vnworthy of
almes.
                  Rabbi SOLOMON writeth (as Lira testifieth)
that those six measures were signes
of the six blessinges of God, which were
to come on the messias which should be
born of RVTH by DAVID, according to
that which is written in the 11. cap of ESAY.
There shall come a rod forth of the
stocke of Ishay &c. and the spirite of wisdome,
and vnderstanding, the spirite ocouncell,
& strength, the spirite of knowledge,
and of the feare of God was on

him. Hee addeth out of this saying of
RABBI SALOMON, two things to be cosidered
on, that the scripture of the olde
testament, is not onely to be expounded,
historically, but also sometime mistically:
the other, that that saying of ISAIAH
is alleadged, and vnderstoode of
Christ, euen of the Hebrues themselues.
                  BOAZ went into the Citie, without
doubt he accompanied RVTH for her
defēce, & for her honestie sake. For, honest
virgins and matrones, ought to beware,
that they doe not wander in the
night times in the streets, without light,
and honest companie.
                  RVTH came to her mother in-law,
who asked, what hath befallen to thee
my daughter? or who art thou? that is,
how go thy matters? how doth thy businesse
goe forward? hath thy kinsman
married thee? Parentes ought to take an
accompt of their children, yea, if they be
well growne in yeares, and they shall do
muche good, if their neighbours and
kinsfolkes doe not dissemble, the faultes

of the children to them. RVTH is not become
the prouder for the hope of marriage,
but aunswered modestly to her
mother in-law, shee doth not aunswere
frowardly, but she doth rehearse in order
what was done. Also childrē which
are well aged ought to geue an accompt
to their parentes: And if theyr parentes
be poore, they ought to prouide for thē
and to nourish them: and they ought
not to take away those thinges priuilie,
which they haue gotten by great labor:
PROV. 28. verse. 24. he that robbeth his
father or mother, and saith it is no transgression,
is the companion of a man
that destroyeth.
                  Let riche men learne, that they send
not away them which be poore in deed
emptie. BOAZ would not send away the
daughter in law to her mother in law,
whome he knewe to be oppressed with
pouertie, emptie: Who so doth giue to
the poore, doth lend to the Lord. Let vs
rather giue many giftes to them, then
to dumme images.
                  The mother in-lawe doth bid her

daughter in law, to keep her self at home
vntil she did know now the 
                        •
                     atret wēt:
she will not that shee should publishe it,
as certaine talking women would. Shee
doth adde that BOAZ will not be in rest,
before he hath ended this busines: good
matters are not to be deferred, but that
which is meet is to be done by and by.
                  Let mothers learne out of these
wordes, to instruct their daughters wel;
to teach them good thinges, and to reclaime
them from euill. NAOMIE, biddeth
RVTH sit downe, that is, be in rest
and to looke for the successe, and in the
meane season not to doubt of BOAZ his
faith. They are to be instructed in religion
& good maners, not onely in words
but in example of life. Next we see how
credite is gotten. NAOMIE trusteth this
man, that hee will keepe promise with
RVTH, because she saw him indued with
some vertues, otherwise she would haue
doubred of his fidelitie: neyther would
shee haue beleeued him by and by after
hee had promised her. That is true credite,
when the sayings or deedes of anie

man be of force with others. As if hee
shoulde speake or promise anie thing,
men would not doubt of his troth, if he
doth any thing, men would accompt it
for right. If he commaund anie thing others
will obey, if he doe giue counsell,
others do receaue it, and do make great
accompt of his iudgement. But howe is
this estimation gotten? Not by flattering,
nor by dissembling, but by vertue
often shewed, with a happie successe.
For mens mindes are kindled with the
admiration of vertue, and opinion of
Gods helpe. Manie thinke that dignitie
is gotten, with an outward shewe of
sumptuous apparell, by great titles and
by flatterie. These truely are of great
force amongest fooles, but not amongst
men of knowledge. But this is a singular
gift of God, necessary for magistrates,
doctors, fathers of housholdes, also for
artificers and merchants. IOB. 29. declareth
howe muche hee was esteemed amongst
all men, because he did his duty
faithfully: & did not leaue of to deserue
well. Estimation is lost, if we do not performe

those thinges which wee do promise,
or that those thinges which we do
speake are false, or those thinges which
wee do are worthy of reproofe. Therefore
many vndeseruedly do complaine,
that they haue no credite, when they
themselues doe not that whiche they
ought.
               
            
            
               CAP. IIII.
               
                  The. 20. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        1 Then went Boaz vpp to the gate, and sate
there, and behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz
bad spoken came by, and he sayd, Ho, such one
come sit downe here. And hee turned and sate
downe.
                        2 Then hee tooke ten men of the Elders, of the
Citie, and sayd, sit ye downe here, and they sate
downe.
                        3 And he sayd vnto the kinsman, Naomie that
is, come agarne out of the countrie of Moab
will sell a parcell of land, which was our brother
Elimelechs.
                        
                        4 And I thought to aduertise thee, saying, buy it
before the assistauntes, and elders of my people.
If thou wilt redeeme it, redeeme it, but if thou
wilt not redeeme it tell me, for I knowe there is
none besides thee to redeeme it, and I am after
thee, Then he aunswered I will redeeme it.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     WE haue hitherto heard, of diuers
troubles and afflictions
wherewith. NAOMIE and
RVTH were afflicted: nowe
next we shall heare, how their conditiō
was changed into better. For after that.
BOAZ a wealthie man, married RVTH,
both of them abounded in thinges necessarie
for the sustenance of life. But the
holy Ghost doth keepe this order in
this chap. First BOAZ doth trie before
the Iudges, the god will of the kinsman,
whether hee would buye the little field
of NAOMIE, & whether he would mary
RVTH according to the law. Next he refusing
it, BOAZ married RVTH, therefore
all the people and the elders reioiced at
thē. Thridly, when he had begotten his,
first borne son, the womē blessed NAOMIE
his graund-mother. Fourthly the
genealogie of BOAZ is described.
                  This chapter is replenished with much
doctrine, as we shall heare (God willing)
in their places. And first we see that
godly men may be raysed by the grace
of God out of great pouertie, and lifted

vp vnto great honors. BOAZ sayd vnto.
RVTH asking marriage, that hee would
marrie her, if the nearer kinsman would
not marry her. The next daye hee sate
in the gate as a chiefe Iudge, according
to the opinion of the Hebrues,
who sayd that he was IBSAN the Iudge,
and when the kinsman came by (of whō
he had spoken to RVTH) by chaunce or
rather by the prouidence of God, hee
commaunded him to come to him, and
sit downe and by and by hee called ten
elders, and he commaunded them to sit
downe, and he sayd open his cause.
                  As concerning the phrase, He sayde
no, such one, come hither and sit here?
The Hebrue wordes, Almoni Peloni signifie
nothing, but are onelye put in
stead of some proper name, whiche wee
leaue out eyther because it is known, or
do not, remember it, or because we wil
not name it, the Gretians doe call o dei
                        
                           •
                        as▪
                     
Some men doe thinke that his name
was not conceald without the prouidence
of God, for that he was not worthie
to be remembred of good men, for

that he despised to rayse vppe the name
and seede to hys brother.
                  The olde Hebrues did 
                        •
                     it in iudgmēt
in the gates, or about the gates of the
Citie, all men beholding and hearing
those thinges whiche were done: as
this daye also in manie places publike
iudgementes, especiallye of lyse
and death, are exercised openly. They
doe alleadge this reason wherefore the
Senate is holden in the gate: that euery
man might quickly finde the place, that
the country men needed not to go into
the Citie, and spend muche there, and
that euery one might goe to theyr houses,
theyr busines being ended. Furhtermore,
that many witnesses may be easily
gathered of them, that goe out and in.
Or the gate is simplie takē for the court.
The Chaldeans do translate at the gate:
that is to say, the house of publike iudgment,
at the court: peradu
                        •
                      ture because
those houses had great gates. The Romaines
gathered their counsels for the
most part in the temples.
                  Hee called together the Elders. The

Hebrues do call Zacan, Iudges, of their
age, as the latines doe also call them
Senators and fathers, amongest the
Gretians, also the senate is called Gerousi
                           •
                        
                     
from a worde that signifieth age. They
choose for the most part the Senate, by
whose councell the common wealth is
gouerned of the elders, which seeme
most fit for this matter. For they know
many thinges, and haue learned manie
thinges by their owne hurt. Next they
are not so carryed by theyr affections
as youthes, but they doe administer
thinges with mature counsell. Furthermore,
when they are near to death, they
thinke, or at least ought to thinke, that
they should do nothing agaynst publick
iustice and religion, for shortly God will
take an account of their deedes and sayings.
Whē PISISTRATVS the tirāt, asked
SOLON what encoragement he had, that
he did withstand him so sharply: he answered
old age. Valerius maximus writeth
of Cesselius, that when he did not
obey the Triumuerie, & did speak many
thinges freely against CAIVS CAESAR,

his friends warned him that hee should
take heed to himselfe: he sayd there are
two thinges which doo make mee verio
bold, namely olde age and want of children.
                  It is said that those elders sate down.
By sitting down is signified, that Iudges
ought to be of a mind quiet, peaceable,
and calme, not to be troubled with affections,
and that attentiuely they shuld
heare them which plead in the court,
& not with a wauering mind. SERVIV
                        •
                     
noteth lib. 9. Anei: In antient time men
vsed this phrase to sit, for to aduise, to
care for, and to consider of.
                  After propounding the cause he said
NAOMIE doth appoint to sell the field
of ELIMELECH our brother, (the Hebrues
doe call cousins brethren) therefore
I would bring it to thy care, that is,
shew it to thee, that if thou wilt redeem
it according to the law of kindred, in the
presence of the dwellers hereabout, and
of the elders of my people, thou mayst
redeem it, because there is none neerer,
and if it doth not please thee to redeeme

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      I would thou shouldest tell me, he by
and by, aunswered, I wil redeeme. BOAZ
addeth presently that he must also marry
RVTH, if he will haue the land.
                  The Iewes had their peculiar lawes
of Inheritances and successions. NVM.
27. and 36. chap. the land of Israell was
deuided into 12. Tribes: of which euerie
one of them had their possessions, which
God would not haue mingled; and the
inheritances of one to be transported to
another, The fathers being dead, the
children succeeded in the inheritaunce.
The sonnes ought not to marry wiues
out of their owne Tribes: the daughters
also ought not to marry others out of
their own tribes: If any man dyed without
Children, the brothers did succeed,
but if they had no brothers, the kinsmā.
LEVI. 25. chap. no man ought to sell the
inheritance of his possession: but if anie
man be poore and be constrained to sell
his grounds, he ought to offer it to hys
kinsman, if they will not, then to some
of that tribe: but in the meane season
the seller hath gotten mony, he may alwayes

redeeme it from the buyer: 
                        •
                     
                     length
the possessions returne to their
old maisters in the yeare of Iubily. Ly
                        ••
                     no
                        •
                     eth
vpon this place that women d
                        ••
                     
not inherite, but if a wife remayne after
her husband be dead without children,
she was to haue part of the inheritaunce
to maintayne her selfe.
                  And shee might sell as much as was
hers, and so it is sayd, that NAOMIE
would sell after the same manner, that
part of the ground & of the field, which
was left her by her husbande and children,
which by the law shee had the vse
of whilest she liued. But it was not lawfull
to sell the grounde out of her husbandes
familye, but to his kinsemen. As
concerning the phrase to reueale anye
mā his eares (which is oftentimes vsed in
the holye scriptures) signifieth to admonishe
or to shew any thing, or to reueale
some secret thing to any man. The latins
vse this phrase to pul one by the care, for
to admonish one. VIR. ECLO. 6.
                  Cum cauerem regem et pralia Cynthius aurē ve
                        ••
                     
                  
                  For that was the manner (as Mancinellus

saith) of those, that put mē in remēbrance,
and warne thē to do or to remember
something: looke in the Pro
                     
                        •
                     erbes
of ERASMVS, to pull the eare. If
no bodie will redeeme, the third person
is put for the second, if thou wilt redeeme
it, let me knowe it. First in this
place we haue a notable example of performing
promise: Hee sayd hee woulde
marry RVTH vnlesse shee was that daye
married to another. Now he doth performe
without anye let, those thinges
which he promised to do, and although
it was priuely and without witnesses, yet
he doth without delay performe it, and
hee doth free himselfe from his promise.
Furthermore if any man doth promise
marriage to another, or any other
things let him performe the same faithfully,
as if thou doest promise a certaine
summe of money to any body &c. But
before he doth promise, let him diligētly
consider, whether hee can performe or
no, that which he hath taken vpon him,
And that thou mayst performe it, thy
pleasures is to be lesned, and thou must

labour night and day. PROVERRS. cap. 
                        •
                     .
SA
                        •
                     OMON doth commaund him who
doth giue his worde for another, not to
rest before he be freed, hee doth not bid
him to breake his promise. If bandes be
made or an othe taken, the greater care
doth lye vpon vs. There is so great lightnesse
in men at this day, especially in
marriages? that many doe openly denie
those thinges, which they priuily
promised to the poore, the needie, and
the straungers: nay, they doe not performe
those thinges, which they haue
bound themselues vnto by othe.
                  Next here is an example of righteousnesse
set before vs, hee did not defile
RVTH, that hee might put another from
his right, and get both the wife and
ground to himselfe: for at this day the
course of the worlde is bent this way,
that many doe defile virgines, that they
may be that meanes keepe them without
the consent of their parentes and
kinsmen: Iustice commaundeth to giue
euery man his owne: They are m
                        ••
                     st
which do challenge those things, which

by right of inheritance belong to others
or doe fell or defile theyr folkes children:
Gods lawe doth condemne children
stealers to death. But howe many
are there this day which trusting to their
riches and power, endeuour to spoyle
others vnder the title of iustice.
                  Furthermore, let vs learne to deale
wearelie with couetous, craftie, & contentious
men, such as that kinsman seemed
to be, BOAZ as it is to be supposed
knew the maners of this man, hee doth
not deale directly with him, as if hee
should say, by and by thou must rayse vp
seede, of the wife or widow of thy kinsman,
which is left behinde, hee dealeth
with him ouerthwartly. First he telleth
him of the field, next of a wife to be
married together with it, that there
might be no matters of contention, and
he might by a fit meanes attayne to his
purpose. We ought not alwaies to vtter
all thinges by and by, but we must keep
euery thing for a fit time. God commaunded
SAMVEL. 1. booke. 16. chap.
who shuld annoynt DAVID to be king,

to take a calfe, and to say, he wil offer 
                        •••
                     erifice
to the Lord, least hee should fall
in danger of his life.
                  Furthermore we learne by the example
of BOAZ, that matters of controuersie
are to be propounded in the iudgement
place, in few fit and plaine words

                        •
                     e him selfe doth propose the matter: In
some common wealthes proctors do it,
to whome also it should not be graunted,
that they shoulde hurt the good
name of others, and shoulde bable out
many words, nothing appertayning to
the matter, and so shoulde wearie the
iudges, and draw away their minds frō
the matter propounded, as some are
woont to doe.
                  Moreouer we learne, that it is lawful
for a godly man, to sell, to buy, to bestow,
to change, to redeeme his goodes,
for this is not accompted as a fault for
good & godly men in the scriptures. But
it is red, IE. 32. cap. IERE. the prophet by
the cōmandement of God, bought the
field of Hanameell, by the same lawe
whereby this man is bidden to buy this

ground. We must see that contractes be
made according to the lawe of equitie,
& so that we be not ashamed, how many
witnesses can testifie, after what maner
we haue dealt with our neighbors.
                  Also this is to be noted in the last
place, that those Iudges and that kinseman
sate downe, they hold their peace,
they do not interrupt BOAZ his speech,
they doe not rayse any tumult: so let
Iudges and them which appeare before
Iudges hearken, let these men beeing
bidden or commaunded aunswere, let
the others giue iust iudgement according
to the lawes.
               
               
                  The. 21. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                            Then sayd Boaz, what day thou buyest the
field of the hand of Naomie, thou must also
buy it of Ruth the Moabitesse, the wife of the
dead, to stirre vp the name of the dead, vppon
his inheritance.
                     
                  
                  
                     ALthough BOAZ would willingly
haue married RVTH,
for her honest behauiours, as
soone as it was demanded of
him, yet hee would not do this without

the knowledge of that kinsmā, who was
neerer in the degree of bloud: therefore
he called together the elders, and declared
the matter in theyr presence. And
that hee might auoyd brabling, hee first
asketh the kinsman whether hee would
buy the field of ELIMELECH according
to the law, but when that did please him
he commaundeth him by the same law
to marry RVTH, which he refused to do.
                  But that wee may the better vnderstand
this and the former chapter, and
also other places of the holy scriptures,
I will repeat the wordes themselues of
the law, of raysing vp of seed to the brother.
It is thus read in the 25. chapter of
DEVTER: If brethren dwell together
(in the same Citie or village, that is to
say at the same time, and both their possessions
in one place) and one of them
dye and haue no sonne, the wife of the
dead shal not marry without, that is vnto
a straunger, but his kinsman shal goe
in vnto her, and take her to wife, and do
the kinsmans office to her. (Targū translateth
that hee should marrie with her

Santes dothe translate it, that hee
should contracte affinitie with her)
And the first borne which she beareth
shall succeede in the name of his brother
which is dead, that his name be not
put out in Israell, (or let him succeede
or hee shall succeede in the name of
his brother, some menne thinke the
meaning is, hee shalbe called the sonne
of the dead, and the inheritaunce of the
dead shall pertaine to him) And if the
man will not marrie his kinswoman,
thē let his kinswoman go vp to the gate
vnto the elders, and say my kinsman refuseth
to rayse vppe vnto his brother a
name in Israell: hee will not doe the office
of a kinsman vnto me. Then the Elders
of his Citie shall cal him, and commune
with him: if hee stand and say I
will not take her. Then shall his kinswoman
come vnto him in the presence of
the Elders, & loose his shooe from hys
foote, and spit in his face: R. SOLOM:
doth interprete it, before him, and so
bring shame to the vnthankefull man,
and answere and say, So shall it be done

vnto that man, that will not build vp his
brothers house. And his name shalbe
called in Israell, the house of him whose
shooe is put off. This lawe hath manie
points. First, If a brother doth dye without
children, his widowe ought not to
marry a straunger, that is, a man of another
familie: but to a brother or to another
kinsman of their former husband:
and one refusing, let another succeede
who is moste nigh, as it appeareth by
this booke: Secondly the first son which
was borne of her ought to be called according
to the name of the dead brother
& succeed in his inheritāce. 3. If the brother
of him that is departed shall refuse
to marry his widow, she ought to shew
that to the Iudges, that they should admonish
him of this lawe, and perswade
him by diuers meanes, whereby he may
be perswaded to marry her. 4. If he cannot
be perswaded to these thinges, that
widow shall openly come and vnloose
openly his shooe, and spit in his face, &
as if it were to note him by this publike
ignominie. Some men doe thinke that

these ceremonies doe signifie, that she
was at her owne libertie after this, and
had power to marrie whom she would.
Also there was an olde custome before
the lawe as it appeareth by the history
of ONAN in the 38. of GEN. that the
brother should raise vp seede to his brother,
without this cause it was not lawful
for a brother, to mary the wife of the
brother that is dead. For there was a
law against this kind of incest. LEVI. 18.
and 20. chap. Where the degrees forbidden
by God are noted. If she had Children
of the former husband, it was also
incest, if a brother shoulde marry that
widow. Also in the newe testament, S.
Iohn Baptist doth greeuously rebuke
HERODE, because he defiled himself, by
keeping companie with his brothers
wife, he being yet aliue.
                  God sheweth the cause wherefore he
made this lawe: yet hee is not bound to
giue vs an accompt of his lawes and
iudgementes, but such is his mercy that
he doth oftentimes shewe to vs the causes,
wherefore he doth or commaund vs

something. Which of vs doth shew hys
seruant the reasons wherefore hee biddeth
him to doe this or that? but what
cause doth he render of this lawe? least
his name be blotted out of Israell, least
his family doe perisne, and his inheritaunce
be translated vnto other families.
If widowes should marry strangers, and
part of their goods should be translated
into other families; their inheritaunces
should be scattered and brought to nothing,
& their families should perish-thorough
pouertie. For oftentimes wee see
it come to passe, that good families are
dispersed through pouertie, but GOD
would haue a distinction of tribes and
families in Israell for the promises of the
Messias, who according to the fleshe,
should come of the 
                        〈…〉
                     .
And it is very profitable to common
wealthes if they haue olde and noble
families amongst them: for they can
take in hand great matters, which come
of them, and especially for the gouernment
of the common wealthe. For we
willingly submitte our selues to them to

whome the dignitie, and the noblenes
of theyr family doth bring authoritie.
Also they who haue noble auncestors,
will doe nothing vnworthy their vertue
to bring themselues into infamie. For
new start vppe men doe eyther vse theyr
gouernment wantonly, or are hindred
by the enuy of other men, the whiche
both the olde histories of the Romaines
and the Greekes and other nations, and
also experience doe witnesse. Therefore
God would after this maner doe good
to the common wealth of Israell, that
they might alwayes haue fit men, who
might profitably gouerne the common
wealth. But it oftentimes commeth to
passe, that the sonnes of noble men are
faultie, yet if a sparke of their parentes
vertues shine in some of them, the honestie
of their auncestours and credite
they had in common wealth, doth get
them great aucthoritie. Furthermore
this lawe doth prouide for widdowes,
for vnlesse this lawe did defend them,
many shoulde by and by be cast out of
theyr houses, which they haue gouerned

well before: but by that lawe it is
lawfull for thē to keepe theyr husbands
possessions, if they marry the brother or
the kinsman of hym that is departed.
Also Gods will was to preuent the disorders
of Brethren. Some doe oftentimes
wishe the death of their brother,
that they might possesse their inheritances,
but this cannot come to passe, except
the brother doth dye without children.
Also this lawe doth admonishe others
of their dueties towards the dead,
least they suffer their names to be abolished.
Aphricanus noteth an other
cause of this law, who as Eusebius witnesseth,
writinge of the genealogies diuersly
reported by MATT. and LVKE, amongest
other thinges sayth, those are
accompted naturall successions, which
descend from a true seede or bloud: and
those are legall when a sonne, being begottē,
by another doth possess. For whē
they had not yet the hope of the resurrection,
they did hereby immitate as it
were a certain image of the resurrection,
least the name shoulde be blotted out

through barrennes. Augustine agaynst
Faustus the Manich. lib. 32. cap. 10. Tom.
6. doth expound this law spiritually. In
that a brother is commaunded to marry
his brothers wife, that hee might rayse
vp seed to him, and not to himselfe, and
should call that childe which is borne
to him by his name: what other thing
doth he shew in a figure, then that euery
preacher of the Gospell ought so to
labour in the Church, that hee might
rayse vp seede to Christ for the brother
that is dead, who dyed for vs all: and the
seede which shalbe raysed vpp, shall be
called by his name, &c. some men do also
thinke that it signifieth that they who
are once numbred as Citizens of the
spirituall Israell, shall not perishe. Christ
in the Gospell sayth, Reioice because
your names are written in the kingdom
of heauen. And if any shoulde obiect
whether could not their families be preserued
by other meanes and those dangers
auoyded &c. I answer we must simply
obey gods law, who doth best know
why & wherfore he doth do all things.
                  
                     
This law continued long, whether it
be ceremoniall or iudiciall, their possessions
were confused by the Assirians
and Babilonians, that there coulde no
distinction be seene, and so for a time
this law had no vse, but after that the
Iewes returned into their country, they
began to distinguishe theyr possessions
and kept them agayne as it may be gathered
by that case which the Saducies
proposed to our Lorde of that widowe
which maried seuen brethren, one after,
another whereby they woulde corruptly
gather that there shuld be no resurre
                        •
                     
                     tion
of the dead. MATT. 22. cap. MA
                        •
                     c
12. LVC. 20.
                  But after that Christ had suffered the
death of the crosse for vs, as other ceremonial
& politicall laws were abolished,
so were these also: and sith al the policies
of the Iewes are blotted out, and they
are dispersed through the whole world:
although they would gladlye keepe this
law, yet they cannot: therefore let no
man take this lawe as a collour of hys
wicked lust and incestious marriages, for

the cause being taken away, it hath now
no more place. And although the laws
ceremoniall and iudiciall be abrogated,
yet their marrowe and kernils are to be
obserued, as in this law that wee haue a
regard of the dead: that wee doe not
chaunge inheritances (the which both
others and especially adulterers doe,
which oftentimes doe priuily thrust in
a strange heyre) also that brothers shuld
be carefull to preserue the children of
their brothers and kinsfolkes.
                  Now it may be vnderstoode by all
these; wherfore BOAZ would not marry
RVTH before the other kinsman had
yeelded vpp his right. And because that
kinsman woulde redeeme the ground,
BOAZ added that hee could not buy the
ground, except hee did marry RVTH,
and preserue the seede and name of hys
kinsman.
                  But before I leaue this, it seemeth
not to be omitted, that some men doe
reconcile that law whiche is written in
the 18. cap. of LEVI. of the shame of thy
brothers wife, which is not to be vncouered,

with the other law which is written
in the 25. chapter of Deuteronomie
of raising vp the seede of thy brother, as
they say, that is to be vnderstood of the
wife of thy brother remaining yet aline,
which doth not yet agree, for the same
might be said of other persōs, with whō
it is not lawfull to marry. Furthermore
they which are not of so neere of kinne
are forbidden. S. Augustine writeth thus
of this sentence in the 6 quest, vpon
LEVIT. Thou shalt not vncouer the filthinesse
of thy brothers wife for it is the
filthinesse of thy brother and of thy father.
The question is asked whether this
is forbiddē to the brother aliue or dead
and it is not a small question. For if we
say the scripture speaketh of the wife of
the brother liuing, for both of these are
contayned in one general commaundement,
whereby a man is forbidden to
come to another mans wife, therefore
what is the matter that hee doth so diligently
distinguish these persons, which
he calleth of the same stocke by proper
prohibitions? Also whether is that commaundemēt

of the wife of thy father, to
be vnderstood of thy mother in law, thy
father beeing aliue or rather dead? For
thy father being aliue, who doth not see
it muche more to bee forbidden, sithe
a manne is forbidden to defile the
wife of anye other man by adulterie?
Therefore it seemeth to bee spoken of
those persons, whiche not hauing husbandes
may marry, vnlesse they bee forbidden
by law: as it is reported to bee a
custome amongest the Persians. But agayne
if wee vnderstand that hee is forbidden
to mary his brothers wife, he being
dead, it is contrary to that the scripture
biddeth of raysing vp seed, if he die
without children, & by this that prohibition
being gathered with this commaū
                     demēt,
the exceptiō is to be vnderstood
least they be contrarie one agaynst another,
that is, it is not lawfull for any man
to marry the wife of the brother deceased,
if the brother deceased doth leaue
children: or els that was forbidden
as a thing not lawfull to marry a brothers
wife if shee hadde bene put away

from him by a byll of diuorcement: for
then as the Lord commaunded, that
MOSES should giue foorth a bill of deuorcement
for the hardnes of the hearts
of the Iewes, and by this dimission hee
might thinke that any might lawfully
marry with his brothers wife, where he
did not feare adultery, because she was
put away by a bill of deuorcement.
                  And others do take this law in LEVITICVS,
that thou shalt not marry thy
brothers wife simply without any exception,
as the lawe against manslaughter,
adultery, theft, &c. least incest should
seeme to be commaunded and all the other
lawes seeme to be contrary among
themselues: neyther say they must wee
thinke that God graunted this marriage
for an outward profite, which he called
before incestuous. For by the name Brethren,
in that former law is not to be vnderstood
natural brethren but kinsmen,
after the maner of the Hebrues, & truely
euen those whose marriages were not
forbidden. For brothers children and sisters
children are called brothers. But

that I may note this by the waye, brothers
sonnes are called Patruelis, Brothers
and sisters sonnes amitini, Sisters sonnes
consobrini. In this selfe same chapter, ELIMELECH
is called the brother both of
BOAZ and of his kinsman. S. Augustine
writeth thus against Faustus, Manich.
the scriptures declare that kinsmē & kinswomen
were wont to be called generally
brothers or sisters. LOT is called ABRAHAMS
brother when that ABRAHAM
was hys vncle, by the vse of the whiche
worde, they are called the brothr of our
Lorde in the Gospell not onely those
which the virgine Mary bore, but all his
kinsemen which were of his kindred.
                  ABENEZER testifieth vpon LEVITICVS
that the old Hebrueswere of this mind.
But the Cabalistes, hauing wayed the
matter better, were not of this mynde.
Also in our time there was a certayne
learned godly man deseruing wel of the
Churche of God, and hee was of this
minde. And so hee expoundeth the 22.
chap. of MATT. of the 7. brothers which
married one widdow, because they wer

kinsmen amongest themselues: but in
those degrees, wherein it was lawfull for
them to marry one & the same woman.
It may be prooued by two argumentes
that this law of raysing vpp seede to the
brother is to be vnderstoode of naturall
brethren, out of this little booke of
RVTH. First NAOMIE who coulde not
be ignorant of this lawe, doth perswade
her daughters in lawe that they shoulde
goe home, for if she should haue a husband,
and should haue hope of children
yet it was not needefull for them, that
they shoulde stay vntill they were men.
Next BOAZ sayth, that the other kinseman
shoulde buy the ground by right,
and marry RVTH because there was
none neerer then he. Next the second
kinseman was not admitted of him vnlesse
the former refused. ONAN was punished
for this cause because he would
not rayse vp seede to his brother. GEN.
38. Furthermore wee must not by and
by depart from the proprietie of the
wordes in the lawes, especially if they
be not set downe other where. And the

Hebrue word Iabam, signifieth no otherwise
than a husbands brothers Iafamah
a woman, which is to be married in this
case by the lawe of affinitie or kinred.
Therefore this lawe is first to be vnderstoode
of naturall brethren, next it is to
be applyed to other kinsfolkes. Therefore
that other iudiciall or municipiall
law in DEVTER, is an exception against
that generall and morall law in LEVIT.
which as we haue sayde God hath lefte
out for certaine peculiar causes. Neither
is there any cause wherefore we should
haue it this day in vse.
               
               
                  The xxii. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        6 And the kinsman aunswered, I cannot redeem
it, least I destroy mine owne inheritaunce: redeeme
my right to thee, for I cannot redeem it.
                        7 Now this was the maner before time in Israel,
concerning redeeming and chaunging, for to
stablishe all thinges, a man did plucke off hys
shooe, and gaue it hys neighbour, and this
was a sure witnesse in Israell.
                        8 Therefore the kinsman sayd to Boaz, buy it
for thee: and he drew off his shooe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THat kinsman, when he heard
say that NAOMIE would sell
her field, sayde by and by I
will buy it according to the
law: and afterward when he heard that
he must also marry RVTH by the same
law, he renounced his right. Hee sheweth
the cause, least he should destroy his
owne inheritance. But how shoulde hee
destroy it? peraduenture RVTH was
young and he feared least he should beget
many children of her. Whether he
had wife and children before, it is not
set downe. Also the law of marriyng thy
sister in-law, doth not expresse whether
a sister in lawe ought to marry a brother
hauing a wife and children before.
Truly if he had a wife & children before
it would haue bene very vnprofitable to
haue marryed a newe wife, and begat
more children. For children begotten
of diuers mothers, doe very seldome agree
amongst themselues. Furthermore
he saw that RVTH was not onely poore,
but also that he should nourishe NAOMIE,
who was olde. Hee did not feare

that if he shoulde haue more groundes,
he could not till them (as it oftentymes
commeth to passe, and therefore it is
better to till few well then manie euill)
for he would haue the field, but not the
wife. LIRA noteth, that some of the Hebrues
do expound it of the children that
should come of RVTH, if he had married
her: because that it is written in the 23.
chap. of DEVTER. The Ammonites and
Moabites shal not enter into the church
of God for euer. But if he had sayd and
alleadged this, he had sayd vntruely, for
that punishment dothe not fall on women,
or by consequent on their children
begotten of a man of Israell. Therfore
it is to be vnderstoode of the Children,
hee had alreadie by another woman:
For if he had married RVTH hee
must haue taken paynes, for the bringing
vppe and prouision of his children,
now had by others, that he called blotting
out, according to the common mā
                     ner
of speaking, which is spoken of anye
man when he hath taken notable losse, it
is sayd hee is destroyed or blotted out.
                  
                     
He did not offend in this that he had
a care of his houshold, and that he had
rather encrease his inheritaunce, then
spoyle it. For as long as wee may encrease
oure riches without the shippewracke
of conscience, we ought to doe
it. 1. TIMO. 5. If there be any that prouideth
not for his owne, and namely for
them of his housholde, hee denieth the
fayth and is worse then an Infidell. But
the care of their houshold ought not to
draw them, by vsuries and other vnlawfull
wayes to get riches. And in this
that kinsman offended, whosoeuer hee
was, because he was incōstant, one while
he sayd that hee woulde buy the fielde,
now he refuseth it saying, that hee cannot
take the ground together with the
widow: he speaketh contrary of one and
the same thing. Next the lawdoth please
him as farre as it is profitable to hym,
where it was not, there he reicted it.
                  And what impudencie or boldnesse
was this that he sayth, that hee shall destroy
his owne inheritance, if he do that
which God commaunded his people

for the preseruation of inheritance: will
hee seeme to be wiser then God? Doth
not God preserue families, and promise
and bestow his blessinges on them that
obey his commaundementes? Can any
familie be safe or without danger, whether
God will or no? If he were in danger
of his riches, could not GOD encrease
the same againe? shoulde hee not
haue thought that this should be for his
brothers honor?
                  This man hath many fellowes in
these dayes. How many are there which
speake very largely of the doctrine of
the Gospell, and doe extoll the same
with woonderfull prayses, because they
hope, they shall get credite and wealth
by it: but after they cannot obtayn that
which they sought for, or hauing obtayned
it, fearing daungers, least they
shoulde leese their riches, they hate it,
and speake reprochefully of it? Truely
many doe onely alowe some pointes of
the doctrine of the Gospell, as that it
offereth to vs all good in Christ, & they
reiect that which it deliuereth of taming

the fleshe. They doe hate auricular confession,
excommunication and the popishe
fastes: But they do keepe drunken
feastes and may-games, and other suche
kinde of feastes straightly. The subiectes
doe willingly heare the dueties of theyr
Lordes: but they refuse to doe theyr
owne. To bee short when it is for theyr
profite they doe allow of the lawes and
commaundementes, but when it is vnprofitable,
they are displeased with them
& do wholly despise them. Some of the
contrary parte, doe dispraise and despise
false worshippes, and superstitions, by
and by being smothed with the dayntie
dishes and giftes of false teachers, they
turn their failes, & praise & defēd them.
The author fascicul
                           •
                         temporū
                      a writer not to
bee despised, writeth of a certain master,
who disputed much against pluralitie of
benefices, as they are called, and against
the riches and pride of the prelates,
which when it was tolde to the Pope,
he sayde, let vs giue him a good preferment,
and these and those benefices,
and hee will be pleased, which when it

was done, hee by and by chaunged hys
minde, saying he neuer vnderstood this
matter before now, because hee was sodainly
of a poore man made rich. And
how many are there now, and haue bin
in al times, who were no otherwise perswaded
then this kinsman, which thinke
they should perish, if they did lead their
life after the lawe of God? As if they
shoulde rest on the Saboth dayes, and
graunt their seruauntes also rest, & yeeld
meate sufficient to their seruauntes and
hirelinges: or giue great almes to the
poore, when as in other things belonging
to theyr housholdes, they should rather
haue a regard to saue &c. This is
common, that by the transgression of
Gods law, men would auoyd daungers
and increase their riches.
                  And after this kinsman denyed to
marry RVTH, and to take her ground, he
doth exhort BOAZ to vse his priuiledge:
he doth renounce his right, by wordes,
and by an outward signe and token. The
law doth command a sister in law, if her
kinsman will not marry her, to pull of

his shooe, and spit in his face, adding;
so let it be done to the man, who would
not rayse vp seede to his kinsman: and
this mans house shal be called the house
of him, whose shooes were put off. The
Iewes had many superstitious opinions
of this shooe, of what leather it was and
howe it shoulde be made, and many other
suche foolishe thinges: whereby
it may be perceiued how the fall away
in the expounding of holy scriptures,
which cast away Christ the true light. In
this place the man himselfe puld off his
shooe, and not the kinsewoman to note
him with ignomie: nor spitte in his face:
peraduenture because BOAZ did willingly
take his place, accepting of the groūd
together with the widow. It is not sayd
that RVTH was in the gate, namely because
that the kinsman was callenged to
do his duety by BOAZ (as BORRAV
                        •
                     
writeth) not by RVTH.
                  And I thinke that this lawe must not
be expounded, as it is commonly by
that lawe in the 25. chap. of Deuter. of
pulling off the shooe by the sister in-law

&c. But I doe thinke that it doth
simply declare, that this was a solempne
custome amongest the Iewes of buying
and selling of fieldes, as if anie body
will deliuer ouer his right, and giue hys
possession to another, his shooe beyng
drawne off hee giues it to another, and
he drawes it off himselfe. And therfore
I thinke that by the shooe is signified,
that the buyer hath hereafter power to
walke and goe through it, or ouer that
field whiche was deliuered him of the
seller. Some men doe thinke that in the
conspiracie of ABSOLON, DAVID went
barefooted, because the putting off of
the shooe was a token of giuing place.
2. SAMVEL. 15. Our country men professe
that they giue ouer their right by
giuing the hand, globend an die hand. Some
doe think that the Prophet doth allude
to this when he sayth in the 60. Psalme.
10. verse: I will cast my shooe ouer Edom
Naeli: some doe expound it my fetter.
In the 108. these same wordes are repeated.
Santes Sagninus doth cite R.
Himanuel, who doth expound it both a

fetter and also a gloue. Now the word
Naal signifieth to goe and to shut or to
locke. The same RABBINE addeth that
it was the maner of kinges when they
besieged fortified townes, to cast into it
their gloues, declaring that they would
not depart from it before it were taken.
Santes doth apply that hither, that Cicero
writeth in 11. Philippica of Antoni.
For he was wont to take manicles, those
are gloues, least they shoulde feare any
longer besieging. Yet this place of Cicero
may otherwise be expounded. For
Manicles are such wherewith the hands
are bound, giues those thinges wherewith
the feete are bound: It is read in
Virgilles Aenei 2.
                  
                     Ipse viro primus manicas atque arcta leuari,
                     Vincla iubet Priamus &c.
                  
                  Priamus hauing pitie vpō Sinon, losed
his manicles, which by epexegesis are
called straight bondes. PLAVTVS in
ASINARIA, the manicles coulde scarse
compasse his hand &c. therefore the
meaning is, he was woont to giue hym
selfe by and by into the handes of his enemie.

There are also gloues of iron to
defend the hand. Iuuenalis
                  
                     Quale decus rerum, si coniugis auctio fiat,
                     Baltheus & manicae, Cristae, cruris
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sinistri.
                  
                  
                     Dimidium tegmen. If thou vnderstandest
it this, then this is the meaning: they
were woont by and by to take away
theyr armour, and deliuer themselues
to theyr enimies, they will fight noe
more &c. If thou doest vnderstande
it of the sleeue of the garment, it is
the same meaning, because that by and
by theyr weapons being put away, they
put on their apparell. In Virgill the 9.
booke Numanus vpbrayding the Troyanes
being besieged, sayth: And theyr
coates haue long sleaues, & theyr heads
are attired with miters. But these things
by the way. Hitherto belongeth that also
the Chalde paraphrase doth expoūd
this place by the interpreter Quinquarborus.
And this was an olde and vsual
custome amongst the Israelites, when
they did take, or giue, or redeeme or
chaunge one with another, that they
might make sure, he drew off (who granted

his right) the gloue of his right hād,
and by that he did giue his possession to
another: so truely the Israelites were
wont to giue ouer their possessions, to
their neighbors before witnesses: furthermore
the redeemer said vnto BOAZ,
buy it for thee: Then BOAZ tooke the
shoo of his right foot, & came into possessiē
&c. Here I do reméber the history
of Conradinus the last Duke of Sueuias,
nephew to Frederick the Emperor: who
as Auentinus writeth in the 7. booke of
Chronicles of the BOIARS complaineth
much of the iniuries of the bishops of
Rome, nowe yeelding vp hys necke to
the hangman to be cut off, he throwing
vp his gauntlets or gloues into the ayre
sayd, that he yeelded vppe by hys right
his kingdomes of Arragon, to the kyng
his kinsman, &c. and these thinges fell
out, anno. 1258.
                  It appeareth that the Elders in manie
thinges did vse the same rites and customes.
As in betrothinges amongst the
Romanes, the Bridegrome gaue to the
Bride an iron ring, Plinius in the three

and thirtieth booke the first chapter: afterwardes
they beganne to geue golde.
Also they did vse water & wine in contracting
of marriages, as a signe of marriage,
in the house of the married wife,
the keies are giuen her, and when shee is
deuorced, they are taken away from her
agayne. Amongest vs the bridegrome
and the bride do ioine hands togeather,
which is a signe of making marriage. At
this day the keyes are geuen to the conquerors,
the right of gouerning the city
is deliuered to them. Also in the hādling
of seruauntes to geue them a boxe, and
driue them about house. Also it was almost
cōmon in al nations, that they vsed
some custome in the manner of choosing.
These were the ensignes of Emperours
in old time, Iuory chayres, Laurell
Crownes, Iuory septers, purpell, sergeantes
with rods and faggots and fier
carried before them. The Germayne
emperours, as TRITEMIVS witnesseth,
first the sword was girded to him, next
armor for his shoulders were put on, after
the scepter was geuen them, after the

crowne was put on their heads. In other
kingdomes the speare is onely geuen
them, sometime the sworde, sometime
both. If any body will know more of
these matters, in the 22. 23. chapt. of the
most noble embassad our of the commō
wealth, and the most studious searche
                        •
                     
out of all artes of antiquitie FRANCISCVS
HOTOMANVS FEVDISTICVS, of
the which many things of this kinde are
diligently obserued and marked of him
out of diuers authours. That kinseman
doth yeeld vp all the right that was his,
he doth not aske the fielde for him, and
giue RVTH to BOHAZ, as they who leauing
others in cōmodities do bend thē
                     selues
to their owne commodities: and
although they haue no right to others
or their goods: yet against law and right
they challenge those thinges to the
which they are driuen to cruellie by the
wantonnes of princes.
               
               
                  The. 23. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        9 And Bohaz sayd vnto the Elders, and vnto
all the people, yee are witnesses this day, that

I haue bought all that was Elimelechs, and
all that was Chilions, and Mahlons of the
hand of Naomie
                        
                        10 And morouer Ruth the Moabitesse the wife
of Mahlon haue I bought to be my wife, to stir
vp the name of the dead vpon his inheritaunce
and that the name of the dead bee not put out
from amongst his brethren, and from the gate
of his place: yee are witnesses this day.
                     
                  
                  
                     HERE is declared what BOHAZ
did, after that the kinseman
(whose name the holye
ghost of purpose concealed)
had yeelded vp his right. First he sayth
plainely, that he hath gotten the possessions
of ELIMELECH and his sonnes;
then that he will take RVTH the Moabite
to wife, and that not for lust, but lest
the name of MAHLON, who was departed,
should be blotted out frō amongest
his brethren, that is, his kinsmen, & from
the gate of his place: that is, from Bethlehem.
By which words, he sheweth the
excellencie of his stocke, that manye of
his kindred haue sate in the gate; that is,
haue beene Iudges. And it had beene a

thing to be lamented, that so noble a family
shuld perish, which might in times
to come yeeld gouernors for the people
                  Here it is demaunded, whether BOHAZ
did not against the lawes, for biddinge
to marrie straungers, within the
which, though the Lorde comprehendeth
those nations whiche hee had appointed
to destruction, yet wee haue
shewed before, 1. chap. 3. Sermon, that
they also do extend to other infidels, by
reason of the daungers of idolatrie. But
where there was no daunger of falling
awaye, it was not altogeather vnlawfull
to marry. RVTH was now conuerted to
the fayth, and to the worshippe of God
alone, and had geuen testimonye of her
fayth by her especiall good workes. So
the father of BOHAZ, SALMON DAVIDS
great gandfather, married RAHAB a cananite,
who had preserued the spies and
had made a notable shewe of her fayth.
There must alwaies be more regard had
of the true worshippe of God, then of
riches and kindreds. ABRAHAM. GEN.
24. bound his seruaunt by an oth, that

he should not go to the cananites, but
to his owne kinsfolkes to seeke a wyfe
for ISAACKE his masters sonne. ISAACK
or rather REDECCA sendeth her sonne
IAACOB to LABAN, least he should marrie
with Idolaters. GEN. 28. It behooueth
parents to followe this example,
when idolaters go about to make marriages,
they promise many thinges which
they do not afterwardes performe. He
that loueth daunger (as it is sayd) shall
perishe in it. The daughters which are
bestowed vppon superstitious men, are
subiect to more daunger, then young
men which are married with superstitious
Idolatrous women. Let children also
remember theyr duties, and not seek
for such matches agaynst the good wyll
of their parents. It is accounted as a fault
in ESAV, that he offended his parentes
by marrying idolatrous wiues, GEN. 27.
That matrimony which is lawfully contracted,
with the godly hath many troubles,
what good then wilt thou look for
of that vnequall marriage? Otherwise
to be conuersant with the Idolaters, it is

dangerous and troublesom, what if thou
wert wholly bound to them? Deceaue
not thy selfe with a vayne hope, that
thou canst win thy wife, or the wife the
husband, for we see the contrary come
to passe, for the moste part. And it is
commonly knowne what befell to SALOMON
the wisest man that euer was,
when hee married idolatrous women.
BOAZ dealt publickely in the place of
iudgement, of both these poyntes, first
of the possessions: then of the marriage
with RVTH, and he did nothing secretly
admonishing vs by this his fact, that we
shuld so bargaine, in buying, in selling,
in changing, and redeeming, as if we did
the same, publickely in the iudgement
place before many witnesses, or in the
sight of all men. Howe many are there,
which doe so bargaine with their neighbors,
that they dare not for shame tell,
howe they made it, and what were the
conditions of their bargaines? They
name a somme of money, whiche
they shoulde haue giuen to their neighbour,
they say they dealt lawfully with

him without deceite, when they knowe
they lye: Furthermore they will haue,
their lying bookes witnessed with good
mens seales. It should haue bene considered,
that there is an accompt to be
giuen, and that wee shall haue two witnesses
against vs, namely, our own conscience,
and God the beholder and reuenger
of our sinnes. But marriages
must not be contracted secretly, but before
witnesses, no man must be deceaued
in marriages, but all thinges must be
done with good faith. Secret marriages
which are commonly made by baudes,
vayne promises, dronkennes and suche
other means haue seldom a good & happie
ende. Let not maydens hearken to
yong men which promise thē marriage,
if they would first deliuer them their bodies
to be abused. For if they were honest,
they had rather begin theyr marriages
with thee with prayers made in the
holy assembly, then by lying with thee.
It was also both wel, and wisely appointed
by the olde fathers, that they which
should be married, should be ioyned together

by the minister of the Churche
publickly in the holy assemblies. For
hereby we doe declare that marriage is
a holy thing, and not a worke of darkenesse,
whereof wee should be ashamed.
They whiche doe euill doe feare the
light, and doe seeke for corners & darknesse.
Herein are also other commodities.
For wee see which are lawfull matches,
which not. This also prouoketh thē
which are married to performe the marriage
fayth, ech with others, because
that they promised the same by wordes
and by giuing of the hand in the holy
assembly, the minister of the Churche
going before. If any man, in the presence
of three or foure, promiseth that, he will
do any thing, hee will throughly performe
the same, if hee be a good man,
and may doe it with a good conscience,
how much more, ought married people
to performe those thinges, which they
haue promised one to an other, in the
sight of God, and his aungels, and the
whole Church? Furthermore, the whole
Church, prayeth that the marriage may

be happie and prosperous, wherof more
shalbe said hereafter.
                  BOAZ said to the Elders and all the
people, ye are witnesses (afterward hee
rehearsed it) that these and these things
I haue done. They aunswered, wee are
witnesses, as if they should haue said, if
it be necessary, we will testifie, how this
matter was brought to passe. Let witnesses
speake those things which they haue
heard, seene, or knowe, vppon some certaine
ground, let them not be light persons,
or liers. They doe offend greatly,
which will say nothing, least they shuld
offende anye man, or doe not speake
those thinges rightly which they doe
speake, they doe vtter another mans
wordes in another sence, some thinges
they add, some things they omit, which
doe appertaine to the matter.
                  These are false witnesses, whome SALOMON.
6. PRO. nombreth amōgst those
sixe or seuen thinges, which the Lorde
abhorreth, and in the 19. chap. hee sayth
twise a false witnesse shall not be vnpunished,
and hee that speaketh lies shall

perish. A false witnesse offendeth greeuously,
for he deceiueth the Iudge, who
beleueth the witnes
                        •
                     es that were sworne
according to that saying, in the mouth of
two or three witnesses euery cause shall
stād or fal. Thē he hurteth his neighbor
greatly in goodes, credite, body, & lyfe.
Furthermore hee doth great iniurie to
God, whome the false witnesse maketh
the patrō of his falshood. For these causes,
there are sharpe lawes, both deuine
and ciuill against them. Wherefore let
euery man deale faythfully in witnesse
bearing. And let vs not onely vse witnesses
in matters of great importaunce,
which it may be was sufficient at that
time, but also let vs prouide that those
thinges which we buy and our bargains
and such other thinges, be written in
bookes or otherwise noted diligently,
and without ambiguitie, least contention
shoulde afterwardes arise. In times
past it appeareth that there were smale
notes of sales and bargaines, but nowe
men can scarcely be kept in order, with
large and great bookes.
               
               
                  
                  The. 24. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        11 And all the people that were in the gate, and
the Elders sayd, we are witnesses: the Lorde
make the wife that commeth into thine house,
like Rahel and like Leach, which twayne dyd
build the house of Israell: and thou mayest doe
worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in
Bethlehem.
                        
                        12 And that thy house be like the house of Pharez
(whome Thamar bare to Iudah) of the
seede which the Lorde shall giue thee of this
young woman.
                     
                  
                  
                     AFter BOAZ had declared opē
                     ly,
that hee would not onely
take his kinsmans fields, but
also take the widow to his
wife, the Elders & all the people, which
were come together in the gate, do say
first that they are witnesses, that BOAZ
tooke RVTH to him in marriage. Then
they prayed that God would vouchsafe
to blesse their marriage: and especiallie
they wishe them many children: the
which they declare by two examples.
God make (say they) RVTH like RAHEL
and LEACH. IACOB the Patriarke, who

otherwise is called ISRAEL had foure
wiues, whereof these two were chiefe.
LEAH whome hee married first, was the
elder, and is here mentioned last, and
RAHEL, is set before her, it may be, because
he loued her best for bewty, and
other excellent giftes. For her sake hee
serued LABAN, and should haue married
her first, if he had not bene deceaued by
his father in lawe: GEN. 29. It may be,
that for this cause she is principally called
IACOBES wife: GEN. 46. and not because
that LEACH was not also his wife.
Of these two he begate eight sonnes, of
whome there came and were named so
many tribes of Israell. And this is it
which they say that they builded the
house of Israell, for by them his familie
and posteritie was encreased and preserued,
yea and continued vnto Christ.
Afterward they doe say, let thy house be
as the house of PHAREZ, whome THAMAR
bare to IVDAH. IVDAH the sonne
of IACOB, almost by the like case tooke
THAMAR to wife, a stranger, his daughter
in law, of whom he begate twinnes,

PHAREZ and ZARAH, and so the stocke
and kinred of IVDAH, was encreased:
for from them descended many noble
families. From PHAREZ, camethis BOAZ
by whome descended the line of oure
Lorde Iesus Christ, for of him was hee
borne, into this world, according to the
fleshe. If thou wouldest read this whole
historie, in the book of GEN. thou shalt
the better vnderstand this prayer.
                  In the olde testament it was accompted;
as a great blessing, if any had manie
children: barrennes was holden as a reproch:
the which is manifest by the example
of RAHEL, of whome mention is
made in this place, who at the first was
barren, and of other matrones, as wee
will shew afterwardes. REBECKAES parentes
GEN. 24. blessed her at her departure,
saying, growe into thousand
thousands, & thy seed possesse the gate
of his enemies. The prophet singeth,
PSAL. 128. thy wife shalbee as the fruitfull
vine, on the sides of thine house, &
thy children, like the Oliue plantes,
round about thy table. The fruitfulnes

of married folkes, is also mentioned amongest
the blessings of the Lord in the
lawe. But that which is spoken of the
multitude of children, must be vnderstood
of them which are obedient, godly,
and of good disposition: for degenerate
children, are rather a cursse: holy
children, are the seminary of the church
and common wealth. And as the multitude
of children, so the multitude of
men, ought generally to be reckoned amongest
Gods blessings. But many nations
are so straight (thou sayest) that
men, cannot well liue in them: I aunswere,
that is rather through the fault of
the men, then the straightnesse of the
land, when as they haue no regarde of
frugalitie amongest them. Thus much o
                        •
                     
the first blessing or petition.
                  Secondly they wish vnto them, plenty
of riches and substaunce: saying, and
that thou mayest obtayn, get, or increase
riches, in Ephrathah: that God would
blesse their labour whereby they migh
                        •
                     
honestly get necessarie riches, that they
should not be compeld to begge they

meat, or suffer penurie. Riches are needfull
for the preseruation of the familie.
Neyther is it vnlawfull for men to bee
diligent in gathering thē, whereby they
may maintaine themselues and their families.
Concerning the which matter,
there are many sentences, and precepts
written in the Prouerbes of SALOMON.
But we must take heede taht we do not
attribute, the encrease of riches, to our
wisdom and diligence, but rather to the
blessing of the Lorde. For his blessing or
fauor maketh riche, Prou. 10. All our labours
are in vaine, vnlesse the Lord giue
successe. Luk. 5. The Apostles laboring al
the night, tooke nothing, but letting
downe the net when Christ commaunded,
they enclosed so great a multitude
of fishes, that the net brake. Riches must
not be sought afterwith an insatiable de
sire. psa. 62. If riches increase, set not your
heart thereon, &c. Some doe gather riches
by right and wrong, but they are
cursed riches, whiche profite not their
house, but rather ouerthrow the same.
But if thou hast no riches, or at lest very

small, remember that which SALOMON
sayth, Prou. 15. Better is a little with the
feare of the Lord, then great treasure &
trouble therwith, 17. better is a dry morsell
if peace be with it, then a house full
of sacrifices, with strife, 16. Better is a little,
with righteousnes, then great reuenues
without equitie.
                  Others do translate these words, that
thou mayest become mighty: doe worthely,
for Chail, hath many significations
in the Scriptures: as strength of body,
of the minde, riches, and wealth, also an
armie and multitude of people: before
in the third chap. he calleth our RVTH, a
woman (Chail) of vertue, that is, indued
with notable vertues. BOHAZ in the second
chap. is called a man, Chail, that is, a
man of power, and in Exod. 18. chap. IETHRO
for the gouernement of the commonwealth,
councelleth to choose men
Chail, that is of courage, others doe translate
it, wise men, strong and valiant, and
also dealing truely, who in iudgement
can be drawen from doing their duetie
neither by threatnings, neither by gifts,

nor by promises. There are many places
euery where to bee founde, where Chail
signifieth riches. Iob. 20. 18. ver. It is said
of the wicked: hee shall restore the labour,
and shall deuour no more: euen
according Chail, to his power and substaunce,
shalbe his exchange, and he shal
enioye it no more: the meaning is, hee
shall not reioyce in the riches which he
shall restore in place of them, which he
had gotten by rapine, chap. 31. 25. If I reioyced
because my substance was great,
or because my hande had gotten much:
vnderstande, let me perishe, or some like
worde.
                  Or they do wish, that they might haue
many children, like vnto a great armye:
but of children there is already spokē, or
do worthely or valiantly, out of which a
third thing ariseth to be cōfidered, of the
which it now followeth to bee spoken.
                  For the third thinge which they pray
for is, that he may becom famous & noble
in Bethlehē, which is called by another
name Euphrata, or the citie of DAVID,
of which there is spoken aboue in

the first chapter. Word for worde, Call
name, that is, thou shalt bee of great renowne:
They do pray, that they maye
so behaue themselues, that they might
get, an notable name, and prayse. But
credite and authoritie is gotten by the
study of vertue. AGESILAVS being demaunded,
howe one might get himself,
a good report (the Grecians cal it eudoxian)
amongst men? He aunswereth if hee
speake those thinges, whiche are verye
good, and doe those thinges which are
very honest. ISOCRATES sayd, we must
endeuour more, to leaue a good name,
to our children, then great heapes of riches:
For by a good report, riches may
be gotten, but a good name can neuer
be recouered by money. PROV. 10. The
memoriall of the iust remaineth, but the
name of the wicked shall rotte. PROV. 22
A good name is to bee chosen aboue
great riches, and louing fauour is aboue
go
                        •
                     d, and siluer, In ECCLE. 6. It is accounted
as pretious ointments: by wickednes
& leudnes of lyfe, a good name
is lost.
                  
                     
It appeareth, that this prayer was not

                        〈◊〉
                      vayne, and without profite, for BOAZ

                        •
                     nd RVTH, had children and nephues,

                        •
                     hey encreased in riches, and obtayned,

                        〈◊〉
                      name of great renowne: for they are
numbred amongest the graundfathers

                        •
                     nd grandmothers of IESV the sauiour:
From them many and mightye kinges
descended. We learne, to pray for gods

                        •
                     lessinges, both vpon new married people,
and our selues and others, and that

                        •
                     oth priuately and publickly. But heere
by this prayer is to bee gathered, what
those good thinges are, whiche must
especiallye bee prayed for. The Phi
                     
                        •
                     osophers,
doe deuide the goodes, into
the goodes of the minde, the body,
and fortune, all which thinges are con
                     
                        •
                     ayned
in this short prayer. For they
pray, that they might haue a holy offspring,
riches, or studie of vertue, and a

                        •
                     enowned name. And these thinges
must be sought for, in that fountaine of
all good, which can neuer be drawne
drie that is from God. There are many
afflictions and dangers, wherewith God

doth exercise vs, therfore we haue ne
                        ••
                     
of his grace and blessing that wee may
patiently beare all troubles, therefore
wee must pray to God publickely, and
priuately, that he would mittigate both
those troubles whiche fall out through
the fault of the married people, and also
other troubles, or that he would take
them away.
                  Many in our time, when they do
                        •
                     
heare of new marriages, are not exercised
in praier, they ar all in the rehearsing
of the vices of bridegromes or brides, or
parents or some of their kindred. Manie
doe thinke in the Church of banquettes
and daunces and such other thinges rather
then pray for Gods blessinges on
the new married folkes: yea the married
folkes themselues, are seldome exercised
in prayer, when they are led to the
church to receiue the blessing, nor whe
                        •
                     
they go home. The last care is of Gods
word, & prayers: therfore let no mā maruell
that so many vnhappinesses bee 
                        〈◊〉
                     
marriages. Our praiers shall not be without
effectes, if we doe begin our marri
                        •
                     
                     ges

with them, & continue stil in them.
For wee haue many and notable promises,
that God vouchsafeth mercifully
to heare our prayers proceeding from

                        •
                      liuely fayth.
               
               
                  The 25. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        13 So Boaz 
                           
                              •
                           ooke Ruth, and she was his wife, and
when he went in vnto her, the Lord gaue, that
she conceaued and bare a sonne.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe holy Ghost at length, cō
                     meth
to that point, wherfore
this booke is especially written:
namely that BOAZ took
RVTH to wife, and begate of her a sonn
called OBED, DAVIDS grandfather▪ For
the scope of this booke is to shew what
Patriarcks there were which came from
IVDAH, to whome the Schilo was promised
euen vntil DAVID, to whome the
promise was renued: But the holy ghost
doth comprehend many things in these
few wordes, according to his custome.
He sayth BOAZ married RVTH; and shee
was his wife. When the other kinsman

had giuen him leaue to marry RVTH, he
did not deferre their marriages. For after
they are betrothed, it is not good to
diferre it long. For Sathan in the meane
season can sowe tares, and turne agreementes
into disagreementes. This also
is to be praised in him, that he doth not
vse the marriage acte before, but after a
lawfull contract and approoued marriage.
                  But out of this, that the holy Ghost
was not ashamed in this place to report
of BOAZ, and other where of other holy
men which married wiues: of RVTH &
otherwhere of other matrons: likewise
of conceiuing, bearing, midwifes, nurses
and bringing of children, we doe gather
the married life doth not displease god.
And therare other things which do cō
                     mend
vnto vs marriages as not inuented
by men, but first instituted by God
himselfe in paradise, before the fall of
ADAM and EVE our first parentes. And
that God ioyned them togither, and
blessed them, and there are many places
in the holy scriptures which declare

that God doth alow of mariages which
are diligently to be noted and obserued
of Gods people. Marriages are defēded
by the law of God, thou shalt not commit
adultery. Christ our sauiour would
be borne of a married woman in Cana
of Galilie, hee adorned matrimonie by
his owne presence, and by the miracle
of turning water into wine, he also prescribed
by his Apostles, the proper duties
of married folkes, and by the loue
betweene him and his spouse, he doth
propound and set foorth to vs an image
to be followed in Matrimonie. These
and such other of the like kind are to be
opposed against the iudgement of those
men which doe condemne, or forbid
marriage. For Sathan settes himselfe against
marriage in all ages. Before the
Apostles departed out of this life, hee
stirred vppe the Nicolaitans who vsed
women as in common, of whome mention
is made in the reuelation. Afterwardes
the Tatians and the Eucratians
arose, affirming, that whoredome doth
nothing differ from marriage, and they

take no man that is married to their sect.
At length the Monkes, and Nunnes &
Priestes, arose vpp, which vowed a perpetuall
sole life, and fayned that thereby
they deserued remission of sinnes. They
extolled virginitie with woonderfull
prayses, as if these prayses belong to
those filthie men. They did so speake of
marriage that many forsaking theyr calling
and marriage in theyr olde age,
tooke vpon them the habite of Monkes
and Nunnes. Howe many haters are
there at this day of marriage, which followe
their wandring lustes? Therefore
those thinges are diligently to be obserued,
which the scriptures doe note of
the dignitie of marriage, and in all the
troubles of marriages our mindes are to
be comforted, with the consideration
of this, that God doth allow & approue
of marriages.
                  Next it is to bee obserued, that the
Scripture sayth, he went in vnto her, for
he had to doe with her: hee doth note
with modestie, and shamefaste wordes,
that which is done honestly in lawfull

marriage. So it is sayd Gen. 16. ABRAHAM
went in vnto AGAR. 29. IACOB wēt
in vnto his wiues: MVNSTER noteth vpon
the 23. chap. DEVT. out of the Hebrue
commentaries, that the Hebrue
toong is therefore called holy, because
there are no proper names found in it,
which signifie the secrets of man or woman,
of generation, or excrements, and
such others, but those thinges that are
lothsome or filthy are spoken by some
honest or comely periphrases for the
word lying together, is vsed the worde
of knowing or sleeping, &c. SAMVEL 24▪
It is said SAVLE went in to couer hys
feete, that is to emptie his belly.
                  These phrases teach vs that Aischrologian
or filthinesse in wordes is to be auoyded,
if thou speakest of wanton
matters or of other thinges. PAVL
                        •
                      teacheth
vs the very same. Ephes. 4. 6. cap.
Colo. 3. Those men were woont commonly,
which had incestious mouthes
to be called merry companions. But euē
the Cinikes were euill spokē of amongst
the Gentiles because they spake lothesomely

and filthily. Stobeus doth report
these wordes amongest others of
Charondus Cataneus in the promise of
the lawes: let no man speake filthily
least he defile his soule with filthy deeds
and fill his minde with impudencie and
wickednesse. For wee call those thinges
whiche are honest and deare vnto vs,
with fit names written in the lawe, and
those things which we hate, we abho
                        •
                     re
euen the naming of them for filthinesse
sake. Therefore it is also filthy to speake
a filthy thinge: Also there is a warning
23. SIRAC that we shuld not accustome
our selues to fi
                        •
                     thie and lothsome talke,
for from thence euill thoughtes may arise.
Tender mindes are oft offended
greeuously by such kinde of talke, as the
Apostle witnesseth who sayth. Cor. 25.
cap. Euill talke doth corrupt good manners.
S. Chrisostomus doth call filthie
talke, the chariot of whoredome, which
doth carry men vnto it. Those thinges
that are spoken of speeche, are to be referred
to filthy rimes and songes: wee
must alwayes remember that wee must

yeeld an account to God for euery idle
worde, and then much rather for lothesome
& fil thie talke, the scriptures doth
oftentimes vse lothsome and filthie
words, as 23. Ezech. where by the similitude
of two women he doeth describe
the vnfaithfulnes of both the kingdōes,
namely of Israel
                        •
                      and Iudah, but to a
good ende, according to the maner of
the Phisitians, who doe sometimes prescribe
remedies, in filthie words against
filthie diseases.
                  It is not simplie said, that RVTH conceiued
and bare a sonne, but the Lorde
gaue this sonne to him, for children are
the gift of God, and therefore they are
to be religiously brought vp, that they
may be aproued of him, Gen. 33. IACOB
aunswered his brother ESAV, as king of
his children, they are the childrē which
the Lord hath giuen to thy seruant. IOSEPH
answered IACOB his father, asking
what two yong men those were which
stood by the bed, my sonnes which the
Lord hath giuen mee, in this place, hee
sayth not which I haue begotten, or

which my wife had borne me. &c. The
Bethlehemites prayed before, that the
Lord would make BOHAZ
                        ••
                      wife fruitfull,
for amongst other
                        •
                      Gods 
                        〈◊〉
                      works
this is also commended 
                        •
                     13. Psalm. that
God doth make the 
                        〈◊〉
                      fruitfull, 1.
Sam. 2. cap. HANNA in her hym
                        •
                     e sayth,
that the Lorde hath made that the barren,
hath born 
                        〈◊〉
                      sons, which is not
to be vnderstood; of those onely which
were altogether barren, as SARAH when
shee conceiued IZHAK of ABRAM. Gen.
17. ELIZABETH also was aged and barren,
Luk. 1. As 
                        〈◊〉
                      ISAAKS wife
was in the beginning, Gen. 25. And RAHEL
the wife of IABOB. 30. chap. HANNA
the mother of SAMVEL the Prophet.
Also the hostes of ELISHA the Prophet
obtayned a sonne by his prayer, who
being dead he raysed vppe vnto lyfe. 2.
KING. 4. but of those also, whiche are
fruitfull by nature: for God is the Authour
of all thinges, who hath his reasons
wherfore he doth make some fruitfull,
some barren.
                  It is sayd she bare a sonne, if shee had

borne a daughter it woulde haue bene
great ioy to theyr parentes, but their ioy
is the great
                        ••
                      because they haue a sonne
to be the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of theyr familie. And because
the Messias was promised to be of
the tribe of IVD
                        ••
                     , it is not to be doubted
but that tho
                        •
                     e parents thought that
that he should in time be borne of that
sonne as indeeds it came to passe.
                  She bare but not by and by, but as it
is sayd other where, when the 
                        ••
                     ne was
accomplished. ARISTOTLE in historia
animalium, lib. 7. cap. 4. doth write that
woman onely hath diuers times, wherin
she doth bring forth, for shee may be
deliuered in the 7. month or 8. 9. but
most commonly in the tenth.
                  It is sayd before that the Bethlemites
prayed for the prosperitie of those new
married folkes, nowe it appeareth that
those prayers were not in vayne, for
BOAZ and RVTH obtayned those things
which they prayed for. Also God doth
heare our vowes and prayers. If thou
wouldest say that it shoulde haue bene,
although they had not prayed: we aunswere

although all thinges are done by
the order of Gods prouidence, & most
thinges fall out by the course of nature:
yet prayers are not in vayne: neither are
praiers disanulled by the order of gods
prouidence: for by them oft times the
order and course of thinges is altered.
The women of whome we speake a litle
before, desirous of a childe, by theyr
prayers, obtayned of God that they became
fruitfull.
               
               
                  The. 26. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        14. And the women sayd vnto Naomie, Bless
                              •
                           d
bee the Lorde which hath not left thee this
day without a kinsman, and his name shalbee
c
                              •
                           n
                              •
                           inued in Israell.
                        15 And this shall bring thy lyfe agayne, and cherishe
thine old age: for thy daughter in lawe,
which loueth thee, hath borne vnto him, and
she is better to thee then seuen sonnes.
                     
                  
                  
                     BOHAZ begat a sonne of RVTH,
the whiche amongest the Hebrues
was accounted as a great
benefite, especially in the tribe
of Iuda, out of the whiche the Messias

shoulde bee borne, according to his humane
nature: he is begotten according
to his diuine nature, of the substance of
the father frō al eternity, by an vnspeakeable
meane. It foloweth that the Bethlehemitishe
women, reioyced at the
graundmother of this childe, They say,
God is to bee blessed or praysed, who
would not, that thou shouldest lacke a
reuenger, or a kinseman. Vnlesse a sonne
should be borne vnto her of RVTH, shee
had bene destituted, of all kinsemen. For
although that other kinseman remained
yet she could looke for no helpe of him.
For there is no man so welthy, or mightie:
who hath not sometime neede, of
the helpe of his friends. It is sayd in the
PROVERBE, a friend is more necessarye
then fier and water: for which cause
the Latines do call friendes by another
name more fitte, as necessary men. Poor
men which haue the helpe of rich kinsemen,
and aliaunces, are not so soone iniuried
by others, as they which wante
them. But though we be without frends
yet wee must not dispayre, for wee haue

God not onely as a friend, but also for a
father, if wee trust in him, and lead our
lyfe aright. Then they shew, what manner
of childe, that new borne babe shalbe,
and what he shall do.
                  First they say, his name shalbe continued
in Israell, that is, he shal be famous
and of great renowne. Which they doe
gather of this▪ that his parentes were
godly and notable: they doe likewise
hope, that hee shalbe well brought vp,
and he shal become famous for his own
vertues, and famousnes of his parentes.
Those children which haue famous parentes,
maye easilye become famous, if
they behaue themselues well.
                  Secondly they saye, this childe shall
bring thy lyfe againe. In the first chapter
shee sayd, shee was bitter, for the Lorde
had afflicted her: nowe they say, this
childe shall comfort thee: while he was
little, with his sportes and playes, hee
might re
                        •
                     reshe his sorrowfull graundmother:
and afterwards when he should
grow elder, she might by his studies gather
that hee should become some notable

man. Pro. 20. chap. A childe also
is knowne by hys doinges, whether his
worke, bee pure and right, and so shee
may be of greater comfort. SALOMON
hath many sentences, whiche importe
that children of good hope, & towardnes
and indued with vertue, shall make
the parentes merry. Pro. 10. and 15. A
wise sonne maketh a gladde father, but
a foolish sonne is a heauinesse to his mother.
And chap. 23. The father of the
righteous, shall greatly reioyce, and hee
that begetteth a wise childe, shall haue
ioy of him. Thy father and thy mother
shalbe glad, and she that bare thee shall
reioyce.
                  Thirdly they say, hee shall cherishe
thine olde age, that is, hee shall not suffer
thee to want thinges necessarie, for
the sustentation of thy life. There is a
reason added: for thy daughter in-law,
hath borne him or vnto him: and she is
better vnto thee, then if thou shouldest
haue seuen, that is, many children.
                  The number of 
                        •
                     euen, in the scripture
is a number of multitude. 1. SAM. ELKANAH

sayth to HANNA: am not I better
to thee then ten sonnes? They hoped
that RVTH, woulde not chaunge her
mind with her estate, so that, she hauing
gotten a riche husband, should despise
her poore mother in-law, as it commeth
oft to passe. Furthermore they hoped,
that RVTH would teache her sonne to
loue her mother in-law, that hee might
norish her in her age, for it greatly beh
                        •
                     
                     ueth
mothers to informe their children
rightly of their kinsfolkes and others.
And they doe greatly offend, which do
prouoke the children, sometime against
parentes, graundmothers and their kinsfolkes.
There is a like example of congratulation
in the new testament. LVK. 1
When ELIZABETH had brought foorth
her sonne Iohn, and her neighbors, and
cousins had heard tell howe the Lorde
had shewed his great mercy vppon her,
they reioysed with her. Out of this reioysing
of these women, some things are
to be gathered, for our instruction.
                  First wee learne, to giue thankes to
God, and to reioyce with them, whiche

haue the blessing of the increase of children,
riches or other good things. PAVL
commaundeth vs to reioyce with them
which doe reioyce, and to weepe with
them which doe weepe, not to be malitious,
and enuious, nor that we shoulde
reioice at the miseries of others. For this
is a preposterous ioy, which God suffereth
not to be vnreuenged. If we ought
to reioice with others, & to giue thanks
to God for these good things, which he
bestoweth vpon them, how much more
if he imploy his benefites vppon vs, and
especially for that generall benefit worthie
to be had in remembraunce, that he
would that his sonne our Lorde Iesus
Christ, should become man of the Virgin
Mary, that he might deliuer vs from
eternall death? Now in our times if any
man haue a childe, an office of dignitie,
or any other good thing, they doe feast
and banquet, but God is seldome remembred.
                  Next, in that they doe prayse God,
and giue him thankes, that NAOMIE
hath another kinsman, they doe confesse,

that this is a singuler gift of God:
wee doe not thanke any man for any
thing, which wee haue not receiued of
him. Al good things do come frō God,
the onely fountaine of all good thinges
he doth as yet preserue families, and raiseth
vp friendes for vs. Oftentimes wee
haue such neere vnto vs, which doe abhorre
vs, but God can easily bring it to
passe, that they shall loue, embrace and
vse all good dueties towardes vs. Strangers
doe sometimes l
                        •
                     ue vs, and further
our commodities, the which wee must
also acknowledge as the worke of God.
But when, the waies of men, that is there
studies, doe please the Lorde, hee will
make also their enemies at peace with
them, as it is in SALOMONS prouerbs
the 16. chapter. Thinke not that it is
without cause, that men doe hate, or
loue thee, be enemies, or friendes vnto
thee.
                  Furthermore wee perceiue by the
wordes of these women, what is the dutie
of children towardes theyr parentes,
namely to comfort their mindes and to

cherishe their age. They which doe not
make glad their parentes, but by theyr
wicked life doe cast them into greeuous
heauines and sorrowes, are not onely
murderers of parentes. Nature it selfe
teacheth that parentes are to be nourished
in their olde age. For it is meet that
shoulde nourishe them, of whome wee
wee haue bene nourished, and whiche
haue bestowed innumerable benefites
vpon vs. Howe oft behoueth it the mothers,
to abstayne from certaine kindes
of meates wherein they delite, least they
should hurt the children in the wombe:
How oft doe both the fathers and the
mothers abstayne from meate, least the
children shoulde be famished with hunger?
Howe oft doe children with theyr
crying breake their parents sleep? How
oft are the parents made afraid through
sundry, and sodayne falles of their children?
                  Say not therefore, that they are froward
and complaining, thinke rather
what thou hast bene, and what thou
shalt be, through the weakenesse of age,

if the Lorde graunt thee to liue many
yeeres. The Ethnickes haue many notable
examples of the pietie of children
toward parentes. What an example is it
of that daughter, which with her owne
milke norished her mother in prison, of
whom Valerius Maximus maketh mention.
Pausanias lib. 10. writing of them
which wer called the godly Cataneans,
sayth when the fire, burnt hotly out of
Aetna into Catana, (a Citie of Scicilea,
which was at the foote of this mountayne)
they made no accompt of golde
& siluer, but flying away, this man tooke
his mother on his shoulders, that other
bare his father. But because they went
not away with speede, the flame hasting
the fire ouertooke them: but they cast
not away theyr parentes so. Therefore
they say that the flames parted in two,
and passed ouer both the young men, &
also the parentes, not hurting them at
all. He sayth that these men in his tyme
wer greatly honored of the Cataneans.
The Storkes also doe shewe kindnesse
vnto theyr dammes, when they are old:

here of Antipelargein is taken, for to make
a recompence. Amongest Christians
thou shalt finde children, which hauing
aboundance of wealth, doe yet reiecte
theyr parentes, and yeeld them not
wherewith to slake theyr hunger. Often
times the daughters woulde willingly
doe theyr due
                        •
                     e, but the sonnes in-law
will not suffer it: in like maner the sons
would doe, but the daughters in-lawe
shew themselues very straight: of whom
that cannot be sayde which these women
doe speake of RVTH, that she is to
her mother in-law better then many
sonnes. The sonnes doe oft excuse thē
                     selues,
by theyr pouertie, but yet they
doe follow the cups, and do most sump
                     
                        •
                     uously
against all order apparell themselues,
and are at manie vaine expences.
If the parents haue many children, they
are sent vp and down, from one to another,
especially if they haue milked their
mony from them before: therfore they
doe wisely, which keepe their goods to
themselues, and giue them not to theyr
children: SIRAC. 33. chap.
                  
                     
Of this, that it is sayd, that RVTH is
better vnto her then seuen children, we
do gather this comfort, that we wanting
the helpe of children, God can easily
rayse vppe other men who may doe vs
more good then our owne, who ought
especially to prouide for vs.
                  Daughters in-lawe doe also learne agayne
by this example, how they ought
to behaue themselues towardes theyr
mother in-law.
                  Lastly, women doe learne, what and
how they ought to speake, if they doe
carry children to baptisme, 
                        •
                     and doe visite
women lying in childebed, namely
they shoulde geue God thankes for hys
benefites which hee bestoweth vppon
them, and pray vnto him that the children
may be religiously brought vp, and
serue God: and not talk of matters, that
are light or scurrilous.
               
               
                  The. 27. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        16 And Naomie tooke the childe, and layd it 
                              •
                           
her lap, and became a nursse vnto it.
                        17. And the women her neyghboures gaue it a
name, saying: There is a childe borne vnto Naomie,
                           
and called the name thereof Obed▪
                           
the same was the father of Ishai, the father of
Dauid.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     THERE are three thinges contayned
in these wordes, first
NAOMIE was the boyes
nursse, next the women called
the boy OBED: thirdly, that he was
graundfather to DAVID the king. It is
written, that NAOMIE tooke the infant,
and layd it in her lap, and imbraced him
with great ioy, for so we see it commeth
to passe, that graundfathers and grandmothers
doo oftentimes loue their nephues
and neeses, better then their own
children. Shee became the boies nursse,
not that she gaue him suck but she gaue
him meate, drinke, and washed him &c.
As concerning the worde, meiaenk
                           •
                        th a
nursse, that is deriued of i
                           •
                        nak to sucke in
Hishil to geue milke, as shee which geueth
the infante milke. GEN. 22. Wee
read of REBECKAES nursse: GEN. 35. of
DE
                        •
                     ORA a nursse. 2. REG. 11. Omaeneth
for a nursse, 2. SAM. 3. His nursse tooke

him is deriued aman, to nursse, to bring
vp, meialaedeth a midwife, of 
                        
                           •
                        alad to bring
forth, because she helpeth her that is in
trauell.
                  And though that she had now an aged
body, and therefore not fitte for labours:
yet shee would not leade an idle
lyfe, but did what shee could. Let olde
woemen follow this example, let them
take care of children, teaching them
godlinesse, and withdrawing them from
vices. 1. Tim. 5. If anie wido we haue children
or nephewes let them learn (or rather
as Caluin translateth it) let them
teach, (for Manthan
                           •
                        in signifieth both to
teach and to learn) their children or nephewes
to shew godlines towards their
owne house, and to make a mutuall recompence
to their elders, for this is acceptable
before God.
                  Out of this, that God gaue RVTH so
great ioy, partly by matching her with
so notable a husband, partly by giuing
her a man-childe: wee are taught that
God doth sometime euen in this lyfe
blesse those children which doe honour

theyr parentes. RVTH was faithful towardes
her mother in-lawe, therefore
God hath graunted her a blessed and
a quiet marriage, much riches and great
renowne. Therfore O ye children deale
well with your parentes, geeue them
those thinges whiche are necessary for
them: and prouoke them not to wrath.
                  Next wee doe gather, that God can
easily restore to perfect estate, men, be
they neuer so much afflicted. Hee doth
not onely for a time vse to ouerwhelme
his children with the crosse, but afterwardes
hee doth suffer them againe to
come out of it. These widowes were a
long time in a poore estate, but nowe
God doth exalt them both: hee geueth
to NAOMIE a sonne in-law, and of him
a nephew to nourish her. As after great
tempestes, there commeth a calme, after
a sharpe winter in a pleasaunt course
there followeth a delectable spring, so
ioy followeth sorrow. But God tempereth
it with some trobles, least we shuld
wander out of the way of saluation. The
sacred history is full of publicke and priuate

examples: therefore in aduersities
let vs not be vnpatient, but l
                        •
                     t vs comfort
our selues with the consideration
of such like examples.
                  The neighbours sayd that there was
a sonne born to NAOMIE: but NAOMIE
was not his mother, but RVTH her
daughter in law: but they speake in this
maner, because the graundmothers are
as mothers to the nephewes.
                  Those sonnes are also accompted
their children, which haue adopted thē.
Or it is such a phrase of speeche, as that
in ISA. 9. a childe is giuen to vs. And also
in LVKE 2. This day a sauiour is born
to you in the Citie of DAVID, which is
Christ the Lorde and this is for your
good.
                  They called his name OBED, OBED
signifieth a husband-man, a seruaunt, a
tiller: There is noe cause expressed
why they called him by this name. It
may be because that RVTH who had
this child by a man of renowne, had before
serued NAOMIE faithfully: or because
that RVTH labouring diligently amongest

the seruauntes of BOAZ was,
knowne of him and planted into his familie:
Or which rather liketh me that he
might serue God. All true worshippers
of God are called the seruaunts of God.
The auntient fathers gaue not vnaduisedly
names vnto their children: but of
some especiall occasion, that both they
and theyr children being alwayes put in
minde of the benefites of God, and of
theyr dutie, might be stirred vp to fayth
and thankes geuing. Sometimes they
continued the memorie of thinges past,
by geuing of a name. Israell gaue names
almost to all his children, according to
the successe. MOSES EXOD. 18. called
his sonne GERSHOM because hee was a
soiourner in a straunge land: and he named
the other ELIEZAR, because the
Lord had holpe him. SAMVEL was so
called because HANNA had prayed to
God, that she might haue him. Furthermore
some being willing to continue or
renue the memorie of their parentes or
kinsmen, they named theyr sonnes by
theyr names. LVK. 1. The neighbors and

kinsfolkes contending about a name for
Iohn, would haue called him Zacharias
but his mother said, hee shall be called
Iohn. And when they sayde there was
none of thy kindred that is named with
this name, they referred the matter to
his father, he wrott in writing tables, his
name is Iohn: For the Aungell hadde
commaunded that it should be so: And
this name is deriued of grace, partly because
he had obtayned muche grace of
God, partly because hee should preach
to the worlde, the grace of G
                        •
                     d performed
in giuing of his sonne. For GOD
himselfe gaue sometimes names vnto
men, to signifie thinges either past, or to
come: sometimes also before they were
borne. He gaue ADAM his name of the
earth out of the which hee was made, &
HEVAH because she should bee the mother
of all liuing creatures: ISMAEL because
God had heard HAGAR, Gen. 16.
SALOMON because there should bee a
long peace in his raigne. Iesus because
he should saue his people. Sometime he
chaunged names, as ABRAM, he called

ABRAHAM, because he shuld be a father
of many nations, GEN. 17. SARAA because
many princes should come out of
her. Christ our Sauiour named SIMON
PETER, because hee had neede of great
fayth and constancie. The Romaine bishops
immitated this when they were
created, they called themselues by other
names: the which custome begā as they
writte in the time of SERGIVS the second,
who was before called, Osporci
Swines face, and for the filthines of hys
name, he called himselfe SERGIVS: and
so it continueth vnto our times. And
though it auayleth nothing to saluation
by what name any man be called, yet it
becōmeth christians in geuing of names
to keepe themselues from superstition.
In some yeeres past they consecrated
theyr children to the worshippe of that
Sainct, by whose name they wer called.
                  And there are some which of a kind
of vayne ostentation, called their chyldren
by heathenish names, as Hannieball,
Scipio, Catyline, &c. There are
many notable names, which do admonishe

children of theyr duety amongest
the Hebrues, as ABRAHAM, IAACOB, ISAIAH:
Greek as Chrisostom, Christopher,
Theophilus: latine, as Benedictus
Fortunatus, &c. The Germanes haue also
many notable names which haue excellent
significations. It is meet for godly
parentes to giue their children suche
names, as the remembrance of thē may
prouoke them to vertues. As often as
we heare our name, so oft ought wee to
thinke, that in our holy baptisme we are
receiued into the houshold of Christ. If
we be named by the names of holy mē,
let vs endeuore our selues by fayth and
holinesse of life, to followe their steps.
There are other names also, which are
giuen according to their offices, wherof
it were in vaine to write in this place.
                  But why OBED was called the sonne,
not of Mahlon, but of BOHAZ his naturall
father, S. Augustine sheweth in the
question vpon Deut. 46. The law (sayth
he) of marrying the wife of a brother,
that seed might be raysed vp to the brother
who is dead without children▪ saith

he, shalbe called after the name of him
that is dead, and his name shall not bee
blotted out of Israel, that is, the name of
the dead seemeth hereby to bee continued,
that he which is borne, bee called
by this name, wherby the dead was called,
to whom after a sort he succeedeth,
&c. Vnlesse it may bee vnderstood this,
not that he shal haue this name, but that
hee shalbe accounted as the sonne, not
of him that begat him, but of that dead
man to whome the seede is raysed, and
whose heire he is made. For that which
is added: And his name shall not bee
blotted out of Israel, may so bee vnderstood,
not that the childe should consequently
be called by his name, but that
he should not seeme to dye without posterity,
and therefore his name, that is,
his memorie, remaineth. For if hee had
gotten a sonne himself, and had not cald
him by his owne name, yet his name is
not blotted out of Israel, because he departed
not out of this life without children:
and the brother is commaunded
to perform this towards his wife which

he could not doe: for though hee had
no brother, but the kinseman married
his wife, that died without children to
rayse vp seede to his brother: as BOHAZ
did by marrying RVTH, that hee might
rayse vp seed to his kinsman, whose wife
she was, and had no childe by him: yet
that childe which shoulde be borne of
her shuld continue the name of the party
deceased, because he is called his son:
and so it cōmeth to passe that the name
of the deceased should not bee blotted
out of Israel, and yet not bee called by
his name, &c. Thus farre Augustine. Others
say that the children begotten in
such a marriage, should be called by the
name of the brother which is dead: but
it seemeth that this was somtimes neglected,
because there wanted some brethren,
or because many had rather to beget
children for themselues, then for
their brother.
                  The last thing to bee considered in
these wordes is, who this OBED was,
namely, the father of ISHAI, the grandfather
of DAVID the King, of whose genealogie

it followeth next to be spoken.
               
               
                  The 28. Sermon.
                  
                     
                        18 Those nowe are the generations of Pharez,
Pharez begate Hesron,
                        
                        19 And Hesron begate Ram, and Ram begate
Amminadab.
                        20 And Amminadab begate Nas
                              •
                           on, and Nashon
begate Salmah.
                        21 Salmon begate Bohaz, and Bohaz begat Obed.
                        22 And Obed begate Ishai, and Ishai begate
Da
                              •
                           id.
                     
                  
                  
                     THERE are some places in
the sacred scriptures, which
seem to haue but little in thē
for edification: but be it knowen,
that there is nothing set downe in
them rashly or in vaine. For if a wiseman
will speake nothing without a cause, &
much lesse write that which shall come
into the handes of many: who woulde
thinke that God who is wisdome it self,
woulde appoint his secretaries to write
any thing, which shall bring no profite,
to them that read it? It is true that one

place is more profitable then anothe
                        •
                     
as one fielde is more fruitfuller then another,
and one riuer hath more 
                        〈◊〉
                     
in it then another: but ther is nothing i
                        •
                     
the scriptures that is without vse, thog
                        •
                     
it may seeme at the first sight to be alto
                        •
                     g
                        •
                     ather
vnfruitfull. Mettalls lye hid 
                        •
                     
hard stones, wholsom hearbs are foun
                        •
                     
in sluttishe places, small pieces of gold
are sometimes seen, and precious stone
lye hid amongst the barren sand. Aristo
                        •
                     tle
lib. 1. cap. 5. De partibus animali
                           •••
                        
                      w
                        ••
                     
                     teth
that of al natural things there is no
                        •
                     thing
so vile & abiect, that bringeth no
some profit vnto men. For the works o
                        •
                     
nature are not wrought in vaine, but a
                        •
                     
things are made for some ende. In thi
                        •
                     
place I remember Heraclitus Taren
                        •
                     ous,
who when he lodged in a certain
                        •
                     
shepheardes cottage, cried out as it 
                        •
                     
sayd: come in hyther, for here also a
                        •
                     
gods. The same may & ought to be spoken
of those places of the holy scripture
which seeme to bee altogether barren 
                        •
                     
for they haue sometime an euiden
                        •
                      an
                        •
                     
profitable
                        •
                     vse. This catalogue of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
may peraduenture seeme to many

                        •
                     o be vnpleasaunt and vnprofitable, as

                        •
                     hat which onely containeth an idle 
                        •
                     a
                     
                        •
                     ologue
of names. But for this cause

                        •
                     as this whole booke written, name
                     
                        •
                     y
that wee might knowe the gene
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     gie
of DAVID, and so consequently

                        •
                     f Christ, who was peculiarly promised

                        •
                     nto him. And truely this catologue is
of so great moment, that MAT. & Lvc.
translated the same word for word into
the genealogie of Christ. For the scope

                        •
                     f the Euangelists, and Apostles is this,

                        •
                     hat Iesus is the Christ, that is, the king

                        •
                     nd high priest of all true beleeuers:

                        •
                     herefore it behoued them to shew, that

                        •
                     ee was come of them, to whome hee

                        •
                     as promised. For the holy Ghost pre
                     
                        ••
                     ntly
from the beginning of the world,

                        •
                     ligently declared, of what parentes

                        •
                     hrist should come. God promised our

                        〈◊〉
                      parentes ADAM and HEVAH when

                        •
                     ey should be cast out of Paradise that

                        •
                     e seede of the woman, that is the

                        •
                     ESSIAH or Christ should breake the

                        ••
                     d of the serpent. And the line of

Christ descended not by Caine but by
Seth to Noah. Hee had three sonnes
but the line is drawne from Shem to
Abraham, from him it descended not by
Ismaell but by Isaac the promised sonn
                        •
                     
afterwardes not by Esau his first born
sonne, but by Iacob, who otherwis
                        •
                     
was called Israell. Hee hauing twelu
                        •
                     
sonnes at his death by the inspiration
of the holy Ghost he foretolde vnto Iudah
that he should haue the kingdome,
& the scepter or rodde, that is the kingly
power, should not depart from his trib
                        •
                     
nor a scribe or a lawgiuer (the Chald
                        •
                     
interpreter translateth it a prince, the
Septuaginte a captaine, all one sence)
that is inferiour Iudges shall not depart
from his feet, namely of the tribe of Iudah,
that is, they shall not be taken away
vntill Shiloh come, that is the sauiour,
and Messias, the olde Hebrues doe thus
expound this worde, but the newer o
                        •
                     
latter of them doe woonderfully wre
                        •
                     
this place, and doe deuise most absurd
senses, least they shoulde be compelle
                        •
                     
to confesse that the Messiah is come in

to the worlde. The Patriarcke addeth,
and the people shal be gathered vnto
him, that is the Gentiles shall also come
vnto the MESSIAH and beleeue in him.
Though thys prophe
                        •
                     ie seemeth to
speake onely of the continuance of the
kingdome of IVDAH, and not euidently
and plainly to say, that SHALOH should
come, of the tribe of IVDAH, yet other
prophets did afterwardes expresly foretell
the same. For when as in the tribe
of IVDAH there were many notable
houses, as CALEBS and others, the Prophetes
prophe
                        •
                     ied that the MESSIAS
should co
                        •
                     e of the house of IESEE, and
of DAVID. But of DAVID, there came
most mightie kings, after his family, being
as it seemed almost extinguished
and ouerwhelmed, yet God preserued
him a light, and foretolde that the Messias
should come of IECONIAS DAVIDS
nephew of his sonne IEHOIAKIM. Hee
begate SALATHIEL, from whome the
two Euangelistes doe draw the lyne of
Christ vnto IOSEPH, vnto whome was
espoused the holy virgine, who ba
                        •
                     e

Iesus Christ the king of kinges. And in
this place is the genealogie of the fathers
cr
                        •
                     wne from IVDAH the sonne of
IACOB vnto DAVID.
                  PHAREZ and ZARAH being twinnes
were the sonnes of IVDAH, of THAMAR
his daughter in law, and his wife. Gen.
38. By them are praefigured two sortes
of people, the Iewes, and the Gentiles:
they went down into Aegipt with their
father and there PHAREZ begat ESROM.
                  2 ESROM was the sonne of PHAREZ
Gen. 46. He went downe into Aegypt
with his father & his grand-father as also
HAMVL his brother did, Ge, 46. of whose
posteritie there is nothing recorded, vnlesse
that the familie of the HAMVELITS
tooke theyr names from hym. Num. 26.
                  3 RAM who in the booke of the
Chronicles, and by the Euangelistes is
called ARAM, was the sonne of ESROM
borne in Aegypt after the death of IACOB.
                  4 AMINADAE the sonne of RAM,
great graund-father to DAVIDS great
graund-father was borne in Aegipt.
                  
                     
5 NAASSON the sonne of AMINADA
                        •
                     
graund-father vnto DAVIDS great
graund-father, hee went out of Aegypt
with his father, and after hym hee was
captayne of the tribe of IVDAH in the
wildernes, where hee begate SALMON.
Num. 1. 2. 7. 1. Chro
                        •
                     i. 2. It is doubted
whether he was hanged together wit
                        •
                     
the other princes in the fields of MOAB,
for whoredome and the worshipping of
Ball Peor. ELISAH ARONS wife was his
sister: Exo. 16. Some doe write, that ELIMELECH
the Bethlehemite, the husband
of NAOMIE, RVTHES mother inlaw
and NAASSON were brethren, but
LIRA saith that ELIMELECH and the
father of BOAZ that is SALMON were
brethren and so the other went before
hym in one degree, as he noteth vppon
3. cap. of this booke.
                  According vnto this opinion, BOAZ
and MAHALON, shuld be brothers children,
which seemeth not to be true, for
then should there haue bene none neerer
of kinne then BOAZ, except hys brother,
if hee hadde anie: for these two

sonnes dyed without anie Children.
                  6 SALMON who in this booke and 1.
Chroni. 2. is otherwise called SALMACH
the sonne of Naasson graund-father to
DAVIDS grand-father, was prince in the
tribe of IVDAH when IOSHVA entred
the land of promise this man tooke RAHAB
the Cananite to be his wife &c.
                  7 BOAZ DAVIDS great graundfather
hauing SALMON to his father and RAHA
                        •
                     
to his mother, tooke RVTH to hys
wife. The Hebrues doe say that hee was
IESHAN the Iudge. The Chaldei interpreter
calleth him a righteous man, and
hee writeth that for his equitie the land
of Israell was preserued, from the inuasions
of the enimies, and deliuered, from
the famine, by his prayers. But from
whence he hath this I know not.
                  8 O
                        •
                     ED the sonne of BOAZ and of
RVTH the Moabite was DAVIDS
graund-father.
                  9 ISAI who by the Euangelistes is
called IESSE, was the sonne of OBED:
mention is made of him in the 11. chap.
of the Prophet ISAIAH. Of this man the

Christians are sometimes called Iesseits.
Hee was also called by another name
NAACHAS that is a serpent. 2. SAM. 17.
The Chaldei interpreter vpō this chapter
saith, that he was therfore caled a Serpent
because he was endued with great
wisedome, whereby hee auoyded the
subtleties of the deuil. Reinerus Rineccius
a man very learned and diligent, in
booke of the noble families of the kings
and priestes of Israell noteth, that in his
opinion Nahaz was another man and
not Iesse. For it might be that Abigail
was DAVIDS sister of one and the same
mother but not of the same father. It is
read that ISAI had eight sonnes. 1. Sa.
16. vers. 10. ISAI. caused his seuen sonnes
to come before SAMVEL, he afterwards
asked are there no moe children but
these? In the Chronicles Dauid is called
Isais seuenth sonne, whose names
are these, ELIAB the eldest, ABINADA
                        •
                     ,
SIMEAH, who was also called SAMAH,
NATHANIEL, RADDAI, HOSEM, DAVID.
The name of the eight sonne is not
reckoned, some thinke that he dyed in

his youth, and left no children behinde
him, others do thinke that IONADAB the
sonne of Shimeiah, or some other nephew
was nombred amongst his sons.
He had two daughters; Zeruia and Abigail,
Zeruia had three sonnes: Ioab, Abishai,
Asahel, which are mentioned in the
sacred historie. Dauid names them after
their mother, the sonnes of Zeruia, peraduenture
because that their father was
but a meane man, Abigall had a sonne
called Amasa: of Dauid descended nineteene
Kings, Salomon, Rehoboam, &c.
                  The question is moued in this place,
how Salm
                        •
                     n Rahabs husband, and Bohaz
the husband of Ruth, may bee ioyned
togeather in two generations, when
as the course of the historie, euinceth it,
from the first yeare of Iosuah, (wherein
they thinke that Ierico was taken, and
Rabab preserued) vnto the time of Ibsan,
(whom they will haue to be Bohaz
the sonne of Rahab) so likewise vnto the
times of Eli (wherein Iosephus writeth,
that this RVTH came with NAOMI to
Bethlehem) manye yeares were past between.

I do simplie answere that it doth▪
not euidently appeare by the holy scriptures,
how many yeares after the taking
of Ierico were past, before Salmon married
Rahab, and when he begate Bohaz
of her, or when Bohaz married Ruth: so
likewise, whither this Bohaz was one &
the same with Ibsan the Iudge, and therfore
it is not necessarie that with some
of the Hebrues and Lyra, we shuld imagine
three Bohazes, which shuld successiuely
follow one another, as the grandfather
the sonne and the nephew, which
three should be cōprehended vnder one
name. Furthermore, it is no absurditie if
we should say, that God prolonged the
life of Salmon & Bohaz for many yeres,
as he did also many others of the fathers
after the stood.
                  But it is to bee obserued, that in the
catalog of the genealogie of Christ, many
heynous sinners are rehearsed. Iudah
the father of Pharez, committed manye
grieuous offences. Naasson was defiled
as some thinke, with whoredome and
with the abominable worshipp of Baal

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
Peor. Rahab the mother of Bohaz, is expressely
called a ha
                        •
                     lot, both by Paul &
Iames. But this came to passe by the prouidence
and will of God, that Christe
should come of such parentes, lest anye
man should think that this was▪ wrought
through the merits of the Patriarks: and
also for the comfort of sinners, lest they
should fal into dispair: but might know
that hee came for sinners, according to
that saying. 1. Tim. 1. This is a true saying
Iesus Christe came to saue sinners, &c.
God will be mercifull vnto thē through
his sonne if they repent.
                  The mother of Phares, and also the
mother and wife of Bohaz, were heathnishe
women, which were conuerted to
the worshippe of God. And it pleased
the sonne of God to come of them, that
not onely the Iewes, but also the Gentiles
might haue hope, to obtayne saluation
through Christ, who came also
of the Gentiles, and that for their saluation:
the Iewes are ioyned togeather
with the Gentiles, in Christ the corner
stone. The which the Iewes would hard

                     
                        •
                     y bee perswaded vnto at the first,
Yea euen the beleeuers of the Iewes,
and the Apostles themselues abhorred,
to haue felowshippe and company with

                        •
                     he Gentiles. Therefore God sending
Peter to Cornelius the Centurion, hee
taught him first from a vision from heauen
that he should not abhor his companie.
                  And in that God exalted Dauid to
so great maiestie, being born, of parents
of so meane estate, (for though he came
of so noble a familie, yet his father was
a husbandman) hee did it to make hys
mercy and hys power knowne. DAVID
himselfe in the 113. psal. sayth that God
lifteth vp the poore out of the donge,
that hee may sitte him in the seate euen
with the princes of his people. IOS
                        •
                     
                     PHVS
concluding this history sayth in
taking in hand to expound the historie
of RVTH, it is necessary to set forth the
power of God, for this is very apparent
that God lifteth vpp of the basest of the
people vnto great dignitie euen as hee
did with DAVID himselfe who came of

such parentes: We doe also see by the
wordes, that the Anabaptistes are far
                        •
                     
out of the way, which deny Christia
                        •
                     
the reading of the olde testament, whe
                        •
                     
as those thinges which appertayne vnto
our saluation, are thoroughly set down
in the newe, for who can vnderstand
these wordes in MATTHEVV, BOAZ begat
OB
                        •
                     D of RVTH, except hee hast
read this booke? and in that he sayth of
RVTH, which was a Moabite, there is no
small mistery contayned: for the Euangelist
declareth that Christ woulde be
borne of the Gentiles and that for their
sakes. But here is a bad errour whiche
wee shoulde confute in many wordes.
Some doe make BOAZ a figure of the
Messias and RVTH of the Church the
spouse of the Messias. I doe not denie
but that hee with his spouse is diue
                        •
                     sly
figured in the scriptures, but I had rather
follow the simple and literall mea
                     
                        •
                     ing
of the place &c. They which doe
delight in allegories let them seek them
else-where.
                  Thus hitherto I haue expounded vnto

you th
                        •
                      booke of RVT
                        •
                     , out of the

                        〈…〉
                      many lessons.

                        •
                     ut it is no
                        ••
                     fficient to heare and to

                        •
                     ad these and other such like, except we
endeuor to heare with profite: and to

                        •
                     rame our liues according to the rule of
the word of God. For the seruant which
knoweth the wil of his master, and doth
it not, shalbe beaten with many stripes.
Therefore let vs earnestly praye vnto
God most mercifull and mighty, that he
would vouchsafe to open our mindes,
that we may not onely vnderstande his
oracles aright, but also that wee may
vse them to the confirmation of
our fayth, and amendement
of our life.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   