
      
         
            
            
            THE HISTORIE OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG, KING OF ALBANIE.
            
               Containing his famous actes, his noble deedes of Armes, and memorable victories against the Turkes, for the Faith of Chriſt.
            
            Compriſed in twelue Bookes: By IAQVES DE LAVARDIN, Lord of PLESSIS BOVRROT, a Nobleman of France.
            
               Newly tranſlated out of French into English by Z. I. Gentleman.
            
            
               ANCHORA SPEI.
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, Imprinted for VVilliam Ponſonby.
            1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONORABLE, SIR GEORGE CAREY, KNIGHT MARSHAL OF HER MAIESTIES HOVSE, GOVERNOVR OF THE ISLE OF VVIGHT, and ſonne and heire apparant to the Lord of Hunſdon▪ Lord Chamberlaine, &c.
            
            
               GEORGE CASTRIOT the Prince of EPIRE hauing long ſoiorned amongeſt the French, is now come as a traueller to ſee the entertainment of the Engliſh: his deſire is, to be made knowne vnto ſome honorable perſonage, vnder whoſe fauour and protection he may paſſe freely amongſt the Engliſh without being wronged or iniured in his trauell: but to whom ſhould he haue recourſe? or to whom can he be better recommended then to your ſelfe? whoſe reſpectiue regard of ſtrangers, and Honorable hoſpitality continued without match or compare: and whoſe Noble deſcent vnited in conſanguinitie to the thrice honored houſe of the moſt renowmed Empreſſe of our Engliſh nation, promiſeth acceptance of his deuoted affection and Honorable patronage, againſt all ſuch dangers as commonly accompanie trauellers in forreine countries. He hath heard in places farre diſtant from this Iſle, aſwell of your ſucceſfull imploiments in ambaſſage for Prince & countrie (as beſt can witneſſe the French and Scottiſh nations) as of your grounded experience in militarie profeſſion, wherein you haue bene trained from your younger yeares: and being himſelfe a ſouldier, hath therefore reſolued to preſſe into your preſence, and in your loue of Martialiſts, entirely to commend himſelfe to the aſſurance of your protection. If his attire wherein he is clad, be plaine and ſimple, and nothing ſumptuous: if his habit do ſeeme either too baſe for the ſtate and preſence of the Court, or too contemptible for the nice curioſitie of the citie, or too ſtale for the variable faſhions of the countrie: yet for

that vnder the meaneneſſe of his attire are hidden moſt rich treaſures of incomparable knowledge, and rare experience: I doubt not but you will grace the deſert of his vertues without reſpecting his outward ſhew and apparance: to the intent that ſo admirable an example of all militarie perfections, and the ſingular precepts which may be deriued out of this hiſtorie of his life and actions, may haue that due applauſe and commendation of the world, which the greatneſſe of his exploits, and the worthineſſe of the worke do iuſtly deſerue in the eye & iudgement of the wiſe. VVhatſoeuer defects do appeare about him: you may impute them to the ignorance and ouerſight of his guide, who knew not better how to direct him: and whoſe willingneſſe was greater to cauſe this ſtranger to ſee England, then his skill and abilitie to giue him the rightes that belonged vnto him. Notwithſtanding, if it may pleaſe you in regard of the honorable bountie ſhining in your noble mind, and for Scanderbeg his owne ſake to giue him a gratious welcome: I make no doubt, but others likewiſe, either all, or the moſt, or the beſt will be glad to entertaine him: by meanes whereof my ſelfe alſo who haue conducted him to your preſence, ſhall both hold me highly fauored, and I ſhall euer liue in the continuall contemplation of your honorable vertues as a vowed Orator for the greatneſſe of your fortunes, vnder the fauour whereof, I deſire moſt humbly to be reputed.
            
               Yours moſt deuote
Z. I.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               GEntle Reader, I haue here preſented you with an Hiſtorie out of French into English, containing the life and glorious actes of Scanderbeg King of Epyre, a Prince no leſſe admired in his life, then memorable after his death. I neede not commend vnto you, eyther the excellencie of the Hiſtorie, or the worthineſſe of the partie: for that both the one and the other are ſufficient to commend themſelues, and the shadow of my prayſes will but eclipſe the brightneſſe of their deſerts. Notwithſtanding becauſe it may be expected that I should ſay ſomewhat, giue me leaue to ſpeake what I thinke, though I cannot thinke what I ought to ſpeake. Firſt therefore touching Scanderbeg, ſo exquiſite was his skill and experience in the art and ſcience militarie, ſo excellent and heroicall was his cariage and gouernment amongeſt his ſouldiers, amongſt his ſubiects, and towards his very enemies: ſo amiable and louely were his vertues▪ ſo vnſpeakable and vnmatchable were many of his qualities, ſo honorable and glorious were all his actions, and ſo extraordinarie was his fortune in the multitude and rareneſſe of his victories, that it may be a queſtion whether was greater his vertue or his fortune. The one was rare, the other admirable, and both together haue exempted him from compariſon: in ſo much, that if Hanniball the Carthaginian the ſcourge of Rome, and Scipio the Romaine the plague of Carthage, were now liuing, to reuiue their old diſputation, who should be reputed the beſt Captaine: I doubt not but each of them would giue Scanderbeg the garland, at leaſtwiſe they would acknowledge him (if not ſuperiour to all) yet inferiour to none, and equall to the worthieſt. If we compare his ſmall meanes with his mightie exploites, you will ſay they were wonderfull, if you conſider his policies and fine ſtratageames, you will ſay they were ſingular: if you reſpect his corporall giftes and ornaments, nature her ſelfe will ſay she was prodigall in gracing him, hauing made him as comely as Edgar Atheling, who was called Englands darling, and as vnpenetrable as Achilles, whom no weapon could faſten on. If you regard his fortune, fortune her ſelfe will tell you, that she was fond ouer him. For in him onely she shewed a change of her nature, which being vſually changeable and inconſtant to all men mortall, yet to him continued conſtant and vnchangeable. As for his vertues, Oh how they shine most glorious as the ſunne beames, dazeling the eyes of the beholders with the excellencie of their obiect. Looke into his life, and let this Hiſtorie be the glaſſe to shew you his perfections, you shall finde, that for warineſſe and prudence, he was comparable to Fabius Maximus, who by temporizing repayred the eſtate of Rome almoſt ruinated: for loue to his natiue countrie, he was another Camillus, who being exiled by his ingrate citizens, yet reſcued them from the Gaules. For diſcipline he was equall to Manlius, whoſe ſeueritie to his owne ſonne hath made him euer famous. Couragious as Hector that neuer turned backe to his enemies, bountifull and courteous as Caeſar, who by giuing, forgiuing, and relieuing, made himſelfe way to the Romaine Empire: mercifull as Traian, who neuer ſigned Bill for the execution of malefactors but he bedewed it with his teares: deare to his ſubiects and ſouldiers as Tytus, who was termed the delight and the Iewell of the world. Alexander the glorie of Macedon, got the name of Great amongst the Greekes, becauſe he ouercame the Orient like a tempest: Pompey the ioy of the Romaine Nobilitie, had the name of Great giuen him by

the Romaines, becauſe he purged the ſeas infested with Pyrats, and becauſe he ſtoode for the common libertie: Charlemaine the honour of the French was entytled Great becauſe he brake the force and power of the Sarracens. Gonſaluo the pride of the Spaniards and Italians was called the great Captaine, becauſe he extorted the kingdome of Naples from the Frenchmen. As iuſtly may the Epyrots vaunt of their Scanderbeg to be the glorie, the honour, the pride, and the ioy of Albanie, ſeeing the Turkes themſelues his ſworne and mortall enemies haue giuen and attributed the name of Great vnto him, and ſeeing the greatneſſe of his exploits doe teſtifie that the name and title of Great is no greater then his deſerts. Nay all Europe may worthily acknowledge him to be as great as the greateſt: ſeeing his conqueſt in Aſia and Europe vnder Amurath, the ſtrange recouerie of his kingdome, and of the libertie of his countrie, which he purged from the Infidels: his often and wonderfull victories atcheeued againſt infinite and huge armies, and the continuall courſe of his life, and of all his actions doe shew apparantly, that he was the glorie and onely ſtaie of his owne countrie, the ſole protectour of the common libertie, a bulwarke to Chriſtendome, a champion for the religion, the paragon of that age, and the wonder of poſteritie: a terror to his enemies whileſt he liued, and adored by them after his death. Pardon me (my maſters) if I be ſomewhat immoderate or ſuperſtitious in admiring his excellencie, for what almoſt can there be in any man, that was not aboundantly in our Scanderbeg? ſo many were his perfections, and ſo few his imperfections, as it may iuſtly be imagined, that God created him as a mirror for the world rather to wonder at, then any way poſſibly to be matched, and yet moſt worthy of all men to be imitated.
            Now by the excellencie of the perſon here repreſented, the worthineſſe of this hiſtorie may eaſily be imagined, for where the ſubiect is ſo rare and notable, the eſtimat of the hiſtorie muſt needes be made correſpondent and agreeable. I will not compare it with the beſt that haue beene written, but this I dare auerre, that therein is litle or nothing wanting which in a hiſtorie is thought needfull. The ornaments of an hiſtorie are, elegancie of the ſtile, truth of the reports, varietie of the diſcourſe, and the profitableneſſe of the matter. For the ſtile, howſoeuer this historie may ſeeme defectiue, it is not much materiall: for though it want the grace of elegant and fine phraſes to make it pleaſaunt to curious eares and to daintie appetites: yet for all other the accomplements of a good and perfect hiſtorie I thinke it may go beyond the moſt: if it compare not with the beſt: touching the trueth thereof, diuerſe circumſtances and arguments do proue it to be without controllment, The age and time wherein it was firſt written: the conſent of ſucceeding times which haue receiued it without reproofe, and the teſtimonies of ſundrie authors who haue recorded the moſt notable and ſtrangeſt accidents contained in this hiſtorie. For the varietie thereof to procure delight, I appeale to your owne iudgements when you haue read it. And I doubt not but you will confeſſe: that you haue found few hiſtories or none, more copious, more delectable and more delightfull. For profit likewiſe: in many pointes it will ſhew it ſelfe to be excellent, and you can turne to no part through, but you ſhall finde matter of benefite. Hence may the ſage Philoſopher and prudent Poletist deriue all or the moſt precepts of the Arte and ſcience militarie. Herein may both the expert Martialiſt and the ſimple ſouldier ſee the excellencie and perfection of his calling and profeſsion: the benefit of good order and martiall diſcpline: and out of the Idea of Scanderbeg his actions, may they behold (as it were) the anatomie and ſhape vnto themſelues, the image both of an expert Generall and an abſolute ſouldier. Here may Princes and great perſons behold the bright ſhining luſtre of many royall and heroicall vertues, making their names glorious in the eye of the world, their power fearefull and terrible to their enemies, and their perſons deere and gratious to their ſubiects: here may they take a view of thoſe pernitious vices & enormities of thoſe rash & inconſiderat aſſertions which make them odious to God, hatefull to men, diſcontented

in their eſtates, and moſt wretched and miſerable euen in the greatnes of their fortunes. In ſome, ſuch is the varietie, the veritie, the profit and the excellencie of this diſcourſe: that there is no eſtate, degree or calling, but may find therein ſomewhat to admire at, much to delight in, and moſt things to imitat and to put in practiſe and execution.
            It reſteth now (my maſters) that you make that eſtimate and account of it, which both the excellencie of Scanderbeg his vertues, and the worthineſſe of the hiſtorie doe require and merit: and that you meaſure the good will and painefull labours both of the authors, and of the tranſlator by their diſpoſitions affecting your good and benefit, and not by any ſiniſter ſingularitie of your miſdeeming conceipt. For if you be not too ingrate and iniurious to the memorie of a Prince ſo well deſeruing, if you shew not your ſelues more then barbarous in contemning a monument of ſo great reckoning: or if you be not too auſtere and rigorous in your cenſures: you cannot but graciouſly accept the acquaintance of this hiſtorie: you will friendly welcome the rare example of Scanderbeg his peereleſſe vertues and his ſurpaſsing fortune: and laſt of all, you will couer the imperfection of this worke (if you find any) with the vaile of your ſelfe-gracing courteſie.
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE OF THE FRENCH AVTHOR TO THE NOBILITIE OF FRANCE.
            
               MY Maiſters: If we will exactly weigh and conſider the imbecilitie of our natiuitie: we ſhall find (according to the obſeruation of Plinie:) that nature was verie ſparie and niggardly in our creation: becauſe that man (who was borne to haue the Seigniorie and Lordſhip ouer all other creatures) commeth into the world verie naked, fraile and poore, in compariſon of them. She hath beſtowed vpon all beaſtes euen in their originall and firſt beginning ſtrength, wherewith to helpe them, veſtures wherewith to couer them, weapons to defend them, paſture to nouriſh and feed them. But how hath ſhe dealt with man? he commeth naked out of his mothers wombe, weake and feeble, and not able to ſuſtaine and helpe himſelfe: man alone of all other creatures is borne without knowledge and hath nothing but what is taught him: he is fit for nothing, he is not able ſo much as to go or to ſpeake, and when he hath continued a long time learning and getting of experience, and when he is come (as the Philoſopher ſaith) to his owne naturall: he applieth himſelfe to nothing but to vice and ſenſualitie: and he remaineth ſtill (notwithſtanding all his paines and trauelles) inferior to the brute beaſtes: who on the contrarie euen by the inſtinct of nature do giue themſelues to follow that which appertaineth to their function, and which is proper and peculiar vnto them.
            This conceipt of the compariſon of the impuiſſance and infirmitie of mankind, putteth me in minde of an olde Italian prouerbe, which is: That it had bene expedient and needfull for men either to be borne ſage and wiſe, or to be borne twice. For if we were borne wiſe, we ſhould eſchew and auoide the inconueniences of this life, againſt the which by ignorance we do daily and howerly ſtumble: or at leaſtwiſe in the courſe of our ſecond life, we ſhould put that in practiſe which we had learned in our firſt life: and we ſhould not walke blindfolded in the darknes of error as we now do, comming into this world depriued and deſtitute of the light of wiſedome which Solomon demaunded of God before all earthly things whatſoeuer.
            Notwithſtanding on the contrarie, if we do marke and conſider the excellencie of man: we ſhall ſee that in ſtead of theſe goodly corporall faculties wherein other creatures are his ſuperiours, God hath gratiouſly endowed him with a ſingular preheminence of that part of his nature which is intellectuall and capable of doctrine, and that is our ſpirit, which of it ſelfe is diuine and celeſtiall: and whereas by meanes of her priſon and earthly tabernacle, it is made rude, ſauage, and out of taſte: yet being tempered, reformed, and faſhioned by the fauour and ciuilitie of good artes and ſciences: it eſtrangeth vs as farre from the nature of creatures vnreaſonable: as it maketh vs to approach and draw nigh to the reſemblance of the diuine Image.
            Seing therefore all men are by nature both capable of knowledge, and haue a neceſſitie impoſed vpon them to ſeeke after learning; the gentle man of all others hath

moſt reaſon to apply his mind thereunto: for that he exceeding all other perſons in dignitie of bloud, and in the gifts, graces, and qualities of nature, and being in regard thereof the ſooner called to degrees of honour, and to the managing of great matters, he ought alſo to beautifie and enoble his minde and vnderſtanding, and to make it more & more glorious by the knowledge of good letters, eſpecially of good and worthy hiſtories: for in truth there is nothing ſo louely, beautiful or amiable, but the ſtudy of hiſtories wil plentifully ſupply any man with the knowledge therof, that ſhal delite to be conuerſant, and to exerciſe himſelf in them. This bringeth her followers to be priuie counſellers to kings and princes: this preferreth them to the adminiſtration of kingdomes and common weales: to the moſt honorable eſtates & offices of the warres, and to the gouernments of prouinces: this teacheth vs to be wiſe, at the coſt of others. To be briefe (as Cicero well calleth them) Hiſtories are the teſtimony of times, the light of truth, the life of memorie, the Ladie and miſtreſte of life, and the meſſenger of antiquitie, of the which who ſo is ignorant, may iuſtly be accompted as a ſtranger in his owne countrey. But I will not proceed any farther in her praiſes: only I will encourage you to be familiar with her: for I ſee (God be thanked for it) that ſhe hath good entertainment generally, and is well receiued & cheriſhed amongſt you: that you are content to beſtow a good part of your honeſt leiſure in her companie. Yet thus much let me tell you by the way, & vpon occaſion of this diſcourſe: that foraſmuch as the principall and moſt ordinary profeſſion of Frenchmen is to followe armes, and yet they take litle or no care or pains at all to ſtudy & know the lawes and rights depending vpon the profeſſion of armes: I deſire therefore, that the ſtudie and reading of hiſtories (which repreſenteth vnto vs manifold exāples of ſo many mightie armies well gouerned, and of ſo many Captaines and ſouldiers which haue bene moſt curious and preciſe obſeruers of the ſtatutes and ordinances of the Art militarie) may prouoke and allure you alſo to follow more religiouſly & carefully this ancient diſcipline, and that you would conforme your ſelues to the practiſe thereof: whereby thoſe famous and worthy perſonages haue purchaſed to themſelues endles & eternall honor, to their Chieftaines and leaders innumerable triumphs and victories, and to their countrey mighty Empires, and Monarchies of infinite greatneſſe. What was it that reſerued and freed the name and memory of the Aſſyrians, of the Greekes, & of the Romanes, from the vngratefull ſilence and the iniurious obliuion of deuouring time? What hath made their glorie and renowme to be ſo famous euen till this day? What was it that ſpread abroad the glorious and immortall name of the Gaules, euen to the vtmoſt bounds and limits of this earthly frame? What made them ſo fearfull and terrible euen to the proud and inuincible Romanes: that vpon euery rumor made to the Senate that the Gaules were on foote, they ſpeedily had recourſe to the Dictatorſhip, as vnto a ſacred anker in the moſt tempeſtuous ſtormes and perils of their eſtate? Aſſuredly it was not the ſupernatural force of their bodies: it was not the infinit number of their ſquadrons, but the onely exact, ſtrict, and rigorous obſeruation of the lawes and diſcipline of warre.
            Thus did that famous Conqueror Godfrey Duke of Bouillon: thus did our generous and Chriſtian Argonauts, and infinit others in times paſt make themſelues way vnto the heauens, & purchaſed immortal fame vpon the earth. What hath made the Saracins & the Turks to grow to that reputation and honor by armes? What hath made them inheritors almoſt of all the Empire of the Greeks & Romanes, but this only, that they did firſt imitate and ſucceed them in their good orders and diſcipline? whereof they only of all others at this day are the ſole obſeruers, and they alone may iuſtly vaūt, that they haue the true diſcipline in price & regard: they (I ſay) only may arroga
                  •
               
               
this vnto themſelues: for I know not any one nation beſides them, who make anie account of the ſame. There is no care had now a dayes amongſt ſouldiers and men at armes, of any rules, precepts or pollicie of warres: we loue rather to learne the duties of the field by experience, and by the euent & hazard of our owne proper perill, then by reaſon and diſcipline: and therein do we fulfill the old prouerbe; In loſſe is learning. But (in my opiniō) this is but a bad maxime: for the courſe of our life is briefe & ſhort, and vſe and experience without reading requireth too long a time to furniſh vs with all thoſe things which are neceſſary for the perfection of our experience. But ſtudy & reading of hiſtories being ioyned to experience, is ſufficient in a ſmal time to aduance, to quickē, to refine, & to perfect our iudgement. For (as Philip of Comines hathSaying of Philip of Comines. ſaid very wiſely) A man may know more touching the practiſe of deeds of armes by 3 moneths reading in one good booke, then 20 men ſhalbe able to know by the eye & experience, if they liue in ſeuerall ages ſucceſſiuely one after another. I returne therefore to my matter: and I ſay, that this ſcience and practiſe being moſt needfull and neceſſarie for our nation (whoſe profeſſion is to follow the warres▪) the ſpeedieſt and ſhorteſt courſe, and the beſt way and meanes to attaine to the true and perfect skill of armes, is to conſort and to marrie themſelues to the ſtudie and reading of hiſtories.
            The conſideration hereof hath moued me to communicate vnto you a hiſtory, out of the which (I hope) you ſhall gather no leſſe frute and profit, then pleaſure and recreation. Howbeit I knowe there are fewe or no good Hiſtoriographers auncient or moderne, domeſticall or ſtraungers, but they are publiſhed in our language by the vertuous labors of many learned & rare ſpirits amongſt the French: neuertheles, in this our hiſtorie here imparted vnto you, firſt of all in reading the haughty aduentures and valiant exploites of an age ſo nearely conioyned to this of ours, falling in a manner within the time and knowledge euen of our grand-fathers: we haue good cauſe to reioice & to glorie in the ſame, no leſſe then the world hath euer accuſtomed to make a benefit, and to attribute vnto themſelues the honor of great triumphes, and the glorie of their owne age and times. Beſides, here ſhalbe repreſented vnto you, not the deteſtable and bloudie effects of our owne miſeries, troubles, and ſeditions: nor the hatefull conſpiracies of ſubiects againſt their Prince and countrie: nor the horrible maſſacres of friends and fellow citizens: of children againſt their parents, of brothers fleſhed againſt their naturall brethren: nor of husbands againſt their wiues: you ſhall not heare in this diſcourſe the piteous cries and lamentations of wiues and maidens violated: you ſhall not ſee here the exceſſe of ſacrileges, of burnings, nor the rapine and ſpoile of the goods of friends and allies: but you ſhall reade of a moſt holy, a iuſt, and an honorable warre: of armes lawfully vndertaken, for the defence both of the Chriſtian, and of the ciuill libertie, againſt the Turkes and circumciſed miſcreants, the ſworne enemies of Ieſus Chriſt: you ſhall ſee their townes maintained and defended, their countrie preſerued and protected by the armes of their proper peoples and naturall inhabitants: here ſhall you behold the image of a Prince moſt religious, of a warrior moſt magnanimous, armed with faith and zeale incredible: his ſouldiers faithfull, louing and obedient: here ſhall you trace out ſo perfect an obſeruation of militarie diſcipline, that their notable victories and exploits will appeare vnto you worthie of wonder and admiration. All this ſhall you ſee in this hiſtorie, of the life of George Caſtriot, ſurnamed by the Turks, Scanderbeg, which is, Alexander the Lord, or the Great, King of Albanie: whoſe immortall name is worthie without all contradiction, to be conſecrated to the temple of Memorie, farre aboue all other Knightes, and champions of the Leuant, whoſe honourable actes haue made them to be recommended for the defence of the faith of Chriſt againſt the

deteſtable and curſed ſect of Mahomet. For it ſeemeth that God had a ſpeciall will and purpoſe to marke him with all laudable qualities and prerogatiues: as faith, religion, ſtrength of bodie, comelineſſe of perſon, dexteritie of ſpirit, the practiſe and skill of armes: all which were accompanied with ſo wonderfull and vnſpeakeable good fortune, that it may be iuſtly auerred, that his deedes did ſurmount his deſtinies. The deſcription whereof I haue according to the truth and ſinceritie of an hiſtorie, drawen and deriued out of the writings of thoſe that haue intreated of them: and ſpecially out of the Latine hiſtorie of Marin Barletus Prieſt, borne in Scutarie or Scodra, a Citie in Epire, whom we haue choſen and followed as a principall example and patterne, and as an Authour who hath bene reputed moſt diligent and ſincere, and moſt graue and ſententious. In regard whereof he hath purchaſed to him ſelfe a place amongeſt the moſt notable and famous hiſtoriographers of the Latines, that haue liued in theſe latter ages.
            This Hiſtorie do I nowe impart vnto you (my Maiſters) humbly intreating you, that if ouer much temeritie haue cauſed me to forget my ſelfe in taking vppon me a taske which ſurpaſſeth and exceedeth the feebleneſſe of my ſpirit, you would impute the blame thereof to the readineſſe of my good will and affection, which I haue to do you ſeruice: and that you would pleaſe to receiue this my trauell as graciouſly as I haue made offer thereof vnto your curteſies with my beſt deuotion and abilitie.
         
         
            
            AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
            
               WHereas many of our Latine writers of great authoritie, haue written manie and diuerſe things of the famous deeds of Scanderbeg, and of the greatneſſe of his exploits: for that their honorable teſtimonies may in ſome ſort argue and confirme the truth of this hiſtorie: and becauſe it were too great an iniurie to defraud this Greeke Prince and ſtraunger, of his true and deſerued praiſes: I haue therefore thought it good here to make mention of their names, and to cite the places where they haue written of him: to the intent the Reader may at his good pleaſure and beſt leiſure peruſe them: The Autors are theſe:
            
               1. Volaterrane, in the 8. booke of his Geographie, in the deſcription of Macedonie.
               2. Aeneas Siluius, in the deſcription of Europe. Cap. 15.
               3. Andrew Theuet, in his Coſmographie. 1. Tome. 11. booke. Chap. 3.
               4. Paulus Iouius Biſhop of Nucera, in his Commentarie of the affaires of Turkie, dedicated to the Emperour Charles the fifth.
            
            The cauſe why I haue not ſet downe the verie text and teſtimonies themſelues, as they are in the preface of the French copie, is, becauſe in manie points they haue varied and erred in the report of Scanderbeg his actions, and are much miſtaken in the truth of the hiſtorie. Howbeit I do impute their error vnto this, that they being ſtraungers to the Eſtate and affaires of Epire, and hauing intelligence of the deedes of Scanderbeg onely by heare ſay and by report, they could not ſo truly and exactly ſet downe the truth of matters as they are here deliuered in this Hiſtorie by the Latine Author: who being natiue of the ſame countrey with Scanderbeg, and liuing in the ſame age and time that he did, is to be reputed the beſt witneſſe and moſt perfect reporter of his deedes.
         
         
            A CATALOGVE OF THE AVTHORS FROM whence this Hiſtorie hath bene drawen.
            
               Marin Barletius, Prieſt of Scutarie in Epire: from whom the moſt part of this Hiſtorie is drawne word for word.
               
               The life of Scanderbeg, of an vncertaine Author.
               
               Volaterrane.
               Aeneas Siluius, aliâs Pope Piùs the ſecond.
               
               P. Callimachus, experient of the battell of Varna.
               
               Paulus Iouius.
               Andrew Theuet, in his Coſmographie.
               
               Peter Perondin.
               Bartholomew Facius.
               Theodore Spandugin, a Gentleman of Conſtantinople▪
                  
               
               Andrew Cambin.
               Leonardus Chienſis, Archbishop of Mitilene, of the ſiege and ſacke of Conſtantinople: at which he was preſent, and taken priſoner.
               
               Iſidore Ruthenian Cardinall.
               
               Chriſtopher Richier.
               Wolfangus Chronicle.
               Frances Sanſouin.
               Melancthon his Chronicle.
               Pandolph Callenucius of Peſaro in his Neapolitane histories.
               
               Bonfinius in the Hiſtorie of Hungarie.
               
            
         
         
            
            VPON THE HISTORIE OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, ALIAS SCANDERBEG KING OF THE EPIROTS, tranſlated into English.
            
            
               
                  WHerefore doth vaine antiquitie ſo vaunt,
               Her ancient monuments of mightie peeres,
               And old Heroes, which their world did daunt
               VVith their great deedes, and fild their childrens eares?
            
            
               VVho rapt with wonder of their famous praiſe,
               Admire their ſtatues, their Coloſſoes great,
               Their rich triumphall Arcks which they did raiſe,
               Their huge Pyramids, which do heauen threat.
            
            
               Lo one, whom later age hath brought to light,
               Matchable to the greateſt of thoſe great:
               Great both by name, and great in power and might,
               And meriting a meere triumphant ſeate.
            
            
               The ſcourge of Turkes, and plague of infidels,
               Thy acts, ô Scanderbeg, this volume tels.
            
            
               Ed. Spenſer.
            
         
         
            R. C. GENT. IN COMMENDATION OF THIS BOOKE.
            
               PRowes the hand, and policie the head,
               By which great kingdomes are both had and held,
               Are well obſerued, but are better read,
               By them, in whom it is great States to weld.
            
            
               For what is all that anie one obſerues,
               In that ſhort time, while he hath iudgements eyes?
               Or who is he, that in the ſtate he ſerues,
               Of euerie action ſees the counſels wiſe?
            
            
               Now if great men, great actions long to ſee,
               VVho may with Scanderbeg the Great compare?
               If in the like they will aduiſed bee,
               Here both his doings and his counſels are.
            
            
               And with one labour, noble mindes may reade,
               Prowes for hand, and policie for head.
            
         
         
            
            C. C. GENT. IN COMMENDATION OF THIS WORKE.
            
               When Alexander came before the graue
               Of Peleus ſonne, he cryed, O happie knight,
               VVhoſe fortune was, ſo braue a trumpe to haue,
               To blazon forth the glorie of thy might.
            
            
               So might this Alexander cry aright,
               Had he an equall trumpet to his name,
               Both th'one and th'other ſoone outmatch he might,
               And all that went afore excell in fame.
            
            
               But ceaſe ô Scanderbeg, with further blame
               To blot thy fortune fayling, of thy worth:
               Lo here a trumpe that doth thy acts proclame,
               And all thy prowes worthely ſet forth.
            
            
               And ye that heare th'atchieuements of his dayes,
               Admire his value, and his glorie praiſe.
            
         
         
            Faults eſcaped in the printing.
            
               IN the Epiſtle to the reader For ouercame, read ouerranne. For aſſertions read affectious. For conqueſt read conqueſts. for through read thereof for ſome read ſumme.
            
               In the preface of the Author, for of the compariſon read, and the compaſſion.
            
               In the Hiſtorie, pagi. 1. for Moruua read Moraua. pag. 31. ſor. Tholoies read Thopyes. pag. 5. for Darniſſe read Daruiſſes. pag. 6. for Sanziack read Saniack. pag. 13. for, is his cour, read in his court. pag. 16. & 65. for capitoll, read capitall. pag. 17 for Morauia, read Moraua. pag. 19. & 42. for Tribullians, read Triballians. pag. 23. for Monea read Mocrea. pag. 25. for, I haue in you, read I ſaw in you. pag. 30. for Armathia read Emathia. pag. 31. for Turkes, read Turke. pag. 40. for exhort, read extort. pag. 57. for, at the riſing of the moone, read before the ſun riſing. pa. 62. for Treigno, read Turkie. ibid. for of neither read neither of. ibid. for Alcaran, read Alcoran. ib. for Ruſcia, read Raſcia. pa. 71. for enlargument, read enlargement. ibid. for Veruia, read Seruia. pa. 74. for yet would, read yet could. ibid. for left their king, read loſt their king. pag. 93. for Bola, read Boſa. pag. 133. for mooriſh, read wateriſh. 421. for his Prince, read this Prince. 471. for Valure & Valures, read Valmes. pag. 133. for Chronichea, read Oron ichea.
         
         
            THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
            If there be any other faults, as I hope there are not many, I do entreat the gentle reader to amend them with his pen, and in courteſie to heare with the Printer, conſidering that there was neuer booke printed though but of ten sheets of paper in bigneſſe without ſome faults.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE LIFE AND FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG, KING OF THE EPIROTS NOW NAMED ALBANOIS.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               AMurath the ſecond of that name, King of the Turkes, reſtoreth the glorie and eſtate of the Turkish Empire, being greatlie decaied by the ouerthrow and captiuitie of his Grandfather Baiazeth by the armes of Tamberlaine. Iohn Caſtriot reigneth in Epyre: His linage, vertues, and goodlie iſſue: The birth of George his youngeſt ſonne, and the ſtrange ſignes prognoſticating his future glorie and greatneſse. Amurath warreth vpon Iohn Caſtriot: who being wearie of the warres ſueth for peace, and deliuereth his ſonnes in hoſtage. Amurath cauſeth them to be circumciſed, chaungeth their names, and George is named Scanderbeg. The manner of the Turkish circumciſion, and their orders of prieſthood. The education, vertues, and preferment of Scanderbeg vnder Amurath: His notable ſeruices and good fortune in the warres: He fighteth two combats in the Turkish Court. Iohn Caſtriot the father of Scanderbeg dieth. Amurath vſurpeth his eſtate, and poiſoneth all his ſonnes except Scanderbeg, whoſe excellent vertues and the enuie of the Courtiers cauſeth Amurath to haue him in ielouzie and ſuſpition, and to practiſe by ſundrie plots his death and deſtruction. Amurath warreth vpon the Deſpot of Miſia, and expelleth him his Eſtate: who is aided by Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie. Scanderbeg and Carambey are ſent with an armie againſt the Hungarians: Scanderbeg reuolteth, Carambey and the Turkes are ouerthrowen by the Hungarians in the battell of Moruua. Scanderbeg by a pollicie ſeizeth vpon Croy: and recouereth it and the reſt of his fathers eſtate. The Princes, Nobles, and Commons of Epyre ioyne with Scanderbeg, and by their aide diuerſe of the chiefeſt and ſtrongeſt holdes of Epyre are regayned from the Turkes. Sfetygrade is beſieged by Scanderbeg, who maketh a roade into Macedonie, and ſpoyleth the Turkish territories.
            
            
               THAT the Empires and Eſtates of this worlde are diſpoſed and ordered immediatly by the ſupreme power of the Almightie, & that they are in the hands of the moſt Soueraigne and diuine Maieſtic: next to the holy Scriptures (which do giue vs euident aſſurance of it) there can be none more apparant and liuely markes therof, then their maruellous eſtabliſhment and their miraculous preſeruation. For notwithſtanding that the greateſt and mightieſt Monarchies in the earth, haue had their originall from moſt vile, baſe, and obſcure beginnings: yet hath the diuine Prouidence vphelde them in ſo ſtrange a manner, and

hath made them to proſper with ſo long continuance: that neither the ſundry aſſaults and trauerſes of vnconſtant Fortune, nor the attempts of any humaine forces, haue had the power to abridge any one day of their date and terme limitted and prefixed by the diuine ordinance. Of this we haue a ſufficient, though a lamentable teſtimonie, by that inſolent Empire of the Turkiſh Monarchie, (if we may ſo name that immoderate puiſſance of thoſe perſons) who by a iuſt and diuine iudgement, and for the manifeſtation of our ingratitude and ſecuritie, hath obtained at this day the abſolute dominion and commaund of Aſia, Afrike, and a good part of Europe: conuerting that Empire, which erſt was held holy, ſacred, and religious, into a fortreſſe of open blaſphemies, and into a filthie ſtall of prophane Miſcreants, the profeſſed enemies of the ſonne of God.
            This people being growen famous by the conqueſt of Siria and the leſſer Aſia, and hauing extended their boundes on this ſide the ſea of Helleſpont, and hauing planted their Empire, and ſet it on foote within Europe, and all Greece being ſubdued vnder their obeiſance: made the Miſians, Bulgarians, and Albanians, the Valachians, the Hungarians and Sclauonians to quake and tremble vnder their victorious armes. Beſides, hauing laide ſiege, and preſſed very hard vpon the Imperiall citie of Conſtantinople, and finally hauing triumphed of the Emperor, and of the Chriſtian forces in the Eaſt: yet afterwards in that famous iourney and battell of Nicopolis in Romania in the yeare 1396. their glorie was in a maner extinguiſhed, and the name of the Ottomans was welneare brought to nothing. And in the yeare next following, the mightie1397. king of the Tartarians the great Tamberlain (termed the wrath of the heauens and the ſcourge of that corrupt age:) and Baiazeth the firſt then Emperour of the Turkes, encountring ech other in the confines of Armenia at the foote of the mountaine of the ſtarre; (where ſomtimes Pompey obtained a famous victorie againſt Mithridates) euenthere did the Turkes ſuſtaine ſo wonderfull and grieuous an ouerthrowe, by the great ſlaughter and diſcomfiture of their forces, and the perpetuall impriſonment of their Emperor: that the glorie of their Empire was for a long time diſcontinued, and there remained not almoſt any tract or ſhewe of their former pride and pompe, or of their puiſſance or maieſtie. After Baiazeth ſucceeded Amurath Nephew vnto him by one of his ſonnes, who in that time of their fathers calamity, being but infants, were then preſerued aliue, partly by the ouerſight of the Greekes, and partly by the deuiſions and diſſentions of the Latines, or (it may be) by the permiſſion of the deſtinies: which reſerued them for the future plague & miſeries of Chriſtendom. This Amurath in proceſſe of time, not without many ſeditions of his owne ſubiects, & by great bloudſhed by ciuill warres (for he ſlew his own Vncle Muſtapha in battell) by good happe obtained the Empire, & reſtored their Turkiſh Monarchie: and was the firſt amongſt his anceſtors that reeſtabliſhed their good fortune. And the puiſſance thereof being by him augmented, he rendered the name of the Turkes farre more fearfull and redoubted, then it had bene at any time before paſſed.
            The Turkiſh affaires thus ſtanding, though Amurath were alwaies occupied, ſomtimes in Aſia about the aſſuring and ſetling of his owne eſtate, & ſomtimes in Greece:
               The countrie which the Caſtriots commanded, lying betweene the cities of Durace and Ap
                     •
                  llonse, the common ſort termed Ariha. afflicting and vexing the inhabitants of that countrie, and labouring to depriue them of all Dominion and Empire: yet was he conſtrained for certaine yeares to keepe a loofe & to abſtaine from the country of Macedony, & from the neighbor nations & regions thereunto adioyning. In thoſe daies (for to aſcend beyong thoſe times to the firſt beginning of ſtrange Empires, or to mount higher in recounting forreign affaires is a matter needleſſe and ſuperfluous) in that age I ſay, amongſt many other Princes, which then commaunded in Epyre, now named Albanie, Iohn Caſtriot, a man of no

meane fame and memorie, had the ſigniorie of many cities, townes, and villages, but principally of the ſtrong citie of Croie. But for ſo much as I hold it inconuenient, that the family and originall of Scanderbeg ſhould be altogether vnknowen: (and yet my intent is not to lay downe the whole pedegree and the continuall deſcent of his aunceſtors;) it ſhall ſuffiſe, that I doe but (as it were in paſſing by) giue you notice of this: that the authors and founders of the linage of the Caſtriots had their ſource and firſt ofſpring from Emathia, and (as ſome adde) out of VVumeſtia, which is a part of Macedonie. And their family had earſt reigned in Epyre with happie ſucceſſe and proſperitie, and with no leſſe fame and glorie.
            This Iohn (of whom we are now in diſcourſe) farre ſurmounted all his predeceſſorsIohn Caſtriot the father of Scanderbeg. in prudence, grauitie, and magnanimitie, and being of an hardie and inuincible courage, he did excell in all other vertuous qualities: and eſpecially (if that may import any excellencie) the corporall beautie, and the comlineſſe of his perſon was very rare and ſingular. His wife alſo named Voiſaua the mother of Scanderbeg. Alias. 
               Voiſaua (a woman worthy of ſuch a husband) was much renowmed both in that ſhe was the daughter of the noble king of the Lord of Pologne which is a part of Macedonie and Bulgarie. 
               Tribullians: as alſo for her beautie & wiſdome, and for the excellencie of her ſpirit, farre ſurpaſſing that of other women. And it may be, that ſhe merited no leſſe commendation by reaſon of that goodly iſſue and poſteritie which diſcended from her: a thing which hath made many women glorious, and maketh them worthy of ſpeciall praiſe and commendation. For ſome do hold that ſhe was the mother of nine children, fiue of them daughters; to wit, Mara, Iella, Angellina, Vlaica and Mamiſa: and the other male children: namely, Repoſius, Staniſius, Conſtantine and George. The youngeſt ofGeorge Caſtriot ſurnamed Scanderbeg. them all was George: to whom afterwards (as ſhalbe elſewhere deliuered) the barbarous Turkes gaue the name of Scanderbeg.
            
            But ere we proceede further, I hold it not amiſſe to ſet downe that which (as I haue read) was both by prodigious ſignes and wonders foreſhewed, and by many perſons proguoſticated touching the future glorie and renowme of this famous Epyrot: albeitScanderbeg his future glorie and renowme prognoſticated by diuerſe prodigious ſignes and tokens. I doubt not, but there be many who will make a ieſt and mockerie thereof as of an olde wiues tale, and a matter meerely fabulous. Some ſay that his mother vpon his conception did dreame, that ſhee had brought foorth ſo great and huge a Serpent, that the ſame hauing wellneere couered the whole Empire, did ſtretch out her head ouer the boundes of Turkie, and did deuour and ſwallowe them vppe with her bloudie throate: dipping her taile in the ſea towardes the coaſtes of the Chriſtians: and eſpecially towardes the confines of the Venetians. This dreame being recounted vnto her husband, he conſidering the qualitie of the caſe, helde it a vaine and friuolous thing to ſeeke out the meaning and ſecret thereof, either by the ſuperſtitious viewe of the entrailes of beaſtes, or by ſeeking to the Oracle of Apollo for the interpretation thereof: but hee comforted his wife with an incomparable kinde of ioye, giuing her to vnderſtande by an euident coniecture: That of her ſhoulde bee borne a perſonage of that excellencie, that ſhould make himſelfe renowmed by armes and warre-like exploites: who ſhould be a grieuous and heauie enemie to the Turkes: a happie Captaine and fortunate leader to the Chriſtians: a true defender of the faith of Chriſt: and ouer and aboue, one that ſhould during his whole life, beare great honour and reuerence to the ſtate of Venice. The hope and expectation of the carefull father, and of others was in nothing fruſtrate. For the infant being come into the worlde, did exceede farre and beyonde all compariſon that which was preſaged of him. For on his right arme appeared the forme of a ſworde ſo naturally imprinted, as if it had beene engrauen by the handes of ſome cunning and artificiall workeman.

A notable and euident ſigne of the reputation which hee ſhoulde purchaſe by armes. O the notable bountie of nature which euen in our natiuity doth giue vs aduertiſements and in our bodies doth imprint the enſignes and tokens of that which is to enſue & happen vnto vs. This infant being growen to a lad of ſome yeres (aſſoone as his age would permit him) began to exerciſe his bow and other weapons, giuing ſuch proofe of his forwardnes in the firſt rudiments and apprentiſhip (as it were) of his tender yeares, that the ſignes of his future vertue and valure did eaſily diſcouer themſelues in the eye of ech man ſufficiently: and in his youthfull race alſo there did from thenceforth appeare in him more and more, ſuch an ardent deſire to frame his life in goodneſſe and vertue; and ſo comely and elegant a cariage in his behauiour, with a certaine ſhewe of religion, euen then promiſing a reuerence and regarde vnto the faith of Chriſt; that all men had their eyes and their regard fixed vpon him. He onely was the man whom both father and mother, whom his brethren, and the reſidue of the inhabitants of that countrie did with a ſecret kinde of aſtoniſhment euen admire and wonder at. Of him were all their diſcourſes: of him did the people murmure in all places as of the moſt rare and excellent paragon of that age. Ouer and aboue theſe preſages of his fortune, he had euen by nature a certaine goodly and ſtately feature of bodie, which did (as it were) ſeaſon and grace all his actions. But of a graffe ſo likely and towarde (if it be lawfull ſo to terme him) the deſtinies did not permit the doubtfull parents to gather any frute anſwerable to their deſires. For after that Amurath had ranged Greece vnder the yoke of his obeiſance, and had turned his Enſignes againſt Macedonie, hauing afflicted it with a long and tedious warre, and reduced it to the point of extreame miſerie: Iohn Caſtriot being wearied with the trauell of continuall warres, and weakened by the ceaſeleſſe diſcommodities of thoſe troubles: was in the end conſtrained to entreat and ſue for peace: the which he obtained vpon condition, that he ſhould deliuer all his ſonnes to the Turke in hoſtage. A more greeuous and intollerable ſeruitude, or a more deadly & ignominious bondage could they not haue impoſed vpon any parents. For what ſolace or cōfort could they reape by ſuch a peace? and what contentment could they take of their dignitie and eſtate, which was preſerued by ſuch meanes, ſo lamentable and grieuous? Notwithſtanding what is it which the wretched deſire of life, and the greedie thirſt of raigne and Empire will not perſwade timorous and fearefull men to yeeld vnto? So fared it with theſe vnfortunate old folkes, that they loued rather to cōmit themſelues to the mercie of a moſt felonous and falſe enemie, and vtterly to depriue themſelues of ſo pretious pledges: then to attende with ſome delay the extreame ruine of their fortunes, which were euen then tumbling to decay and confuſion.
            Thus was George (together with his brethren) deliuered in hoſtage to the Turke,George Caſtriot deliuered in hoſtage to the great Turke. cauſing farre greater ſorrowe and lamentation for him alone then for all the others both in publique and in priuate. All this notwithſtanding, the father was nothing deceiued of that hope which he had erſt conceiued of his ſonne. But at the time of his departure from him, after many & often kiſſes and ſweet embracements, he caſt himſelf vpon him as more pitying his misfortune thē any of the reſt: and daily & deuoutly did he pray vnto God; that the attent & expectation which he had in him, might not become fruſtrate & in vaine. And euen amongſt the cōmon people there wanted not ſome, who (wiſhing vnto the lad the yeares & ſtrength of mans eſtate with long life) did ſeeme euen to propheſie that Amurath ſhould in him nouriſh a domeſticall enemie, and the confuſion of his owne houſe and family. Theſe young Princes were no ſooner conueyed to Ottoman: but they foorthwith felt the firſt frutes andOttoman the ſurname of the great Turke. proofe of his infidelitie, in that (violating the faith and promiſe which he had giuen

to their parents) he cauſed them ſpeedily to be circumciſed according to the lawe of Mahomet. The manner of which ceremonie (for that the knowledge thereof is not vnpleaſant) I hold it not impertinent in this place, briefely and particularly in ſome ſort to recite it. The Turkes doe herein obſerue a cuſtome and vſage not muchThe Turkiſh ceremonie in their circumciſion. differing from that of the Iewes, but onely in this one thing, which is added vnto it by the inſtitution of Mahomet. And that is: That before anie be circumcized, (if he be of reaſonable yeares and diſcretion) he is brought and placed in the middeſt of ſome great aſſembly: and there, by the commaundement of their Prieſt (whom they call Darniſſe,) he holdeth vp his forefinger, and lifteth vp his eyes towards heauen crying with a high voice, to the intent he may be eaſily heard and vnderſtood. La, Ila, La: Mehumet Reſulam. Which is to ſay, God, God, God alone, and Mahomet his Prophet. After that, his foreskin being cut off by one skilfull and expert in that art, he is preſented to the people, and his firſt name being chaunged, they giue him a new. Immediatly wherupon, all the ſtanders by both more and leſſe (if the party circumcized were either a Chriſtian or of any other religion) with exceeding great reioycing doe contribute money vnto him: and they magnifie him, kiſſe him, and embrace him: and from thenceforth, there is an houſe aſſigned for him of the publique charge, with ſufficient prouiſions for him to liue vpon.
            But it ſhall not be amiſſe, if (digreſſing a litle from my matter) I diſcourſe ſomwhatThe diuers orders & eſtates of Prieſtes in the Turkiſh religion. of the Turkiſh & Mahometan religion: ſetting down both the ſtate & diuerſitie of the orders, condition, and degrees of their Prieſts and religious perſons in that ſect & profeſſion. The firſt, and thoſe which are of the moſt ſtrict rule & order amongſt thē are called Darniſſes: (of whom we haue before made ſome mention) & we may compareDarniſſes. them to the Fryers obſeruants. But theſe (in the time of Baiazeth their king the ſonne of the laſt Mahomet) being detected of diuers foule offences & enormities which they had committed: were by him baniſhed and exterminated: becauſe that (vnder pretence of deuotion & holines) going about on begging, and retyring themſelues into deſerts and ſolitarie places, they did beſet the highwaies & paſſages, by which marchants, pilgrims & trauellers were to paſſe: and eſpying occaſion & oportunitie (no otherwiſe then as theeues & robbers) they fell vpon them, wounded & murdered thē, and then ſtripped them out of all that they had about them: The report wherof being come to the eares of the Ottoman Prince, he was ſo highly prouoked and diſpleaſed therwithall, that he cauſed all of them (as is ſaid) to be cut in peeces & to be deſtroyed, minding that the memory of thē ſhould haue bin for euer extinguiſhed. Next to theſe there are a ſecond ſort, whom the Turkes in their language call the Hozes: who mayHozes. well be likened to the Friers conuentuels. And laſt of all after them are the Talaſmans,
               Talaſmans. whom they haue for their third order: and they do enioy the laſt place among them, and are like to the order of Prieſts Seculars. Beſides theſe three kinds, there be not any other orders, degrees, or manners of Prieſts or religious perſons, in the ſect or religion of the Turkes: but the whole charge and adminiſtration of the Prieſthoode, ceremonies and holy rites of their religion doth appertaine vnto them only. But now returne we to the ſubiect of this Treatiſe.
            Theſe young Epirots hauing their firſt names changed at their circumcizion, hadGeorge Caſtriot circumciſed and ſurnamed Scanderbeg, by the Turkes. others giuen thē according to the cuſtom of that nation. George, (whether that it were by chance & caſualtie, or were it, that there was in him a kind of appearance more remarkeable then in the others, promiſing ſome thing which ſhould proue in him moſt rare & excellent) was ſurnamed Scanderbeg: That is being interpreted, Alexander the Lord, or the Great. Ineſtimable & great was the ioy which was made about Amurath at the circumciſion of theſe yong Epirots (as is cōmonly ſeene with vs when any one

leauing the filth and infection of Iudaiſme doth embrace chriſtianitie and the light of ſaluation.) And they had ample and large allowance ordayned them for their expences and maintenance.
            But the gentle diſpoſition which did naturally flouriſh and excell in Scanderbeg,
               The diſpoſitiō, education, and vertuous inclination of Scanderbeg amōgſt the Turkes. and his tender age (for he had ſcant attayned to nine yeares) did render and make him more acceptable and agreeable vnto Amurath then any one of the reſt. Thereof it proceeded, that he wanted not good maſters and teachers of all ſortes according to that age which was moſt apt and fitteſt for all the Sciences. And therefore in a verie ſmall time (his ſpirit being prompt and readie to apprehend all things) he had learned the Turkiſh, Arabian, Greeke, Italian, and Sclauonian languages. As his force encreaſed by little and little with his yeares, ſo did he take delight in nothing more then to acquaint himſelfe with all thoſe vertuous exerciſes which were fit for the warres, without letting any one thing to ouerpaſſe him wherein he had not ſome knowledge and inſight. And ſometimes with his ſworde, ſometimes with his bowe and arrowes, both on foote and on horſebacke, he gaue forth daily and almoſt incredibleAdreſſe. proofes, of an agilitle, diſpoſition and readineſſe of his bodie moſt maruellous: alwaies enterprizing ſome act or other of great regarde more then was ordinarie for one of his age. And firſt of all, aſſoone as the force and ſtrength of his members did match the forwardneſſe and fierceneſſe of his courage, and that he could ſhewe himſelfe of ſufficient abilitie to ſupport the trauels of the warres, he framed himſelfe to gaine the fauour and good will of all men, but eſpecially of the Prince: vſing daily to make challenges to his companions in open and publique ſhewes and often ſpectaclesIeu
                     •
                   depri
                     ••
                  . of and in all manners of combats and martiall contentions: and commonly he bare away honor and eſtimation, making thoſe exerciſes the path-way to his future glorie, and to the increaſe of his reputation. At length being growen to a goodly ſtature and full ſtrength of bodie, and being come to ripeneſſe and perfection of yeares, he did betimes and with facilitie accuſtome himſelfe to all labors and trauels befitting a ſtrong and able bodie, were they neuer ſo difficult: as to endure hunger, thirſt, cold, heate, watching, and ſuch like. By the daily practiſe whereof, it is not to be doubted but he made himſelfe moſt apt and able for the warres, and ſo grewe to be complete and accompliſhed in all militarie vertues: and fit to be employed in all martiall ſeruices.
            This was the occaſion, that the Sultan (not willing he ſhould any longer continue about him in the ſtate of a priuate perſon) determined to aduance him: and euen inThe firſt actes, ſeruices, and preferment of Scanderbeg. the beginning he honoured him with the dignitie of Sanziack: (which is the ſecond degree after the Baſſaes, and is of greater of leſſer authoritie, according to the largeneſſe of power which it pleaſeth the bountie and liberalitie of the Prince more orScanderbeg made Sanziac, with a charge of 5000. horſe. leſſe to attribute and impart vnto it.) To Scanderbeg with that new degree was giuen the conduct of fiue thouſand horſe: and his brethren in like caſe (being aduaunced to the like charges, and ſent abrode into diuerſe countries, and emploied in many affaires and ſeruices of the warres, grewe all of them to be very famous and renowmed. But Scanderbeg had ſcant attained to the age of eighteene yeares, but he was ſent into * Aſia by the commaundement of the Sultan, iointly and together with other bandesNatolia. and forces: where by a moſt happie and fortunate beginning, he made the firſt aſſaie of his vertue and good ſucceſſe in warre, embrewing his right hand with a great deſire and delight in the bloud of the enemies. Thenceforth in many broiles of one ſort and other, which happened to be raiſed in thoſe quarters: there was not lightly any expedition made, but that Scanderbeg continually was there in perſon with his regiment. And both he and his companions returned from them victorious to their Lord

the Ottoman. In all which exploites his forwardnes, his vertue, and his fortune were daily obſerued, and principally marked of all men both in generall, and in particular: all the honor of the victorie, all the good ſucceſſe of the warre was caſt vpon him by the report of all men without contradiction: and in a manner without any mention of the chiefe, or commaunders of the armie. And to him alone by the fauour and acclamations of the ſouldiers, was adiudged the triumph and the glorie of the enemie vanquiſhed.
            As yet had not enuie (hatefull and repining at others vertue) aſſailed nor gotten hold on the heart of the Turkiſh Prince: and albeit both the maners and the ſtate of this noble Epirot, were a fit ſubiect for this humour and maladie to worke vpon: notwithſtanding his youth being as yet but of ſimple and meane experience, and his affections in that age being not caried away with any immoderate, or greedie deſire of glorie: but hauing conceiued onely a kinde of liking & loue of honor, it rather purchaſed vnto him the fauour, grace, and good will of all men. And therefore euen Amureth himſelfe did ſingularly grace and honor him, both with good and gratious wordes, and with great and bountifull gifts and fauours. Short was the abode of this young gentleman in Court, by reaſon that (as ſeldome are the Turkes without greatScanderbeg made General of an army in Aſia. affaires) there came newes of new troubles, and tumults in Aſia, whereunto Scanderbeg was appointed; being choſen by an vniuerſall decree, and the good liking of all men, to haue the commaund as Generall ouer the whole armie, with all the honors appertaining to that place in regard of his former deſertes, and for that he had borne himſelfe ſo well in the forepaſſed warres. He had no ſooner accepted the charge, but he did eaſily ſurmount the glorie of his former actes, by the quicke and ſpeedy defait and diſcomfiture of the enemie: which he atcheiued with notable good ſucceſſe anſwerable to his great diligence. Firſt, ouer and aboue the honeſt and worthy teſtimonieScanderbeg returneth home with victorie. giuen by his ſouldiers, he brought home vnto Ottoman moſt apparant and euident tokens of his valure and good fortune: namely, great numbers of priſoners: the ſpoiles of thoſe which were ſlaine: very many Enſignes of the enemies: and ſuch abundance of engines and inſtruments for the warres, that it exceeded beyond all opinion. His owne troupes remained ſound and entire, and in a manner without ſhewe of hurt, ſo as touching the vanquiſhed, ſufficient markes were to be ſeene of their diſtreſſe▪ but amongſt the vanquiſhers there was ſcant any appearance whether they had beene at any fight, or that they had come from the warres. But Amurath did not ſo much wonder at the happie ſucceſſe of his worthy deedes, as he did admire his wiſdome and prudence. For in the commendation of his good happe, fortune might iuſtlySentence. claime a part, but in the frute and benefit which proceeded from his wiſedome and prudence, by good and ſage counſels: the dexteritie of his owne iudgement might challenge that as proper to himſelfe onely. Through the occaſion of this victorieScanderbeg ſent againe into Aſia, and returneth with victorie. greater forces being appointed vnto him, he was againe ſent backe and inioyned to abide in the ſame Marches, till ſuch time as he ſhould haue reduced certaine townes and peoples in thoſe quarters vnder the ſubiection of the Turkiſh Emperour, wherein fortune did not any way faile this young ſouldier, but that euery thing ſucceeded ſpeedily to his minde and hearts deſire. All things being ended and accompliſhed to his liking, and the Empire of Ottoman being enlarged: yea farther then he had in charge, or was commaunded: He beganne from thenceforth to purchaſe vnto himſelfe a great name and maruellous renowme euen amongeſt ſtraunge and forraineThe citie of Andrinople was the chiefe ſeate then of the Turke
                     •
                  . Nations.
            Being returned to Andrinople, though there were no more enemies to be heard of abroad, yet there wanted not ſome at home. For ſo it happened, that there arriued out

of Scythia a certaine aduenturer, more faire and arrogant in outwarde ſhew and countenance, then valiant and braue in fight and combat: This gallant defied and challengedA challenge of combat made by a Sythian to the Turkes. all the Court of the Turke, demaunding if there were any one who durſt encounter him in armes, and to proue himſelfe in fight againſt him. And this was the order of the combat which he offred: That both the champions naked in their ſhirts being ſhut vp in a ſtreight and narrow place, with their ſwordes only ſhould make triall to whom the hazard of the victorie would befall. This raſh and inconſiderate plot had this Tartarian laide, and made choiſe of, either becauſe he was prodigall of his bloud and life, or, it may be, of a vaine hope and conceite, that none durſt accept the chance and hazard of a daunger ſo ambiguous, and of an act ſo vnaduiſed: by meanes whereof his happe might be to beare away the praiſe, and to obtaine ſome great rewarde without endaungering himſelfe in combat. Amurath alſo had proclaimed and promiſed to the conquerour a certaine prize of great and rich value, that he might by all meanes poſſible, animate ſome of his ſeruants in hope of ſo great a rewarde to accept the challenge: as if indeede the onely fruite and glory of the bare victory alone would not haue allured and drawen men on to vndertake the combat. This notwithſtanding, there was none but did altogether diſlike and abhorre the purchaſe of honor and eſtimation, the meanes whereof were ſo deadly and deteſtable. Only our Albanois ſurmounting in haughtineſſe of heart, and abounding in courage, whereas all others ſtoode (as it were) amazed and aſtoniſhed, he aduaunced himſelfe, and preſſed foorthThe combat of Scanderbeg with the Scythian. toward the Scythian, & thus ſpake vnto him: Either ſhalt not thou, O Scythian, beare away with thee this goodly prize and glorie, without the loſſe of thine owne bloud, or elſe being made more honorable and glorious by my death, thou ſhalt be enriched with theſe ſpoiles, and ornaments: vp then and receiue vnto thee an enemie which thy owne deſire hath ſought and purchaſed. And albeit theſe kindes of fight be more befitting and proper to fierce and ſauage beaſtes, and that valiant men may and ought with honeſtie to refuſe them, once notwithſtanding let it be lawfull for me to contemne and neglect the ſafetie of this my perſon, in regarde that thy ſelfe oughteſt 
                     ••
                   haue had as great reaſon, as I, to keepe thy lymmes and thy life from daunger and deſtruction. But vile, and of no account is the ſafetie of the bodie to that man which hunteth after praiſe and vaine-glorie. This day therefore I alſo will make a preſent of my bloud vnto Amurath, and the reſt of my companions. The Scythian being no whit abaſhed nor terrified, thought with moſt braue & fierce words to haue affraied and appaled him, calling him boy and childe (for he was not as then but in the prime of his youthfull yeares, and the ſoft downe had not yet budded on his chinne, nor made his faire and ſmoth face to become rough.) Then being conducted towardes the Sultan, with loud and high clamors of the people: and the field being appointed for the combat according as the Barbarian had demaunded: both of them were incontinently ſhifted out of their garments, hauing not ſo much as their ſhirtes to couer them: and thus leaping all naked into the place, by this new and vnwonted kinde of ſpectacle, they made all the ſtanders by to regard them with admiration. And howbeit that Caſtriot both by his voice and by his countenance did bewray in himſelfe a wonderfull reſolution and aſſurance, notwithſtanding an incredible kind of care intermingled with griefe did aſſaile the hearts of the regardants, and at one inſtant both the age, and the comlineſſe of his perſon, ioyned with a gratious and pleaſing cariage of all the parts of his bodie, had drawen them both to fauour, and to pittie him. Goodly, high, and eminent was his ſtature, his armes ſo ſeemely as the like had ſcarce bene ſeene: his necke ſtrong and ſomewhat bending, ſuch as is much commended inThe deſcription of Scanderbeg his perſon. great wraſtlers: his ſhoulders large and maruellouſly well ſpred: his viſage of colour

faire and white (and as it were ſtained with a litle tainte of purpure): the caſt of his eies ſtraight, & pleaſant, without bleamiſh or imperfection, & in all points correſpondent and agreeable. Theſe corporall perfections did him great ſeruice to his other vertues, and the good qualities of his mind, which ſeemed to be augmented & increaſed by them. The two champions thus reſolute and well aſſured, being furniſhed with ſhort daggers, (for longer weapons would not the ſtreightneſſe of the place permit) made their entry into the field, & were there left with great ſilence on all parts. It is not to be imagined that here needed any great counſel and aduiſe, or any rare and extraordinarie hardines and reſolution, but onely a certaine promptitude, and readines, and a quicke and deliuer agility of the hand. Both of them now ſtanding vpon their gard, and ech readie to offend the other, the Scythian gaue the firſt charge, and onſet vpon his enemie: againſt whom dreſſing and bearing the point of his dagger, he ſtroke at his belly with intent to haue ſtabbed him: Scanderbeg bending his bodie in all partes, and bowing it arch-wiſe almoſt in forme of a bow, with his left hand ſeized on the right arme of the barbarian, and ſtayed the blow: and in the ſame inſtant aduancing his poignard, at one blow he cut his throat, and that with ſuch dexteritie, as he deuided all the arteries of it aſunder. So that with his tongue yet ſtaggering and ſtutteringThe victorie of Scanderbeg. in his head, he tumbled to the ground, litle wanting but that he filled al the place with the maſſie hugenes of his bodie. But being ſoone and ſpeedily remoued by thoſe that ſtood neere at hand to behold the fight, and diuerſe of the Courtiers alſo flocking together full of ioy and gladnes about the Victor, they led him ſafe and ſound vnto the preſence of Amurath, vnto whome (being exceedingly ioyous of his good happe) with his hands yet all bloody, his champion preſented the head of the dead Scythian. Then were deliuered vnto him the rewardes ordained for the partie that ſhould obtaine the victorie, which he accepted (as it were) vnwillingly: proteſting that he did not hazard himſelfe in that enterpriſe, neither for gold nor ſiluer, but onely to maintaine the honor of the Court, and to repreſſe the arrogancie of the barbarian. So great was the modeſtie of this braue Epirot, that thereby he allured vnto him more and more the good will of ech perſon: the naturall bountie and dexteritie of his gentle heart aboliſhing the enuie and hatred, which the excellency of exceeding vertue doth vſually engender in men of his ſort and calling. I hold it not amiſſe here in this place alſo to recount one other exploite which he atchieued with no leſſe honor and commendation, and with like courage by force of armes. At ſuch time as he followed Amurath into Bithynia in a voiage which he made thither rather for his pleaſure and recreation then vpon any occaſion of warre: There were at that time in the citie of Burſa (which is at this preſent the capitall city of the empire of Aſia) two Perſians named Iaia, & Zampſa being of a very faire & goodly ſtature, & moſt ſumptuouſly apparelled,The ſecond combat of Scā
                  derbeg againſt two Perſians. (as is the manner of that nation) they came to ſeeke out the Turkiſh Prince & demanded entertainment in his ſeruice. Ech of thē pleaded in the behalfe of the other, and by magnifying and extolling their owne acts, the one ſought to further the others ſute with mutuall teſtimonies and ſoothing vp of ech other, that it ſeemed to proceed more of a kind of impudent and ſhameleſſe audacitie, then of any valure or reſolution in them. At laſt Zampſa the younger of the two ſpake vnto Amurath in this manner. To the intent (moſt mightie and puiſſant king) it may not be thought, that we are come, furniſhed onely with glorious ſpeeches and great wordes to demaund thy pay, and that (the certaintie thereof being vnknowne vnto thee) we be not condemned of vaine arrogancie, nor of fooliſh hardineſſe and forward temeritie: behold here we are readie to make proofe before thee of our courages, if not haughtie, yet at leaſt deſirous of honor and glorie. Though there be here many braue men, and full of valure,

we chalenge them all to take armes, that it may be tryed whether we be worthy or vnworthy to liue vnder the commaund of thy greatneſſe. Then ſhewing that they had no other armes but their horſe, ſword, launce, and ſhield, and that their bodies were not otherwiſe armed: they ſayed that they would combat only thus appointed. Amurath (as he was both courteous and gracious) after he had ſpoken vnto them with a kind of benignitie, he promiſed them that they ſhould want nothing which on his part might be conueniently yeelded vnto them. And then turning his head, and looking here and there round about him, he ſtayed to ſee if any one would receiue the chalenge. But perceiuing that euery man ſtood ſtill and mute, and that all his ſeruants did by their ſilence bewray a ſecret confeſſion and acknowledgement of their faintneſſe & backwardnes, ſuppoſing it would be ſmally for his honor & reputation, if the preſumption of thoſe Perſians ſhould ſo reſt vnpuniſhed: caſting his countenance vpon Scanderbeg as being well acquainted with his hardines and fierce courage, by meanes whereof he made no doubt, but he would vpon any termes vndertake it though the perill were very doubtfull and hazardous: he thus ſpake vnto him. What is thy cauſe of ſtay (my ſonne) in whom all vertue and valure doe abound ſo exceedingly? This doth belong to thee, and the glorie of this victorie doth tarrie for thee. Go to then, once againe at this time let the gallantiſe and brauery of thy youth, and thy inuincible arme, be made yet more famous and memorable, by ſome notable act in this ſpectacle. Litle entreatie needed to encourage him to this attempt: for hauing kiſſed the prince his feete (according to the Turkiſh cuſtome) he called for horſe and armour▪ to be giuen him, and iſſuing forth (with great applauſe of the people) into the middeſt of a large plaine appointed for the combat, with a braue audacity he called his enemies vnto him: demaunding of them what order they ment to obſerue in the fight. The concluſion was, that Iaia ſhould firſt aſſay his fortune, and if he were victorious that then the fight ſhould be determined, but if he were vanquiſhed then his companion ſhould ſucceede him, and at all aduentures to abide the hazard of the like condition. Scanderbeg would not refuſe their order, albeit the kings ſeruantes (who accompanied him into the liſtes) did alleage the inequalitie of the order, affirming that it was againſt reaſon that the party which had the victorie againſt the one (if he hapned to be either weary or wounded) ſhould endure a ſecond enemy freſh and ſound: notwithſtanding (after that the preſſe of people was auoided out of the place) the trumpet gaue the ſignall of the battell, and the champions ſet▪ ſpurres to their horſes, fetching a full courſe ech againſt the other. Then the Perſian hauing faſtned his lance in the ſhield of his aduerſarie, bare himſelfe cloſe coutched with all his force full vppon him, thinking to haue throwen him from his horſe, and therewithall he brake his ſtaffe vpon him. On the other ſide, the Albanois (who ranne onely at the head) did miſſe altogether in his courſe, by meanes whereof, both the one and the other hauing runne in vaine, they held on their cariere, ech paſſing beſide other that they might afterwards betake them to their courtelaxes. But Zampſa hauing loſt all patience (without tarying for the iſſue and euent of his companions fortune) aduaunced himſelfe, and coutched his lance againſt Scanderbeg: who on the other ſide quickly perceiuing the danger, and that it was not now time with booteleſſe termes of expoſtulation to accuſe his enemie of diſloyaltie, prepared himſelfe to aſſaile him manfully, and preſsing hard vppon him with his launce, he pierced him cleane through the throate. Scarcely was he laide on the ground, but that Iaia running haſtily thither, and with an horrible voice addreſſing himſelfe againſt Scanderbeg, with his ſword in his hande, it litle wanted that he had not ſlaine him, but he ſpeedily gaue his horſe the turne, and returning vpon him with his ſword likewiſe drawen, he ſuſtained the force of his enemie cōming againſt

him. And as they redoubled their blowes twice or thrice ech vppon other, enforcing themſelues to drawe blood one of the other, Scanderbeg lighted vpon his right ſhoulder neere vnto his necke, and with one onely blowe he gaue him ſo deepe a wound that he had well neere cut it off: and the vnhappie horſe trailed along the bodie of his vnfortunate maſter almoſt parted aſunder. Thus, theſe two ſtout and hardyScanderbeg his victorie of the two Perſi
                     •
                  ns. warriors (to the great contentment of the beholders) came to their end by the hand and proweſſe of one man alone: but had they auoided the death in the conflict, yet could they not haue eſcaped the wrath of Amurath, for that ſo cowardly and traiterouſly they had ſurprized his champion, and tooke him at the diſaduantage. Caſtriot was conducted towardes the Sultan charged with both their heades, as being triumphant in a double victorie. From thenceforth all his former exploites in the warres▪ and the remembrance of the Scythian lately conquered (albeit freſh in memorie) were now cleane forgotten, and did vaniſh away to nothing in reſpect of this new purchaſed glorie: both the Emperour, the great Seigniours, and all his companinions in generall did honour him with diuerſe large and bountifull preſents: calling him the auenger, and the author of their honor and reputation.
            It may be that I haue dwelt ouerlong, and beyond all meaſure vpon the deedes of this worthy perſon: but in my opinion the praiſe and commendation of men of war and the commemoration of their actes in particular; is a principall point which doth wholly and eſpecially belong vnto them. For that which is done in the warres, others haue their part and intereſt therein: but theſe exploites did Scanderbeg atchiue with his owne proper hand: and therefore my deſire is (if it muſt needes be) that our diſcourſe ſhould be noted rather to exceed in being ſuperfluous, then to ſeeme ingrate in not giuing him his deſerts, & the rather, for that I mind to be but briefe in other ſeruices effected of like nature and condition, of which alſo I am preſently to intreat. That which he did in the ſight of Amurath at the taking of Nicomedia, and Pruſia, and at Ottrea a good towne in Aſia is nothing inferiour vnto his former deedes, whether we regard the daunger, or the greatnes of the fact: for he was the firſt man that mounted on the wall, and diſplaied his enſigne on the rampier: and entring the towne in maner all alone, he was the chiefe cauſe of the winning of the ſame. Likewiſe being ſent into Europe againſt the Chriſtians: ſometime againſt the Greeks, and at other times againſt the Hungarians, he did more often purchaſe the renowme and eſtimation of a ſage & prudent Captaine, then of one too venturous and ouer hardie. If he ſaw any neceſſitie that hee muſt needes ioyne in battell, and that he could not either refuſe it without ſuſpition, or giue it without griefe: he would before all things, deſire of God, that it might be far from him to purchaſe honor by ſhedding of the blood of Chriſtians, & to keepe him from vſing crueltie towards them: for in outward appearance only, and in his externall habit, he was a Mahometiſt, but inwardly, and in his hart, he did moſt conſtantly obſerue the faith and profeſſion of a Chriſtian. Neuertheleſſe as often notwithſtanding as he was enforced to marche againſt them, he did euer ſeeke by all meanes poſſible, as litle as might be, to endomage them: prouided alwaies that he did not thereby wrong his owne forces of which he had the command and gouernment. By meanes wherof, he did beare himſelfe ſo well, & did his deuoire in ſo good faſhion, and did ſo fully diſcharge the dutie of a good and politique Captaine in all ſeruices of charge both within the campe and in fight, that euen the Chriſtians themſelues did not maligne him any whit the more for it. And this his moderate, ſtayd, and aduiſed behauior ſeemed to proceed rather of true diſcipline and prudence militarie, then of any fraude, ignorance, or want of courage: and continually did he gouerne himſelfe with ſuch arte and dexteritie, that he would neuer ſuffer himſelfe (if he could chuſe)

to be beaten: and yet by all meanes poſſible, would he giue oportunity to the Chriſtians to ſaue thēſelues: or (if he could not do otherwiſe) he would take them priſoners: holding it farre more tollerable for them to endure ſeruitude and bondage, then to be put to the ſword, and vtterly to be deſtroyed. When he would exhort or endourage his ſouldiers at any time, he did it with ſuch a grace, & ſo effectually (were it in campe, or in the middeſt, and heate of fight) that he would worke in them both ſhame and feare almoſt at one inſtant: and afterwardes in the furie of fight he would order all matters ſo ſubtilly by the liuelineſſe of his ſpirit, and the ſtate of his armie ſhould be diſpoſed ſo cunningly, that the preſeruation thereof (ſeeming to be with a certaine difficultie, and by his extraordinarie vertue) did afterwardes purchaſe him more honour and eſtimation with Ottoman, then others could obtaine by many a notable and famous victorie. From thencefoorth there was none that went beyonde him in credite and authoritie about the King: and no man was more agreeable, and better accepted amongſt the ſouldiers, by reaſon that he was courteous, familiar, and friendly, not challenging to himſelfe in particular, the honour which was gotten in common, but attributing it to the whole companie. Whatſoeuer money came to his handes he would diſtribute bountifully, and diſpend liberally; iudging the ſame (and not without cauſe) to be of great efficacie and force to drawe vnto him the mindes and goodwill of men: and the ſureſt bond to tie the heartes of the popular ſort vnto him. Euerie man of his owne free will and motion, and without call, would gladly haue beene ranged vnder his enſigne: and for the loue of him would expoſe him ſelfe freely to the hazarde of all perilles. But fortune did not long forbeare to powre foorth her venome: for Iohn the father of Caſtriot inIohn Caſtriot dieth. this meane time happened to dye in Epire, whereof Scanderbeg being aduertized, albeit by theſe lamentable tidinges (according to his naturall dutie) he conceiued exceeding ſorrow in his minde: yet did he neuer diſcouer by any open and apparant ſignes of ſadneſſe or mourning, the ſecret dolour and griefe which lay hidden within his heart. For ſo it was, that vſually hee called the Sultan his verie father andAmurath vſurpeth the kingdome of Epyre. ſoueraigue Segniour. Hereupon Amurath (neither more nor leſſe then as if he had beene the lawfull heire of the realme of Epire) did ſpeedily diſpatch thither Sebali
                     •
                  
                with a ſtrong garriſon: and cauſed him to ſeize vppon Croie, and other places of importance: and by this meanes all at leiſure, and without effuſion of blood, he obtained the peaceable poſſeſſion of all the fortreſſes and ſtrong holdes of that kingdome, the inhabitantes thereof being either of ſmall force, or ill prouided to maintaine their libertie, and being not well able to hinder the Turke in the right and intereſt which he pretended to the ſucceſſion of Iohn their deceaſed prince: becauſe he had all his ſonnes in his cuſtodie, and at his owne diſpoſition, hauing purpoſelie gotten them into his handes: to the intent the ſcepter comming to be voide, and without heires, he might in the end vſurpe it vnto himſelfe. Voiſaue (who after theVoyſaue dieth. death of her husband did continue in her houſe with her daughter Mamiſa, who was left vnto her as the onely wretched remainder of that miſerable realme) by the appointment of Amurath had a certaine ſmall portion of land aſſigned her in Macedonie for the prouiſion and ſuſtentation of the reſidue of her aged yeares. And the report is, that ſhe departed this life in an extreame age, before the comming of her ſonne into Albanie, vnto whome ſhe left her ſayed daughter vnmarried, after that ſhe had long and carefullie kept her in the eſtate of a virgine, and afterwardes ſhe being by him prouided of an husbande was reeſtabliſhed in her former place of dignitie.
            Looke with what courage this generous youth had borne and concealed the

griefe of his fathers death: with the like did lie diſſemble all things whatſoeuer. Ottoman on the other ſide, nothing doubting but that this his dealing would be verie hardly digeſted both by him and his brethren who were then reſident is his Court (as hauing reaſon to expect the poſſeſſion of that crowne appertaining vnto them) continued his diſloyaltie towardes them, and made away the brethren of Scanderbeg,
               Scanderbeg his brethren poyſoned by Amurath. cauſing them (as many haue affirmed) ſecretly and cloſely to be poyſoned. And afterwards conuerting his thoughts vpon Scanderbeg, he caſt diuerſe wayes & deuiſes in his minde how he might not disfurniſh his Realme of ſo worthie a perſon (of whom, as of another Hercules, he did ſerue his turne in all difficult and perillous aduentures) and yet aſſure him ſelfe in the meane time, and remaine free from the burthen and danger of that ſuſpition which did mightily perplexe him. In this humour and affection he called Scanderbeg vnto him, and (as ſome ſay) with a long diſcourſe fitted to that purpoſe, began to comfort him, as well for the death of his father, as for the miſerable and vnhappie ende of his brethren: and withall, he made offer vntoAmurath his notable diſſimulation in vndermining the thoughts of Scanderbeg. him (if ſo be he had 
                  •
                deſire not to continue anie longer in the ſtate of a ſubiect) that he ſhould either haue his fathers kingdome, or ſome other rich eſtate in Aſia, and prayed him neuertheleſſe that he would not leaue and abandon him, eſpecially being encombred with ſo great affaires and ſo manie warres: for that abiding with him, he ſhould haue at his owne diſpoſition and in his owne hands, all the beſt, and moſt excellent meanes, which might make him glorious and honourable, and might render his life moſt happie and fortunate. The fraud and cunning of this old foxe being ſoone diſcouered by this youth, he tooke no long time to aduiſe himſelfe, but with a readio and ſuttle wylineſſe framing his countenance to his ſpeech, he made himSanderbeg his anſwer to Amurath. this anſwer. Iohn my father, and all my brethren do lieu in thee moſt ſoueraigne king and moſt bountifull Amurath: 
               as long as I may remaine neare thy perſon, neither anie deſire of my countrey, nor the regard of any kingdome ſhall enter into my mind being ſufficiently contented. Albeit then thou do preſſe me at this inſtant to accept theſe giftes, or rather burdenſome charges, willingly do I hold my ſelfe contented in the great magnificence of thy ſpirit, and I will gladly embrace the liberalitie of my Prince his fauour. But this is my full reſolution, to liue continually vnder the wing of thy Maieſtie: and aſſure thy ſelfe that hardly, or not at all, will I be of anie other minde. Beſides, old age (which is vnprofitable and vnfit for the warres) will ſoone ſuppreſſe and mortifie my courage (though otherwiſe inuincible) from any ſuch deſire. My preſent yeares are farre fitter to beare the charge of the warres, then to ſuſtaine the waight and burthen of a kingdome: and more fit is this hand to manage armes then a royall ſcepter. Giue vs therefore ſome enemie, ô Amurath, that we may more cheerfully receiue a kingdome conquered by our vertue, rather then that which ſhould come of thy gift and liberalitie.
            
            The king tooke ſingular pleaſure at his ſpeeches, and ſo great credite did he giueScanderbeg his wiſedome and prudence. vnto his wordes, that he heaped promiſe vpon promiſes, endeuouring to fill him with hopes, and the expectance of great matters. From that time forward the Albanois beganne ſecretly to feele the maladie and griefe which did dayly ſpreade it ſelfe more and more: and notwithſtanding that with ſingular diſcretion he did diſſemble all things, yet did not that make him negligent, but that he did looke nearely vnto him ſelfe, and tooke great care for the ſafetie of his perſon; and the more he was in doubt of the tyrant, the more did he ſtudie to purchaſe the fauour of the commons, and the affection of the ſouldiers. Neuertheleſſe being vnceſſantly occupied in ſome one or other tumult in the warres, he did euerie day adde newe matter to make him ſelfe renowmed, and no leſſe did he growe to be enuied. For he could

not ſo eaſily preuent the faithleſneſſe of men, either by the modeſt ſhew of his mind, or by his liberality and ordinary curteſie: but that with the time euen vertue it ſelfe did engender the contrary to his deſire. In ſo much that there were ſome in the Court, who (not able to endure the apparaunce of ſo great vertue in a ſtraunger, euery dayScanderbeg enuied, ſlaundered, and ſuſpected in the Turkes Court. more and more increaſing) as ſoone as they perceiued that Amurath did any thing encline or hearken vnto them: they would daily ſlaunder him behind his backe, giuing their Lord to vnderſtand for certainty, that the ſumptuous expences which he beſtowed vppon the common ſort ſo bountifully, and the fauour of the people which he ſought for ſo ambitiouſly, were a ready meane to raiſe him in power, puiſſance, and authority: Alledging moreouer, that he being ſuſpected by thoſe in court, it was a good and ſufficient proofe of that which he did inwardly intend and aſpire vnto. All this it was eaſie to perſwade the Prince, and the rather for that the accuſation of his magnificence and his large expences, did openly ſhew it ſelfe to be true according to their ſurmiſe. Alſo the old age of the Sultan, being of it ſelfe fearefull, iealous, and ſuſpitious, did curiouſly interpret all other matters to the worſt; in ſuch ſort that a certain doubt did by litle and litle engender in his ſpirite, cauſing him to be miſtruſtfull not only for the Realme of Albany, but alſo for the ſoueraignty euen of his own Empire. And his conſcience being confounded and conuinced by the gilt of his owne miſdeedes and wickednes, and the iealouſie which he had of his eſtate ill gotten, made him repute all things ful oftrechery and infidelity: and to ſuſpect his moſt inward and familiar frends as moſt dangerous and ſecrete enemies. This his ſuſpition being augmented, he began ſecretely to hate Scanderbeg, and to beare a more watchfull and intentiue eye vpon him: to ſee if he could by any couert and cloſe meanes cut him off, and worke his confuſion; not that his wicked and pernicious will wanted power and liberty to doe any miſchief, but becauſe he had no reaſonable cauſe, nor ſufficient colour to procure his death & deſtruction. To oppreſſe him wrongfully and by violence he was afeard, becauſe he ſaw him ſo well beloued of all men generally; and for feare leaſt he ſhould alienate the hearts of others, and by an example of ſuch cruelty, ſhut vp and take away in time to come from his Kingdome, the hope of all vertues and good deſerts by any ſtraungers: by which meanes principally the Ottoman Empire had bene amplified, and raiſed vnto his greatneſſe.
            But whileſt theſe things were thus a doing, other affairs of greater waight and importanceThis Seruia, Boſnia, and Ruſſia is called by the Turkes Segoria. happening abroad, did ſucke and ſwallow vp theſe domeſticall ſuſpitions & diſtruſts: for open warre was proclaimed againſt George Lord of Miſia, commonly called the Deſpot of Seruia. The king of Turkes deſired nothing more then to commit this charge vnto Scanderbeg, and that for two ſpeciall conſiderations: The one, becauſe he could not finde any man, whoſe ſeruice in his affaires was ſo fortunate as was his: The other, for that knowing him to be hot & forward in the war, and prompt & ready to hazard him ſelfe to all dangers, he did well hope that he ſhould ſee him miſcarie in ſome one encounter or other againſt the enemy; as in armes it doth oftentimes betideScanderbeg ſent with an army againſt the Deſpot of Seruia. to diuers. For this cauſe hauing leauied his forces, Caſtriot was ſent againſt the Miſians. This was at that time, that he dealt worſer with the Chriſtians, then he was accuſtomed, for feare leaſt in temporiſing, & attending ſome fit oportunity of retrait, if he ſhould not take the occaſion to ouercome when it was offered, he might miniſter matter of ſuſpition to Amurath, who was already enclined to take any impreſsion of miſtruſt in his iealous and ſuſpicious head. Oftentimes therfore he defeated the Deſpot, and put him to the worſe, returning in all conflictes with victory to Andrinople. Againe, at ſuch time as the ſaid Deſpot had newly repaired his forces, and did begin to make head againe, and to reenforce his army; Scanderbeg being diſpatched againſt

him with more luſty forces, did vanquiſh him in battell, and put his army to flight. And hauing razed many of his holdes and fortreſſes: he ledde backe his ſouldiers loaden with the ſpoiles and rich booty of their enemies.
            Theſe tumults abroad being appeaſed, the old wretch by the like purſuit of his formerAmurath conſpireth and practiſeth the deſtruction of Scanderbeg. deteſtable deſſeignes, did againe addreſſe himſelfe and conſpire againſt him, who had bin the author of ſo notable a victory, and of the reſt, and tranquillity of his eſtate. To this end he cauſed the ſame time a ſolemn Iuſts and tournement to be proclaimed both on horſebacke and on foote, promiſing gifts and rewards of great value to them that ſhould beare away the prize: to the intent that by this deuiſe and policy he might expoſe and put Scanderbeg to all perils and extreme dangers. But as his counſails were abhominable, ſo did they appeare to be vain and of no effect: For albeit great numbers both of ſubiects and of ſtrangers, all hardy, actiue, and able men did daily preſent them ſelues to this triumph: yet did Scanderbeg continually ſhew himſelfe amongſt them, & with an admirable hardines & brauery, and no leſſe good hap held againſt all cōmers, and as one fatally predeſtinated to be victorious, he alone did cary away the honor & the prize, with the extreme wonder and ſingular fauor of all men. The vnmatcheable vertue in this gentle warriour, which might haue ſufficed to aſſwage and mollifie the arrogancy & fiercenes euen of his enemies, could no whit bend the corage of Ottoman alone to any curteſie or clemency, but his diſtruſt ech day growing more forcible, his heart alſo began to be enraged & enflamed with anger & hatred, making him to bethink with himſelf more ardently, how he might by ſome other ſecret kinde of death diſpatch him. But why am I thus caried away in the purſuit of theſe vain reuenges, & fooliſh counſailes of Amurath on the one part, & the prouidence of Scanderbeg on the other part? why rather do I not in a word attribute the ſafety and preſeruation of this man vnto God only? Aſſuredly he it was that confounded the ſpirits & ſenſes of Ottoman: he it was that raiſed vp thoſe diſturbances of the wars, and new commotions in Miſia: finally, he it was that ſtirred vp the arms of the Hungarians, to the intent that this mans life (being vowed and deſtinated to maintaine the dignity of the Chriſtian religion) ſhould not be abridged & cut off: and that the ancient liberty of Epire might once again be reuiued: for had not a kind of diuine power interpoſed it ſelf in this caſe: there is no doubt but that Amurath had attained to the height of his intent and deſire. Did he want any means to bring him to his end? might he not haue had a thouſād deuiſes with which (without the leaſt fear of ſedition) he might haue circumuented him? where were poiſons? where were ſecret traines & ambuſhments? where were falſ and ſlanderous accuſations, which are the ordinary weapōs of tyrants to execute their malicious and miſchieuous attempts? Scanderbeg hauing with great facility diſcouered theſe trains & ſecret practiſes, & perceiuing that (if he cōtinued long about the prince) he ſhould hardly be able to auoide his ſnares, he found it high time to bethink himſelf how he might aduance his affaires, for the recouery of his fathers eſtate by ſome good & vertuous exploit, & by the ſubtelty of his own ſpirit (a thing which he had alwaies conceiued in his thoughts by the ſweete remembrance of his liberty) he deuiſed ſome honeſt colour to quit him ſelfe of the ſeruice of Amurath, & vnder pretence thereof, to return one day into his own natiue country, ſo greatly by him deſired: where all men with one mind did attend and wiſh him with a vehemēt & generall affection: yet did he neuer impart this his determination to any man liuing: neither did any perſon euer diſcerne his hidden conceite, either by word or by any other ſigne, notwithſtandingScanderbeg ſollicited by the Albanians to the recouery of his eſtate. that there were many, & eſpecially of the Albanois, in whō he might haue repoſed ſpeciall confidence, by reaſon of their ordinary frequenting, & long familiarity together: & eſpecially ſome of them, who after the deceaſe of Iohn his father (inuited thereunto

aſwell through the bruite of his great renowne, as for the deſire they had to recouer their libertie) were come vnto him on the behalfe of the principall and chiefeſt perſons in Albanie, to offer him the meanes, occaſion, and oportunitie, together with the aide of the ſubiects, to pull his fathers crowne and ſcepter out of the hands of Amurath. Notwithſtanding, knowing how great the inconſtancie and lightneſſe of men is, and conſidering the greatneſſe of the perill, he diſſembled it verie wiſely, and the rather for that (holding it a verie eaſie matter to get the poſſeſſion of all other things) yet he had his minde mightily perplexed and diſtracted, how he might recouer Croie, which was his principall care. The Turke had furniſhed it with ſo ſtrong a garriſon, that it was impoſſible to gaine it by armes or by force, but onely by art and induſtrie. It was alſo the chiefe and capitoll citie of the realme of Albanie, ſituated vpon the creſt of a moſt high and ragged mountaine, and on all ſides almoſt inacceſſible, being ſo fortified by art, and ſo defended by the naturall ſite thereof, that (except it were by famine onely) for an enemie to vſe any other force or violence againſt it, it mightScanderbeg his wiſedome and ſingular diſcretion. be held meere folly, and a verie mockerie. By meanes whereof, if the mind of Scanderbeg were at any time ſounded in it, he would commend their affection, and the remembrance of their libertie not yet wholly extinguiſhed in the hearts of their nation: But he alledged the wonderfull power and puiſſance of the Turke: telling them, that his gouernement was not grieuous nor inſupportable, and that it was but a follie and meere madneſſe, raſhly to begin any tumult or commotion, where was wanting ſufficient forces to bring them to a good concluſion. And that they ought not to account of that libertie, the poſſeſſion whereof would be of ſhort continuance, and for which they ſhould afterwards be brought, not into the like and ſo eaſie a ſeruitude, but into a bondage, and reſtraint of libertie farre more grieuous and intollerable: bringing themſelues in the end to be murthered and maſſacred as ſacrifices to appeaſe the wrath of the Prince, who would be mightily incenſed againſt them, by reaſon of their rebellion. And yet did he alwayes comfort and cheere them vp, promiſing them, that according to the credite and authoritie which he had with Amurath, he would procure, that their yoke might be gracious, and his gouernement ſo moderate as might ſtand with the condition and ſtate of their affaires. Thus did he diſcreetly prouide on all partes both for them and for him ſelfe: and did continually temporiſe, finely plotting & deuiſing the way and oportunitie how to eſcape and get away; no more nor leſſe then as a poore priſoner, who attending with great patience and deuotion ſome ſedition within the place of his reſtraint, and a generall aſtoniſhment of all perſons, by meanes whereof, whileſt euerie man is buſied in extinguiſhing the fire of the diſſention, he may in the meane time ſtrike off his fetters and breake priſon: and (aſſuring thereby his libertie) it may be the meanes to auoyd the hard ſentence of the rigorous and ſeuere iudge.
            True it is, that fortune did not long hold his deſire in ſuſpence, for whileſt theſe things were thus in doing, the Deſpot of Miſia (of whom we haue lately ſpoken)Deſpot of Miſia reeſtabliſhed in his eſtate, and expulſed againe by▪ Amurath. was reeſtabliſhed againe in his eſtate, as well by the reuolt of his owne ſubiects from the Sultan, as by the forces of his neighbours, and the ayde of his friends ſometime chaſing and expelling, & ſometimes cutting in peeces ſome of the Turkiſh garriſons. By occaſion whereof the Sultan being grieuouſly incenſed againſt him, & perceiuing that to bring him to reaſon he muſt not from thenceforth any more commit the conduct of his affaires to other chiefes & commanders: he determined to go thither him ſelfe in perſon, and hauing leuied a moſt puiſſant armie, hee marched againſt the Miſian, with purpoſe vtterly to ſuppreſſe and deſtroy him; the which did verie ſoone and eaſily fall out, euen according as hee wiſhed: for that the Deſpot being

farre inferiour vnto him in power and puiſſaunce, did (as it were) at the firſt ſtroke, looſe all his holdes, and places of ſtrength, and flying into Hungarie, left all vnto him, without any one droppe of bloud ſhedde in defence thereof. Some ſay that Ottoman in this voyage, did aide him ſelfe with the counſell and ſeruice of Scanderbeg, rather then of any other in his Court: as of one, who by his happy conduct in many other warres forepaſſed in thoſe quarters, had gotten more knowledge and experience of the places, and of that countrey, then any other whatſoeuer. But as yet for all that, could he finde no fitte occaſion to effect his owne deſſines and purpoſes, howbeit that the time was not now farre off to accompliſhe it. For Amurath had ſcarcely brought backe his troupes to Andrinople, and licenſing them to depart, had ſcant broken vp his Campe; but a publique bruite and report began to grow of new troubles, and emotions of the Hungarians, and of other daungers approching, farre more furious then the former. For the misfortune of the Deſpotte by the mediation of Iulian the Cardinall of Sainct Angell, (whom Pope Eugenius had ſent into Hungarie,
               Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie, aideth the Deſpot againſt Amurath. and had expreſly giuen him in charge to labour the king to that effect) made Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie, to arme him ſelfe for the reeſtabliſhing of the Deſpot in Miſia. The Turkiſhe Emperour being enformed of this practiſe, did ſpeedily aſſemble his forces, and put them in a readineſſe, to the number of foure ſcore thouſand fighting men: and before that the Chriſtian army ſhould make their entry into Miſia, he cauſed the Baſſa of Romania named Carambey, and Scanderbeg iointly,Scanderbeg & Carambry ſent by Amurath againſt the Hungarians. with twenty thouſand men to ſet forward into Hungary, and there to mee
                  •
               e them 
                  •
               re they approached any nearer. He (according to his accuſtomed manner) with the body of his army, and all the baggage, followed after them faire and eaſily. On the other ſide, it was a goodly ſight to ſee the Enſignes of the Chriſtians, both for their number, and for the brauery of the ſouldiours and the Captaines, who were no leſſe then thirty fiue thouſand fighting men; but eſpecially the great Huniades that famousIohn Huniades. Captaine, commonly ſurnamed Iancus, whoſe very name alone (as hath bene reported) had many times foiled and vanquiſhed the Turkes. One thing notwithſtanding did much abate the courage and fierceneſſe of our forces: and that was becauſe for default of bread, the ſouldiers hauing no other but boyled wheate to liue vppon: they died for the moſt part ſodainely, through a certaine violent flixe of the body, cauſed by this kinde of victuall. The Baſſa therefore haſtening with his troupes, did incampe him ſelfe neare to the riuer of Morauia. Huniades
               In Bulgary. not able to endure this brauado, firſt of all he ſent certaine eſpialles to get notice, and to bring him tidings of the approach of Amurath: and as ſoone as he could make any true coniecture of his forces, and of his determination, with tenne thouſand men, the beſt appointed of all his hoaſt, leauing the King behind in his campe,Battell of Moraue, betweene Huniades and the Turkas. he paſſed ouer the Mora
                     •
                  e, and with notable violence, went to charge the Barbarian, who at the firſt approach being ſomewhat aſtoniſhed, did a little recule, and giue backeward: but all ſodainely perceiuing and contemning their ſmall numbers, he attended the comming of Huniades, and receiued him to the fight. Caſtriot (who now ſpied the time and opportunity 
                  •
               it to accompliſh his deſire and determination, which he had before conceiued in his minde, and did ſeeke with all his power the ruine of the Turkes) euen in the beginning of the battell did put him ſelfe with his owne bandes by litle and litle to the retrait, and afterwards by plaineThe reuolt of Scanderbeg. 
               
                  •••
               ght, did turne his backe before the enemy: ſtriking into the others by his example a feare and terror, and withall a certaine perſwaſion to do the like. And indeed the Baſſa was much terrified by this accident, either becauſe he ſaw ſo braue a man, and one ſo reſolute in the warres, now contrary to his wonted manner, prepare him ſelfe

rather to flie then to fight: or becauſe he was in doubt that he was deceiued and betraied, in regard whereof he charged the enemy more faintly and with leſſe ſtomack, This was the occaſion that the Hungarians being encouraged (as it appeared) by the feare of the other, without any great force or effuſion of bloud, brake and ſcattered the battell of their enemies, who abandoning their armes, and baggage, their CaptainesTurkes ouerthrowen by Huniades. and Enſigns, without any care of their companions: and hauing no other recourſe but to their heeles, endeuoured to ſaue them ſelues by running. Huniades purſuing the aduantage of his victory, neuer left killing ſo long as there reſted any for execution. Euery place was full of mountaines (as it were) of dead bodies heaped together: all was filled with feare and tumult, eſpecially at the ſacking of the pillage and the ranſacking of their campe. Of priſoners there were about a foure thouſand: amongeſt others there was one taken aliue, who was in chiefe accompt & authority of the great Turk. The Baſſa with a very ſmall company had much adoe to eſcape. Then Scanderbeg as one carefull and diligent in his enterpriſe, hauing firſt communicated and imparted it vnto his frends (amongſt whom was Ameſe his nephew, a yong man of ſingular hopeAmeſe, ſonne of Repoſius, alias Carraguſa. Scanderbeg ceàzeth vppon the Baſſa his Secretary: and can ſeth him to write letters for the deliuery of Croy vnto him. and appearance of vertue, the ſonne of Repoſius afterwardes by the Turks named Carraguſa, by a wife which he had maried before he was empoiſoned by Ottoman) and now ſeeing the fortune of the Turke to decline towards a change, and their army defeated, he laid hands vpon the Secretary, which was neareſt vnto the Baſſa, (vppon whom of purpoſe he had borne good eſpiall) and hauing ſtayed him, with a good corage he cauſed him to be fettered, compelling him ſpeedily, after ſome refuſall, yet through feare of his life, to endite for him counterfeit letters to the Gouernor of Croy: by the which it was enioined him in Amurath his name to conſigne the place into the hands of Scanderbeg, as newly appointed and deputed to haue the entire charge & gard thereof: making him alſo to ſet downe in writing many reaſons ſeruing to that intent and purpoſe, for the better confirmation of the matter, with ſome appearance of truth and probability, to draw the Gouernour and his people the ſooner to credite it. The letters being written, both the Secretary, and all the reſt which were taken together with him, were preſently put to death, to the intent that the matter might the longer remaine concealed from the great Seigniour▪ and not they onely, but as many as fell into the hands of Caſtriot had no better fortune. So that this army of the Turkes was almoſt all brought to nothing: for that thoſe alſo which eſcaped the fury of the ſouldiers, comming (by meanes of their diſperſed and ſcattering flight) into the handes of the Paiſants by one and the ſame death made an end of their daies. A great number of the ſouldiers Albanois who were preſent at this encounter, after they had intelligence of the act of Scanderbeg, as they went here and there wandering and diſperſed, aſwell to auoide the hand of the Conqueror, but principally pricked with the deſire of their natiue countrey, did gather them ſelues neare vnto him: and in an inſtant they were found to be a troupe of three hundred good and able men. Haniades and his people charged with ineſtimable ſpoile and booty, did retire themſelues to their companions. I may not here let paſſe in ſilence that which ſome haue ſeemed to affirme: That Scanderbeg had before hand had ſome intelligence with the Hungarians, and by ſecret meſſengers had acquainted and inſtructed Huniades of all matters in particular, & that he was the cauſe that made him haſten with his forces. Howſoeuer it was as I dare not auerre it▪ ſo I doe not greatly ſtand vpon it. But this I beleeue well, that all things were guided, and directed with ſingular prudence and good aduiſe: and the euent and iſſue of the matter (which many times is a true Iudge of our actions) doth authoriſe and confirme this opinion. But leauing Hungary for a ſeaſon, let vs draw backe into Epire, whileſt in the meane time the renow me of this great loſſe; and the newes

of this notable diſcomfiture is poſting towards Amurath.
            
            The victorious Caſtriot hauing fully ſatisfied his wrath, and accompliſhed hisScanderbeg i
                     •
                   receiued into Dibria. People of Miſia on the Weſterne part therof: after whom ſucceeded the Bulgarians. vowes and deſire vpon his enemies: and hauing likewiſe rather adorned then charged his ſouldiers with honourable ſpoiles: diſlodging from thence with very long iournyes, he arriued with his troupe into the vpper Dibria the ſeauenth day after. This towne is ſeated in the confines of the Tribullians, ſeauenty miles from Croie, and is very famous amongſt the Epirots, for that it bringeth forth men very actiue and valiant: and it was ſingularly eſteemed and fauoured of Scanderbeg, by reaſon of their fidelity, and many commendable ſeruices which they had done for the defence and protection of the ſtate vnder Iohn his father, at ſuch time as he was moleſted by Ottoman. Other towne or fortreſſe there is not in thoſe Marches towardes Macedony, but onely Sfetigrade: but the people of the countrey diſperſed throughout mountaines, and vallies without any encloſures of walles, doe preſerue them ſelues by the onely naturall fortification of the places againſt the violence and iniuries of their enemies. Caſtriot then there firſt of all made ſome ſtay, not holding it conuenient to paſſe further, till he had ordained and ſet in order certaine affaires of ſome conſequence and importance as you ſhall heare. Hauing ſent (very ſecretely) for ſome of the principalleſt in the towne to come vnto him (for he had a ſpeciall care to conceale, and keepe all things ſecret, and therefore had ſo diſpoſed his iourney, as he might arriue thither in the night) he diſcovered vnto them the ſecrets of his thoughts, and he obtained al things to his content, not ſo much as one perſon being found, (as the report goeth) that would in any thing gaineſay his demaund, either for feate of the grand Seignour, or for miſtruſt of an act ſo dangerous; or of his owne diſpoſition, as ſome would haue done. But on the contrary, their owne deſire ſo long time nouriſhed, the incomparable reputation of himſelfe, conceiued by ſo many yeares (which was a great furtherance vnto it) and withall the loue and ſingular deſire which they had of liberty, had wonderfully wrought him into the good grace and fauour of euery man. All therefore in generall, which were about him (as it were) in emulation each of other, ſometime with great ioy and triumph: ſometime ſheading of teares through exceſsiue gladneſſe, with long embracements, ſome kiſſed his handes, others his face, one the head, another his feete, yea and al parts of his body, ſeeming to be rauiſhed with the ioy of his good fortune: and ſhewing the ſingular contentment which they had in the reſource, and reſtitution of the Albanois name and maieſty. And preſenting vnto him all the means of their vtmoſt power, and ability, they offered the ſame vnto him: both their bodies, their hearts, their children, and whatſoeuer was of any better accompt, and value then other euen vnto their liues. The firſt thing that they tooke order for, was to ſet good and ſpeedy watch and ward, for feare that (during theſe affairs) ſome aduertiſement ſhould come from the Turke to the gouernour of Croy, which might diſcouer the practiſe. It was aduiſed alſo touching the leuy that ſhould be made; what forces ſhould take armes at the firſt ſignal and token that ſhould be giuen them. Of the three hundred horſe which he had brought with him, reſeruing but a very ſmal number (with which he determined to ride to Croy to preſent the Packet to the Gouernour, and to receiue the gouernment) the reſidue he ſent before, and well neare as many of the Dibrians, who knew all the paſſages of the countrey, willing them very cloſely to ambuſh them ſelues in the woods, and thickets next to Croy, til ſuch time as he had gotten poſſeſsion of the town, and that then he would couertly let them in to cut the throates of the Garriſon. All things being well diſpoſed and in order, the ſelfe ſame night that he came thither (it was in the end of Autumne, when the nights began to grow long) he whom the ardentnes of his deſire did make impatient of delay, and who held that the leaſt ſtay, was

of great importance to endanger his enterpriſe, earely in the morning before the breake of day, he departed from Dibria, accompanied with his troupe of horſe, and his baggage, and certaine of the Dibrians who attended him, and he drew directly towards Croy, with as great ſpeede as might be. And as he approched towardes the towne, willing by this deuiſe to ſet the better colour vpon his deliberation, and to make it ſeeme more probable, he commanded on the way that Ameſe, with two others as his ſeruants, ſhould goe before to cary the newes vnto the Gouernour, and to aduertiſe him, that he with his traine was not farre off. The young man being of an excellent quicke ſpirite, and good courage, and ſo well diſſembling him ſelfe both in habite and in ſpeach, as if he had bene a Turke naturall, was receiued into the towne, and went ſpeedily to finde the Gouernour: vnto whom, (hauing after their maner) done his reuerence, with a good grace he began to make mention of Scanderbeg, ſaying that he was his Secretary, and with great modesty told him withall, that his maſter and his traine onely, would be there very ſpeedily. As God would, that which Ameſe deliuered, was from point to point beleeued, and from thence forward the Barbarian began to prepare and make him ſelfe ready to depart: and before that he had either read the letters, or had any notice of the will and pleaſure of his Prince, he truſſed vp his baggage, and prouided to diſlodge: in ſuch ſort, that Scanderbeg being come, and the Packet opened, and the letters read, credit was giuen vnto the ſame, and they obeyed thereunto, according to their tenour and contents, and the Albanois wasThe gouernment of Croy, reſigned vnto Scanderbeg, by the Gouernor. receiued with great ioy. Then were called before him (as is the vſe) all the ordinary garriſon, and the auncient inhabitants of the towne of all ages and eſtate. His great renow me being diſperſed ouer all partes, made him much eſteemed and welcommed of euery man. The Turkes loued his naturall diſpoſition becauſe he was popular and familiar, by occaſion whereof, all of them tooke it in good part to be vnder his command. The Croians, who ſaw before their eyes the race of their good Prince, did forth with take heart and courage, and (neither more nor leſſe, then as if they had preſently bene deliuered from ſome long captiuity and miſery) they began ſodainely to conceiue in their inward thoughtes and wiſhes, the ſecret counſailes and enterpriſe of Scanderbeg. And in eſpeciall, ſome of thoſe who were of eldeſt yeares amongeſt them, and did as yet retaine their auncient deſire, carying in their mindes the apparaunt ſignes of his vertue ſhining in him from his infancy, they would diſcourſe of his education, the beginning of his birth and natiuity, and the curious preſages of his parents; yet was there not any one of them all the while, that durſt open his conceite vnto the new Captaine, nor yet betake him to armes, till they ſaw that he him ſelfe did aduaunce forward, and ſet in foote as chiefe and leader to regaine their liberty. (It was concluded betweene Caſtriot and a few others, that ſome ſhould ſtirre vp the youth of the towne, and when time ſerued prouoke them to take armes: and it was forbidden them to make any ſigne or token of alteration, till that the ſuccours of the men at armes, (which lay neare the towne in ambuſhment) were let in within the gates: the which being enioyned them to be done ſecretely, and in the dead time of the night, was put in execution, and they were brought into the towne. The portes being ſhutte, the ſtreetes, the croſſe wayes, and all the ſtrongeſt paſſages being filled with armed ſouldiers, the Turkes not knowing any thing of their counſailes, or at leaſt for feare diſſembling it: and the errour of the night augmenting the feare of the daunger, Scanderbeg gaue the ſignall to beginne the maſſacre. The firſt thing that was done, was to oppreſſeThe Maſſacre and butchery of the Turkes at Croy. the Sentinels, who being diſperſed vppon the walles, as the manner is, in litle ſtandings or cabinets of woode, were eaſily ſubiect to their violence, and ſoone

put to the ſword, others being diſpoſed in their places. With no leſſe furie the priuate houſes being forced open, the bands of Croie were the firſt that marched, Scanderbeg himſelfe doing the office both of a commander and a ſouldier. At the ſhutting vp of the gates, many being ſurprized ſuddenly, had their throtes cut in their beds. But the alarme being come from one and other to all the reſt, a great number being wakened, ran preſently to armes according as the tumult, and the darkneſſe of the night did giue them leaſure: and rendring them ſelues vpon the place, they endeuored to caſt themſelues in order of battell, with intent either to die honorably, or by making head a while againſt the enemie, and gaining one of the ports, to ſaue them ſelues by flight. This notwithſtanding, all the paſſages being ſhut vp, and both the one and the other of their deſſeignes being aſſayed in vayne, they ſaw them ſelues on all partes murthered and ſlaughtered as beaſtes. Thus the hope of all flight being taken away from them, and being depriued of all good and honeſt meanes to dye with honour, they had recourſe to cryes and lamentations, which they had long forborne; and with teares (abhorred of all generous hearts) they called for mercie to Scanderbeg, praying and adiuring him to make a ſtay of further ſlaughter, and not any more to deface and ſtaine the fortunate beginning of his eſtate with bloudſhed: and that he would make choyce rather to let them liue, and to reſerue them to a ſeruile eſtate of bondage, for the further increaſe and ornament of his triumph: then to diſgrace it ſo with the ſhew of their bloudie & ſlaughtered carcaſſes: and by too too much crueltie to diſhonor this day of ioy, and the aſſurance of his eſtate with their innocent bloud, howſoeuer iuſtly ſpilt; that they had not merited any ſuch thing: that they had not deſerued the ill will and malice of the people, nor had bene iniurious to any; but that they had as friends (rather then as enemies) inhabited and conuerſed with them in the towne which was committed vnto them by Amurath: and that for their part they would not from thenceforth debarre any man from regaining their libertie, but laying downe their weapons and their armes, they did proſtrate them ſelues inuocating the mercy of the vanquiſhers. On all ſides were heard horrible and fearefull cryes, clamours, plaints, howlings, ſighes, threats, and lamentations full of confuſion. In the middeſt of the heate and furie of the maſſacre, Caſtriot with all his power cauſing his ſouldiers to retire, and to ſound the retrait, was eaſily moued with the pitifull voyces of theſe miſerable ſuppliants: and he deferred the courſe of his proceedings till the morning following: in hope that this people ſo beſet on all ſides, and ouerwhelmed with infinite miſeries and miſchiefes, might peraduenture either by faire or fowle meanes, by flatterie or by threats, be brought and drawen to embrace the Chriſtian religion. Neuertheleſſe for all that, wiſely ordering his companies, and appointing to each man his place, he commanded to keepe good watch, for feare and doubt of ſome ſurpriſe that might be made by the enemie. Him ſelfe in the meane time rode directly to the port, accompanied with Ameſe and ſome others that followed them: and there ſent and diſpatched him away with certaine Dibrians to carrie the tidings to Dibria vnto them who were of his faction, how that Croie was his owne, and of all the reſt which paſſed: admoniſhing them all in generall to take armes, and to ſollicite their allies and neighbours to the recouerie of their libertie: and that they would not faile (during this troubleſome change, and vnexpected aſtoniſhment on all partes) to expell and driue away the garriſons of the enemies: eſpecially now that Amurath did not yet know any thing, and whileſt he was occupied in the wars againſt the Hungarians. And as for him, that as ſoone as he had cleered the towne of the Turks, & ſet the ſtate thereof in good peace and quietneſſe, he would incontinently be with them, with the beſt and braueſt troopes that he could poſſibly aſſemble. The next morning

at the ſunne riſing, being deſirous to make an end of that which reſted vndone within the towne: he cauſed it to be cried by ſound of trumpet, that all thoſe which would be baptized, and become profeſſed Chriſtians, ſhoulde retire them ſelues neare vnto him without armes: and they ſhould both haue their liues giuen them, and be indifferently admitted to all places of charge and dignity within the towne. But all thoſe which ſhould neglect and refuſe this fauour, ſhould be held for enemies, and it ſhould be lawfull for euery man to puniſh them with all extremity of cruelty. The terrour of this Proclamation did not much moue their wretched ſoules and obſtinate mindes, and few there were that did hearken vnto this good and wholeſome counſaile (ſo liuely were the old preceptes of their aunceſters fixed in their feeble ſpirites: and ſo deepely had they taken roote, and were (as itThe obſtinacy of the Turkes. were) engrauen within their bones, that they could not be diſſwaded from them.) Moſt willingly therefore did they make choiſe, that their miſerable bodies ſhould accompany their guilty ſoules to deſtruction, rather then they would enioy the exceeding clemency both of God and men. The Turkes therefore, deſiſting from prayers, for that the condition propounded vnto them by the Chriſtians, ſeemed vnto them very vnreaſonable, and hauing recourſe vnto a vaine and booteleſſe flight, they did rather delay then auoide their torment, by reaſon that the corpes du gard of armed ſouldiers diſpoſed on all the wayes, did eaſily oppreſſe them being amazed and diſperſed. And albeit that many of them enraged (as it were) when the hideous image of imminent death and deſtruction did preſent it ſelfe to their eyes, did with their naked ſwordes make them ſelues a paſſage in ſome of the ſtreets through the middeſt of their enemies: yet could they not for all that, auoide the handes of the reſt, and though they ranne here and there as birdes ſhutte vp in a cage, and did wander by all the croſſe wayes of the towne, hauing no way to eſcape, yet were they ouerthrowen by the ſouldiers comming vppon them: or elſe did they murther them ſelues with their owne weapons. For it is ſayed that ſome of them were ſlaine by their owne hands: others getting into the Temples and ſacred places to hide them ſelues, were drawen out by the ſouldiers deſirous of bloud, and were made (as it were) a ſacrifice for the common liberty. Libertie was in euery mans mouth, and euery where ſounded the ſweete name of Liberty. Many of them being not yet for feare gotten out of their houſes, but keeping themſelues within dores, did there ſhedde their owne bloud, excepting ſuch as retiring them ſelues into the inner and moſt ſecrete partes and corners of their houſes, did for a time beguile the ſouldiers notwithſtanding all their wilineſſe and diligence: a great number of them alſo had refuge vnto Scanderbeg, not for that the feare of ſo hideous a ſpectacle, had withdrawen them from their former intention, but onely to prolong (as long as they might) the courſe of their vnhappy liues. For this fury being appeaſed, and the tumult ceaſing within the towne, euen as Caſtriot was in making preparation to haue them to be baptized, the moſt part of them with faire intreaty and ſupplications did not ceaſe to importune him, that he would not againſt their wils force them therunto: that well they might faine themſelues through the feare and horror of preſent death to yeeld them ſelues to be Chriſtians, but that they could not forget the auncient lawes and ceremonies of their Elders; that they meant not obſtinately to oppoſe them ſelues nor reſiſt againſt any of his commaundementes, though it were to preſent them with a cruell death: neuertheleſſe, that this could not enter into their thoughts, becauſe that ſuch ceremonies and traditions ought to be vſed to ſuch as are willing, and not with conſtraint and violence. And they required him by the faith which he had plighted vnto them, and by the reuenge

which he had ſufficiently of late taken of their parents and brethren: that he would at leaſt wiſe make them Meſſengers vnto Amurath of this ſtraunge hap and maruellous accident.
            
               Scanderbeg his wrath together with his arms being abated & laied aſide, and ſeeing them all diſarmed, and with their handes erected to humble themſelues before him, was eaſily intreated to giue them both life and liberty, albeit he did not eſteeme this faithleſſe and infidell nation worthy of any fauour and compaſsion. But litle ioy had they of this benefite, for that at their departure out of the townes, their deſtiny did deliuer them to the indiſcretion of others outrage, and to the mercileſſe greedineſſe of the communalty. As for thoſe that were baptized (of whom there were ſome) beſides the exceeding ſhewes of ioy and triumphe made by the townes▪ men for their conuerſion; they were abundantly alſo prouided of all neceſſaries, as of houſes, victualles, penſions, and all other ſeruiceable commodities at the publique and common charge. Notwithſtanding, it was ordained that good gard ſhould be had of them, till ſuch time as the new ſeale of their Religion were knowen to haue taken roote and increaſe within their hearts, being as yet but freſh and newly begun; and principally for doubt leaſt vpon theſe alterations they ſhould attempt ſome kind of treaſon. Of all thoſe which afterwards did come forth of diuerſe holes and ſecret places, ſome lighting vpon ſuch of the inhabitants, who were of a more milde and curteous diſpoſition, were kept priſoners, hauing promiſed great ſummes of money for their raunſome: the reſt were killed vpon the place.
            Theſe thinges thus accompliſhed, and all things chaunged and reformed withinThe countrey about Croy reuolteth from the Turkes in fauor of Scanderbeg. the towne, the ſtandards and enſignes of the Turkes being either torne or burnt whereſoeuer they were found, and all tokens of their remembraunce being vtterly aboliſhed and defaced: Caſtriot ſpeedily diſpatched ſome of the beſt and moſt appara
                  •••
               t perſons in the towne throughout the next places, depending of the iuriſdiction of Croy, to acquaint them with all the ſucceſſe of his dealings, and to make them all to take armes. But they needed neither meſſenger nor ſolicitour: almoſt all of them were found ready in Armes, attending onely for ſome one to be their chiefe and leader to their reſolute and couragious ſtomackes. And therefore in a moment with a good and ſufficient troupe of ſouldiers enrolled, paſsing from thence further on, they went forwardes to incite others to doe as they hadde done. The Garriſons of the Turkes with whome they encountred, were all put to the ſword, and when they had gathered on all partes, ſuch numbers of men as they thought ſufficient, they tooke their way backe againe to Croy: where Scanderbeg at the ſame houre, hauing made all his companies to march together, by long iourney
                  •
               , arriued at Dibria, where he found Ameſe with an other good troupe of ſouldiers, and all things in good peace and quietneſſe: For hee had a good while ſince 
                  ••
               aſed and expelled from thence the Garriſon which the enemy hadde in that place. The old Gouernour of Croy was in like caſe ſlaine and all his family, without ſauing any one of them, and his baggage ranſacked. But now before all other matters, and ere hee purſued the conqueſt of the ſurplus of his eſtate; Caſtriot ordayned two thouſand good men vppon the Frontiers neare to Sfetigrad, and the mountaine Moneo, as well to ſtoppe vp and debarre the iſſue of the enemyes which ſhould be found within his prouince: as alſo for to fortifie and defend the paſſages, if any forces ſhould happen to be ſent thither by the Sultan; For on that ſide was the way more at hand, and more frequented to come from Macedony and Thrace into Epire. Himſelfe with the reſt of his troupes, deſcended into baſe Dibria.
               
In this place Fortune preſented vnto him amongſt others a worthy perſonage, notable for the nobilitie of his bloud, and for the haughtineſſe of his courage▪ one Moſes
               Moſes Goleme 
               Goleme, by whom afterwards Scanderbeg was aided as a principall companion, both of his vertues and his trauailes in many high and difficult enterpriſes. After this he viſited the other places and fortreſſes neare adioyning, the which for that they neither were enuironed with walles, nor defended with any great numbers of Turkes, did giue him (as you may imagine) eaſie acceſſe and entrie. From thenceforth all others which remained, of what age ſoeuer (as hauing quitted all other care, and ſetting their minds on nothing but armes) did wholly betake them ſelues to follow him, and called him the Protector of their libertie. Libertie ſounded in their mouthes, and liberty was all their hearts deſired.
            Whileſt theſe things were thus in doing, many Turkes (as I haue heard) beingScanderberg diſcomfiteth the Turks that make head againſt him in Epyr
                     •
                  . rallied and aſſembled together out of diuerſe quarters, came in troupe to encounter the Chriſtians, and to aſſay the hazard of fight with them: but the victorie was no leſſe impoſſible to them, then it had bene before to their companions. The reſidue then knowing that it was bootleſſe to attempt by force to make any reſiſtance againſt him, rendred themſelues vnto him: and caſting their armes downe at his feete, they choſe rather to make a triall of his faith, then to feele the weight and puiſſance of his arme. To the intent therefore, that by exerciſing rigour againſt perſons diſarmed, and who ſubmitted their neckes vnder the yoke of his obeyſance, he might not incurre the eſtimation of a man cruell and bloudie minded, as alſo to draw vnto him the hearts and good will of his owne ſubiects; by this humanitie and dexteritie of his ſpirit, he referred them to the diſcretion of his ſouldiers, putting it in their choice, & giuing themTurks y
                     ••
                  lding themſelues priſoners to Scanderbeg are referred to the mercie of the ſouldiers, who put them to the ſword. the power either to pardon or to puniſh them. In vaine were all prayers, and in vaine were all exclamations to perſwade the courages of his men at armes, whoſe eares were deafe, and would not hearken vnto them: for but a verie fewe of them were reſerued aliue, and ſuch as of whom they hoped to haue great ranſomes. Scanderbeg did neither openly approue, nor in his heart did he condemne this ſeueritie▪ yet it was that which he moſt deſired, doing alwayes the like, to the intent he might altogether aboliſh the name of Turkes out of the prouice. For the reſidue of his affaires, becauſe he could not be preſent in all places, and for that the preſent occaſions did require expedition and extreme celeritie, he made a diuiſion of his troupes. Some of the chiefeſt young men he ſent into diuerſe parts of the countrey here and there, to diſpatch that which remained: as to ſtirre vp their confederates, and to preuent their enemies. Ameſe with about two hundred men was appointed to enter within Croie: for he was certified that there were not ſufficient forces to gard the place: and yet was that to be regarded as their principall garriſon. Him ſelfe riding and poſting into all quarters, ſometimes on one ſide, ſometimes on another, and hauing a verie carefull eye to all occaſions, he employed and ſpent certaine dayes for the recouerie of ſome other places, and to gayne by his preſence the amitie and good affection of all parties.
            There remained one onely point, but of greater labour and difficultie then all theScanderbeg cō
                  ſulteth & prouideth for the recouery of the ſtrong holds & fortreſſes of Epyre from the Turkes. reſt, and that was the ſubduing of the other townes: in the reducing of the which to his obeiſance conſiſted no ſmall importance of the recouerie of his eſtate. B
                  ••
                for that they were all defended by good and ſtrong garriſons of the Sultan▪
                it was aduiſed that the fort ought to be enterpriſed with more puiſſant and brauer forces: and with mature and readie deliberation. For this cauſe it was concluded, that all thoſe whom he had departed and deuided into ſundrie quarters, and vpon diuerſe charges, ſhould reenforce, and with as much ſpeede as might be, augment their bandes with freſh

ſupplies: and this done, they ſhould repaire incontinently to Croy: Scanderbeg himſelfe tooke his way thither forthwith, and there continued attending their comming. Litle diſtance of time was there betweene his arriuall and theirs, and the report hereof did drawe manie others alſo into the action. For manie noble and excellentMuſache de Angeline. Goique and George Stre
                     •
                  
                  ſes. Gyue Muſache. Muſache de Thopy the huſband of Mamiſa. S
                     •
                  euen Cernouiche the huſband of Mar
                     •
                  . Captaines, eſpecially of his allyes, came to ſeeke him ſpeedily and well accompanied: amongeſt whom were Muſache de Angeline (ſo called by the common ſort) being his Nephewe by his ſiſter Angelina: and the two Streeſes, Goique and George brethren, his Nephewes alſo by his ſiſter Iella, and Gyne Muſache the huſband of Vlaica: for Iohn his father before his deceaſe, had married all his daughters to diuerſe Princes and great Lordes of the countrie (excepting Mamiſa, who was giuen by Scanderbeg to Muſache de Thopie, after the recouerie of his Realme, and the pacification of his eſtate.) Alſo from Steuen Cernouiche (who had eſpouſed Mara and had by her many goodly children) he wanted not ambaſſages to viſite him, and to congratulate his good fortune and proſperitie: beſides great ſuccours that he ſent him both of men and money. More then theſe there did gather & aſſemble together from houre to houre, ſuch a concourſe of people comming & reſorting vnto him, that they came at length to exceede the number of 12000. men on his parte. Caſtriot being notably encouraged by this fauour and good affection of his friends and ſubiects, and ſeeing them fully preſt, and readie to march, he would not ſet forward, vntill he had in full counſell deliberated vppon his affaires, and that he had vſed ſome exhortation vnto his armie. Thus therefore, or the like in effect, he ſpake vnto them.
            I ſee not here (braue Captaines and valiant ſouldiers) any new & vnexpected matter,The oration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers. nor more then I haue heretofore in my minde coniectured, or that my hopes did make promiſe of vnto me, as often as I called to mind the auncient worthineſſe of this Nation, and your ſingular deuoire towardes my deceaſed father. For (be it ſpoken without preſumption) of my ſelfe I neuer doubted but that I ſhould alwayes retayne the ſame minde, and the ſelfe ſame loue and affection to my countrie: and that I ſhould be alwaies of like courage for the recouerie of our publique libertie. In like manner your deſires, your vowes, and your wiſhes were in effect together with mine ioyntly, but as one and the ſame thing. For manie times (whereof willingly and freely I doe delight to make often rehearſall) you did by all manners and meanes of affection and dutie conuite me vnto this charge whileſt I was yet abiding about Amurath. Peraduenture in your opinion I might ſeeme to haue beene forgetfull of my countrie, to haue forgotten mine owne honour: and it might be, you thought me careleſſe of our deliuerance and freedome, at ſuch time as I ſent you home to your houſes charged with ſorrow, without any certaine hope, without anie apparance or likelihoode of anie generous or honourable thought ſeene or diſcerned in me. Certainely (my good citizens) by that diſſembled remiſſneſſe and default of mine, I prouided both for your ſuretie and mine owne ſecuritie: the eſtate of our affayres being then of that qualitie and diſpoſition, as they required rather to be put in execution, then to be conſulted on: beſides that I haue in you a greater neceſſitie rather of a bridle to reſtraine you, then of ſpurres to pricke you on to the recouerie of your libertie. True it is that I concealed from you my deliberations, but the cauſe why I ſo long forbare to make knowen vnto you my readie will and affection, was: not for that I either ſuſpected your loyaltie, or that I had not ſufficient knowledge of your good hearts (for your ſelues were the firſt that entred into this dangerous courſe, and made me acquainted with the ſecrets of your thoughts) but that which turned and withdrew me from it, was the frailtie of mortall men, and the inconſtancie of mens mindes: the which, as in all other actions

it is brittle, variable, and inconſiderate: ſo muſt it be drawen with force and violence, and not guided by any gentle entreatie and vſage to ſeeke and purchaſe libertie. For it is in nothing ſtable and conſtant, neither doth it obſerue any good order or direction, and if there fall out any the leaſt occaſion or opportunitie, which may giue any hope or plauſibilitie for the purchaſing thereof, or for the attempting of it onely: not a thouſande ſwordes, not a million of perils, not manifeſt death and apparant hazard to looſe both life and goods might haue diuerted and turned vs from our purpoſe. But after that the matter once in vaine attempted, had made knowen your endeuors, either muſt you haue endured a moſt cruell puniſhment, or a bondage farre more hard and intollerable, all hope had beene quite taken from you in time to come, and the oportunitie once let ſlippe had beene loſt for euer after: ſo that this fact muſt haue bene enterpriſed once for all, and if it had not ſucceeded at the firſt, all future means to accompliſh it had bene vtterly loſt without any hope euer to returne againe. For this cauſe (I will ſpeake it freely) hardly durſt I truſt my ſelfe with my owne conceipt of my enterpriſe, neither could I thinke my ſelfe aſſured in that I had communicated it to my owne thoughts: I miſtruſted leaſt my tongue, impatient of a caſe ſo important, ſhould diſcouer it to the very walles of my priuate chamber, witneſſe thereof is Ameſe my Nephewe, my chiefeſt friende and counſellour at that time, and the faithfull companion of my trauels, and ſome fewe beſides him, whoſe faithfull and forward aſſiſtance and diligence did vs good ſeruice in the execution of this action. For albeit we liued together and familiarly (as it were) in one and the ſame courſe of life: though we did eate at one and the ſame table, and though wee did in a manner (as it were) breath ioyntly with one and the ſame ſoule: neuertheleſſe, neither they nor any man aliue did euer heare me mindefull of my countrie, but onely in the warre of Hungarie: neither was there euer anie man that heard me vſe any ſpeech, or to vtter any one worde at any time, which might argue mee to be a Chriſtian or free man, till ſuch time as I ſawe and perceiued that I might freelie doe it, and without all feare of daunger. Well therefore might you (O Albanians) haue ſought and found out ſome other perſon (as this Prouince was neuer deſtitute of moſt excellent ſpirites) whome you might haue made the author of your libertie: and who might haue more aduanced your meanes and courages thereunto: but it pleaſed you, and it may be, God would haue it ſo, that you ſhould attend this your deliuerance rather by me, though ſomewhat with the lateſt▪ then to go ſeeke out others, or by your owne vertue to purchaſe and obtaine it. It was not any griefe vnto me, neither did the magnanimitie of my minde, albeit nouriſhed to libertie, ſuppoſe the time any thing long or tedious, to be helde in ſo long ſubiection, and to haue my courage kept vnder by the villanous Barbarians: becauſe I did ſtill liue in hope that you ſhould one day ſee me in the ſtate wherein I nowe am. But why doe I vnder your patience vſurpe vnto my ſelfe this name of a deliuerer? It is not I that haue brought hither libertie vnto you: but here haue I founde libertie, ſcarce had I ſet my foote within your countrie, ſcarce had your eares heard the ſounde of my name, but that all of you made haſte to meete me; and you did in a maner contend who ſhould be the formoſt to come vnto me, no otherwiſe then as if you had heard that your parents, your brethren, or your children had beene reuiued from death to life: and as if one had tolde you, that all the Gods ha
                     •
                   beene arriued amongeſt you, you did euen at the firſt preuent me with ſuch a number of good and officious regardes, and you did ſurcharge me with ſo manie demonſtrations and arguments of your exceeding ioy and gladneſſe, that in my opinion, the ſeruitude and dutie wherein I ſtande bounden vnto you: is

no leſſe then the libertie which I haue gotten and purchaſed by you. It is not I that haue giuen you this Empire and Seigniorie: it is not I that haue giuen you this citie, it is you that haue giuen it vnto mee: it was not I that did put armes into your handes, I founde you readie in armes: I found you euerie where bearing the ſhewe of libertie, in your hearts, in your countenance, in your ſwordes, and in your launces: and (as moſt loyall tutors and gardians ordained by my father, you haue put the Scepter into my hande with no leſſe faith and diligence, then as if you had kept and preſerued it for me euen till this day: and you haue brought me by your labour and carefulneſſe into the poſſeſſion of my aunceſtors without any effuſion of bloud. Now therefore (in the name of God) doe you leade and conduct me to the recouerie of the reſt which is yet remayning in the hande and poſſeſſion of others. The greateſt part, and in a manner the whole worke is already by you accompliſhed: Croy is recouered, and the territorie thereof wholly reduced vnder our obeiſance: the Dybrians and all the people in generall are now vnited vnto vs, the name of the enemy is baniſhed and exiled out of the countrey, onely the townes and ſtrong holdes do reſt vnſubdued. If I conſider their diſcommodities, how al places are either taken by vs, or beſieged, and howe nothing is left them but the encloſures of their walles; I haue hope of good ſucceſſe: but if I contemplate the difficultie and ſtrength of the places, and the force of the garriſons placed in them by the Tyrant, it behoueth vs either to vſe ſome notable policie to ſurpriſe them, or ſingular reſolution and obſtinacie in forcing them. But hereof we ſhall better and more conueniently both conſult and determine, when we come vppon the place in the face of the enemie, and our armes in hande, then nowe that we are abſent, and our mindes altogether doubtfull and vnreſolued. Let vs then march on and aduance our enſignes ſpeedily, let vs take vnto vs the courages of conquerours: fortune ſhall ſeconde our endeuours, which hitherto in all our actions and in all places hath ſingularly both accompanied and followed vs. Petrella is the place wee muſt firſt ſet vppon, not that the ſame is inferiour vnto others in the ſtrength and naturall ſite thereof: but for that (being neerer to this citie) I haue good hope that it will be the more terrified by the fame and report of our good fortune which we haue had at Croie. Manie are the ſpectacles which are preſented before their eyes both of your valure, and of their owne calamitie: it may happen that theſe thinges may ſomewhat moue and appale them, but if the conceite of theſe will not make them to tremble: that which ſhall be wanting, aſſuredly our owne reſolution and obſtinacie muſt and ſhall ſupply. For this is one thing we muſt holde reſolutely and to build vppon; That if this place be not caried and if we come not therein to the ende of our deſires, we muſt neuer thinke to returne any more vnto our houſes. Let vs trie therefore by all meanes, by arte, cunning, and policie: by paines and trauaile, by patience, by the ſworde, and by golde and ſiluer, that by our ſucceſſe in this, we may finde the beginning and commencement of our good fortune: and we may make it the firſt good ſigne and augurie of our victorie. If it pleaſe God that we enter by force, we muſt remoue all pittie and compaſſion of theſe obſtinate Miſcreantes, and wee ought rather to vſe the victorie with all obſtinacie and ſeueritie, for the greater diſcouragement of thoſe that ſhall reſt vnſubdued. If by compoſition and without bloud, wee can by any meanes gaine it, then is it requiſite, that wee carrie our ſelues towardes them in all courteſie, and vſe them friendly and fauourably both in generall and in particular: to the intent wee may make others the more tractable, and keepe them from being too obſtinate and deſperate.
            
            
               The modeſtie of Scanderbeg by this Oration was principally made knowen,The ſiege of Petrella. and it was highly commended of all the armie, neither was his aduiſe and counſell in any point, either chaunged or ill accepted. Moſes with three thouſand horſemen, as vauntcurrers were ſent before to Petrella, being followed neere at hande by Caſtriot, who led the reſidue of the forces. Some ſay that hee caried with him certaine ordinaunce founde within Croy, the ſooner to aſtoniſhe thoſe within the towne: But others doe affirme, that the whole ſeruice was enterpriſed and ended without anie helpe of artillerie at all. For my parte, if it be true as ſome ſaye, that he reconquered all his eſtate within the ſpace of one moneth onely: hardly can I beleeue that hee would charge and trouble himſelfe with ſuch a trayne of cariages, eſpecially in the winter, when all the wayes were ſo hard frozen, and ſo full of yſe, that neither horſe nor man could eaſily trauell, but with great difficultie: though they had beene little or nothing at all loaden and burdened. The armie of the Albanoys being arriued before the walles, and the companies quartered into diuerſe partes, the towne was quickely enuironned to the moſt aduantage that might be deuiſed: the greater parte of their forces were lodged in Tyranna the greater, ſo named by reaſon of a leſſer ſeated neere Croye, for that theTyranna the greater. place thereabouts ſeemed moſt conuenient and next at hande to encampe in. The beſiegers and the beſieged were both of one minde: neuertheleſſe Castriot endeuoured firſt of all by faire and courteous ſpeeches, and by great and large promiſes to ſounde their determination: and hauing made choiſe of one of his owne companie, faithfull and expert in this facultie (and whome he had brought with him of the reliques of the warre of Hungarie, into Epyre,) hee ſent him vnto theCompoſition offred to the garriſon of Petrella. 
               Petrellians to offer them ouer and aboue the ſafetie of their liues and baggage, anie other reaſonable compoſition vpon condition that they would render vp the place: and in caſe they would abide with him, and exchaunge both their lawe, and their maiſter together: or if they had rather to returne to their owne Prince againe, that he ſhould promiſe all of them good ſtore of ſiluer, beſides rich giftes vnto the Gouernour.
            This ſouldier being of a quicke ſpirite, and verie ſubtell, with ſpeeches fitte and appertinent to the purpoſe: finding this people alreadie enclyning to yeelde themſelues, brought them to ſuch reaſon as himſelfe deſired: and he tooke not the beginning of his perſwaſion concerning Scanderbeg: but in regarde of the miſhappes and great buſineſſe of Amurath vppon his diſcomfiture in Hungarie, and the conſpiracie of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes: And then with a firme aſſurance he came to the inſtructions of his Captaine often times inſinuating for a colour into the mindes of the hearers the proſperous fortune of the garriſon of Croye, and the miſerable condition of the others who laie diſperſed throughout all the corners of the Prouince, and were left and abandoned for foode vnto Wolues and dogges in the open fieldes. The trueth of theſe perſwaſions beeing in parte heard, and in part ſeene with their owne eyes, they were ſoone and verie eaſily beleeued, and the conditions were accepted: that they ſhould freely depart with their armes, bagge and baggage: as for other preſentes they regarded not. The Gouernour therefore appointed certaine to treate with Scanderbeg vppon this point,Petrella yeelded. and to ratifie the agreement with ſolemne oath. All matters beeing concluded and ended, the Barbarians departed: there was a newe garriſon receiued within Petrella, and the Prince of Albanie being mindefull of his promiſe, after he had honoured and kindly entreated the enemies with good ſpeeches, he furniſhed them with money, horſe, and victuals, and after ſent Moſes with certaine horſemen

to conduct them to the frontiers of Epyre, for feare leaſt they ſhould ſuffer ſome outrage by meanes of ſecret ambuſhmentes or open violence on one ſide or other by his owne followers, as diuerſe others had ſuffered the like vſage. Beholde nowe in the diſcourſe of theſe affaires, howe the exceeding and wonderfull good fortune of this Chiefetaine doth bewray it ſelfe no leſſe then his ſingular and excellentScanderbeg moſt fortunate vertue: and as God did ſuccour him in preſeruing him from the traines of Amurath, when he abode with him; In likecaſe I may iuſtly auerre, that at the verie time of his ſetling and reeſtabliſhment in his Signiorie, he did not onely fauour him, but did alſo fight for him. The towne of Petrella, though ſmall inThe ſituation of Petrella. circuit, is notwithſtanding inexpugnable by reaſon of her ſituation, both for the nature of the place, and the height of the mountaine, vppon the toppe whereof it is ſeated: beſides it was aboundantly prouided of men, armes, and munition. Neuertheleſſe in the winter time (being a verie hard and vnfit ſeaſon for the ſiege of townes) it made ſo little reſiſtance againſt him, that hee loſt not in the winning thereof ſo much as one ſouldier, nor (as the common ſaying is) a worde waſt or in vaine. Herein alſo haue we to commende his ſingular patience which ſtoode him to great purpoſe, and his bodily ſtrength, which was hardened to all trauailes, beſides the infatigable and vnwearied vigour of his ſpirite, whereby he executed all offices and dueties of charge, with great promptneſſe and celeritie. But to the matter: The fortreſſe being regayned, and all thinges neceſſarie ordayned and prouided, he made not anie abode there, not ſo much as a day, an houre, or anie moment of time: but at the verie inſtant truſſing vppe his baggage, hee ledde his forces againſt the other townes ſo ſpeedily, as though they had fledde away before him. All places were couered with ſnowe, the faces of his men were euen ſhronke with colde, their handes frozen, their bodies benummed and almoſt ſenſeleſſe: yet would he ſuffer no man to enter into the towne ſaue onely the garriſon, neither would himſelfe ſet foote within it, to make others as it were aſhamed by the example which himſelfe gaue them. But one thing there is reportedThe properties of Scanderbeg. of him of farre greater maruell, which I may not ſuffer to be forgotten, and that is, that from the firſt day in which he entred into Epyre, euen to the perfect and full recouerie of his eſtate: it was neuer knowen that he ſlept at any time full two houres in a night, which may bee reputed a miracle proper to a bodie of ſome diuine nature, and to a ſupernaturall force and vigour. It may well be that he attayned to this patience of labour, and ſufferance of hardneſſe, by a cuſtome in often watching, by daily exerciſe, and by the greatneſſe of his forces. Some doe holde (which the auncients alſo did excuſe in that great perſonage Papirius Curſor) that he was a great eater and drinker. His vſe was in fight to combat with his arme bare and naked: and he tooke no care either of heate or colde: a thing (it may be thought) more maruellous then credible to all poſteritie. But let vs nowe returne from whence we are digreſſed.
            The next courſe taken was directly to Petralba, diſtant 30. miles from Petrella,
               Petralba, and the deſcription thereof. and as much from Croy: and from Petrella to Croy was fiue and twentie miles. This caſtle is in Emathia, vpon the height of a mountaine, the which beſides that it is of ſmall entertainement, and not able to yeeld any great reliefe or ſuſtenance, can not be forced but by famine onely. Moreouer hauing the riuer of Emathy neere vnto it which waſheth the foote of the mountaine; it is the cauſe that it yeeldeth vnto the place no leſſe ornament and beautie, then defence and commoditie. No ſooner had the ſouldiers planted their enſignes before this towne, but that thoſe which helde it, did yeeld it vp by one of their companie, whom they ſent purpoſely to Scanderbeg:
               
and they had the like conditions graunted and accorded vnto them as had the Petrellians: and as inuiolablie were they obſerued, certaine of the Epyrots being aſſignedPetralba yeelded. them for a conuoy to their garriſon at their diſlodging from the towne againſt the violence of the countrie inhabitants. The towne being furniſhed with all things neceſſarie, ſcant had they any leaſure to breath themſelues, but that they marched onStelluſa and the deſcripion thereof. with the like heate and furie to Stelluſa: being diſtant from Petralba fiue and twentie miles, from Petrella fortie, and from Croy fiftie, or thereabouts. This litle hamlet likewiſe, notwithſtanding that it meriteth no great commendation for her greatneſſe, yet may it with good right be accounted of, by reaſon of the naturall fortification, and the pleaſantnes thereof, and the healthfulnes of the aire. In the plaine champion fields of Armathia, there runneth out a very high mountaine ſeated as if it had bene of purpoſe in the middeſt of a valley, the toppe of the ſame being excellently well enuironed with walles maketh this caſtle. In this place our Epirots being arriued about the ſunne ſetting, nothing was done for that day, but they attended the day following. Early in the morning Caſtriot hauing ſent his Heraulds to the beſieged, they had nothing but wordes, neither was there any certaine anſwere giuen them: for the Barbarians being diſtracted into diuerſe opinions, it litle wanted but that they had fallen into a mutinie by reaſon of the obſtinacie or (to ſpeake more properly) the firme reſolution of the Gouernour; who contradicted the others, vpon the capitulation and agreement, perſwading the multitude to ſtand to their defence. Notwithſtanding being vanquiſhed by the greater number, and yet not willing to accept the reaſonable offers made him, he was in the end conſtrained to receiue a yoke farre more diſgratious, vile & pitifull. For the ſouldiers being not able to diſſwade him by words, theyStelluſa yeelde vnto Scanderbeg by the 
                     •
                  iſon, who 
                     •
                  ade their gouernour priſoner. led him bound and pinioned with others of his faction vnto Scanderbeg, and contenting themſelues with the ſame conditions as the former, they deliuered the place into his handes. Vnto theſe more then to all the reſt did the Chriſtians in all friendly ſort vſe notable bountie and liberalitie. The greater ſort of them by reaſon of their crime and treacherie committed againſt Ottoman, would not returne into their own countrie, but did ſtill continue in that place: of whom ſome were baptiſed, and the reſidue were left to their owne libertie and diſcretion to vſe their religion at their owne choice and pleaſure not any one of them wanting maintenance and entertainment of the publique and common charge.
            There remained yet vnrecouered the citie of Sfetigrad, the which in the SclauonianSfetigard beſieged. language ſignifieth, the holy citie. Thither therefore without any ſtay made at Stelluſa, the Prince of Epyre marched with his armie making all the ſpeed that might be: this towne being ſeated in the vpper Dibria on the frontiers of Albanie, vppon an high mountaine (as we haue ſaide alſo of the former) and it ſtoode aloft and verie eminent as the neſt of an Eagle, being well neere as great in compaſſe as Stelluſa. AllOf the antiquitie and originall of the chiefe townes of Epyre. theſe places by vs before mentioned had not any founders of any great antiquitie: for thoſe which the ancient kings of Macedon and Epyre, and other ſtrange Princes had ſometimes builded; as Meandria, Heraclia, Togla, Nicopolis, Echinā, Leucas and certain others: they had bene deſtroyed and razed by the enemies of the Latines, or (as we may more fitly terme them) the firebrandes and plagues of mankinde, the Gothes and Gallogretians, at ſuch time as they inuaded and ouerwhelmed the whole world. This was the reaſon that ſome of the inhabitants of the countrie, & the particular Lords of places long time after that being deſirous to recule and reaſſemble in one the multitude moſt miſerably diſperſed, and to reduce it into ſome forme of a Prouince: for that they knewe it to be a matter of ſome difficultie to reſtore the reliques and ruines of thoſe auncient townes; and if they were repayred, yet they would be neuertheleſſe

ſtill ſubiect and expoſed to all calamities and iniuries of enemies to come, as they had bene in times paſt (they being for the moſt part ſeated in the plaine and open champion) they made choice therefore of the toppes of mountaines for their ſeates and dwellings, and there did they build theſe fortreſſes of ſo ſmall and litle compaſſe: both becauſe the ſite and platforme of the ſaid mountaines would not yeeld them any larger ſpace or circuit for their walles: and to the intent alſo they might the more eaſily beThe founda
                     ••
                   of Croy. defended when any enemies ſhould come to aſſaile them. And although that Croy (as the capitall and chiefe citie of the realme) be farre more beautifull and larger, beyond all compariſon, then all the others: neuertheleſſe I find that he which founded it was one named Charles, a man rich and very wealthy, of the noble family of the Tholoyes, the which (at the ſame time that Scanderbeg did enioy the ſouereigntie of Epyre) hadScuria or Scodra. Tyranna, Duraz. the Gouernment, ſeigniorie, and lordſhippe of Scuria or Scodra, which is a part of the ſame Prouince ſufficiently famous and notable, and lyeth betweene Tyranna and Duraz.
            
            Aſſoone as Caſtriot was come in ſight of the enemie, after he had deuided his companies ech in his quarter, and that he had ſet good watch and ward on all partes of theSfetigard ſummoned by Scanderbeg. campe, he demanded parley with them of the towne, and to prouoke them the more by examples, he made knowen and put them in mind from point to point of all that he had done at Croie, Petrella, Petralba & Stelluſa: and chiefly of his liberalitie & gratious vſage, and entreatie of the garriſon of Stelluſa: and on the other ſide of the captiuitie of the gouernor of that place: whom they ſhould ſhortly ſee executed with others that were likewiſe obſtinate. This meſſage did aſtoniſh euerie one of them, & aboue all, the captain of the garriſon: who hauing before his eyes the ſignes & markes of other mens fortunes, durſt not beginne to declare and open his aduiſe, nor yet to make anſwer to the enemie, miſtruſting the inconſtancie of the common multitude, and the mutableThe oration of acommon ſouldier to the garriſon of Sfetygrad perſwading them to hold good againſt Scanderbeg. mindes of the popular ſort being for the moſt part nothing reſolute. Wherefore hauing honorably receiued and feaſted the Herauld: he addreſſed himſelfe to his ſouldiers with great modeſtie and beganne thus to ſpeake vnto them. How thinke you valiant men & faithful ſouldiers? or what ſhall we ſay to this ambaſſade of our enemy? Then one of the ſtanders by (wel perceiuing the intent and meaning of the Gouernor by his ſpeeches) with his ſword drawen, and ſhaking it aloft as he held it in his hande: Captaine (quoth he) ſeeing thou doeſt terme vs valiant and faithfull: and doeſt repute Scanderbeg for our enemie: this my ſword ſhall make anſwere for vs all. What reaſon hath any man to alleadge here vnto vs ſo preciſely & expreſly that which hath paſſed at Croy and at Stelluſa? do they thinke thereby to feare and terrifie the courage of men free and reſolute? As great diuerſitie as there is in the countenances of men, and as different as are their viſages: ſo great varietie is there in the habilitie and dexteritie of their ſpirites. Ech man is wiſe to himſelfe: or ech man is fooliſh in his owne actions. Neither the Petrellians, nor the Stelluſians receiued any lawes of vs, nor were they commaunded by vs: no more ſhall they commaund or preſcribe lawes vnto vs. Let vs take heed that the examples of theſe ſlaues ſo baſe & infamous do not any way enter into our harts ſo valiant and generous. Couragious mindes do highly diſdaine, not onely in caſes that are ſhamefull and reproachfull, but euen in honeſt actions, to imitate the deedes of other perſons: but ech man liueth after his owne guiſe and diſpoſition. Let it be that the Gouernor of Stelluſa ſhould be ſacrificed before our eyes, and that his companions ſhould be likewiſe maſſacred: what, do you thinke that we alſo ſhall die in their bodies? or that our ſpirits ſhall be extinguiſhed in theirs? or is it likely that our blood can be ſpilt in thē? O moſt happy rather are thoſe bodies, & moſt venerable are their ſoules, who of an excellent deſire and affection to keepe their faith

and their libertie, haue equally contemned both gold, ſiluer, the ſword, and all things elſe which the wretched nature and condition of mankind doth either affect or is affraid of. Returne therfore meſſenger backe againe to our enemie, and carrie this meſſage to thy Generall from a priuate ſouldier: tell him, That if this be his intention, to impoſe vpon vs any termes of commaund, let him ſhew vs the ſtrength of his arme which as yet by men of courage is nothing feared nor redoubted: it may be that if god be not for vs, he may by force bring vs in ſubiection: but by perſwaſions of good words to draw vs thereunto I am ſure he ſhal neuer do it. Moreouer it ſeemeth in this caſe that your Scanderbeg is not the man he is reported to be, namely: of a ſpirit gentle and courteous, readie to pardon, and no leſſe iuſt to his enemies then to his owne. For wherfore then is the gouernor of Stelluſa detained priſoner? who for his king, for his faith, for his libertie: freelie, valiantly, iuſtly, and as became an honeſt man hath deliuered his mind and opinion? wherfore is hereſerued to be butchered by the hands of the executioner? he hath not deſerued to be put to the ſword nor to ſuffer death: who ſo honorably hath neglected his owne ſafetie, and ſought the hazard of death for the preſeruation of his libertie. The ſouldier was heard with great admiration of all of them without the interruption of any perſon, till he had ended his ſpeech of his owne accord and diſpoſition. Incontinently there beganne a great tumult of infinite people aſſembled round about him, clattering their ſwordes and bucklers together with great noiſe: and after this ſigne and token followed a mightie clamor of ſuch as did alow and approue his diſcourſe. The Turks Gouernor being the better aſſured and encouraged to ſee his ſouldiers ſo well reſolued, licenced the Chriſtian Ambaſſador to depart: and at the ſame inſtant bending all his care and ſtudie to prouide for the ſure and ſafe keeping of the towne, he commanded his ſouldiers to withdraw themſelues euerie one to his place, and where his deuoyre did call him. And although order had bene taken before in manie pointes for the defence of the wall: he altered notwithſtanding the whole order and courſe thereof, and diſpoſed otherwiſe of it, either augmenting or changing things as neede required. Beſides in the middeſt of his preparations he would euer and among vſe exhortations and good encouragements: telling them, That they now gaue manifeſt proofe and ſhew of that wherof himſelf had euerThe Gouernor of Sfetigrade encorageth his ſouldiers ſeeing them reſolute to ſtand to their defence. conceiued a certaine hope and aſſurance: that the examples of other places which had ſo faintly & ſo cowardly yeelded their necks to the yoke of the enemie ought ſo much the more to increaſe their conſtancy and perſeuerance: that they ſhould thinke vpon the great rewards and recompence prepared for them by Amurath, if that they alone in all Epire, and in the middeſt of the diſloialtie and tretcherie of all others, did manfully ſtand to the defence of the name, the libertie, and the empire of the Ottomans. On the other ſide if want of courage or cowardiſe ſhould carrie them from regard of their dutie, they ſhould haue iuſt occaſion to expect from him farre more rigorous and hard intreatie then thoſe of Petrella or Stelluſa: for that the infidelitie of the others was in apparance more excuſable, becauſe they ſeeing thēſelues beſieged, & on all parts hard beſet by the enemie, and in the very hart of the enemies countrie, ſeemed to be euen forced to render themſelues: whereas they, being but vpon the limits and frontiers of the enemies dominions, & being couered & protected with a place of greater ſtrēgth and inpregnable, could not alleage thoſe vaine excuſes and faint pretences: eſpecially for that euen in an inſtant they might haue ſuccours from their Prince, wherwith to make their enemies forſake & raiſe their ſiege. A further cōfort he gaue thē in this alſo, that the winter (an vnfit ſeaſon to beleager any place) would make their trauels but ſhort & of ſmall continuance, for that he firmly beleeued, whē the enemies ſhold haue notice of their laſt reſolution, they would not in haſt make any attempt againſt them,
               
nor be ſo fooliſh hardy as to thinke to force their walles, but would retire themſelues incontinently.
            To theſe perſwaſions he added a deed of no leſſe prudence and policie, and thatThe gouernour of Sfetigrade putteth all the Chriſtians out of the towne. was (for feare of ſome treacherous mutinie and conſpiracie) to put out of the towne all the Chriſtians and ancient Citizens: of whom diuerſe had bene ſuffred to remaine both there and in other townes by the Sultan, who had appointed the ſuburbes for them to lodge in. Theſe things thus prepared and diſpoſed, they within the towne did reſolutely attend the enemie. Whileſt theſe things were in doing, Scanderbeg hauing intelligence of the anſwer of the defendants, and the artificiall oration of the ſouldier, ſmiling at the conceipt which he had propounded, he ieaſted at it in theſe termes. Behold (ſayed he a braue ſouldier if his deedes be anſwerable to his wordes: but God willing we will ſend him alſo to keepe companie with thoſe happie ſoules of the Stelluſians. This ſaid, he cauſed the Gouernour and other priſoners to be brought before him, vnto whom, preſenting the image of the crucifix, ſome were conuerted: Deſdrot and the reſidue were executed. When they came to conſultation concerningDeſdrot the Gouernor of Stelluſa executed. the aſſailing of the towne, there were three ſeuerall opinions ech differing from other. The firſt was, that there ought not anie attempt to be made at that time againſt the citie; for that all places were couered with froſt & ſnowe in ſuch ſort that it made the mountains inacceſſible, the ſouldier being hardly able to keepe his footing: for which cauſe, they held it much better to deferre the ſiege till the ſpring, by reaſon of the difficulties of the winter. Others were of the minde that choice ſhould be made of theDiuerſity of opinions touching the ſiege of Sfetigrade. beſt and moſt picked ſouldiers; that ſcaling ladders, artillerie, and ſuch like inſtrumentes of aſſault ſhould be prouided, and that the obſtinacie of the defendants ſhould be encountred with the like in the aſſailants: and that they ought not to take any further time of breathing or delay vpon the matter: after the manner of ſmall and ſillie birdes, who vſe to attend the pleaſantneſſe and temperature of the ſpring tide: that they ought in any caſe to beware how they did giue time to the enemie wherby they might be ſuccoured and relieued by Amurath. But Moſes (folowing the middle way & a meane courſe betweene both the one and the other of theſe opinions) did conclude; that neither ought they to attempt the aſſault of the towne, nor yet to quit and abandon the ſiege: and that this was to be done in an other manner and faſhion then they had a duiſed, and that was, that thoſe forces (which they were to entertaine and to keepe in a readines vpon the borders for other accidents and occurrencies, might alſo ſerue and commodiouſly ſupplie the neceſſities and wants of the campe: ſo as the ſiege neede not altogether to be broken vp, but they might in the meane time hold the enemie ſhut vp within their hold: and ſo by litle and litle prolong the ſeruice to a time of more oportunitie, and ſo ſhould they take from them all leiſure and meanes to take ſpirit and courage vnto themſelues. This opinion being ſo indifferent was generally approued, and the execution thereof committed vnto the author thereof by Scanderbeg, who cauſed to come thither the regiment of two thouſand horſe (whichMoſes left to keepe the ſiege of Sfetigrade. was not farre off) all well appointed and verie willing to the ſeruice: and he adioined vnto them another thouſand, leauing Moſes with all theſe forces to continue there before the fortreſſe. The reſidue of the armie with enſignes diſplayed retired to Croie: there alſo a councell being held, the opinions were verie different touching the ſum and principall point of the whole warre; the moſt of them being verie vnwilling and greatly grieued and diſcontented to quitte and leaue their armes, but did perſwad him to follow the victorie, and to inuade the enemies countrie, and to winne ſomething from the Ottoman Empire. Others did alleadge the time ſo contrarie: the ſnowe, yce, and raynie weather ſo vnpleaſant and weariſome, that hardly could the

ſouldiers endure them, and therewith all the fieldes all parched and dried vp with extreame colde ſo as they would not be able to yeeld them any food or paſture for their horſes. Caſtriot aſſenting vnto this latter opinion, to the intent they ſhould ſee how he tendered the ſafetie and good of his ſouldiers, and that during the time of this delaie he might the better intend to the fortifying of the countrey which he had conquered, licenſed all men to depart hauing firſt rendred thanks vnto his ſouldiers in this or the like language:
            I know not (my companions) whether I ſhould firſt or laſt praiſe and commend inThe oration of Scanderbeg vnto his Chieftaines and ſouldiers. you your vertue or your good fortune: this latter hath bene ſtirred vp by the former, and the former hath ſuccoured & furthered the latter, and by her induſtrie and celerity (a thing in warfare verie requiſite) hath made your counſels and your endeuors all one and equall. For this cauſe, I haue conceiued a moſt aſſured hope and preſage of the future renowme and glorious name of Albanie, and of your honour and reputation. What is there wherein fortune can hereafter refuſe vs? what is there but your patience will ſurmount and compaſſe? It is yet ſcant the thirteth day ſince that I (full of doubt and vncertaintie, and almoſt as one forgotten or vnknowen, by reaſon of my long abſence and pilgrimage) did happily arriue and ſet foote in this my natiue countrie poſſeſſed with infidels and miſcreants: of whom (Sfetigrad excepted) there is not nowe remaining in this prouince, neither the name, nor (if I may ſo ſpeake) not ſo much as the ſmell or odour. It is God to whom firſt and before all we ought to render thankes, that had ſo blinded the eyes, and ſhut vp the vnderſtanding of our aduerſaries, cauſing them to deliuer into our hands the poſſeſſion of ſo goodly and ſtrong fortreſſes without any ſlaughter and blooſhed: next of all, your painfull patience and ſufferance hath merited great praiſe and commendations, which hath deſpiſed ſo many diſcommodities preſenting themſelues before you, as the menaces of the heauens, and the iniurie and roughnes of the winter, and yet without turning your faces either one way or other, till ſuch time as your noble thoughts and deſires long ſince conceiued in your hartes were fully ſatisfied and contented. I do well like and allowe your willing mindes on both parties, as well thoſe who iudge it needfull to purſue our victory, as thoſe alſo who thinke it good for a while to deferre our proceedings. For albeit there be nothing that ſhould ſtay the man that is magnanimious and valiant, but that vertue is accuſtomed to make her ſelfe wayes through fire and water (as the ſaying is) and through all places how ſoeuer vnacceſſible: notwithſtanding ſo long as no inconuenience do happen vs by our delay, you may well (without any wrong to your ſelues) haue a care to your bodies, and to conſider that they are made of no other then a humaine conſtitution. Retire you therefore victorious in a good and happie houre to breath and refreſh your ſelues: ſo ſhall you returne more gallant, ſtrong, and luſty, in a ſeaſon more temperate, to newe ſeruices and expeditions: then ſhall all of you haue the free vſe and your full of warres, of labours and trauels: then ſhall you finde a continuall emploiment in armes: then ſhall you receiue largely the paye and wages which you haue nowe ſo well deſerued. For if Ottoman ſit ſtill and doe ſuffer vs, to wage warre without diſturbance (as we haue begun alreadie) then will we ouerrun, ſacke, burne the tirant his countrie, and aſſay vpon ſome of the neighbour-garriſons: if we can get to be maſters of them. But if the Sultan (which I thinke moſt likely) doe proclaime warre againſt vs, we will then aduiſe our ſelues in the field by the countenance of the enemie, how and in what manner we are to proceede, and to demeane our ſelues againſt him. Neuertheles howſoeuer we haue occaſion of ſeruice elswhere, it will behoue vs to giue the firſt attempt againſt Sfetigrad, and there to employ and bend our firſt forces: For I hold it no leſſe ignominious then vnſufferable, that the

infidels ſhould continue there ſetled and vnremoued to the great reproch & diſhonor of the Epirots. But it is neceſſarie at this time, that we temporiſe for a ſeaſon, for feare leaſt in attempting with too great obſtinacie the deſtruction and ruine of Sfetigrade: if the action ſhould fall out to be vaine, & our attempt fruſtrate; we ſhould retire with ſhame as ouercome and vanquiſhed, and the enemie growing inſolent would learne in a ſmall time to contemne and deſpiſe our forces: and ſo ſhould we haue to contend not againſt men onely, but euen againſt the heauens. I haue heard ſome ancient Captaines highly blamed, who by imprudence and want of experience in the arte military haue loſt goodly armies, more by the diſcommodities of things then by the ſword & force of the enemie. But beſide all this, we haue the feaſt of the natiuitie of Chriſt our ſauiour now at hand, & I am not of the mind that any thing ſhould be enterpriſed during theſe feſtiual daies, nor that we ought to depriue any of life in a time wherein we our ſelues haue receiued life, & were brought vnto the light, but rather by our vowes and daily prayers (I may often repeat it) let vs yeeld thanks vnto God in all reſpectes for our liberty, for our eſtate and empire, for our wiues, for our children, for our ſelues recouered & freed from the bondage of our enemies. For my part (my good friends) if there be any thing wherein I am not able to be thankfull: I proteſt vnto you it is principally in that you haue brought me theſe excellent gages of ſo many gallant youthes, and haue honored me with the preſence of ſo many valiant & braue Captains, whoſe companie is very agreeable and acceptable vnto me. My minde doth promiſe it ſelfe great matters, and all great good hap by the aide and aſſiſtance of ſuch leaders. It is they who will giue me the meanes, themſelues will giue me the matter and occaſion whereby one day I ſhall be able to be thankefull vnto you according to the worthines of your deſerts. At this time if there be any thing which may purchaſe you honor or reputation: ſpeake it freely, vtter your thoughts and open your minds vnto me. For I aſſure you the acknowledgement of the greatneſſe of your ſeruices, whereby I am bound vnto you, ſhall neuer faile nor be wanting in me.
            
            The meaner ſort of people, and ſome alſo of good qualitie, became ſo audatious by reaſon of this ſpeech, & ſo ſhamleſſe, that (as if they had feared leaſt one of them ſhould haue ſtepped before the other to make their demaundes) flocking together in great troupes, and preſſing neere about him very rudely: they were not aſhamed to make diuerſe requeſts vnto him according to their ſeuerall humors & affections, ſome crauing to haue the pay of horſemen, ſome of footmen. Others deſired money & horſes; and ſome deſired rents, reuenues & liuings: and many who vpon the change of the eſtate, had bene ſpoiled of their patrimony by the Turkes to giue it vnto others, were importunate to be reſtored vnto their poſſeſſions. That which could conueniently be done & without contention was liberally granted them: the reſt which could not be without the iniurie of ſome other, was referred till ſome further oportunitie. The Captaines being diſmiſſed, & Scanderbeg being entred into the towne with his own traine (for that there were many which followed him, eſpecially his Nephewes and the Princes of his bloud.) The firſt thing that he did was, to cauſe to be enrolled and admitted into the communion of the Chriſtian faith, by the Sacrament of holy Baptiſme,Ameſe and other of his companions Baptiſed. 
               Ameſe & ſome other of his companions, who came with him from Hungarie, and a great multitude alſo of Turkes, which were yet remaining at Croy and at other places: the ſame hauing bene before left vndone for the haſt which they had to proſecute the warre. The ſolemnitie hereof being ioyned with the feaſt of Chriſtmas, was celebrated with great ioy for many daies together. The inhabitants of the countrey both in publique & in priuate did ſend him according to the cuſtome, many preſents. Likewiſe the Princes his neighbors as they had of late preſented him with many cō
               uenient

gifts fit for the warres, ſo did they now giue him the like of ſundry ſorts and kinds as fit ornaments for the time of peace and publique tranquilitie: namely, rich furniture, and other pretious ſtuffe for houſhold: knowing well that in that eſtate of his affaires, and in the time of warrelike tumults, he had brought nothing with him but his armes.
            This reſt did not Caſtriot inioy any time of long continuance, for euen in the chiefeſtThe Turkes in Epire aſſemble in armes againſt Moſes. time of the feaſt, & in their greateſt mirth: behold there came newes on a ſudden from Moſes, how that the Turks of that prouince which had fled into the places next adioining with a great troupe of their confederats & no ſmall number of the common ſort gathered together, were comming with all ſpeede poſſible to ſurpriſe him. Vpon this occaſiō 
               Scanderbeg himſelf haſtned preſently away, becauſe if it ſhould happen that he going before ſhould be drawn far off by the enemy, he feared leaſt either he ſhould be conſtrained to leaue & abondon the enterpriſe of Sfetigrade: or if he did determine to hazard the fight before the wals, he might be incloſed in the midſt betweene them and thoſe of the town. But ſee now the occaſion of al this tumult: theſe reliques of the Turks which were eſcaped out of the hands of our men, namely the garriſōs of Petrella, Stelluſa, & Petralba, (after that accident was paſt) perceiuing now by a kind of quietnes & delay, that all troubles of war did ſeeme to be laid aſide, & (as it were) aſleepe: and that Scanderbeg hauing broken vp his camp did keep his winter at Croy: & that Moſes with his troupes did abide both for the gard of the frontiers and the ſiege of Sfetigrad: they reallied & aſſembled themſelues together neare Alchria (a litle towne vnder the obeiſanceVVhich is Pharſalia, famous by the ouerthrow of th
                     •
                   great T
                     •
                  mp
                     •
                  y. of Ottoman in Macedony) and there hauing rayſed a great number of others, they tooke their way with great ſpeed directly towards Sfetigrade, pricked forward aſwell with a deſire of reuenge, as alſo to aboliſh towards their lord and maſter by ſome memorable act, their former default, & the ignominy of their forepaſſed infidelity. Now albeit the prince of Albany did not much trouble himſelfe with this rumour, not beleeuing that a number of ſuch raskals could or durſt be ſo hardie as to enter within his borders: notwithſtanding to the intent he might not (at his firſt comming to the crown) cōmit any act or make any ſhew of negligence, nor be ſeene to abandon Moſes in time of need, he mounted ſuddenly on horſebacke accompanied with thoſe who were with him at the feaſt, & about one hundred horſemen of the towne, & ſo went on to ſuppreſſe the ſuſpition of that danger which was thē in growing & beginning. But the matter fell not out to be ſuch as needed either much to be doubted or any great haſt or expedition to be made in it▪ For aſſoone as theſe gallants perceiued Caſtriot to approch, like as they did at the firſt ſet forward and aduance thēſelues in feare and doubt, ſo being as ſoone and eaſily chaſed away and driuen backe, ſcant did theyThe Turkes are chaſed away by the comming of Scanderbeg. leaue any token or appearance of their tract or footſteps where they had paſſed. This their folly notwithſtanding procured them great miſchiefe. For the Duke of Albany being incenſed in that they (hauing bene the cauſers of this his iorney & diſturbance) had by their ſodaine retreate robbed and depriued him of ſo fit matter and occaſion to purchaſe honor & commendation, with a thouſand horſe which he tooke of the garriſon with Moſes, he made a rode ouer all the countrie, and ſuppoſing by this dā
               mage,Scanderbeg maketh a road into the Turkiſh borders. that he ſhould draw forth the enemie and bring them to fight: he ran here and there courſing and beating the champion & plaine countrey: and like a mighty floud and deluge that ouerwhelmeth all things, he deſtroyed, haried, and ſpoyled all things and made an exceeding hauock in al places, in ſuch ſort, that alluring & delighting the ſouldiers by the ſweetnes of prey and booty, he largely prouided and furniſhed them both with victuals and munition for the reſidue of all the winter.
            The end of the first Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               A Murath mightilie perplexed vpon the reuolt of Scanderbeg, and the ouerthrow of his Armie, concludeth a peace with the Hungarians: and reſtoreth Miſia to the Deſpot. Scanderbeg enlargeth his conqueſts and dominions, and preparing for warres againſt the Turkes, confederateth him ſelfe with his neighbours. The princes of Epyre aſſemble in a generall counſell and Parliament at Liſſa, they elect Scanderbeg both king of Epyre, and chiefe Generall of their forces. Sfetigrade is yeelded to Moſes vpon compoſition. Halie Baſſa is ſent with an army of 40000. Turkes againſt Scanderbeg: who meeteth with him, ouercommeth him in a ſet battell, and then ouerrunneth and ſpoileth the Turkish Territories. The peace concluded between Amurath and the Hungarians is broken by the perſwaſions of Iulian the Cardinal & Popes legat, who cauſeth the king of Hungarie and the Chriſtians, to enter into league againſt the Turkes. The Nauy of the Chriſtians ſeize vpon the paſſages of the ſea of Helleſpont, to keepe Amurath from comming into Europe, who is buſied in warres in Aſia againſt the king of Caramania or Cilicia. Vladiſlaus writeth vnto Scanderbeg, to ioine with him in that warre againſt Amurath. Scanderbeg marcheth with an Army of 30000. to ioine with the Hungarians, but is hindered by the trecherie of the Deſpot of Miſia. Amurath hauing corrupted certaine marchants Genowaies for money to tranſport his Army out of Aſia, paſſeth ouer into Europe, and marcheth againſt the Chriſtians, who encounter him neare Varna. The famous battell of Varna betweene Vladiſlaus and Amurath: wherein Vladiſlaus is ſlaine, the Chriſtians diſcomfited, and Amurath obtaineth a bloudy victory. Scanderbeg hauing burnt and ſpoiled Miſia in reuenge of the Deſpot his infidelity, returneth with his Army into Albany.
               
            
            
               NOw that we are come to the end of domeſticall matters, it is requiſit that we returne to forraine affaires. When Ottoman was certified by true and certaine meſſages of the eſtate of Hungary, & how matters had paſſed in thoſe quarters, albeit Fame (which commonly is then moſt ſwift and ſpeedy when it bringeth the report of ſome miſhappe and miſaduenture) had before filled all places with the vncertaine rumour and tumult of feare and ſorrow, yet when he knew that the Baſſa was defeated by the cunning & ſleight of Scanderbeg, that his▪ Army was diſcomfited, that there was ſcant left any one remaining: and that the other was eſcaped ſafe and ſound from the battel with Ameſe and others his complices and adherents, and had ſodainely poſſeſſed himſelfe of Epyre; Amurath I ſay, being touched to the quick, with deepe & extreme grief for ſo ſorrowfull and heauy newes, was deſirous by ready & diligent ſearch & enquiry, to be enformed at large

of the diſcourſe of the whole action, and of the reuolt of the Albanois, and aboue all of that ſubtell and wily deuiſe, whereby hee had gotten the falſe letters from the Secretary (for this no more then the reſidue) could be long concealed from him. The maruell and aſtoniſhment of a deede ſo audacious and deſperate, and of a miſchiefe, as it fell out, ſo ſodaine and vnexpected, did ſo binde vp the vſe of his tongue, and repreſſed his ſpeech within him, that he was not able to ſpeake any one word. Notwithſtanding after a while, the paſſion being ſomewhat moderated, and comming to diſgorge it ſelfe, and to breake forth in words and ſpeaches: ſometimes with threates and menaces, and ſometimes with complaints and exclamations, he did digeſtAmurath mightily perplexed vpon the reuolt of Scanderbeg. and ſwallow vp with all poſſible and continuall vehemency this his wrath and indignation. Sometimes he would call him vngratefull Scanderbeg, ſometimes wicked and lewd Scanderbeg: then would he reproach and obiect vnto him, that hee had now vomited forth the venome which had laine ſo long hidden in his ſtomacke, that he would long before haue done the like, if he had had any oportunity and fit occaſion for a counſell ſo furious and execrable, but that now he had eſpied the time to accompliſh his wicked and vnhappy enterpriſe with moſt ſecurity and impunity: euen in the middeſt of his moſt vrgent affaires, and when he ſaw him buſied with matters of greateſt waight and conſequence, whereof had enſued this his deſaſter and inconuenience in Hungary. Againe, at other times the ſubtill and cautelous tyraunt, to the intent himſelfe might be the more pleaſing, & better thought of by his ſubiects, and the other more odious and hatefull vnto them, woulde openly queſtion and demand with him ſelf, what reaſon although (ſaid he) there be no reaſon for a man to do euil, ſhould moue Scanderbeg to commit a crime ſo hainous and of ſuch impiety? conſidering that being with him he was become great, and not inferiour to any both in wealth and authority: and did as farre as his heart could wiſh, enioy the full contentment of all things, which the couetous and vnſatiable minde of man could imagine to clime and mount to, the ſupreme and higheſt degree of honour, as well in warre as in peace. That there was neuer any ſtraunger which had receiued ſo good entertainement and nouriture in his Court, neither had the vertue of any Alien bene ſo highly recompenced and ſo honourably rewarded. Againe in one and the ſame inſtant faining and diſſembling to the vtmoſte of his power, and extreame diſcontentment and impatiency of griefe and ſorrow, hee would exalt the loialty of his princes and nobles, and would often exclaime, and with a loud voice affirme, that this notwithſtanding was a great good hap and benefit both for him and for the Ottoman Empire, to ſee him ſelfe freed and diſcharged from ſo waighty a burthen as is domeſticall fraud and treaſon: that it might be, he ſhould haue bene ſurpriſed with ſome other poyſon farre more daungerous, and with ſome miſchiefe of greater dammage and inconuenience, if this plague ſhould haue beene ſuffered to grow or to continue in his houſe any longer time: that nothing ſhould now trouble his minde, and for this fact, hee doubted not but it would aske vengeaunce both of God and man: it being vnpoſſible that he ſhould ſuffer ſuch a crime to remaine vnpuniſhed, by which, contrary to all right and equity, with ſo wicked and lewd a minde, he hadde giuen that victory to the Chriſtians in Hungarie. For if he had had any cauſe or occaſion of reuenge againſt him, or any colour or pretence of iuſt diſcontentment, for the detayning of his patrimony from him, and the inheritaunce of his fathers kingdome: what could his Army doe to that, which with all horrour and cruelty he had brought to the Butchery, and had made it neither more nor leſſe, then as a ſacrifice to the enemies? What hadde the innocent bloud of his ſubiectes deſerued? And in briefe the poore Secretary, whereof was he guilty that he might

not eſcape the handes of this bloudy tormentor.
            
            With ſuch like diſcourſes did the Sultan enflame the hearts of the Barbarians, who were already of them ſelues ſufficiently animated againſt him. But nowe ridings being brought one ſtill vppon an other from the partes of Epyre, it did more violentlie aggrauate and exaſperate his ſorrow at ſuch time as it was tolde him that Croie was taken by Scanderbeg, that he was poſſeſſed of the other places and ſtrong holdes of like waight and conſequence, that the garriſons were ſlaine and deſtroyed, and in briefe, that the whole eſtate of his aunceſtours was remitted and reduced vnder his power and gouernment, with the incredible fauour and good liking of all the nation. Now albeit theſe matters went neare the heart of Ottoman, and did extreamely grieue him; yet hauing in a manner put all other things out of his minde, he bent and conuerted all his thoughtes to the warre of Hungarie. There was not any other matter or ſubiect of quarrell or enmity thought on, but that onely was it which all men did aduiſe him to proſecute: and which both the deſire of euery man in particular, and the publique vowes and prayers of all in generall did earneſtly long and wiſhe for. Yet did the diuerſe and variable opinions of the greateſt Captaines, hold the minde of the old man in ſome doubt and ſuſpence: ſome of them who would not be perſwaded there was any daunger,Amurath conſulteth with his chiefetaines, whether it were more expedient to war vpon Scanderbeg and the Epirots, or vpon the Hungarians. till ſuch time as they ſhould ſee all ſubdued by Scanderbeg, were of this minde; that it was beſt to marche with all their forces againſt the Hungarians, and that they ought not by faintneſſe and cowardiſe to leaue the euent and triumph of all the warre, vnto thoſe who hadde vanquiſhed and were conquerours but in part onely: and yet that neither had they hadde that aduantage and victory of their fellowes, but onely by the treaſon and fellony of his owne followers. Furthermore that there was a great difference and no compariſon to be made betweene the force of one Baſſa, with a few vauntcurrers of ſome twenty thouſand, in regard of all the puiſſaunce of Ottoman, and of the flower of Aſia and Europe, and the huge forces which the Sultan hadde for the guard of his perſon, that theſe were not vſed nor accuſtomed to be ouercome and conquered. But others who did feare ſome greater ruine and miſchiefe, were of a contrary aduiſe and opinion: affirming, that by how much the more the former did excuſe the misfortune of the Baſſa, laying it vppon the diſloyaltie of Scanderbeg: ſo much the more was hee to be blamed in regard of the ſmall number of the enemies; for that Huniades with leſſe then the moity and one halfe of their number, and without any bloud of his ſouldiours, had giuen them ſo grieuous a checke and diſcomfiture. And whereas they compared the Baſſa his forces, to the royall army, and the greatneſſe of the imperiall hoaſt which they commended ſo highly: theſe on the contrary did alleadge and willed them to conſider, the greatneſſe of the power of Vladiſlaus, with the renowme of all Hungarie and Poland, beſides the ſuccours of the Italians guyded and conducted by Iulian the legate Apoſtolique, and the ſtrength and forces of the Almaines: all which hadde not as yet any thing entermedled in this warre, but in very great deuotion did attend the occaſion to enter into this warre with their vtmoſt power and ability. Beſides that, the Chriſtians would not now in time of neede and extremity, leaue or forſake the Deſpot, whoſe cauſe they had already ſo fauoured and vndertaken, till ſuch time as they had fully enſtalled and ſettled him in the ſeate of his aunceſtors. And laſt of all, that Scanderbeg who had newly declared him ſelfe for their enemy, was not to be deſpiſed and contemned, that there was none of them but knew very well of what and how great ſpirite and courage the man was, and with what good fortune (beſides his ſingular experience in the warres) he was euer accompanied. That hauing

in a moment extinguiſhed the name of his aduerſaries, he was now reentred and repoſſeſſed of al the eſtate of his father, without any charge or loſſe ſuſtained: then what would hee doe hereafter when he had ſettled and aſſured the affaires of his Realme, and gained the hearts and good willes of his ſubiects? That it was not to be doubted but he would ſtirre vp all Princes Chriſtian to enter into Armes, and would ſpare no trauels, dangers, nor watchfull labours to exhort and wring from him daily, ſome part or peece of his Empire. That it would argue great ſimplicity in the middeſt of ſo many enemies, both before and behinde and on all ſides, and in the middeſt of ſo many forces, to looke for any other, then a very bad and moſt vnfortunate iſſue. The wiſeſt way therefore and moſt expedient was, for once to yeelde vnto Fortune, for feare leaſt ſhee did often triumphe ouer them, and to diſcouer and lay open vnto her one part of their body, for the better couering and ſafety of that which was moſt ſubiect and expoſed to her violence and aſſaults. That warres are guided rather by time, then by force of armes, that they ought not to take it grieuouſly to render Miſia vnto the Deſpot, to the intent they might by that meanes purchaſe a litle leiſure, and (as it were) a time of breathing from ſo many loſſes and dammages ſuſtained by the wars. But why ſhould they ſpeake of rendring Miſia, when indeede it would be but lent him for a ſeaſon? For at any time they might take it backe againe, and with more eaſe and facility, then it ſhould be yeelded or giuen vnto them.
            Theſe conſiderations did greatly induce Amurath, being before in doubt and vncertainety,Amurath reſolueth and concludeth a peace with the Hungarians. to allow of this aduiſe and to doe thereafter. Notwithſtanding fearing to be noted of puſillanimity and baſenes of courage, if he ſhould ſo ſoone and eaſily condiſcend to this opinion: after he had preciſely debated and diſcuſſed many reaſons and arguments both on the one part and the other; in the end he yeelded, and (as it were) by a kind of conſtraint ſubſcribed to this laſt concluſion. There was ſent therefore an ambaſſage to the Hungarians with offers of Miſia vnto the Chriſtians, and of truce for ten yeares, according as themſelues had demanded. Huniades who by reaſon of the weakenes and infirmity of the others, was in a manner left alone to mannage all the affaires both of peace and of war, perceiuing his troupes to be vnfit for the warres, did not refuſe nor prolong the conditions offered by the Turks. There be ſome notwithſtanding who affirm, that that great lord & fauorit of Amurath who (as we haue ſaid) was taken priſoner by Iancus, beſides, the ſumme of 40000. crowns agreed vpon for his ran ſome, had aduiſed to demaund Miſia of the Sultan, aſſuring him that he would not refuſe to grant any thing, by reaſon of the diſcomfiture & ouerthrow of his Baſſa. This being an eſpeciall proofe thereof, becauſe in the preparation of his prouiſions for the wars, this word had eſcaped from him amongſt his familiars, that he would accord with the Chriſtians, the which he did accordingly with the ambaſſadours,Miſia reſtored to the Deſpot by Amurath. whom Huniades ſent vnto him for the concluſion & ratificatiō of the agrement. Certaine it is (as ſome ſay) that Amurath hauing had perfect notice afterwardes, of the pitifull eſtate of our forces, it litle wanted but he had run mad for rage and anger: and he tooke ſuch an extreame griefe thereat, that with the teares euen trickling downe his checkes, he lamented that a victory ſo certaine and aſſured, through a vaine and fooliſh feare ſhould eſcape him, and be taken out of his handes.
            Out of Albany all this while there came no new tidings, but onely of certaine roades and falſe alarmes made vppon the confines of the Turkiſh Empire, by occaſion whereof, Ottoman, both for the diſcommodity of the winter, and becauſe he had not yet well digeſted in his hart the peace of Hungary, who (as it was reported) were daily as yet in armes, till the Deſpotte were fully and entirely eſtabliſhed in his eſtate, did put ouer the affaires of Epyre to another time of more opportunity, and caried

him ſelfe according to the time. For he was ſo extreamely perplexed and troubled in his thoughts, as he would daily walke vp and downe by himſelfe alone, imagining & deuiſing from day to day vppon the variety and diuerſity of the cauſes and reaſons which brought vpon him, and continued theſe new impediments and hinderaunces one after an other, to the great good, welfare, and encreaſe of the Chriſtians affaires. The which (God be praiſed) did daily grow better and better and were in good reſt and happy eſtate. For this is a thing moſt aſſured, that the roughneſſe and intemperancy of the cold and froſty weather, and the doubtfull faith of the Hungarians, did at that time yeelde our people great matter and cauſe of quiet. But the affaires of Miſia being now compounded and ſettled by the retrait of the Hungarians, and the winter being paſt; what was it that then did hinder Amurath, that hee did not preſently make ſhew of his hatred againſt Scanderbeg, and ſeeke ſome notable kinde of reuenge vpon him, in diſcharge of that malice, which had ſo long boiled in his ſtomacke? For before the thirtieth day of Iune, there was no motion of any war againſt him. It may be peraduenture that the courage of the olde man being abated by his loſſe in Hungarie, he made more reckonning and accompt of his caſe then of the loſſe of Epyre, or of all the iniuries receiued by Scanderbeg.
            
            
               Caſtroit hauing taken his leaue of Moſes, returned from Dibria to Croie, where, being exempted for a while from the trauelles of warre (for the time would not permit him otherwiſe) he ſpent the better part of the winter in prouiding for the ciuil affaires of the weale publique, and in ordering the eſtate of particular occaſions: whereuppon1443. ſeeing the ſpring to approach and draw on, he tooke with him Ameſe, and ſome few horſe beſides, and went to leauie certaine forces, and hauing made a muſter and taken the fielde with ſixe thouſand men, he drew ſtraight to Sfetigrade. But what ſhould he doe there? As the place was nothing changed in difficulty, no more was the enemy altered in obſtinacy. Neither menaces nor faire wordes would profite any thing. Artillery or other engines hee hadde none, and if hee had brought any, it might be they had ſerued ſomewhat to abaſh and terrifie them, but litle or nothing would they haue profited him for the recouery of the place. On the other ſide to try his fortune with the manifeſt perill of his men, and (as it were) with their certaine and vtter ruine, ſeemed vnto him a courſe of great raſhneſſe and temcrity. For this cauſe according to the beſt counſell and opinion, whereunto the greater part alſoThe countrey about Sfetigrade ſpoiled and haried. did aduiſe him, leauing for a ſeaſon all care of Sfetigrade, hee marched elſe where with his campe, with intent to amplifie and enlarge the limittes and borders of his dominions. But firſt of all he ſpoyled and deſtroyed all things that bare fruite about the towne: depriuing the beſieged of the benefite and profite of all the champion, and not leauing them any thing, but the onely bare and naked encloſure of their walles. It is reported notwithſtanding, that certaine of the inhabitauntes of Sfetigrade,
               Citizens of Sfetigrade pray Scanderbeg not to ſpoil
                     •
                   the countrey. or of them which remained in the ſuburbes, came ſecretely vnto Scanderbeg, praying him in regard of their ſeruices paſt in the time of Iohn his father, that he would not vtterly deſtroy all things in this order, hauing not deſerued it at his handes, but that he would cauſe to ceaſe this ſpoile and hauocke, whereby in effect, they and not the enemy ſhould be vtterly depriued of all ſuſtenaunce and nouriture: That he had both leyſure and other meanes ſufficient to chaſtiſe the garriſon of the Turkes, and to chaſe and diſneſt them out of their holde: and that for their partes, they woulde moſt willingly watch for ſome oportunity, and giue aide and furtheraunce to this affaire, if they ſawe any hope (were it neuer ſo ſmall) to effect it. Caſtroit tooke pleaſure to hearken vnto them, and hee condeſcended to their requeſt. For what reaſon had he to doubt either of men that were Chriſtians, or of thoſe who hadde

bene the auncient ſubiects of his aunceſtors? For this cauſe, commaunding his enſignes to march, he turned his fury and rigour to other places.
            There was in this prouince a goodly open and large country and circuit of ground, maruellouſly pleaſant, and wonderfully well peopled, with many townes and boroughes alſo, very plentifully inhabited. Thoſe of the countrey doe call it Moerea,
               Moerea wonne and poſſeſſed by Scanderbeg. and it lieth towardes the Tribullians. Thitherwardes Scanderbeg leading his army, did adde the ſame to his dominion: paſſing beyond the boundes whereof Iohn his father was poſſeſſed. There was not any where an enemy to be found in all the countrey: for the Turkes before that time either had bene expelled, or had willingly auoyded and forſaken thoſe partes. The inhabitaunts and the reſidue of the nation Albanois, hauing quickely loſt the memory and remembraunce of Amurath, had enrolled them ſelues without being ſought vnto vnder Scanderbeg: and they marched vnder his enſignes, and vnder the Eagles in times paſt well knowen vnto them. ForScanderbeg his Armes. in his ſtandards which were Guelles, he bore an Eagle with two heades ſable. Theſe being the auncient armes of his family. From Mocrea paſſing on from place to place, ſometime ſhewing him ſelfe gracious and full of courteſie, and ſometimes fierce and terrible, he enlarged his conqueſtes from day to day, and made them farre more rich and ample: and giuing order and directions continually for ſome oneIndu
                     〈…〉
                   prude
                     ••
                  e of Scanderbeg in prouiding for the ſafety and defence of his dominions. thing or other, he would appoint guardes vpon the paſſages, and make prouiſions for the garriſons. Oftentimes comming and going to Croy, he would viſite all other places of importance, and be euer riding and courſing here and there in and out continually: ſeldome or neuer was he idle, but he would be preſent euery where, and there was no place or corner but he tooke diligent and ſpeciall notice of, mountains, hils, forreſtes, thickets, caues, dennes, and ſecrete lurking holes. All his thoughtes and deuiſe was vppon the warres, to ſee before hand how he might one day with litle loſſe of his men, make head againſt an enemy ſo puiſſant and mighty. That litle leaſure that was left him, was wholly ſpent in dayly roades and inuaſions to ſpoile and waſt the territory of the Pagans. He hated nothing ſo much, as that his ſouldiersAn Army not to continue long in a place. ſhould corrupt them ſelues with idleneſſe, hauing this ſentence of Fabius Maximus daily in his mouth, that it was not good for an Army to continue long in one place, but that the often chaunge and ſhifting of their place and campe, was much more laudable, and would enable and make them farre better diſpoſed to all the actions and ſeruices Military.
            Theſe things could not be ſo handled, but that Amurath muſt needs haue knowledge of them: for by this time there came vnto him many meſſengers from Pharſalia, and other parts of Macedonie: ſo as all partes of his pallace were filled vp with outcries and clamours: many reports being brought, and importing that all was loſt and vtterly deſolate; that Scanderbeg hauing obtained the poſſeſſion of infinite places, did dayly purſue his conqueſts with his accuſtomed fierceneſſe and crueltie. That long ſince both the one and the other Dibria had willingly rendred them ſelues to his deuotion, killing with their proper hands the Turkiſh garriſons, or deliuering them bound and fettered to their new Lord and maiſter. Theſe marches both of the neather and vpper Dibria did of old appertaine to Iohn Caſtriot: but he (as hath bene ſayd) being oppreſſed by Amurath, and by meanes of the peace which he demanded, had giuen him his owne children in hoſtage, and had reſigned vnto him both thoſe prouinces, which he quitted vnto him vpon ſome other conditions. Now theſe curriers comming (as is ſaid) to the court of Amurath, declared, that by meanes of the reuolt of the Dibrians, the Chriſtians would ſoone and eaſily come to be maſters of Sfetigrade: the which being ſeated in the vpper Dibria, where all was at their deuotion, did not

now know from thence forward where to find or haue any thing more or leſſe for the maintenance of the warre, or for the nouriture of his campe. That Mo
                     •
                  rea and many other places had made themſelues a partie with them, which, although it had neuer vntil that day acknowledged the houſe of Caſtriot for their gouernour, yet either through the rebellion of the inhabitants, or for feare, or by conſtraint of miſchiefes endured, was now become ſubiect vnto Scanderbeg. Theſe aduertiſements did ſtirre vp and incite the tyrant to take armes, more of neceſſitie then of choler. VponAmurath leuieth an army againſt Scanderbeg. this occaſion hauing with great diligence aſſembled his Counſell, & the matter fully concluded on, he commanded a puiſſant armie to be leuied: by the which without the aduenture or loſſe of any thing, he thought vtterly to aboliſh and extinguiſh the name of Scanderbeg, and to take vengeance of the reuolt of the Albanois, and of ſo many iniuries which he had offred him.
            
               Caſtriot in like maner being certified of Amurath his reſolution, not onely by perſons vnknowne and ſtrangers vnto him (as in ſuch changes there do neuer want men of that ſort) but by ſome alſo who were his friends, of whom he had as yet good ſtore about Amurath, made and procured long before, and whom the change of fortune had no whit altered or changed. He (I ſay) as he had ſhewed himſelfe of an incomparable audacitie and confidence in expoſing himſelfe to all perils: ſo did he euen in the middeſt of them vſe ſingular prudence, ſage aduiſe, and counſell. For conſidering the greatneſſe and importance of his conceipts, and the weightie burthen which he had taken vpon his ſhoulders, and hauing ſome doubt and miſtruſt in him ſelfe, that he ſhould not be of ſufficient abilitie to ſuſtaine and beare it out for ſo long a time, nor yet be able to renew his forces ſo often as the greatneſſe of thoſe warres would rerequire: which he foreſaw (as a true Prophet) euen within the entrailes of Epire, and whereof he did but attend the comming euerie houre; he determined therefore toConfederacy of Caſtriot purpoſed with his neighbours, for the reſiſting of the Turkes innaſions. ſeeke out ſome ſtrange and forreine ſuccours, by meanes wherof he might more ſurely order his owne affaires, and by the ayde of many might be the better able to repell and keepe off the force and violence of the tempeſt that did ſo threaten him. Firſt of all therefore he reſolued to enter into confederacie, and into ſome ſtrict and perpetuall kind of alliance with the Princes and great Lords his neighbours, both Albanois and * Illyrians. A thing indeed verie difficult to be effected, for that commonly men areTheſe are the Sclauonians. naturally more prone and apt to diſſention and diſcord, then to amity and concord. Yet did this fall out vnto him very facile and eaſie, as both the iſſue and the diſcourſe of the matter will make it manifeſt.
            But for that this treaty could not commodiouſly be handled with euery one in particular, neither by letters, nor meſſengers, nor by him ſelfe in perſon: it was therefore thought beſt, that a Diet and generall aſſembly of all of them ſhould be aſsigned and appointed in ſome place within the circuite of Albany; to the intent, that both the preſence of the parties meeting together, and their voices and opinions being reported and made knowen in common amongſt them all, it might be the better knowen by the aduiſe of the whole counſell, what courſe was moſt meete and expedient to be taken. In the choiſe of the place alſo he vſed no leſſe prudence and modeſtie: for none of all thoſe Princes were ſummoned to repaire to Croie, for feare leaſt it ſhould be thought he would ſtand too much vppon his greatneſſe, and would arrogate to him ſelfe the preheminence in their aſſembly: as alſo to auoide all occaſion of miſtruſt: neither did he conuite them to Apollonia, Diana, Zabiach, or any other towne appertaining to the name of Albanie: to the intent he might take from them all matter of enuy, backwardneſſe, or delay, which might haue growen if they had bene drawn againſt their willes out of their own territories: or elſe for feare that they

ſhould diſdaine to repaire to any place belonging to a ſtraunger: becauſe it might be they eſteemed their owne townes of as much if not of more worthineſſe then thoſe of others. As there is a kinde of people, who doe preferre and prize anie thing of their owne, farre before the like of other mens. But there was the towne* Liſſa (we ordinarily call it Aleſsia) diſtant ſomewhat more then two and twentie miles from Croy,
               
               Liſſa or Aleſſia. Scodra, at this preſent called Scutari. and ſituated betweene that and* Scodra. This place was thought not vnfitte for this conuocation, both by reaſon of the conueniencie and commoditie thereof, as alſo in reſpect of the gouernement and dominion of the Venetians, being no leſſe gentle and gracious, then pleaſing and agreeable to their good likings: for this towne was of their appurtenances.
            Thus were meſſengers diſpatched on all parts to call them together, and to ſignifieA generall parliament or aſſembly ſummoned of all the princes and Eſtates of Epire. vnto them the dayes & the place wherein they ſhould aſſemble. Of thoſe which were aſſigned, there was not any one that was vnwilling or negligent in comming: not one of them made any excuſes or delayes, neither was there any buſineſſe (as it happened) either publike or particular which cauſed any of them to faile or to ſtay away: but all of them haſtened thither with exceeding readie and verie willing mindes. This was an euident teſtimonie what maner of men they would ſhewe them ſelues in time to come in other the accidents and occurrences of warre. But here it ſhall not be amiſſe for the readers a little to retire them ſelues, and that the grauitie of this hiſtorie be a while diſcontinued, and my ſelfe permitted a little to wander and to digreſſe ſomewhat from my purpoſe: for as much as my intent is to number vp (it may be ſomewhat too curiouſly) and by roll (as it were) to regiſter the names of thoſe perſons, who did with their preſence then honour that aſſembly and conuocation: or rather the dignitie and reputation of Epire: to the intent the poſteritie may haue cauſe both to grieue and to maruell at the calamitie of the eſtate of Albanie, and at their vile and miſerable condition, which ſhortly after came vppon them ſo ſodainly, the image and repreſentation of which thinges may ſerue in time to come for their inſtruction. How beit that peraduenture nothing ought to be taken as ill ſpoken or ill done, which a man doth with a good intent of ſeruice and piety towardes his countrey, his friends and fellow citizens: Notwithſtanding before I come to recite the names of thoſe who aſsiſted this aſſembly, I hold it not inconuenient likewiſe to deliuer in this diſcourſe, from whence the nation of the Epirots or Albanois hath deriued his originall.
            Some ſay that the Epirots (who are alſo called Albanois) did in times paſt diſcendThe originall of the Albanois. This is Cumania ſubiect to the Tartarian. Straho. Pius 2. Papa. of the noble and auncient people and inhabitantes of Italie: who in like manner did poſſeſſe a certaine portion and part of Colchida. From whence if any doe alledge, that the language of Epire or Albanie is deriued, it may be that he is not deceiued in this opinion; ſeeing that we finde it written in Strabo: that there be in that place vſed ſixteene ſundry languages: and Pope Pius the ſecond, a man ſingularly learned both in diuine and humaine ſtudies, and ſome other moderne writers, (who haue followed Trogus Pompeius) are well neare of the ſame opinion. For Trogus Pompeius
               Trogus Pompeius. affirmeth: that the ofspring and beginning of the Albanois was from Italie, and he aſſureth vs, that the Albanians did follow Hercules at his departure out of Italie (after he had for a ſpace kept thoſe heardes and troupes of cattell, which he tooke from Gerion within the mount Alban:) and that they were ledde thence by him into this Prouince, being allured thither by the fertility of the herbage and paſtures. Of theſe then are iſſued the Albaneſes or Epirots, of whome a part made their aboadePeloponneſus or Mor
                     •
                  a. in Peloponneſus (which at this preſent is called Morea,) and part of them ſeated them ſelues in Macedony, or rather in Albany or Epire. Now of theſe at this

time was Scanderbeg the chiefe. A prince couragious and inuincible, who in our ageScanderbeg the chiefe of the Princes and eſtates of Epire
                     •
                   his deſerts. had great affaires, and kept continuall warres againſt the infidels for the name of Ieſus Chriſt, and did ſpend almoſt all his life in armes, fighting for the maintenance of the Catholicke faith: and many a time did he vanquiſh and diſcomfite in open field and plaine battell, euen with verie ſmall forces, many and exceeding great armies of the Turkes, at the ſight and preſence of whom, the troupes of the Barbarians did ſcarſe dare to preſent them ſelues. In ſumme, by him onely was this prouince for a time retained in their obedience to the Goſpell of the Sonne of God.
            But returne we nowe againe to the drift of our diſcourſe. Ariamnites Thopia
               A Catalogue of the Princes of Albany aſſembled in coū
                  ſell with Scanderbeg. 
               Goleme, a man of ſingular renowme and authoritie, both for the continuall and ancient nobilitie of his bloud, as alſo for his notable practiſe and ſcience Militarie; and for the maieſtie and venerable regard of his countenaunce (a thing whereof the common ſort make no meane reckoning) being accompanied with a gallant and goodly troupe of men both horſe and foote, preuented all others by his great ſpeedeAriamnites Thopia Tributarie to Amurath reuolteth 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                   him and cleaueth to Scanderbeg. and diligence, and was the firſt that arriued thither to this Diet. This man in former times, hauing bene ill handled by the armes of Amurath, had ſubmitted him ſelfe to his ſubiection, and had yeelded to pay him ſuch tribute as it pleaſed the Turke to impoſe vpon him. But at this time taking courage a freſh, vpon the occaſion nowe offered: brauely and couragiouſly he made knowen the hatred and diſcontentment earſt conceiued in his minde, and the courage of his heart, which he had worthely retayned and preſerued. And there was no man that was more forward, or that put too his helping hand, or that did conſpire againſt the Barbarians with ſo great ardour and vehemencie as he did for the common libertie. Neither did he want anie meanes to worke the contentment of this his deſire, and to ſatiſfie his minde in that behalfe. And it ſeemed in effect that his forces linckt and conioyned with the others, had bene all ſufficient to reſtore and to reuiue the good fortune of Epire: them ſelues alone hauing once bene of abilitie in a full and entireThe ſtrength, puiſſance and acts of Ariamnites. Riuer of A
                     •
                  as or Vauiſſe. Gulfe of Ambraſia. warre, to make head and to reſiſt againſt the Sultan. True it is, that his puiſſance, power, and ſeigniorie did reach from the farther ſide of the riuer of Aoe, or AEas: (howbeit that the people of the countrey do giue it another name, calling it Vauiſſa) vnto the gulfe of Ambraſia, being in a manner all alongeſt the ſea coaſtes of Epire. This is that Ariamnites which hath bene knowen by the ſurname of Great amongſt the Macedonians and Albanians. For he did manie notable and memorable actes for the Goſpell and faith of Ieſus Chriſt againſt the Turkes, giuing them diuerſe, and moſt ſhamefull ouerthrowes and diſcomfitures: and as long as he liued he did not ceaſe to perſecute them. He encountred Mahomet their ſoueraigne Prince and Emperour in the inuaſion which he made vpon Albanie, and ouerthrew him, and plagued him moſt ſhamefully. For, aſſayling him within his campe, he gayned and wonne his enſignes which he had within his owne tent and pauillion, forcing him to flie away and to forſake that Prouince with notable dammage and ignominie.Andrew Th
                     •
                  
                  py. Comine. Muſache. Tanuſe. Tire the leſſer▪ Epidamne o
                     •
                   Duras, once Dirrachium. Cymerians. Vl
                     •
                  xians. Corſon. Cymerot
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                Next to him came Andrevv Thopie, a man famous for his race and valour, and of no leſſe reuerence for his age, hauing there with him his two ſonnes, Comyne and Muſach, and Tanuſe his nephewe: whoſe aunceſtours (as we haue before written) were the firſt founders of Croy and Petrella. Their forces in like caſe were braue and goodly: and their Dominion was of as faire a circuite in Epire betweene Tire the leſſer and Epidamne, which is Duras. And beſides theſe places and demaines (which hauing loſt their ancient and firſt names, are by the inhabitants called Scuria, Muſachiene, Cherabie, and Farca.) They were acknowledged alſo for Soueraigne Lordes of the Cymerians and Vlixians. This countrey is mountainous, and right

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
againſt Corfou. It is inhabited with a people fierce and vnconquerable, if not warlike and martiall, (we call them commonly the Cymerots.) Theſe haue not commonly the aſſurance and defence of anie other ſuccours by anie matter, meanes, or arte, but onely the naturall ſtrength and fortification of the places themſelues. This people hath euer and with good ſucceſſe contemned the inſolencie of the Turkes: and after the death of Scanderbeg, when Albanie was ſubiected and ſubdued, with a ſingular libertie and freedome of nature, they liued long time without the knowledge of anie forraine yoke: and at this time (as I vnderſtand) hauing voluntarily called vnto them and made choyſe of certaine garriſons and companies of Spaniards out of Apulia, they haue betaken them ſelues to the obedience of one chiefe Lord: and they doe liue in a moſt excellent forme of pollicie. George the nephewe ofGeorge Streeſe Iohn & Boye Streeſe. 
               Streeſe, and the ſonne of Balſee was there in companie alſo: Iohn and Boye his brethren being left at home, becauſe their young yeares did make them vnable for the warres, and vnfit to be called to counſell. Betweene Croie and Liſſa laye the territorie that theſe did enioye, in a ſoyle both large and rich, and no leſſe pleaſaunt and delightfull. From the Muſachees (for ſo is the familie ſurnamed) there cameThe familie of the Muſachees. verie manie; all which, as they were of one and the ſame diſpoſition, and of a like conformitie of minde with Scanderbeg: ſo did not they hold their eſtate and ſigniorie anie way ſeparated or deuided, but ioyntly and together with him. Ouer and beſides theſe, there preſented them ſelues the two magnanimous and valiant Princes Nicholas and Paule Ducagin, each of them in armes and well appointed: butNicholas and Paule Ducagine. Zadr
                     •
                  me. 
               Paule was knowen aboue the reſt by a certaine ſingular obſeruance of religion. They were Lordes of a countrey which the Epirotes call the vpper Zadrime, on the other ſide of the riuer of Dryne, euen to the higher Miſia: a region verie ſpacious and fertile, watered with fountaines and moſt wholeſome brookes, and inhabited with a people moſt fierce and warlike. In this place are to be ſeene manie tokens and ſhewes of antiquitie, townes, buildings, and famous temples, manie of which are now defaced, and throwen downe euen with the ground, and ruinated from the toppe to the verie bottome. And more then that, within the heart of this region doe remaine and appeare certaine monuments of marble, vpon which might be read the names of manie Emperours both Romanes and others: and amongſt them there were ſome markes alſo or teſtimonies that S. Paule the Apoſtle had there preached the lawe of the Sonne of God vnto that people.
            Thither alſo came in like manner Luke Zacharie, who afterward followed theLe
                     ••
                  y or Luke Zacharie. part of Scanderbeg with the like courſe of felicitie and good fortune, and with a ſingular good will and affection did perſeuer therein euen to the ende. This man being worthie of a greater heritage, was poſſeſſed of a reaſonable large portion of ground within the vpper Zadrime, together with the towne of Daina founded by his aunceſters,Dayna. and deſcended vnto him by right of ſucceſſion. This is a pretie litle towne planted vpon an high mountaine, as are almoſt all the townes of Epire: yet is the territorie of it fat and rich, of an excellent good aire and healthfull: full of veniſon and fowle, and well repleniſhed with all kinde of trees and fruites. The pleaſant riuer of Dryne maketh his courſe on that part which lyeth towards the Weſt. The whichThe riuer Drine or Drin
                     •
                  n. prerogatiues and excellencies of that place haue bene celebrated by the auncient writers, with a kinde of contention, and with ſo great diligence and perfection, that there is not almoſt left for them which come after, anie matter worthie the ſpeaking of. Neuertheleſſe although many things at this day (as it falleth out) haue diſguiſed and blemiſhed the former grace and beautie of it, yet peraduenture it ſhall not be amiſſe if I alſo for my part doe at this time in a word or two intreate of it. The floud of

               Dryne (as ſome ſay) doth deuide Epire from Dalmatia and Sclauonie or Illiria: andEpire deuided frō Dalmatia and Slauome by the riuer of Dryne. The gulfe of Rizique or Catarra Acroliſſa. The Iſland of Laſſa. is no whit inferiour in greatneſſe to the famous riuer of Po in Italie. It hath his ſource or head amongſt the peoples of Macedonie towardes the North, and with a ſwift courſe doth water the walles of Liſſa: and then within a while entermingling her ſtreames with the waues of the ſea, it doth diſcharge it ſelfe into the Adriatique ſea, or gulfe of Rizique, or Catarrea, ioyning neare to Acroliſſa, where alſo it embraceth an Iſland being ſome ſeauen miles in circuite, which at this preſent retayneth the name of Liſſa; by reaſon that the towne of Liſſa (which in auncient time was ſeated on the other ſide or bancke of the riuer) hauing bene burnt and deſtroyed by the Turkes: and the multitude which inhabited the ſame, making their retraite thither, did in this Iſland make their continuall abode, as in a place of greater ſuertie, which was the occaſion that together with them ſelues, they tranſported thither alſo the name of their old towne and citie. Ouer and beſides theſe, there was alſo in the ſameOtherwiſe Peter Span. aſſemblie, Peter Spaniard, a Prince of happie fortune, and a moſt happy father of many goodly children: for he had there with him of his ſonnes, Alexia, Boſdaira, Vroa, and Mirqua: each of them being of equall height and of a goodly ſtature all alike, and wonderfully reſembling each other, both in conditions and naturall diſpoſition. In this companie alſo was Lech or Luke Duſman, and Peter, with other pettie PrincesLech or Luke Duſman. their neighbours, vnder whoſe commaund and obedience were the Peonians and vpper Pelagonians euen vnto Miſia: and the Sardoicians, beſides certaine ſmall villages and fortreſſes neare about Driuaſta and Baleſia. Not long after theſe, thither cameDryuaſta. Baleſia. Steuen Zernouich, George and Iohn. Xabiac. Falcon. Sclauonie, or of old Liburnia. The Venetians alſo Steuen Zernouich with George and Iohn his ſonnes, worthie children of ſo great and honourable a perſon, and of ſo worthie a father: to him did appertaine the ſtrong and well fortified townes of Xabiac and Falcon, with their territories moſt large and ſpacious, lying in Sclauony or Liburnia. The moſt noble and auncient common weale of the Venetians did not make any default, but did make their appearance alſo: for vnder their Empire, beſides the city of Scodra, were many townes of great fame and renowme, and a good part of Epyre. To conclude, this great company did draw thither with them others of the moſt principall amongeſt the youth and flower of all thoſe quarters, who aſwell for their owne particular intereſt, as for the publique and common good, did come to offer their perſons and beſt meanes againſt the Turkes, for the honor, the ſafety, and the preſeruation of their countrey.
            Now come I to the Oration of Scanderbeg, the which when thoſe (who were called to the counſell, were gathered together in the great Church at Liſſa: he began in this manner. I would to God (fathers and princes moſt debonaire and religious)Oration of Scanderbeg to the Princes of Epyre, in the aſſembly at Liſſa. that the credulity and light beliefe of vs Chriſtians, would once draw to an end, and that we would once waxe weary of the faithleſneſſe of the Ottomans, or to ſpeake playner, that their infidelity more then barbarous, might from henceforth be made open and manifeſt vnto vs. For as concerning my ſelfe, being at this day peraduenture ill thought of, as the motiue and occaſion of theſe new troubles: neither would I haue diſturbed the tranquillity of this eſtate, nor haue ſollicited you to expoſe your liues to the inconueniences of armes, nor to the laſt and vtmoſt extremity of all things: were it not, that Iohn my father (whom God pardon) a Prince in other things wel aduiſed, had not giuen too too much credit to the faire words and ſpeaches of this periured & diſloyall Amurath, at that time, when vnder the pretence of a deadly peace he obtained of him for pledges (as liberally as he demaunded them) his owne proper children in hoſtage. But wherefore do I complaine me of my father? This error and this deſteny is common vnto all Princes Chriſtian. What ſhall I ſay of the Greekes, the Miſiaus, and others of our faith and profeſsion? This ouer great facility of crediting

and beleeuing hath without doubt ruinated & deſtroyed all of them: in ſuch ſort that on the tyrants part, they haue nothing at all left them, but the repentance of their ſimplicitie and ouerſight. Neuertheleſſe whileſt I powre forth theſe my plaints, and do in my mind carefully repeate theſe cautels and treaſons of Ottoman: yet withall as long a I do contemplate and caſt my thoughts vpon you, and do conſider your prudence, and the vnitie of your minds and affections, this doth greatly ſtrengthen me, and biddeth me be of a good hope, ſeeing that hardly or neuer he hath ſubdued or deſtroied any people either nation, but* by deceipt & fraud only, or by their proper ouer eaſie beliefe and credence, or by their ciuill diſſentions and domeſticall hatreds. Go to now: let anie man here tell me, whether Ottoman did euer by his proweſſe atchieue anie great conqueſts, and whether the innumerable prouinces and infinite realmes which in our time he hath gotten and purchaſed, haue bene annexed vnto his crowne by force of his armes and puiſſance: let them account and recken vp the number of thoſe his triumphes and victories. Shall Epire then, being ſo inuincible, ſo flouriſhing in armes, ſo repleniſhed with Princes, with valiant Captaines, with ſo many warlike and ſtout peoples, ſo vnited and agreeing within themſelues; ſhall Epire I ſay, onely through this our credulitie be made the ſubiect of his outrage? How greatly the Barbarian doth eſtimate and redoubt your vertue, I my ſelfe can giue you moſt certaine and aſſured teſtimonie: euen I, who haue liued with him many yeares both in warre and in peace. They would not euen now enterpriſe nor vndertake the warre againſt you, but that verie neceſſitie doth conſtraine them to it. Now what good or great matter can be effected or executed by a courage that is forced & violently drawne vnto it, any braue and reſolute ſouldier will ſoone tell vs. But howſoeuer this affection and matter of ſo iuſt griefe, do carie me away in ſpeaking vnto you, yet I am not ignorant, but that there be many who hauing bene now of a long time accuſtomed to a peace (though ſmally honorable) will be highly aggrieued and diſcontented when they ſhall ſee themſelues inuited by me to participate with the miſeries and miſchiefes of warre: and they will not ſticke to ſay; That whatſoeuer be the fortune and ſucceſſe of our armes, yet nothing can be done without the expence and loſſe of their bloud. In like caſe me thinkes I ſee how the mothers will be diſcomforted, when they ſhall ſee their children ſent to the daungers and hazardes of the warres: the wiues will be heard to lament with great griefe and ſorrow, for the care which they haue of their husbands ſafetie: and the verie infants left at home in their houſes, will ſeeme to crie, for feare they ſhould be made orphanes: all men generally will call me cruell, and will deteſt me (which I can not thinke without horror) as a new authour of warres, of perils, and of bloudſhed and murther: whereas they ought rather (be it ſpoken without vaunting) to name me the Occaſioner and preſeruer of their libertie. But neither am I ſo careleſſe of the publique and common good, nor ſo carefull of mine owne priuate profite and intereſt, that I can endure to heare ſo manie complaints aamongſt you, nor to ſee ſo many miſchiefes light vpon you all in common: but that if this my counſell (moſt worthie Princes and Lordes) ſeeme not good and to your liking: or if this occaſion of entring into armes be not found profitable for the weale publique: or be not held honourable by all of you, I will be readie and willing to yeeld vp vnto Amurath (if you thinke it good) both Croye, and all the reliques of this vnfortunate Realme and Kingdome, deſiring much rather with the particular daunger of mine owne life, to prouide for your ſuretie, then to raigne with the publique detriment and dammage of all of you. One thing onely there is, the griefe whereof doeth greatly preſſe me: and that is, the miſerable condition of my people, and the innocent bloud of my cittizens, whome my heart can not ſuffer

to be offred vp as a ſacrifice to the enemie without a chiefe, without a gouernour: ſeeing their faith and loyaltie preſenteth it ſelfe daily to my remembrance, of the which at the time of my reſtitution into this kingdome, euen of late they haue left ſufficient and good proofe vnto all ages that ſhall ſucceede hereafter. But what? O immortall God! (giue me leaue my lords to ſpeake freely vnto you) Is there any reaſon that your fellow citizen and countrie man ſhould ſtill abide with the tirant, in the middeſt of ſo many dangers and euer dwell in ſo damned a religion, as a continuall fugitiue from his natiue countrie, rather then to ſpend the reſt of his life in Epire, in the place of his natiuitie, in the ſocietie of Chriſtians, and in the middeſt of you his owne countrie men? Or is it poſſible that I ſhould be in Epire, and there to ſee and endure hereafter, that the ſeate of my aunceſtors, the ſcepter of my father, our ſepulchers, our temples, & eſpecially (if I may ſo ſpeake) that our Gods ſhould any longer remaine vnder the tirannie of the circumciſed miſcreants? alas, doth it ſeeme a ſmall thing to you, that I haue euen vntil this day ſeene their hands filled with the blood of my ſubiects: that I haue dwelt ſo long with a wicked and vnmercifull bloudſucker, and haue ſpent well neere all the beſt and moſt pleaſant ſeaſon of my age in manifeſt & certaine danger of my life? From henceforth let vs (ſeeing God hath ſo permitted it) let vs I ſay, be aſhamed of our condition. It is a great ſhame & infamie for vs any longer to endure thoſe for our maſters (ſo do our miſhaps conſtraine me to call them) whom in the time of our fathers, one baſe and ignoble towne of Scythia could ſcarcely ſuffer for ſlaues and villaines, ſo contemptible were they at that time: and being accuſtomed only to rapine, theft & robbery, they haue encreaſed euen till this day, wherin they haue growen ſo hardie, as to threaten & menace Chriſtendom with all kinds of extremitie. Wherfore (moſt magnanimous and couragious Princes, aſſure your countrie, your wiues, your children: defend them, and reſtore them to the true repoſe of a quiet libertie & tranquilitie. But if your owne eſtate ſeeme vnto you tollerable; at leaſtwiſe betake you to rightfull and iuſt armes, for me and in my behalfe, not for an Albanois, not for the ſonne of a Prince, not for your kinſman: but for a poore exile and baniſhed perſon. I ſpeake not to men that will refuſe a iuſt and lawfull warre: but I would haue you my maſters to defend him, whō 
                  Iohn Caſtriot (a Prince not careleſſe of your good welfare) if he were now liuing, would recommend at this preſent vnto your valure and fidelitie. And if for all this, my calamitie doe not yet moue you, but that you preferre an ignominious peace, before an honorable warre; I will haue recourſe to my owne Nation, to my owne people and citizens, being reſolued to ſubmit my ſelfe quietly to the hazard and aduenture which fortune ſhall ſend me: and with thoſe only who with ſo conſtant & free harts haue vowed and conſecrated their owne liues for my ſafetie. But neither will you (moſt courteous Princes) as I thinke, forſake & abandon me: for to what end are all of you here aſſembled in ſuch deuotion, if it be not for the warre, ſeeing that you cannot ſerue your ſelues of me to any other vſe or purpoſe? You I ſay, will defend me, though it were euen againſt your wils: when you ſhall vnderſtand, that this land afflicted by Amurath, ſhall implore & craue your aide and aſſiſtance, when you ſhall know that the enemie inſolent & puffed vp with victorie, will ſubuert & ouerthrow your Seigniories & your libertie: & with a bloudy throat, & full of rage, & with polluted and ſacrilegious hands, wil run & make haſt furiouſly to ſucke & ſwallow vp your bloud. But let me intreat you, not to ſtay and attend theſe extremities: doe not you make ſo long ſtay and tariance, till you ſee ſome comming (then perhaps it will be too late) to implore your ſuccours: but euen now rather, and preſently conioyning your forces with our forces, & your armes, with our armes: let vs driue and compell the enemy ſpeedily to take the field, or let vs be the firſt to ruſh

vpon him, and to inuade his territories. Then if he ſhall once ſee vs vnited: ſure & certaine it is, that either he will change his thoughts: or if he do aduenture to march forward, he may well, to his coſt, looſe and come ſhort of his wretched and greedy deſire of victorie & conqueſt. For doe you thinke, that I in the meane time with the troupes which you ſhall commit vnto me, will remaine ſhut vp and reſtrained within the encloſures of any walles, and that as one of a faint courage and degenerating from my anceſtors, I will hide my ſelfe in ſome corner? or that from ſome high place or tower amongſt children, I will take vp my ſtande to beholde the enemie ſpoyling of your fieldes, and ſuffer the deſtruction of your landes and liuings and ſuch like calamities? No be you aſſured, that ſuch cowardize ſhall neuer come within my heart: the enemie ſhall ſee me daily & continually euen in his face with my enſignes, with my ſouldiers, to trie the fortune of his aſſaies and attempts; not in plaine battell & open fight: but (God aiding me) by ſome other better kind of pollicie, and it may be, with verie litle and ſmall loſſe of my men, I ſhall make the deſſeignes and audacitie of Amurath to turne to ſmoake and to vaniſh away to nothing: and that from hencefoorth he ſhall haue enough to do, and be conſtrained to giue ouer his quarrell, and to leaue his baggage vnto you for a prey and bootie; at leaſtwiſe if he loue not to ſee his campe (after long continuance in his enemies countrie, in the fields of ſtrangers, and in the midſt of many diſcommodities) to be brought to that paſſe, as it ſhalbe rather in eſtate of an armie forced and beſieged, then of a beſieger & one that forceth others. Vp then (noble and moſt Catholique Princes) let vs ſet aſide all delaies, let vs viſite the Prouince, let vs ſet downe good lawes & orders of diſcipline, let vs leauie and muſter our ſouldiers, and let vs lead on our forces, that when the infidels come in ſight, and the ſound of the trumpets doe call the ſouldiers to the battell, we be not then vnprouided, and to ſeeke for counſell, when there will be no time for it. Let vs make ſhewe vnto the poſteritie, and let vs make it knowen vnto all ages to come hereafter, that we are men worthie of a Chriſtian Empire.
            
            The oration of Scanderbeg being ended, all the great perſonages in the aſſemblie did generally addreſſe themſelues vnto him, as the authour of their freedome and reputation: and all with one accord approuing his ſpeech, with infinite praiſes & commendations did exalt & extoll him euen to the heauens. For this cauſe there was not any, who did not willingly commit vnto him al the charge & weight, and al the conduct & managing of this warre, chooſing him alone as chiefe and ſuperiour. EuerieScanderbeg choſen generall of the warres againſt the Turkes by the Princes of Epyre. one did conſigne vnto him his ſubiects and his armes, teſtifying thereby & by his high clamours, that to him only was due the honor of this ſouereigntie; the only name of whō, as of another Alexāder, was able to defend that litle angle & corner of Macedony againſt all the aſſaults of the enemie. And more then that, the perfection of his skill & ſcience in armes & the art military: his maruellous prudence & counſel euen befitting & worthy an Emperor: his long experience practiſed in the manners & cuſtomes of the barbarians: his diuine iudgemēt confirmed by daily vſe & long experience, did enflame the harts of them all with a certaine and aſſured hope of victory. But after ſo many goodly offers made vnto him, the principall and chiefeſt was this, which Aryamnites in the preſence of the whole aſſembly, did preſent vnto him, for he after he had raiſed himſelfe out of his ſeate, and with a good grace and eloquent oration had exalted the rule and gouernement of Iohn the father of Caſtriot, the counſels and deliberations of the ſonne, and the happie beginnings of his vertue and good fortune, then frankely and freely did he offer vnto him a yearely tribute: which he preſented vnto him in this or the like language.
            That which Amurath did exact and take of me euen till this day, during the time

that I preferred an ignominious peace before a deadly and fatall warre: and whileſt I
                  Oration of Aryamnit offering him ſelfe tributarie to Scanderbeg. did loue a ſhamefull libertie, better then the warres accompanying and occaſioning my misfortunes: the ſame doe thou receiue moſt valiant Prince by the conſent both of God and man; receiue (I ſay) the gage and pledge of a good heart, if not ſo great and magnificent, yet at leaſtwiſe not ingrate and vnthankefull. I adiudge it and giue it thee freely, for the libertie of Albanie and mine owne, for the maintenance of our eſtate, of our crowne, our people and our children: praying thee that from hencefoorth, thou wouldeſt vſe in common with me, my men and my forces, and if there be any other thing which either my fortune or my vertue ſufficiently tried and knowen, haue reſerued vnto me from the handes of ſuch an enemie. And this which I doe preſent vnto thee moſt redoubted Prince of the Albanois (for letviz. Amurath. Scanderbeg choſen king of Epyre. me be the firſt to call and acknowledge thee by this name) and moſt worthy defender of our libertie, I doe offer it thee without exception of time, both in warre and in peace.
            
            Immediatly vpon this act, many others moued by a certaine iealouzie, did of theirPrinces of Epyre ioyne in league to aide Scanderbeg. owne motion ſeſſe and taxe themſelues, becomming tributaries vnto him, according to the qualitie of their power and abilitie. Andrewe and Tanuſee his Nephew were inferiour to none of them in liberalitie. And by this meanes a great ſumme of money was gathered at that inſtant for to defray the charges of the warre. And it may be (as the report ranne in thoſe partes, that the reuenue of Scanderbeg did amountReuenewes of Scanderbeg more then 200000. crownes by the yeare. to more then two hundreth thouſande crownes by the yeare. But be it that that which he poſſeſſed within the Prouince, was of a more large compaſſe and circuit then any other Prince, yet it can not be gaineſaide, but that hee was ouerchargeable and burthenſome to his ſubiects in exacting vpon them alone this huge ſumme, eſpecially in a time of warre kindled on all partes without ceaſing, and the inhabitants (as a man may ſay) with one hande holding the plough, and with the other the ſworde. Yet ſome man peraduenture will alleage, That he did ſupplie aSalt
                     •
                  its belonging to Scanderbeg. Campupeſcupi. Selite. S. Nicholas. great part of that charge, by the benefite of certaine excellent good ſaltpits which he had in the part of the countrie called Campupeſcupi, betweene the mountaine and the place named Selite on the one ſide, and S. Nicholas de la Pierre, on the other ſide. The which countrie is verie famous or rather infamous by reaſon of a notable deſaſter and great miſhappe that befell the Romaine Senate, who were once there beſieged, at ſuch time as Caeſar being Dictator, did take armes againſt Pompey, and his owne natiue countrey. But to our purpoſe: The reſidue of the companie who were not of power and abilitie to furniſhe him with taxes and ſubſidies, did promiſe him the imployment of their perſons liberally and freely, and their continuall labour and trauell. The Venetians, becauſe they woulde not derogate anie thing from the maieſtie of their greatneſſe, would not taxe them ſelues, nor bee tyed with the reſidue to the aduauncing out of anie certaine and ordinarie contribution: but they promiſed to be readie at all times to ayde and helpe them with victualles, and anie other kinde of ſuccours. Nowe after that this worthie perſonage had beene made thus beholding vnto them by an infinite number of prayſes and officious courteſies (according as all of them did ſtriue therein, either more or leſſe to ſurmount each other) and after ſolemne and publique prayers and proceſſions generally made for the better ſtrengthening and fortifying of the league: ſome of the companie did accompanie him to Croie, and the reſt retyred themſelues to their owne homes. The firſt that was appointed to come thitherSfetygrade yeelded to Moſes. was Moſes, who (hauing ſo ſtreightened and neere preſſed Sfetigrade, that it was rendered vnto him by compoſition) had beene called backe with his troupes

from the frontiers, excepting a few, who were left there vpon certaine mountaines to keepe good watch: beſides thoſe whom he had put in garriſon within the towne. Theſe bandes did not exceede the number of fiue thouſand men, for that Caſtriot at his comming from thence to the former aſſembly, had licenſed many of them to depart; by meanes whereof without any delay commiſſions were made and diſpatched and many great men ſent abroad to leauy ſouldiers on all parts.
            Whileſt theſe things were thus a doing within Epyre, you may not thinke that the braynes of Amurath alſo were vnbuſied, or that he did forget anything touching the ſubiect of this warre which hee had enterpriſed with ſuch hatred and fierceneſſe of courage. He had nowe raiſed an armie of fortie thouſande horſe,Haly Baſſaſent with an armie of 40000. againſt Scanderbeg. all men of choiſe: and he had committed them to Haly Baſſa one of his leaders, a man as valiant of his perſon, as in matters of aduiſe and counſell well tryed and approued: and who for his ſufficiencie had attayned manie high degrees and great charges of honour in the warres: in ſo much that the brauerie of the troupes, and the reputation of the Chieftaine, did giue them an eaſie hope and good aſſurance of a happie and fortunate ſucceſſe. There was no other talke to be heard amongſt the Turkes, but of this armie and of the warre of Epyre: and ſuch was the opinion and conceite of all in generall of this iourney, that whoſoeuer had heard them, would haue iudged, that Scanderbeg had beene alreadie taken priſoner: and that hee had beene euen nowe going to ſuffer puniſhment and execution. So doe wee ſee ſometimes in the ſiege of a towne, that the aſſaylantes before it be taken, doe thinke to haue the victorie without bloud: and they doe often fall to contention amongſt themſelues about the parting and deuiding of the ſpoile and bootie. For it is a propertie vſuall and accuſtomed in the ſpirites of mortall men, to reckon without their hoaſt, and to promiſe themſelues great matters without paine or difficultie. For this cauſe euen in Epyre there was nowe nothing but diſorder and confuſion by reaſon of the troubles which ſeemed to approch: for the brute of the comming of the Baſſa made all things ſeeme greater and more fearefull, then they were in truth and in deede. A man might haue ſeene on all ſides thoſe that dwelt in the fields, haſtingA notable deſcription of the tumult and confuſion amongeſt the common people where an inuaſion is expected. to ſaue themſelues in the townes, and driuing their cattell before them: the Burgeſſes fortifying their walles, and appointing gardes for their portes, as if the enemie had beene alreadie diſcouered: the olde men quaking and trembling would put the young men in minde of their countrie, their wiues, their children, and of the honour of God and their religion eſpecially: they would cry vpon them to be of good courage and hardie, and they would neuer ceaſe to inflame & animate them that they might the better doe their deuoire and dutie. Neither was the weake and tender ſexe of women free from this publique feare and terror, but that it did embolden them to runne out into the ſtreetes amongſt their armed husbands: ſometimes ſtirring them vppe to vertue and manhood, by their iuſt and pitifull lamentations: and ſometimes in extreame care running to the temples and holy places, and making their vowes, prayers, and orizons vnto God before the altars, for the preſeruation of their countrie. And the litle children alſo aſtoniſhed with their mothers teares, would crie out more and more with all extremitie.
            As for Scanderbeg none of theſe newes, neither of the arriuall of Haly, nor of the enemies armie, nor the aſtoniſhment of the cōmon people, did any thing at all moue him: but he made a mocke of the vaine attempts of Amurath, & of the fooliſh feare of the Albanoys. Hauing therfore aforehand ordered all things throughout the prouince for feare leaſt too great licenſe & neglect of the enemy ſhould abate the courage of his ſouldiers, & diuert them from the care & regard of the war, he did ſo deale & perſuade

with them, that he enflamed their harts with ſo generall a confidence, & did put them in ſo good a hope of victory, that they were neuer ſeene to deſire any thing more then the comming of the Turkiſh generall, ech of them hauing a kind of enuie and deſire to make proofe of their deuoire and valure: and by the generall and particular deſert of them all to leaue vnto their Prince a large and ample teſtimonie of their loyaltie. In like manner in this one thing did Scanderbeg alſo ſhewe a notable example of hisCourage and reſolute aſſurance of Scanderbeg. maruellous courage and aſſurance, giuing all the world occaſion of wonder: yea and Haly Baſſa his enemie, if he had in any ſort conſidered of the fact, I doe not doubt, but it would haue made him greatly abaſhed. For whereas many fierce and warrelike peoples and nations did reſort vnto him in great abundance from all partes: ſo as he might well haue made, not one, but many great and mightie armies: he, after he had cōmended & magnified their good affection, would not admit any but the choiſeſt of them, and did retaine with himſelfe only eight thouſand horſe, and ſeuen thouſand foote. The ouerplus both of the old bands, and of the new encreaſe he licenſed to depart: of whom notwithſtanding he diſpoſed ſome in certaine places for diuerſe accidentes and occurrences. Euery man wondered and was abaſhed at this deuiſe of the Prince ſo hardie and aduenturous: but my opinion is, that this his act proceeded of ſome doubt, leaſt if he ſhould haue had the diſgrace to be ouercome in ſet battell, he ſhould afterwards want the meanes to relieue himſelfe. And this was the occaſion (as I beleeue) that he did furniſh ſo many fortreſſes with forces and garriſons, as being willing to reſerue them for a ſupplement and remainder of defence in time to come, againſt the inconueniences of an ouerthrow, and by meanes wherof, he might by way of ſurpriſe, extort the victorie out of the hands of the enemie, beginning perhaps to waxe inſolent in their proſperitie. Notwithſtanding he was neuer heard to ſpeake of any ſuch matter, but he did continually and with a cheerefull countenance promiſe himſelfe an aſſured good fortune, and a ſucceſſe in all things anſwerable to his deſire, which maketh me to thinke and to affirme, that this only was not the reaſon, why he retayned at that time ſo ſmall forces. But I beleeue that it proceeded of a ſingular confidence which remained in him: a thing commonly ſeene, eſpecially in great and excellentConfidence and fortune ſeldome faile great and excellent natures. natures, who very ſeldom or neuer doe find themſelues abuſed or deceiued by fortune. For this is to be marked, yea and to be admired in Scanderbeg, that almoſt continually and with verie few and ſmall forces, he obtained againſt the infidels ſo many and often victories, as it is almoſt incredible. This is it, which hauing oftentimes rauiſhed and held me in ſuſpence, hath made me in this hiſtory to deliuer many aduentures to the poſteritie, the truth wherof had not yet ſunke into my owne mind and opinion. And yet (it may be) hereafter it will not be amiſſe nor inconuenient to beleeue them: becauſe it can not be denied, but that ſome ages doe bring foorth ſtrange caſes and accidents, to the intent we ſhould haue ſome matter to maruell at. And that this is true, we may beholde a principall example of the like valure and good fortune: if we looke no further then euen in the ſame age, to Hunyades,
                whoHunyades the Deſpot of Tranſiluania was the father of Mathias Coruinus king of Hungarie. ſo many times in a manner all alone, did foile and confounde the puiſſance of the Turkes, and with a ſmall number obtained more trophees of victorie, then manie others who haue bene much better accompanied, & whoſe numbers haue exceeded. But why ſhould we ſtand any longer with ſuch curioſity vpon the truth and credit of this matter, ſeeing that (without ſingular impudencie) no man can denie theſe things being ſo freſh and late in memorie, and whereof it litle wanteth, but that our fathers might with their eies haue bene witneſſes.
            
               Scanderbeg hauing now enrolled and taken a generall view and muſter of his ſouldiers, and publique vowes and prayers being offered vnto God by euery man according

to his owne fancie, departed from Croy and encamped neere to the lower Dibria, where euery day he heard newes that the enemy approched. Therupon he bethought himſelfe, that being newly made their Chieftaine and Captaine, he ought to vſe ſome ſpeech to his new ſouldiers: for which cauſe commaunding ſilence, Thus he beganOration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers marching againſt the to ſpeake vnto them.
            I would wiſh (my companions) that you had happened vpon me as your Captaine, and that I might haue enioyed your notable & faithfull ſeruice, when my affaires had bene in greater proſperity, and in a time wherin my reigne had bene more happy and fortunate. For nowe being aſhamed of the many bondes and obligations, whereby I ſee my ſelfe tyed vnto you, I would not haue inuited you to the diſcommodities of new warres, and to ſo many freſh miſchieues: but hauing bene ſo well receiued and entertained by my Citizens, I would then haue yeelded them (at my eaſe and leiſure and with patience) that due thankes and recompence which long before this time I had prepared my ſelfe to render vnto them: and as a Chieftaine that ſeeth his ſouldiers embrued and couered with blood, I would make no ſpare of my ſelfe in recompence of your labours, trauels and daungers, and for the blood of the enemy which you haue heretofore ſhed ſo valiantly. But ſeeing the deſtinies haue ſo ordained, and that it pleaſeth fortune that I muſt diſcouer vnto you my affaires, and that I muſt be an occaſion rather of your paines then of your tranquilitie and reſt: Conſider I pray you, that it ſtandeth vs vpon to endure it valiantly and patiently, and to ſubmit our ſelues to whatſoeuer difficulties this warre ſhall bring with it; to the intent that one day we may liue in peace and quiet. It behoueth vs, willingly and with francke and readie mindes to take armes, to breake the bondes of ſo long a ſeruitude and bondage, and the enemie being chaſed from our partes, afterwardes to reioice our ſelues in a more happie kinde of life, and in a perdurable and laſting libertie, whereunto it is not needfull that I paine my ſelfe to animate and incenſe you: For that as all of you doe now ſhew your ſelues affectioned to take my part: ſo is it moſt certaine, that wordes (as the ſaying is) doe not increaſe hardineſſe in men that are couragions: ad hereunto that I canne ſay no more vnto you with my weapons in my hand then you being in armes ought to know of your owne ſelues. The enemy (whom you haue nowe neare you) will adueriſe you thereof ſufficiently: the indignitie of ſo many iniuries: the wrath and hatred which they haue conceiued doe admoniſh you of it, and doe arme you againſt them: the yoke of our bondage ſhaken off and broken: the libertie both of our bodies and of our ſoules: the mortall hatred of Amurath: the qualitie of the Barbarian: the cruell commandementes: the horrible executions wherewith he doth aduance himſelfe to ſucke vp our blood: and laſt of all the proces of the finall ruine and deſtruction of vs all being now paſt and fully concluded on: all theſe doe inuite you to take armes againſt him. If then our countrey (the loue whereof containeth all loue, and for which we ought to thinke, that we haue neuer ſhed ſufficient of our blood, if the particular vertue of euerie one of vs, if the honour and nobilitie of our kindred doe ſtrengthen the courage of anie man; let them animate you (my friendes) to betake you to armes and to ſharpen your launces. You haue by my purſuite and procurement, ſo ſpeedily and without the loſſe of one drop of blood, recouered Croie the ſeate of your forefathers: Spare not now in defence thereof to ſhed your bloud if neede be. This is the daye, wherein both hope and oportunitie doe preſent themſelues vnto you, for the recouerie of your countrey ſo long time loſt: and for the rayſing of you to great and high fortune, you haue choſen me either for your companion or your Captaine before any other, and I wil not be the laſt in any labors, in any hazards whatſoeuer: and if peraduenture in other things my forwardnes

ſhal not be ſeconded with as good fortune: yet will I neuertheleſſe make known vnto you the conditions, the conceites, the wiles and policies of the enemy: with whom (it may be by the diuine ordinance) I haue ſpent the moſt part of my yeares to my owne hindrance, and haue bene inſtructed in them to the end they might ſerue to ayde you at this preſent. It would be vnpleaſing vnto me heere to report vnto you their baſe and vile condition, but that hope (which maketh promiſe of a victorie leſſe painefull) doth render the ſouldier more reſolute and deliberate. What other thing are they but the dregs and ſcum of ſlaues and raskals gathered together, more accuſtomed to theftes and robberies, then to a true warre and a iuſt kinde of fight and combat? Is it certaine that this ſort of men, whoſe name is ſo famous amongſt perſons fearefull and timerous, ſhould be thoſe Turkes, the ſlaues and fugitiues of the Scythians?
                  Originall of the Turkes. whoſe fathers (as ſome ſay) had their dwellings beyonde the Ryphean mountaines, and the Iſles of Tarracont euen in the heart and boſome of the North, and in the Northerne Ocean? A nation filthy, villanous, and opprobrious: nouriſhed in dennes, ſecret corners, and filthie places: who not diſcerning the fleſh of Wolues and Vultures, doe fill and ſatisfie their hunger vpon humaine abortiue bodies, and who can very hardly glorifie themſelues of any one battell gotten well and honeſtly. It may be that they haue vſurped by fraude and deceite moſt large and ample dominions, and that they will from time to time daily purchaſe more both better and fayrer as long as matter ſhall be giuen them whereupon to exerciſe their treaſon and infidelitie. Here nowe me thinkes I ſee how Amurath betaketh himſelfe to his wiles, ſleightes, and ſubtelties, when his other aſſayes ſhall not be able to preuaile againſt you. Beholde and marke well this ſubtell and cautelous Ottoman, who will make you faire and goodly promiſes vppon the hope of others misfortunes. It ſeemeth vnto him belike, that there is not any where any kinde of people, but they ſhould be like vnto the Greekes, Bulgarians, and Miſians: all which beeing inueigled and blinded in their owne misfortune and deſtruction more then was conuenient, after they had ſimply and in good faith yeelded themſelues vnto him: the good Prince did either driue them all into exile and baniſhment, or did depriueI▪ ſide i
                        ••
                     e of Amurath to the Greekes and others. them of their ſight, or did mangle and deforme their members, and wholly disfigure them. That which I nowe tell you (my friendes) is to admoniſh you, as thoſe whom I eſteeme and ſet by, as thoſe to whome I haue conſecrated my life and my bloud, to the intent you may glue me by this ſubiect, ample and large occaſion, either to commende you, or to accuſe you: for at this preſent I doe not thinke it needefull either to prayſe or diſpraiſe any man. For what iudgement can be made of a ſouldier, onely brauing and vaunting himſelfe within a campe? Then will I make the cenſure of your deſerts, when I ſee your ſwordes ſmoaking with the bloud of the Turkes: when my ſelfe both as a beholder and an encourager, will immitate your prowes, being prodigall both of life and ſafetie. At that time will I heape vpon you all ſortes of commendation and rewardes. But if any one of you doe feele his courage to waxe colde through cowardice, meaſuring our forces by thoſe of the enemie: if he thinke that thoſe who ſurmount in number, will ſurmount alſo in vertue: Let him freely depart and diſlodge from hence, I ſpeake it in a good houre, for feare leaſt going with vs hee ſerue rather to make vppe the number then to giue vs ayde or ſuccour, let him retire hence to his owne home preſentlie. Or if all of you be of that opinion, and that this feare be common vnto you in generall: If neither God nor man can make you aſhamed, let vs then reenforce and ſtrenthen this our armie with ſome newe ſupplyes, or elſe let vs turne our faces and retire ſpeedily. But he which ſhall redoubt and ſtand in feare of the 
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
follow with a troupe of horſe, and to couer themſelues vnder their ſides: by meanes whereof they might be the better able both to ſafe gard themſelues from the enemie, and to endammage the Barbarians the more grieuouſly, who miſtruſted no ſuch kind of matter in their ordering: betweene the one and the other of theſe troupes ſtoode George Streſe, a Knight moſt hardie and couragious, accompanied with the ſouldiersGeorge Streſe. and all the youth of Croy round about him, hauing ſo diſpoſed of them purpoſely, that he might be both the beholder and encourager of his citizens. After the ſquadron of archers followed the maine bodie of the infanterie: namely, the bands of pikes and targatyers, conducted by Aidyn the brother of Gnee Muſachee. Vranocontes a ſage andAidin. Vranocontes. expert warrior with the reſt of the horſemen, led the rereward and the ſupplies. This was a ſtrong and cloſe batallion, compounded of the flower of the olde ſouldiers, and beſt men: holding themſelues firme like a bulwarke for the rallay & retraite of the other troupes, before that they ſhould be broken or forced to recule: (the Romaines named it Triarij.) The troupes of footmen that marched with him, were commanded and had in charge; that aſſoon as they ſhould ſee their fellowes to breake forth in the am buſcado, and the enemie charged behind, and entangled betweene the two points or wings of the armie, they ſhould ſuddenly ſpread themſelues, and opening their rancks, ſhould giue way vnto the men at armes: and that then with a new terror, they ſhould diſorder the enemie, and with one and the ſame charge ſtrike in vpon them being alreadie wearied and ſore trauelled: and that then the ſaid footmen cloſing and ioyning themſelues againe in troupe in their owne places, ſhould together with the ſupplies ſtand faſt, and keepe the batallions from being broken or endammaged, till ſuch time as they might ſee manifeſt and apparant likelihood of victorie, and the enemie in full diſaray and diſorder. In this manner had Scanderbeg martialled his troups, and cauſed them to holde cloſe without ſuffering the trumpet to giue the ſignall of fight, till he ſawe the Baſſa alſo arranged in order of battell, and aduancing forward. For he feared leaſt that the ſouldiers disbanding themſelues through ouermuch haſte and raſhneſſe to the encounter: and breaking their orders by reaſon of their too great furie and deſire to aduance themſelues, ſhould bring the eſtate of the whole armie to ſome encombrance.
            The Generall of the Turkes conſidering the order of our battelles, aduanced forwarde, and by way of mockery often repeated theſe wordes: Euer, euer (quoth he) doe the greater deuour the leſſer, and with open throate he laughed both to ſee themThe battell betweene Scanderbeg and Haly Baſſa. ſo raunged, and at the fooliſh pompe of the Chriſtian: marching ſo formally (as he thought) to his owne funerals. One of the Ottoman legions was come forward with great hardineſſe before the others, but being charged ſpeedily and neerely by the forlorne hope of the Chriſtians, they gaue backe and forſooke their place as ſuddenly, before that the two armies had affronted ech other: and at the verie firſt beginning, they ſuffered thēſelues to be beaten backe euen within their trenches, retyring themſelues faſter then a good pace. But the Prince of Albanie miſdoubting ſome Turkiſh ſtratageme, ſent forth part of his horſemen both to ſtay the furious purſuit of his ſouldiers, and to bring euery man into his place. The like hapened in the left wing, and therefore both the one and the other being retyred to their troupes, they prepared themſelues againe to the future conflict, and to come vnto a full battell with both the armies. Now were the Mahometiſts the more encouraged, for that a few of theirs in a mockerie (as it were) had deceiued many of the Chriſtians: wherefore when the maine fight beganne, Tanuſe and Moſes parting betwene them the two wings of the enemie, went fiercely to the encounter. And Caſtriot with the like furie pricking forward cheerefully with his horſe, did aſſaile the Batallion of the enemie that himſelfe

had made choiſe of. At one and the ſame time alſo was the ambuſhment ready to breake forth of the wood with moſt high and loud cries and clamours, before that the enemie with all his forces had giuen in vppon our ſquadrons, and before that all were come equally to the medley. Manie companies of the Turkes perceiuing this, (eſpecially thoſe of the rereward,) & being poſſeſſed with a ſudden feare, leauing both the campe and the charge, betooke themſelues to flight: ſo that they in the vowarde being ſurpriſed and incloſed by the two wings of the Chriſtians, did ſee themſelues expoſed to the butcherie and ſlaughter of the middle legion. There was but one batallion onely of the enemie which Scanderbeg was not able to breake, nor durſt to ſet vpon, ſo well was the ſame defended and reenforced by the Barbarians, who had made it of their greateſt number of their people as a ſure and ſafe rampier for the ſafetie of the whole armie. There (as it was ſoone after knowen) did the Baſſa Haly, being enuironned with the ſtouteſt and ſtrongeſt forces of all his armie, maintaine the euent and hazard of the battell for a verie long time, wauering and vncertaine. In this meane while Aydin hauing charged vpon the middle warde of the Turkiſh armie, and preſſing hard vppon thoſe legions, had filled all with murther and bloudſhedde: and the tumult was there more bloudie and deſperate, then in anie other part of the fight. For the enemie ſeeing that there was no meanes of faſetie left him, but onely by armes, with the greateſt furie that might be, forced in vppon our men with their ſwordes in point, to the intent they might not die vnreuenged. And after the hazarde and vnfortunate errour of warre had brought ſome of them thither to the encounter: there came others ſtill running to their ſuccours, thinking by the acceſſe of their forces to haue relieued their companions; in ſuch ſorte that the more the Turkes made head thitherwardes, and the thicker that they reſorted to the encounter: ſo much the longer and doubtfull would the reſiſtance haue beene, if Vranocontes freſh and luſtie both of courage and of forces, diſmarching in the ſame inſtant, and falling in pell mell amongeſt them, as they were now wearied and wauering had not ended the battell, and ouerthrowen thoſe that remayned. That which moued the Chriſtian Chiefetaine to be of this minde: that his hoaſt ſhould inuade the Infidels ſo late, and not to come to the ayde of his men before they were in ſo harde an eſtate, was this; for that he ſawe both the two winges, and the Cornet and garde it ſelfe of the Prince on all ſides beſet and buſied: and hauing their handes full at the beginning, he would not that they ſhould remaine altogether vnfurniſhed and deſtitute of ſupplyes and ſuccours. And therefore he deferred the employment of his horſemen, and made choice of this time and occaſion as moſt fitte and proper to weaken their forces, and to giue them the checke and ouerthrowe. Hence it grewe that not anie one of them almoſt did eſcape awaye in ſafetie, but that they paſſed vnder the ſworde of the Chriſtians, excepting onely three hundreth vppon whom, lifting vppe their handes for mercie: and caſting awaie their weapons as people wearied and ſpent with woundes, Castriot would not permit the extreame rigour of victorie to be vſed. By occaſion whereof the troupes of Scanderbeg, after this their goodly exploite and militarie trauell accompliſhed and ended, came with exceeding great reioycing andVictorie of Scanderbeg of Haly Baſſa & the Turkes. acclamations to the preſence of their Generall, where they founde all things as they wiſhed and deſired. For the Croyans had wholy broken the battallion of the Baſſa, and after a wonderfull ſlaughter did purſue the Turkiſh Generall, who ſaued himſelfe with the loſſe of his horſe. There was nothing ſeene nor heard on any ſide but bloud & maſſacres with cryes and lamentations of men drawing to their end: Some tooke priſoners, others leauing behind them the trunkes of the dead bodies deformed, did

cut off the heades to make preſents of them to their Generall: manie of them alſo fell to rifling of the baggage: according as the minds of ſome men are to be egerly ſet on their gaine and profit. Finally throughout all the campe there was mention made of this victorie ſo memorable and almoſt incredible, euen to them eſpecially who were ouercome and vanquiſhed: euerie man being abaſhed at the maruellous execution in ſo ſhort a time: for the fight continued from the ſunne riſing but till the third houre. In this battell beſides foure and twentie enſignes taken, and 2000 Turkes priſoners, there were ſlaine vpon the place two and twentie thouſand. Of the Chriſtians thereNumber of Turkes 22000 ſlaine. died verie few; and it is ſaid that there were not miſſing of them but about one hundreth and twentie: but of ſuch as were wounded there were a farre greater number. In this manner then did our men that day obtaine that notable victorie vpon the miſcreantes according to the expectation and hope of them all in generall: withall that in this hard encounter, nothing was forgotten which might not onely inuite, but alſo compell fortune to fauour them in the euent and iſſue of the battell. There was no oportunitie, place, nor good order, nor any notable reaſon which might be eſteemed iuſt and neceſſarie to drawe a man to the hazard of battell, but it was carefully and diligently obſerued. If we ſhould ſpeake of the Captaines and the ſouldiers; I dare well affirme, that in this iourney Lyons had Lyons for their leaders and conducters. A great number of them were olde ſouldiers, who had before times borne armes euen vnder the father of Scanderbeg: ſo as you would not haue taken them for ſouldiers, but for maſters and teachers in the arte militarie. In this ſort did they thinke nowe to haue made an end of this warre by meanes of the winning of this battell: and that once they ſhould haue abated the bragges and audacitie of the Turkes.
            
               Scanderbeg being nowe maſter of the fielde, held himſelfe quiet within his campe, the reſidue of that day, and all the night following. The next morning (his courage as yet boyling through the good hap of this encounter) he buſied himſelfe in taking order for that which remained, and eſpecially to animate the ſouldiers to an enterpriſe verie conuenient and needefull, and which ſhould be no leſſe delightfull to themſelues: to witte, the ouerrunning, and ſacking of the enemies countrey. And thereforeOration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers, inuiting them to ſpoile the Turkiſh territorier. he vſed theſe or the like wordes vnto them.
            Hitherto (my ſouldiers) haue you foughten for me your prince, euen till this day, and till nowe haue you ſhewed and done your deuoire for your countrey: from henceforward your owne profeſſion doth inuite you, and your owne good fortune doth ſummon you to continue as you haue begunne. Behold how on all partes the legions of the enemie are by your vertue ouerthrowen and diſcomfited: and nowe may you number and recount your owne prowes and valiant deedes. It may be that ſecretly in your thoughtes, you promiſe to yourſelues from me ſome great rewards, and ſome ſingular recompence, which ſhould be prepared and prouided for you, for ſo many labours: for ſo much blood: for ſo many trauels ſuffered in this battell: and I proteſt vnto you on my faith, your expectation ſhall not be fruſtrate, ſo farre forth as I ſhall find the meanes and poſſibilitie. I do verie well and ſufficiently conceiue in my minde the commendations and praiſes of you all both in generall and in particular. This onely is the reward that you ſhall expect of me (let me make my ſelfe a litle merrie with you) if ſo be the courages of ſouldiers canne content themſelues with praiſes onely. Other goods haue I not at this time, wherewith I may honour your valure: but hereafter when I ſhall haue things in abundance to diſpoſe of, aſſure your ſelues I will depart with them vnto you as bountifully. What is there that you can receiue more pleaſing and with a better courage? according to other mens iudgement and opinion, then this honor & glory, which ech of you ſhall carie home in triumph

as a conqueſt atchieued by his owne arme and proper vertue? Beholde here neare at hand the territorie of the enemy, rich and plentifull in wealth of all ſorts: your gallantiſe and proweſſe hath diſfurniſhed them, and made them bare and naked of all defence: now therefore with good leyſure and eaſe doe you charge and loade your ſelues with the prey and ſpoyle thereof, which is left and abandoned to your pleaſure and diſcretion. Let the feare of the enemy farre and wide know you to be the Conquerours; euen you (I ſay) whom our natiue countrey ſhall preſently ſee retourning home chearefull, ioyous, and triumphant. This will be no ſmall encreaſe of benefite vnto you, to come from a peece of ſeruice ſo excellent. Neuertheleſſe, to the intent it may be ſayed, that I alſo in ſome ſort haue rewarded you for this dayes victory, and that the one of you haue no occaſion to enuy the other, ſeeing that the vertue of you all in the fight was alike and equall; I doe here ordaine and appoint, that the footemen ſhall take the horſes of their ſlaine enemies, and that all of you from henceforth ſhall ſerue on horſebacke as men at Armes. Now therefore (vnder the fauour of the great God) let euery man follow me chearefully, that we maie goe on and reape the moſt acceptable and gladſome fruites of your perfect and full deuoyre.
            
            The ſouldiours who had liſtened all this while verie attentiuelie to his ſpeaches,Spoile and ſack of the enemies countrey, permitted by Scā
                  derbeg to his ſouldiors. with verie great ſignification of ioy and gladneſſe (as men ouerioyed with hope of the prey and booty, which they did expect by ſpoyling of their enemies countrey) did approue this his encouragement. They ran therefore euery where, here and there without diſcretion, without order, without conduct, being ſtirred and pricked on with an aſſured and ſodaine contempt and negligence, proceeding (as it ſeemeth) of their happy and good ſucceſſe. But the Prince being well aduiſed, and not hauing any affiaunce in the inconſtant and fickle fauours of Fortune, he ſtayed the fury and violence of his ſouldiours, till ſuch time as thoſe which hee had ſent to make a diſcouery, did bring him backe word that there was no daunger. And then (the ſacke and pillage being permitted them freely) the men at armes altogether puffed vppe with the late victory which they had gotten, and diſperſed here and there in diuerſe places, did caſt them ſelues in vppon the enemies country, and caried away the goods of the husbandmen, their perſons, and their cattell. Neither did their furie ſpare to ſhew it ſelfe vppon the verie trees. Nothing was pardonned of what kinde ſoeuer, whereunto the fire and the ſword might doe any dammage and diſpleaſure, excepting onely women and children. The booty was gathered and drawen together, and driuen with ſuch confuſion, noiſe and debate, that a man woulde haue iudged, there had bene begun ſome new tumult of warres, and that the fieldes had bene full of men fighing and combatting. Their woundes did not withhold or hinder anie one of them (for the greedie deſire of pillage had drawen thither many of thoſe who were wounded in the battell) but their paines and trauels ſo lately taken, were quite forgotten, and (as it were) cleane vaniſhed away. Neither the labours, nor the waightineſſe of their burthens, did not diſcourage any one of them, no more then the exceſſe and aboundance of ſpoyle (which commonly cauſeth wearineſſe and ſatiety) did ſatisfie and content them: in ſo much that the griefe and ſorrow of the ſouldiors was greater, for leauing that which they could not beare away, then their ioy and contentment of that which they caried with them. When they had thus continued long enough in ſpoyling and foraging, and that the rage of the ſouldiours was mitigated and appeaſed vppon the countrey of the enemy: Caſtriot cauſed to ſound the retraite, and his men being ouerloaden with the prey and bootie, marched awaie preſentlie with great gladneſſe and ioy. The Captaines made themselues

               mery at the ſloth and lazineſſe of the ſouldiors: reproaching them that of braue and valiaunt warriours, they were now become ſheepeſtealers: and of defendours of the glory and renow me of Albanie, men might ſee them chaunged into the habite and trade of ſheepeheardes. And thus ſcoffing ſometimes at one, and ſometimes at another, with many pleaſaunt ieſtes and wordes of mockerie, each after other in this or the like manner; what (ſayed they) woulde Halie Baſſa now ſaie with the reliques of his diſcomfiture, if hee were euen nowe in place and did ſee you in this point, dragging after you ſo vile and baſe baggage of neither worth nor valour, but a fitte reward for couetous and greedy ſouldiours? Would hee not bluſhe extreamely at ſo vile and ſhamefull Conquerours? And would hee not reproach his men of their faintneſſe and cowardize, that hadde ſuffered them ſelues to be ſurmounted and ouercome by ſuch a ſort of baſe companions: and for that they hadde yeelded vnto ſuch men the honour and the glorie of the combate? Thus did the ſouldiours full of mirth and merriment, with diuerſe ſportes and ſongs full of ioy and gladneſſe, caſe and mittigate the hard trauell of the way, till ſuch time as with high cries and clamours they ſaluted the guardes of their Campe which marched on before them. The night following being paſt within their Campe: Scanderbeg the next morning before daie breake, commaunded to truſſe vp the baggage, and with his hoaſt triumphaunt marched on directly towardes Croie. The multitude ſcattered euery where throughout all the high waies and paſſages, did ſalute and call them both generally and priuately triumphant and valiaunt. Euery man admired the greatneſſe of the ſpoiles gotten from the enemy, and hardly were the new made men at armes diſcerned and knowen from the old. Theſe congratulations and reioycings did endure many daies, and there were ſent vnto all the Princes and particular Lordes of Epire, letters crowned with lawrell and certaine ſtandards, and the reſidue were hanged vp in their churches.
            This yeare was famous and notable by reaſon of this victory: but much more1443. memorable was it afterwardes by the dolorous diſcomfiture of the Chriſtians at Varna. The which to paint it out vnto you more liuely, I muſt draw backe to theOf the warres betweene the Turkes and the Hungarians. defait of Carambey, whereof I entreated in the former booke. You knowe (if you haue any knowledge in the courſe and vſage of Armes) that one diſgrace of Fortune, and the gaine of one onely battell, doth euer bring much disfauour and many miſhappes to the looſer, and cauſeth freſh beginnings of new enterpriſes to his enemies. Euen ſo that rude Baſtanado giuen to Carambey at the battell of Moraua, and the reuolt of Scanderbeg falling both at once vppon Amurath, did ſollicite and cauſe the * Caramanian to moue warre againſt him: ſo that preparing a puiſſant and mightieThis is the king of Cilicia. This Pontus and Bithinia. Army, and therewithall inuading the Turkes in * Natolia (which is called alſo great Tregnyo) he conſtrayned Amurath to paſſe into Aſia, with the reliques of his defeated forces, to aſſure the eſtate of that countrey. But finding that he ſhould not be ſtrong enough, vnleſſe he did wholly and altogether oppoſe him ſelfe againſt this new enemy: beſides that the ſucceſſe of the forepaſſed ouerthrow at Moraua, did make him begin to bethinke him ſelfe, and to redoubt the felicity of the Chriſtians. Firſt of all therefore (as I haue told you) he would aſſure him ſelfe of the king of Hungarie by a peace: the which being concluded, and reſpectiuely ſworne vppon the holie Euangeliſtes, and the Alcaran, was fully ratified by the mediation of George the Deſpot of * Seruia and Ruſcia: which notwithſtanding was ſoone after violated, by the meansThis is the vpper Miſia, by the Turkes called Segoria, which I will now ſhew you.
            The Turkiſhe Ambaſſadour being diſlodged and departed from the Court of Vladiſlaus: beholde ſodainely there arriued letters from Francis Albert a Florentine,

Cardinall of the holy ſiege: the contentes whereof were. That the Turke withLetters from Francis Albert Cardinall to Vladiſlaus king of Hungary. innumerable companies was paſſed ouer into Aſia, to fight againſt the King of Caramania, hauing left his countrey in Europe vnprouided and difurniſhed of defence, and wholly diſarmed: and that he with three ſcore and tenne Gallies well armed and appointed, and many other great Veſſelles of warre, hauing ſeized on all the portes and paſſages, hadde taken from the Infidell all meanes and hope anie more to tranſport his troupes and forces on this ſide the Sea. And that ſuch opportunity which then was offered, ought not to be loſt and omitted: that now this curſed and wicked nation might be either rooted out in a manner without anie fight, or at leaſt wiſe chaſed and driuen ſo farre off, that they ſhould be no more heard nor ſpoken of. For you muſt note: that Iulian Caeſarin Cardinall of SainctIulian Cardinall of Sainct Angell. 
               Angell and legate of his holineſſe, being then neare about Vladiſlaus at Buda, had lately procured a new league betweene the Chriſtians for the ruine and deſtruction of the name of Ottoman, and had cauſed Pope Eugenius the fourth of thatLeauy of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes. name, the Duke of Burgoyne, the Venetians, and the Genowayes to enter into the ſame, who hauing put in readineſſe and prouided this army by ſea, hadde now ſeized vppon that ſtraight. At the ſame inſtaunt (as if it had beene a thing done of purpoſe) the Meſſengers of the Emperour of Greece, reported the like newes and in manner to the ſame effect. If theſe tidings were diſpleaſing to the legate, I leaue to your opinion. For hee was greatly greeued to ſee the accord and agreement paſſed betweene the King of Hungarie and the Turke, to the preiudice of his practiſes and endeuours, by meanes whereof ſo great and mighty forces were aſſembledThis is Helleſpont, the Arme of S. George. A Maxime of the Romiſhe Prelates. Cardinall Iulian maketh the king of Hungary to breake his faith and league with the Turkes. * Curſed and vnhappy. at the ſea neare * Gallipolis. And he doubted leaſt he ſhould be taxed either of lightneſſe and inconſtancy, or of faithleſneſſe and infidelity. But he knew ſo well both how to do, and to ſpeake vnder colour of this Maxime: * (That faith ought not to be kept with infidelles and miſcreants,) that the compact and conditions of the peace, were broken and violated. And he abſolued and freed both the king, his nobles, and all others, who had beneſworne thereunto, from the oath which they had ſolemnly taken and made, ſo that all of them entred chearefully and gladly into this * bleſſed league. The Romaine legate him ſelfe was there preſent, followed with a faire and goodly troope vnder the Croſſe. Iancus Huniades that tempeſt of warre with his Valachians came thither likewiſe, and had the title to be lieuetenaunt Generall of the Army royall.
            Vppon the preparation of ſo high and haughty an enterpriſe, all were moued at the glorious renowme of Scanderbeg, and at his freſh victory gotten vppon Halie
               Vladiſlaus and the Chriſtians do ſeeke the aide of Scanderbeg againſt the Turkes. Baſſa, and they perſwaded them ſelues that if they could ioyne, vnto this their great preparatiue and prouiſions of the Hungarians, the forces of the Albanois yet ſhining in the Vermilion colour of the Turkiſh bloud: this would be an aide and ſupply vnto them of ſingular aduantage, and a moſt certaine aſſuraunce of a good and happie ſucceſſe to their deſires. For this cauſe vppon good deliberation approued by all of them, and with all ſpeed poſsible: according as the apparaunce of miſchiefe and inconuenience neare and imminent did require, letters were ſent away, of which this was the tenour.
            
               
                  
                     Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie and of Poland, ſendeth health to ScanderbegLetters of king Vladiſlaus to Scanderbeg. Duke of the Albanois,
                  
                  It may be that Gods will was, that this our late congratulation ſhould be deferred vntill this preſent: to the intent that wee might at this time reioyce together with you in the double ſucceſſe of your proſperitie: not onely for the happy

recouery of your owne eſtate, but alſo for that by your vertue and prudence, the ſame hath bene couragiouſly defended. In this then doe we ſolace and reioyce our ſelues both with you, and with all Chriſtendome: conſidering that the diuine clemency and your valour, hath giuen ſuch ſuccours and comfort to the publique weale and eſtate Chriſtian. For to ſpeake the trueth, the loſſe of the nation of Albanois hath beene ſuch a wound that wee may continually bewaile it, as much as any one of our other miſhappes and misfortunes: at that time when Iohn Caſtriot your father (whom God pardon) a Prince (as I vnderſtand of excellent merite and deſert,) being oppreſſed by Amurath, and taken out of this world by the vngratefull deſtenies, had neither the meanes to leaue vnto you the inheritaunce of his Crowne and Scepter (as vnto his Sonne, being then vnder the yoke and bondage of a ſtranger) nor yet was able otherwiſe to prouide for his affaires. O that it had pleaſed God, that this Father being moſt happy and fortunate in ſuch a Sonne had bene now liuing: no greater bliſſe could haue befallen him, whereby to ſurmount all humaine felicity, then to haue ſeene you before his death. For ſo doe you ſeeme vnto me aboue all other Princes in this world (be it ſpoken without diſpleaſing of any other) the moſt accompliſhed in all graces and perfections both of minde and body, as being diuinely endowed with a certaine fatall and wonderfull Fortune: by the good encounter whereof, not onely all the land of Albany may vaunt it ſelfe, to be in ſurety and ſecurity: but they ſhall alſo recouer their firſt forme and beauty, the auncient glory of their kingdome, the free liberty of their religion, and all the rightes and priuiledges of the people which were lately diſmembred from the Realm of Macedon, by the vnlawfull robbery of the Ottomans. For (to ſay nothing of thoſe things, which from your infancy hauing made you continually to be enuyed, haue purchaſed vnto you heretofore, euen amongeſt the Barbarians, an immortall name and glory) what can there be more magnificent then this victory, which (as wee haue heard and doe beleeue) you haue obtained with ſingular admiration in the vtter ouerthrow and diſcomfiture of Haly Baſſa, and ſo great and mighty troupes of the Pagans? But now ô Scanderbeg, there offers it ſelfe vnto you a ſubiect of farre greater glory, vnder the fauour and bleſſing of God, who by his wonderfull counſaile and decree, hath reſerued you in theſe ſo difficult and daungerous times for the ſafety and publique good of Chriſtendome: with a moſt faire and fitte occaſion to reuenge vppon the Sultan, all his wrongs and iniuries both new and old: as well thoſe done to your owne perſon, as thoſe againſt the eſtate and kingdome of Albanie; and not onely the domeſticall and ciuill miſeries of your owne countrey, but the publique calamities alſo, and thoſe opprobrious diſgraces done againſt the Chriſtian religion now oppreſſed, (I will not ſay extinguiſhed,) if ſo be that vppon the point, and in this extremity of our affaires, not yet altogether deſperate and without hope, you will ſuccour vs with your victorious Forces. Hereunto doe all the princes of Hungarie, and of Poland, and all good men inuite you. Iulian the Cardinall of Sainct Angell intreateth you, and ſo many Catholique and deuout men at armes Chriſtians, who are here with vs long ſince ready in armes and well appointed, no other thing doe wee attend then your enſignes. This will be a ſure meane at this time (if you refuſe not this fitte opportunitie which God now ſo graciouſlie ſendeth vs) to vanquiſhe our common and troubleſome enemy, and wholly to determine this warre: to chaſe and driue away the Turkes, and to diſpoſſeſſe them of Europe, ſo long time by them occupied and wrongfully vſurped. I neede not then (as I take it) vſe any kinde of perſwaſion vnto you in this cauſe and quarrell, the defence whereof doth purchaſe vs ſafety, light, and liberty. Contrariwiſe being

abandoned, I will not forehalſen that which may come of it. Wee ChriſtiansO that a
                           ••
                         Chriſtiant would well payze and conſider theſe wordes. haue beene too too ſlacke and backeward in doing our deuoyr to helpe and ſuccour each other. The flame hath now well neare conſumed all of vs: yet haue none in the meane time bene aduiſed or perſwaded, that this fire would paſſe on and come neare vnto them ſelues. What doth the eſtate of the Greekes repreſent vnto vs, and the condition of the Triballians, and laſt of all mine owne loſſes▪ What Iliade can recount vnto vs all the miſchieues wee haue endured, and thoſe which doe daily menace vs? So many braue and valiaunt Princes the bulwarke and defence of Hungarie which we do looſe from time to time aſwell in puiſſant armies conſumed and brought to nothing, and with one and the ſame fatall chaunce of warre almoſt wholly extinguiſhed? In ſuch ſort, that in this Realme from hence forward, there is neither family, wife, nor matrone, exempted from bearing a part in this grieuous and lamentable calamity. All this and worſe by farre do Chriſtian Princes heare of, and yet, the miſerable eſtate and condition of their Allies can nothing moue any one of them: but thus doe they ſuffer vs on all parts to be expoſed to the rage and fury of the common enemies, as if we were an offering to be ſacrificed to all perils and daungers; Onely Eugenius the chiefe Paſtor of the Church, and Philip Duke of Burgundie are to be excepted, who haue not reiected nor refuſed the burthen of our afflicted and miſerable Fortune. The one hath ſent hither his legate the Cardinall of Sainct Angell, with notable and puiſſant ſuccours: and the Duke of Burgoyne with his Army at ſea, hauing aduentured as farre as Gallipoly, doth valiantly hinder the paſſage of the Turkes into Europe. One other hope there is not now farre from vs: and that is, the ſuccours whereof we are ſo deſirous; the which we doe require of you, being moued thereunto, partly by your valour ſo well knowen and notorious, and partly alſo in regard of the imminent perill, and the hazard of the common affaires, which preſſeth vs all in generall. And albeit we are not ignorant of the diſcommodities which may befall you in this expedition: we pray you notwithſtanding that they may not withhold and keepe you backe, aſſuring you, that as it cannot be but to your great honour, ſo the benefite of this your preſent deſert, ſhall not be beſtowed on perſons of an vngrate and thankeleſſe ſpirite. But that which you ſhall at this time beginne and vndertake for our preſeruation and dignity: we will from henceforth and euermore continue for your glory, and for the increaſe of your greatneſſe. God haue you in his keeping.
                  
                     From Bude our Capitoll and chiefe city the fourth day of Iuly. 1443.
                     
                  
               
            
            By this time had Haly Baſſa brought backe the reliques of his defeated army vntoH
                     •
                  ly Baſſa returneth to Amurath. 
               Amurath: howbeit that the newes of his deſaſter oftentimes reiterated, had made way before him. Some ſay that he was ſharply reproued by the Ottoman, who obiected vnto him by way of reproach, that it was not likely that ſo puiſſant an army could haue bene almoſt wholly ruinated without ſome great and notable cowardize, or ſome counſell raſh and timerous. Sometimes he would exclaime and ſay, that his army was betrayed▪ ſometimes he would alleadge, that either it was ſurprized by the negligence of the Generall, or that in comming to the encounter, they had giuen the aduantage of the place vnto the enemy: whereof it proceeded that ſo great a deſaſter and miſfortune had fallen vpon his people. Now albeit Haly Baſſa could not deny, but hee had bene ouerreached and preuented by our ambuſhments, the which might haue deceiued any man, were he neuer ſo polliticke, ſubtill, and circumſpect, yet did he excuſe himſelfe neuertheleſſe, calling his ſouldiours to witneſſe, that there was nothing in him to be reprehended, but the variable and inconſtant chaunce and lotte of Armes: and that there wanted neither good order, nor diſcipline, nor the aduauntage of

place, nor the oportunity of charging at a fit and conuenient time▪ Finally that neither the ſouldiours did faile their Captaine, nor the Captaine their ſouldiours. But if it would pleaſe his Maieſty, to permit him once more to attempt and make triall of his Fortune; he would make him to ſee, that he had a deuiſe and ſtratageme, by which he would bring it to paſſe, that this proſperity of Scanderbeg ſhould proue dolefull and lamentable. The vaine promiſes of the Baſſa did ſoone moue the Sultan, who being now more animated then euer, was willing that in any caſe new forces ſhoulde ſpeedily be prouided, if the other Baſſaes and Councellours, eſpecially Caly Baſsa, making him to change his aduiſe, had not ſhewed him: That another war of greater difficulty and conſequence did fall vpon his ſhoulders, that the enterpriſe of Epyre might with ſafety, either be deferred or omitted, but ſo could not the tumults of Hungarie, but that it behoued him carefully to attend and looke vnto them.
            In the middeſt of theſe affaires, the letters of King Vladiſlaus being brought to Scanderbeg, were a ſpeciall meane and occaſion to moue and induce him to giue him aide and ſuccours. For a more honeſt cauſe and fitter occaſion of warre, could notScanderbeg calleth a councell of the Albanois to conſult vpon the ſending of ſuccours to the king of Hungarie. haue bene found then was the ſame miniſtred at that time. This notwithſtanding, for that he would determine nothing without the aduiſe of thoſe with whoſeayde he was to ſerue him ſelfe vppon all occaſions: hauing called together his chiefetaines, he would that the kings letters ſhould be read openly in full aſſembly of a generall councell. And there was not any one who did diſalow of that warre, for that the exceſsiue greatneſſe of the Ottoman Empire encreaſing from day today, did animate euery one with the ſpurres of wrath and indignation: and did ſollicite their mindes, almoſt trembling and quaking for feare of more grieuous inconueniences: and did ad mouiſh all the world of the vnfortunate condition of the Chriſtians, and of the former fortune ſometimes inuincible of the Hungarians, the which if Amurath ſhould once caſt to the ground, euery man did propound and ſet before his eyes, both in publique and in priuate a finall deſolation; conſidering that there was no where to be found any puiſſance more ſufficient, or better able to ſuſtaine the feeble and weake eſtate of Chriſtendome for any long ſeaſon, nor which could with continuall warres and endleſſe hoſtility, repreſſe the Turkiſh malice, whom the inſolency and pride of ſo many victories, had made to be their deadly and extream
                  •
                enemy. Moreouer, the hope of the Epirots was ſo augmented by the happy ſucceſſe of that victory lately befallen them; that they went euery where ſaying and promiſing vnto them ſelues, that they ſhould finde the like fortune: eſpecially ſeeing they changed not their Chiefe, nor their enemy, but the place of the warre onely. To conclude, all of them did affirme, that it behoued them, and they ought to aduenture the loſſe of their liues for the gaining and getting vnto themſelues, ſo great and puiſſant a king to be their friend in this troubleſome ſeaſon, againſt the inconſtancy of fortune, and ſo many humaine accidentes. Wherefore it was concluded without contradiction, that ſuccours ſhould be ſent him, but as touching the number of the men of warre, and the forces of thoſe ſuccours, they could not ſo ſoone be accorded and agreed: and this difference continued amongeſt them till the darke of the euening came vpon them. Many opinions being laied downe on the one ſide and the other touching this point, ſome agreed vppon eight thouſand, others vppon fiue, and the moſt part offered fewer, ſhewing that there was no reaſon to disfurniſh the Prouince of men, the warre being on all ſides kindled, and the enemy (it might be) yet boyling in deſpite vpon the confines of Macedony, and that they ought not to thinke, becauſe the Baſſa had bene lately beaten, that therefore the warre was ended and determined: but rather it wanted ſo much that the Turkiſh forces were thereby weakened, or their courage

diminiſhed; that on the contrary, he was by reaſon thereof much more enflamed and incenſed. Some alſo made a doubt, and it was long debated with great diuerſity of opinions, whether Scanderbeg himſelfe ſhould march thither in perſon, or whether they ſhould onely ſend aide and ſuccours vnto the king, for that without the infinite diſcommodity of the proceedings and affaires of Scanderbeg, and his eſtate not yet throughly ſettled and confirmed, he could not well be abſent, nor leaue the care and adminiſtration of the ſame: that his preſence (if need were) in time of peace or of warre, would be of great conſequence and moment, conſidering that the people of Albany would acknowledge no other ſoueraigne to command ouer thē: that al things, he being in place and preſence, would ſucceed well, and floriſh by his aduiſe and counſell: But he being abſent, it could not be otherwiſe then a caſe moſt pittifull, to ſee the deformity that would enſue within the countrey, by the negligence and ſecurity both of the citizens, and of others of all eſtates and qualities, who for griefe and ſorrow which they ſhould conceaue at his departure, would ſuffer the vigour and liuelineſſe of their ſpirites to vaniſh and to relent.
            The Prince of Albany, albeit he had not determined any way to alter or change his firſt reſolution, yet becauſe he would not ſeeme to diſdaine or to make litle reckoning of the loue and good will of his ſubiects (whom he could not vpon the difficulties of that voyage openly contradict) nor yet to repugne againſt their offer of ſo ſmal numbers of ſouldiours, for feare leaſt he ſhould ſeeme willing to draw them on by force to a ſtraunge warre, and to be the cauſe of new perils and dangers vnto them, he iudged it no leſſe conuenient for the common profite, then for his owne in particular to be ſilent, and to vſe litle or no ſpeech in the matter. But the vehemency and earneſtneſſe of Paul Ducagin (whoſe ſpeach was worthy and well beſeeming ſo excellent a prince) did ſoone cut off all theſe diſputes and diuerſities of opinions: and did in an inſtant appeaſe all theſe difficulties, that ſo troubled their mindes, thus ſpeaking vnto them.
            It may be (worthy Princes Albanois) that you attend and expect in great deuotion,Oration of 
                     •
                  aul Ducagin, touching the number of the ſuccours to be ſent into Hungarie. what kinde of ſtile and ſpeach, I doe now meane to vſe vnto you, and vnto which of your opinions I will encline and ioyne my ſelfe. But I aſſure you, there is no ſuch matter as you thinke of, for that I ſee not that you haue laied downe or expounded any thing which is correſpondent to the greatneſſe and Maieſty, either of Scanderbeg, or of the name of the Albanois. Pardon me though I ſay ſo (for in generall counſelles this hath euer bene allowed as a ſpeciall priuiledge, for each man to ſpeake freely and at liberty, and to be heard quietly and patiently.) And therefore if it be lawfull for me now to diſcourſe vppon theſe your conſultations of the warre of Hungarie: much more willingly would I hearken vnto thoſe who would reſolutely diſlike of ſending any ſuccours at all vnto the King: and would rather decree and ordaine (and that not vnaduiſedly) that the ruine and deſtruction of our neighbours, and the perillous eſtate of ſtraungers were not to be preferred nor regarded before our domeſticall miſchieues, and our owne proper neceſsities. For is there (I pray you) any thing ſo ridiculous, as to heare you to count ſome vppon eight, ſome vpon fiue thouſand ſouldiours, and ſome vppon fewer, to vphold the waight and burthen of ſuch a warre and ſo important, as if you were to thinke that a King ſo puiſſant and mighty, would demaund out of the whole countrey of Epyre ſo ſmall a number, in the extremity, and (as it were) the laſt triall of his Fortune? Shall Scanderbeg be ſo meanely accompanied into the middeſt of the Varnian fieldes, where all men in generall doe attend and wiſhe for him? Shall ſo many Princes and great Lordes of Hungarie, and of the Chriſtian Army, ſee your chiefe and ſoueraigne (whoſe glorious renowme is now diſperſed and gone into all partes before him) ſhall he I ſay be

ſeene marching before a handfull of men, no otherwiſe then as one accompanied with ſo many theeues and robbers? Admit (which God defend) that he ſhould happen to be ouerthrowen and vanquiſhed, well and iuſtly might the enemy mocke and ieſt at the miſhappe of his diſcomfiture, much more his owne ſubiectes, in that hee would aduenture to conduct into a forraine countrey, and into an other mans dominions ſo ſmall a number of men as would ſcant be in ſafety within their owne home and dwellings. Contrariwiſe, if he ſhould ouercome and get the victory, litle praiſe and leſſe profite would come of it. Some others there be, who with a deuiſe all new and not heard of, would that forces ſhould be ſent to the King for his ſuccour, but they would not that Scanderbeg ſhould bowdge, that forſooth a regard ſhould be had of his Citizens, or of the vnruly multitude, who would hardly be brought to receiue or admit the command of any ſecond or inferiour perſon. This is the point (my maiſters) wherein conſiſteth all our difference: either that abſolutely (as I haue ſayd) we doe refuſe to ſend the King any ſuccours, or elſe that you chaunge your aduiſe and opinion. What ſhall we ſend theſe triumphant ſuccors vnto the Hungarians without Scanderbeg, whoſe onely name will yeeld them more ſuccour, then if all of vs were with them and he abſent? whom they eſpecially doe inuite, and whom all of them doe demaund and ſeeke after? Let vs ſend them then a gods name, if any be diſpoſed to goe without him. Cannot your Citizens liue one day in reſt and quiet without Scanderbeg, and will you that the ſouldiour being in armes, ſhould follow the aduenture of forraine ſeruice without his Captaine? Do you thinke that our houſes and our countrey ſhall be in danger without his aſsiſtance? and ſhall the ſouldiour finde him ſelfe ſafe and ſecure in a ſtraunge countrey and a farre off, being ſeperated and farre remoued from his accuſtomed Chiefetaine and Generall? What is then to be done? On the one ſide your forces doe hate and abhorre to go into Hungarie without their Scanderbeg: and on the other ſide, the loue of your countrey, and the deſire of your fellow Citizens doth reſtraine and withhold you. For my part my aduiſe is, that a ſpeedy leauy be made as great and as puiſſaunt as may be, that wee loſe not the occaſion of this warre propoſed and laied before vs: and during the other affaires and buſineſſes of the Ottoman, let vs not doubt the eſtate of our owne countrey. Furthermore, who is he that will not promiſe and aſſure him ſelfe of an vndoubted victory, by the iſſue of this encounter? Vnleſſe it be ſome one whom his timerous ſpirite miſledde and abuſed, doth terrifie and hinder from being reſolute? As touching Scanderbeg, there is not any one of you but will confeſſe, that it is more eaſie for you to finde a man to gouerne you in peace, and to adminiſter iuſtice, then to conduct and lead ſouldiours marching with their Armes. But to the intent you may not thinke that in this diſcourſe, I bring you nothing but great and glorious wordes: Behold here am I, who doe offer my ſelfe with fiue thouſand men to the warre of Hungarie: and (if neede be) doe vow and conſecrate my life for the ſeruice of Ieſus Chriſt, principally, and next for the glory and reputation of all of you: and for Scanderbeg his honour, name and dignity.
            
            This round and ſharpe Oration of Ducagin, and the liberall offer of his paines and labour, together with the great authority which the man had with all the Princes of Epyre, and with Scanderbeg eſpecially, did ſoone worke a chaunge and alteration in their mindes and opinions. Scanderbeg him ſelfe was the firſt that approued his deuiſe, and after he had recounted and numbred vp his merites and worthy actes in the whole courſe of his life before paſt: he ſayed, that there was not any one beſides him in all the company, that had ſpoken rightly, and for the reputation of them in generall. And he did often times repeate it, that moſt happy and fortunate ſhould the

eſtate of Albany be, if it had many ſuch men of like deuotion. This Paul (as we hauePraiſes and commendation of Paul
                     •
                   Ducagin. ſaid) was one of the moſt puiſſaunt and nobleſt Princes of Epire: and amongſt other his vertuous conditions, he was moſt ſingularly commended for a certaine true, vnfayned, and perfect zeale in religion, and was held in high accompt and eſtimate amongſt all men: being deſcended out of that honorable family, from which very many moſt famous and warlike Captaines had beene deſcended: and eſpecially Nicholas,
               Nicholas ſonne of Paul Ducagin, his valour and pro
                     •
                  reſſe. Peneropole, 
                     •
                  r Perſera. ſonne of the ſayd Paul, who farre ſurpaſſed and excelled all his forefathers and anceſtours in the honour and renowme of Armes. Of this man there is yet at this day extant and remaining in Peneropole (a towne of Thrace by the inhabitaunts called Perſera) a notable monument or marke of his excellent vertue, and of the ſtrength of his arme (if I may ſo tearme it) immortall. And that is the reliques or peeces of an enemies target, the which in a certaine fight of late (whereof the memory is yet but new and freſh) he did with one onely blow of his Cymitary cut quite in ſunder from the one ſide thereof to the other; that the hand of the Barbarian holding it then in fight, was ſo maymed, as from thence forward he was neuer able to vſe it any more in the warres. I take it not altogether impertinent if I haue here a litle digreſſed fromDigreſſion. the intēt of our hiſtory: to the intent that both ſo honorable a father may be the more commended in ſo worthy a ſonne, and that an act ſo rare and memorable, might not vtterly be forgotten, nor altogether ſwallowed vp in the deuouring gulfe of obliuion and vngratefull for getfulneſſe.
            The whole power and care of ordering the expedition into Hungarie was abſolutely referred and committed vnto Scanderbeg: that he ſhould doe and ordaine all things as him ſelfe ſhould thinke to be beſt and moſt conuenient both for his owne honour, and for the well fare and credite of the nation and name of Albanie. To the intent therefore he might no longer delay the ardent deſire of Vladiſlaus in ſo vrgent neceſsitie of his affairs, before that he publiſhed the leuie or muſter of any companies, he ſpeedily diſpatched away the Kings meſſenger, and willing him to haſten with all ſpeed poſsible, he gaue him letters to this effect.
            
               
                  
                     To Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie and of Poland, Scanderbeg Prince of the Epirots wisheth health and proſperitie.
                  
                  Moſt inuincible King, your letters I haue receiued with no leſſe ioy then contentment:Letters of Scanderbeg in anſwer to Vladiſlaus king of Hungary. the tenour whereof hauing cauſed publikely to be rehearſed in a full and generall aſſembly of my Captaines and Chieftaines, there is not anie one of them but with moſt voluntarie and liberall hearts haue aduiſed vs to embrace this ſo fitte and oportune an occaſion of ſo iuſt a warre by you offered vnto vs. And euerie man doth frankely and freely affirme, both openly and in priuate, that nothing could haue happened vnto them by the Diuine bountie, more agreeable and acceptable, then that they might by ſome notable ſeruice teſtifie their gratefull and thankefull mindes, and binde vnto them ſo excellent a Prince, as alſo to giue ſo fit ſuccours vnto the eſtate of Chriſtendome. I am exceeding glad, and doe take ſingular contentment in this laudable deuotion and forwardneſſe of mine owne people, both in regard of your ſelfe, and in the behalfe of the common and publike cauſe: in that our men of warre, and all other my ſubiectes of all eſtates and degrees (without any perſwaſion vſed on my part) doe ſhew them ſelues ſo chearefully and couragiouſly minded in defence of the faith and Chriſtian religion, and ſo well affectioned towardes your Maieſtie. And to ſpeake the verie truth, who is he (if he be not hatefull both to God and men) if there were no queſtion neither of religion nor of common danger: that would notwithſtanding refuſe a warre ſo iuſt and ſo lawfull? and for ſuch a

king, by whom alone we may and ought all of vs to acknowledge, that we Chriſtians doe not onely raigne and poſſeſſe our eſtates, but we liue, we breath, and enioy the liberty of our ſpeach? Who would not willingly take armes, and euen ruſh into manifeſt and certaine danger for the people of Hungarie, by whom the publique eſtate of Chriſtendome hath bene in all ages mightily ſupported and defended with ſo many trauelles, and ſo much bloudſhed? Who from the very cradell (as it were) and their firſt beginnings, haue bene continuall enemies to our enemies, and haue vowed them ſelues for the maieſty and dignity of the name and profeſſion of Chriſtianity? Would it had pleaſed God (moſt mighty and redoubted Vladiſlaus) that it had bene in my power to haue brought vnto you ſuch forces towardes this honourable enterpriſe, as might haue bene aunſwerable to the greatneſſe of my courage, and good affection. It might then perhaps ſo fall out, that Europe ſhould not any longer continue oppreſſed in this ignominious eſtate, whereunto it is now reduced by this wicked Amurath. Neither ſhould the fields of Varna and Baſilia ſo often fume and ſmoake with the bloud of the Hungarians: neither ſhould all the corners and quarters of Macedony be ſo filled with the bloud of the Epirots: both which peoples haue bene made as the onely ſacrifices of others ſinnes and offences. We are euen now all of vs at the verieNote. point of extreame daunger vtterly like to periſh, whileſt euery one thinketh that he is borne for him ſelfe only and alone. But why do I in vaine burſt forth into theſe bootleſſe and vnprofitable complaints and lamentations? Aſſuredly I doe not thinke my owne power altogether ſo weake and feeble, neither do I beleeue (if it ſhall pleaſe God that our forces may once meete and ioine together in ſo happy a warre) that the name and eſtate of Chriſtianity ſhall haue any cauſe to ſorrow or to be agreeued in the euent and iſſue of our fortune. For beſides thoſe fifteene thouſand ſouldiours, which lately diſcomfited Haly Baſſa on the borders of Macedon: my determination is to adde other fifteene thouſand vnto them: with all which forces, as ſoone as I may conueniently, I will begin to march and take my iourney, being ready to follow your enſignes to all euents whatſoeuer. So God preſerue you in all proſperity.
                  
                     From Croy 
                        the third of Auguſt. 1443.
                     
                  
               
            
            Theſe letters being diſpatched away to the King, Scanderbeg applied and bent all his mind and ſtudy for the leuying of forces. Firſt of all, thoſe companies which hadAn army leauied by Scanderbeg for the aid of the king of Hungary. foughten againſt Haly Baſſa, he cauſed to be made ſtrong with new ſupplies, not ſuffering any one of them to abſent him ſelfe from this voyage: And he was fully determined not to vſe any idle and vnprofitable perſons in this iourney, but ſuch onely as ſhould be willing and reſolutely minded. Then hauing ſent publique Commiſsioners throughout the Prouince to that effect, he had ſoone raiſed and enrolled to the number of ten thouſand more. Paul Ducagin did moſt largely make proofe by the effect and by his deeds, of the good mind and affection which he had before in the aſſembly, made ſhew of by his ſpeaches. For comming to preſent him ſelfe to Scanderbeg, euen with the formoſt, beſides his owne perſon, he brought with him alſo, fiue thouſand all choſen and picked men, and ſingularly well appointed. Immedialy hereuppon all domeſticall matters being ſet in order, and the affaires of the Prouince well prouided for: Caſtriot hauing taken a view and muſter of his whole Army, and hauing diſpoſed of the ſeuerall companies, and deuided his regiments as it ſeemed beſt vnto him, he diſtributed and beſtowed all the particular places of charge and office, and appointed vnto them fit and able Captaines and officers, as if the warre of Hungarie had euen then bene begunne, in that hower and very inſtant. Afterwardes publique praiers and general proceſſions being made for the victory: neuer did the people of Epire (who were alway more enclined to armes then to religion) ſo importune the

diuine maieſtie with their prayers and ſupplications, as they did at that time for the happy returne of their ſouldiers, who were then to march out of their owne country. All things both diuine and humane being thus well ordered & diſpoſed, the ſoldiers now drawne from their natiue home, did take vnto them a new kind of courage; and their minds and imaginations were continually deuiſing vpon no other thing, neither had they ought elſe before their eyes, but the warre of Hungary: neither did they carrie the ſhew and countenance of any other then of ſuch men as had bene euen lately accuſtomed and exerciſed to embrue themſelues in the bloud of their enemies.
            Thus with great and exceeding ioy had they aduanced their enſignes euen to theScanderbeg marching with his armie towards Hungarie, is hindered by the Deſpot of Miſia. frontiers of Miſia, when that either cruell Fortune, or the immortall and ſecret order and decree of the heauenly powers, or (which is moſt likely) the indignity & hatefulneſſe of the ſinnes and wickedneſſe of the Chriſtians, which ſeemed now to approch neare to receiue their deſerued puniſhment from the deuine maieſtie, did raiſe & ſtirre vp the diſloyaltie and periurie of one wretched perſon, to trouble & breake the courſe of theſe glorious attempts: cauſing both perpetuall matter of lamentation to the Hungarians, and a moſt memorable loſſe and calamity to the eſtate & wealth of Chriſtendome. This was George VVhoruich (of whom we haue made ſo often mention) at thatGeorge Deſpot of Miſia his deſcription. time called and commonly named the Lord or Deſpot of Seruia: a man (if ſuch graces and accomplements had any way furthered his vertues and good behauiour) of corporall beauty, and of an excellent maieſtie and countenance moſt gracious & venerable: and one that in eloquence and grauitie of ſpeech was moſt rare & admirable, and not inferior to any of his time, deſcended of a noble and ancient familie, and very aged and well growne in yeares. As concerning his faith and religion (that we may not in this alſo omit his impietie) he was one that did altogether neglect and contemne it: for being a verie Atheiſt, and hauing his pernicious mind deuoyd of all pietie, feare,His irreligion, atheiſme and impietie. and reuerence of the Deitie, he did equally and alike contemne and deride both the precepts of Chriſtianitie, and the traditions of Mahomet. On a time (long after the battell of Varna) when this old Prince, being at leaſt ninety yeares of age, and flying from the face and preſence of Mahomet, did happen to come into Hungarie, to deſire their ayde and ſuccours againſt the Turkes, he chanced to fall in companie with a notable zealous preacher Frier Iohn Capiſtran of the order of S. Francis, vnto whom (after heFrier Iohn Capiſtran. had heard him make many excellent and holy diſcourſes touching his reuolt and apoſtaſie frō the faith of Chriſt, it is reported, that he made him this anſwer; That ſooner & more eaſily he could be perſwaded to hang himſelf, then to abiure thoſe traditions (though he were now paſt ninetie yeares of age) which he had reciued from his forefathers: giuing vs thereby to vnderſtand how dangerous a thing it is, to make a mock and ieſt of religion, and of the Sonne of God, and to follow after peruerſe and falſe opinions, when they ſhall once grow to haue gotten an habit within vs. For the Deſpot in this perſwaſion retyring himſelfe from the preſence of the Frier, was heard oftentimes to reiterate and repeate theſe words. That he had rather his ſubiects ſhould call him a Prince miſerable and vnfortunate, then an old and aged dotard. This man then now at this time did mightely cleaue vnto the Turke, and fauoured his quarrell againſt the Chriſtians, both in regard of his daughter Gathaguſina (whom he had maried vnto Amurath) as alſo becauſe of the hatred which he bare vnto the Hungarians, but eſpecially to Iohn Huniades the Deſpot of Tranſiluania, by whoſe aide & aſsiſtance (as we haue before declared in the enlargement and libertie of Scanderbeg) at ſuch time as he was ſuccoured againſt the Sultan, & reſtored into his kingdome, he tooke it in ill part, that certaine townes and places of Ver
                     •
                  ia, which had bene graunted vnto Huniades in recompence of his vertue and deſert, were not reſtored and redeliuered

vnto him. For this cauſe vnderſtanding of the preparations made for the warre of Hungarie, and of the comming of Scanderbeg, who approched neare his borders: he ſtopped vp all the wayes and paſſages, and debarred him from entring within his dominions. Caſtriot did aſſay, but all in vaine, by his Ambaſſadors ſent to the Deſpot, toAmbaſſadors ſent frō Scanderbeg to the Deſpot of Seruia, to perſwade him to graunt him paſſage thorow his countrey. admoniſh him of the wrong and iniurie which he offred him: and he intreated him in friendly ſort, That he might not be the firſt which ſhould charge him with ill dealing, who had giuen him no cauſe of offence and iniurie: that he would not of his friend and neighbour, purchaſe him for his enemie, and draw vpon him ſelfe the arms both of all Hungarie and Epire. That he would not ſuffer and procure by his meanes and occaſion onely, ſo great a loſſe and miſchiefe to all Chriſtendome, which might ſwallow vp both himſelfe & his eſtate and Empire. For albeit in regard of his daughter, he did ſo cleaue and adhere vnto Amurath, yet he ſhould not thereby hope and expect for any other then certaine loſſe & aſſured dammage: hauing had good proofe & experience both of the infidelitie and periurie of his ſonne in law, & of the great pleaſures & benefites which the Hungarians on the other part had often times done him.
            
            Theſe perſwaſions nothing preuailing in a mind ſo depraued and corrupted, and the Prince of Epire now perceiuing that he was out of all hope to get paſſage by anie other meanes then by the ſword, he fully reſolued with him ſelfe to take that courſe: notwithſtanding that both it diſpleaſed him highly, & that he held it a matter of ſome danger and difficultie to begin the warres ſo neare his owne home, and to hazard his forces at that time to the trauell of armes, which hee had thought to haue reſerued whole, freſh and ſound, and to haue made proofe and triall of them againſt the royall armie of a more worthie and ſtronger enemie.
            Whileſt the Albanian army thus incenſed through diſcontentmēt, did ſpend theirVladiſlaus marcheth with his armie against the Turkes. time vpon the borders of Miſia in the middeſt of infinite inconueniences and diſcommodities: and whileſt the iourney of Scanderbeg was delaied rather then hindered by the diſloialty of that Apoſtata the Deſpot: (for there is no doubt, but he could at length haue gotten paſſage, though not without ſome dammage and loſſe of his forces.) Vladiſlaus in the meane time, both encouraged by the letters receiued from Scanderbeg, & prouoked alſo with an aſſured hope and conceipt of the honour and ſucceſſe of future victory: or rather being drawen on by a certain fatall neceſſity, wherunto he was predeſtinat: ſuch was the particular deſteny of them all, and Fortune (not contented nor ſatisfied with ſo many deadly & mortall ſpectacles) did now inuite theſe men who of late had bene preſerued, and had yet ſcarce breathed themſelues, from their forepaſſed miſeries, to the danger of more lamentable and fatall perils; Vladiſlaus I ſay and the army of the Chriſtians, hauing marched through Valachia, and paſſed ouer the Danow,
               Valachia. Danow or the riuer of Danubia. were now come to Varna, with an intent & purpoſe to conioyne & vnite their forces, to thoſe which were at Sea, and ſo to paſſe on with eaſie iournies and enſigns diſplaid into Romania. The countrey of Varna (which did ſwarme with ſuch numbers of enemies ſhortly after, & long afore hand was infamous through the ruine of many mighty armies, and was a place alwaies as hateful and odious euen to the braueſt ſouldiors) is a goodly champion & plaine valley, ſituated on the other ſide of the confines of Miſia
               Deſcription of Varna neare to the mountaine Hemus. Mar Maggiore, or the great ſea: once named Pontus Euxiniu
                     •
                  . Galata. Macropolis. vpon the ſea: called Maggiore, or the greater ſea, foure dayes iourney from Andrinople, in a ſtreight gulfe betweene two pointes or promontories, vppon the one of which is ſeated Galata, and vpon the other Macropolis. The bottome of that valley on the right hand is inhabited with husbandmen in ſeuerall ſmall villages or hamlettes ſlenderly peopled and frequented. On the left hand where Galata ſtandeth, is a great marſhe at the foot of the hils extending forth her ſtill ſtanding waters, euen to the other valley neare at hand, which bendeth towards the Occident.
            
               
               Amurath being aduertiſed of theſe troubles towardes, was not any whit diſcouraged,Amurath marcheth againſt the Chriſtians. but hauing liuely repulſed the Caramanian, and reaſſured his countrie of Natolia, he made no doubt nor difficultie of anie thing, but onely howe he might tranſport his armie ouer the ſea, by reaſon that the fleete of the biſhoppe of Rome and the Duke of Burgundie, did take from him all hope of paſſage: in ſuch ſort thatInfidelitie and not able auarice of the Chriſtans helping the Turkes to paſſe into Europe, at the ſtreight of Helleſpont. he made no great haſte to march againſt the Chriſtians, till ſuch time as certaine Marchants Genowayes (if it be true that is reported) did free and deliuer him from that care in conſideration of a great rewarde promiſed and agreed vppon to be giuen them. For at a certaine narrow VVhich being of old named Boſphorus Thracius, is about 8. miles & a halfe aboue Conſtantinople. ſtreight of the ſea (betweene the two ſeas of Maggiore and Propontide, deuiding Aſia from Europe) was the Turkiſh army tranſported out of Aſia, they that paſſed them ouer, taking for ech man his paſſage a ducat. There were numbred to be about a hundred thouſand, all which were gathered and collected out of Aſia, becauſe the Sultan had a vehement ſuſpition of the faith, both of the Greekes and his other ſubiects within Europe. After his armie was once tranſported, he marched on with ſpeede and celeritie ſo incredible, that within ſeuen daies he came to pitch his tentes within foure miles of the Chriſtians campe, neere to theVarna or Dioniſiopolis. citie of Varna, named by the auncients, Dioniſiopolis.
            
            The ſuddaine and vnexpected newes of the approach of Amurath with ſo great and mightie a puiſſance, made the Chriſtians to keepe good watch & ward throughout their hoaſt, and in all the quarters of their campe: euery man being cōmanded to make himſelfe ready to the battell. Vladiſlaus in the meane time, and the other Princes his confederates entring into councell, did conſult vppon the ſeuerall occurrences of their affaires, debating vpon many and diuers matters which were propounded of no ſmall weight and conſequence: but the concluſion was, that they would hazard the fortune of the field, in caſe that Amurath would accept the battell. The whole chargeIancus or Iohn Hunyades lieutenans General of the Chriſtian armie. of the armie, and the ordering and marſhalling of the ſeuerall ſquadrons and troupes was committed to Hunyades to diſpoſe of it as he ſaw cauſe: in the execution whereof he made ſhewe both of his beſt deuoire and endeuour, and of all the skill and experience which he had of a long time purchaſed by the practiſe, purſuit, and managingOrder obſerued by Hunyades in placing the battells of the Chriſtians at Varna. of armes. For he ſo placed and ordered his armie, that behind them and at their backes, they had the mountaines to defende them; the one of the flankes was garded with the marriſh aboue mentioned, and the other was fortified and defended with chariots chayned and bound together. The Turkes were the firſt that beganne the fight, the which hauing continued for a while; the vantgard of the Turkiſh armieThe battell of Varna betwen Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie, and Amurath the great Turke. was receiued ſo couragiouſly, and preſſed with ſuch furie by the Chriſtians, that (as if the victorie had beene alreadie gotten by them) the ſame was ſoone diſordered and put to flight, and purſued more then two miles off: in ſo much that Amurath himſelfe had beene driuen to ſhift for his owne ſafetie, if the two Biſhoppes of Varadia and Strigonia (who were better skilled in their Portuiſſe then practiſed in armes) had not disbanded them ſelues vnaduiſedly, and forſaken theBiſhops of Varadia & Strigonia by their folly, hinder the victorie of the Chriſtians. place aſſigned them, onely for the chaſing of the enemie on that ſide where they were broken: which was the occaſion that a great and freſhe troope of Turkiſh archers on horſebacke, charging in flancke on that ſide which they had abandoned and left vndefended, did finde an eaſie entrie in vppon them: and they greatly troubled the rankes of our footemen, with a ſhower and tempeſt (as it were) of their ſhotte and arrowes, which they powred vppon them thicke and thinne. Hunyades with his Valachians running ſpeedily thither, preſently vppon his arriuall chaunged the fortune of the fight which continued for a long time doubtfull and vncertaine. Afterwardes (hauing his eye open on all partes and to all occaſions)

whereſoeuer he ſaw his owne forces to haue the worſt, he ſuccoured the left wing: which as then alſo was ſore encombred, and was not able to ſuſtaine and endure the ſhocke of the enemy: but he notwithſtanding ſtill vphelde and maintained them in good point. Yet would he not hinder but that Amurath in the meane time, founde the leaſure & opportunity to re-ally himſelfe, and by the encouragement of Haly Baſſa he made head with his ſquadron of Ianiſſaries, and renued the perill of the encounter. Hunyades was in great doubt & feare of his young king, whoſe fiery and haughty courage did giue him great cauſe to ſuſpect ſome hazard and miſaduenture by his raſhnes and temeritie. And indeede it fell out that the vnfortunate Prince of an hardie and inuincibleVladiſlaus his ouergreat hardineſſe or raſhneſſe. courage, had broken in vpon the rankes of the Ianiſſaries, fighting and beating with the men at armes, vpon the troupes of horſe, which ſerued for the gard of Amurath his perſon. Great was the number both of men and horſes which were there laide on the ground: ſome of them being ſlaine, and others hauing their legges cut off or maymed. In ſo much, that they could not any longer march vppon the plaine ground, but they were conſtrained to make themſelues way vppon the heapes of dead bodies: ech preſſing and ruſhing vppon others ſo egerly and fiercely, that a man would haue iudged it rather a meere rage and furie, then any ardent and vehement deſire of victorie, that animated them on in this conflict. The Ianiſſaries ſtoutly ſuſtained the force and violence of the Hungarians which were in company with their king, yet did he himſelfe in the end breake in amongſt them, and they moſt politiquely receiued him into the middeſt of their battallion, whereof it enſued; That being held either as dead, or taken priſoner, at the ſame inſtant that the Turkes were now turning their backes, and readie to flie away: the Chriſtians alſo on the other ſide, as hauing left their king did beginne to abandon the place, and in ſteede of fighting, fell to plaine flying. In this manner both the one partie and the other, beganne to giue place to their enemie: in ſo much that ech of them was ignorant of their owne good ſucceſſe and aduantage in ſo ſuddaine and variable an inclination of their fortune.
            Vpon theſe alterations Iohn Hunyades ſeeing the Chriſtians in diſaray, and moſt fearefully and ſhamefully to forſake their rankes, he made himſelfe way through the middeſt and thickeſt of the preſſe: and being come to the place where Vladiſlaus thenHunyades perſwadeth Vladiſlaus to retyre and to preuent an vtter ouerthrowe. was, he ſhewed him the diſorder, the affray, and confuſion of the Chriſtians, hee cryed and called vnto him, he requeſted and entreated him to turne bridle and to yeelde vnto the preſent miſchance, and not to hazard all to vtter miſchiefe, and to the misfortune of an entire diſcomfiture: that there was as yet great good hope of the victorie, and that it attended and ſtayed for him, conſidering that the loſſe on his ſide was ſo ſmall and of ſo litle account, that it appeared in a manner, as none at all: and that therefore it were good he did retire himſelfe within his Chariots and trenches with his men ſafe and ſound as they were, ere they were altogether ſcattered and diſperſed. For the loſſe of his life alone, would not onely hazard and endaunger his owne realmes & dominions, but the ſtate of all Europe, and the whole bodie of Chriſtendome. All theſe perſwaſions and reaſons notwithſtanding, the king ſtill thruſting himſelfe moſt vndiſcreetly into the midſt of his enemies, after a ſharpe & furious conflict (his horſe being wounded & hought) he was in the end ouerthrown to the groūdVladiſlaus king of Hungarie ſlaine by the Turkes. and ſo ſlaine in the companie of many of his Nobles both Hungarians & Polonians. Hunyades for a time held good, and made reſiſtance, endeuouring and aſſaying diuers times, to haue reſcued the kings body, but all was in vaine. For the head being cut off, and faſtened vpon the end of a launce: the Chriſtians vppon ſight thereof, being on all partes terrified and abaſhed, did ſeeke by maine flight to purchaſe the ſecuritie of

their owne perſons: excepting certaine Valachians with whom their Chiefe and leaderHuniades his flight and impriſonment by the Deſpot of Servia. 
               Huniades (ſeeing that he could not ſtand againſt the huge multitudes of the Infidels) tooke part alſo with the reſt in the retreate: Holding it no diſgrace after the deceaſe of the king, that ſome ſhould remaine to reuenge the ignominie of this ouerthrowe, and to extinguiſh the memorie of ſo diſhonorable a defeat. And therefore as well as he could, he ſaued himſelfe, taking his courſe after the ſunne ſet towardes the coaſts and confines of Seruia: where he was ſtaied and made priſoner, and moſt ſhamefully put in irons by the Deſpot, being reſtrained of his libertie till ſuch time as thoſe townes, whereunto he pretended a right, were firſt yeelded and reſtored vnto him. The Cardinall Iulian (the authour and procurer of the breach of peace which had beene ſworne betweene the Turkes and the Chriſtians) made there alſo his laſt end: howbeit Callimachus. Iulian the Cardinall his miſerable end and ſlaughter. ſome write, that he was ſlaine by his owne men through the hatred which they bore him: for being the occaſion of that calamitie by the breach of faith and periurie committed at his onely inſtance and procurement. And that being ſo ſlaine, he was ſpoyled and left naked, hauing ſuffered many reproches as he was giuing vp the ghoſt, for his ill and wicked counſell in procuring of this warre. The twoBiſhops of Varadia & Strigonia drowned in the mudde. Biſhops were likewiſe drowned in the mud, as they fled into the next mariſhes. Thus you ſee the euent and ſucceſſe of this iourney, ſo famous and memorable, which coſt the Conquerour greater loſſe & bloudſhed, then it did to the partie conquered. Some alſo doe report, that Amurath after he had eſcaped this daunger, did ſhewe himſelfeVictorie of the Turkes with great loſſe and bloudſhed. much more ſad and penſiue then he was vſually accuſtomed: and being therfore blamed by his ſeruants, he made them this anſwere; I would be loath, quoth he, often to gaine in this manner. In that place where the battell was foughten, and the dead bodie of the king found, Amurath cauſed a mightie piller to be erected, with an inſcription for a monument of his victorie: and at this day are yet to be ſeene diuerſe mounts and litle hils, made with the bones of thoſe who were there ſlain and buried, which doth argue that the ſlaughter was great and wonderfull: which fell out on the day and feaſt of Saint Martin, the eleuenth of Nouember, in the yeare of our redemption. 1443.
            This battell is ſomewhat otherwiſe deſcribed by Pope Pius the ſecond, neuertheleſſe we in this place haue followed Callimachus, who hath ſet it downe with a moſt excellent and good grace, and without any partialitie. This is moſt certaine and apparant, that the Chriſtians euen to this day, may finde good and ſufficient cauſe to be diſcontented with the Deſpot of Miſia, for keeping the bands & army of Scanderbeg from being preſent at that battell, by reaſon of his faithleſſeneſſe and diſloyaltie. For it could not be but the good deuoire and prowes of ſo many thouſandes of reſolute fighting men would haue done much, & the only valure of Hunyades ſeconded with the ſufficiencie and good fortune of Scanderbeg, how could it but haue wrought ſome notable & ſingular effect? And what could haue hindered them, but that they would haue borne a great ſtroake in the happie euent & good ſucceſſe of that battell? What ſight or ſpectacle more famous and notable could any man haue ſeene in any age, then a battell foughten againſt the enemies of Chriſtendome, and directed by two ſo glorious and renowmed Chieftaines? Both of them were moſt hardie and valiant ſouldiers,Compariſon of Hunyades and Scanderbeg. and moſt expert and accompliſhed Captaines, of wonderfull great force and ſingular ſtrength of their bodies, and equall and alike in greatneſſe of courage. Howbeit more fortunate was the latter, being one that had fortune alwaies more fauourable vnto him, as appeared afterwards in the whole courſe of his life. Hunyades was more aged and ſtriken in yeares: Scanderbeg much younger and leſſe exerciſed at that time in armes. And albeit he had not bene in ſo many conflicts and foughten fieldes,

yet had he continually good and happie ſucceſſe: being as fortunate in priuate combats betweene man and man, as in the maine fight of plaine and ſet battelles. Both of them were verie acceptable and agreeable to the minds and good liking of their ſouldiers, but Scanderbeg was of a more pleaſant conceit and diſpoſition. The one did ſeldome or neuer exchange the ſeruice either of the Valachians or Hungarians: the other was much delighted, and did often ſerue himſelfe of the Italians in his conqueſts: taking a ſingular pleaſure in the vſe of their armes, and in their counſell and aduiſe. Huniades neuer knew other enemies then the Turkes: Scanderbeg in the warre of Italie when he reſtored the libertie of the kingdome of Naples, in the aide of Ferdinand king of Naples, did purchaſe to himſelfe no leſſe glorie and reputation, then he did by his often triumphes obtained againſt the barbarous infidels.
            This fame and report of the ouerthrow and diſcomfiture of the Chriſtians, being euerie where diſperſed, and Scanderbeg being certified (whileſt he was yet remaining in the limits of Seruia) of the grieuous calamitie and defait of the Hungarians; tooke on as if he would haue died for verie conceite and griefe of that miſfortune: and hauing a long while bethought himſelfe, and caſting vpon many matters in his minde, he reſolued at length to turne bridle, and to take his way to his owne country. Neuertheleſſe, to the intent his iuſt griefe might not remaine altogether vnreuenged, nor the miſchieuous wickednes of the Deſpot reſt vnpuniſhed; with his armie all incenſedScanderbeg ſpoileth the Deſpots countrie in reuenge of his 
                     ••
                  echery. Les appanages. and enraged, he ſuddenly brake in vpon his countrey: and ouerrunning and ſpoiling it in moſt hoſtile manner: he made it feele the three extremities of ſword, fire and blood: which are commonly called & accounted the maintenance & nutriment of the warres. As he was returning into Epire, infinite numbers of Hungarians and Polonians, who had eſcaped from the ſlaughter at Varna (according as their flight and good fortune guided them) came to ſeeke him in great troupes and companies.Hungarians flying from the ſlaughter 
                     ••
                   Varna, relieued by Scanderbeg. Raguſa. To all of them he gaue good and freindly entertainment, and (according to the extreamitie of their miſfortune and calamitie) hauing furniſhed them with prouiſion both of money and victuals for many daies: he prouided them alſo of ſhipping to carrie them to Raguſa, from whence they tooke their iourney to their owne home and dwelling place.
            The end of the ſecond Booke.
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               AMurath incenſed againſt Scanderbeg by the exclamations of the Deſpot, reſolueth to warre vpon him: but firſt ſeeketh to vndermine him by treacherie and offers of peace and amitie which Scanderbeg reiecteth. Feriſee Baſſa is ſent againſt Scanderbeg, and is defeated: Muſtapha Baſſa is ſent againſt Scanderbeg, and is likewiſe ouercome. The murther of Lech Zacharie Prince of Dayna in Epyre. The cauſe of the warre betweene Scanderbeg and the Venetians. Muſtapha is ſent againe with another armie into Epyre: Dayna is beſieged by Scanderbeg. The Venetians leauie an armie for the reliefe of Dayna. The battell of Drynon betweene Scanderbeg and the Venetians. Scanderbeg repayreth and fortifieth Baleſe with a garriſon, and maketh Ameſe his Nephew Gouernour of the fortreſſe: Ameſe thinking to ſurprize the citie of Driuaſta is aſſayled by the Dryuaſtines and put to flight.
            
            
               THE armie of the Hungarians being ouerthrowne and ſcattered, neither did Amurath reape any great profite or aduantage1444. of this victorie, neither did he proſecute his good fortune, which then ſeemed to ſmyle vpon him, inſomuch that it ſeemed the ſucceſſe of this battell did rather abate then encreaſe his courage: and ſo many loſſes receiued one after an other did reſtraine him (albeit he had the victorie) from being deſirous of any further warres. And this was the cauſe that no queſtion was made, nor any thing at all done touching the affaires of Epyre, which had bene expreſſely put off and deferred to the intent the Turke might be eaſed of that care, and not finde himſelfe charged nor diſturbed with a double burthen of troubles and vexation. But the new and often aduertiſements which came partly from the Deſpot, and in part from the frontiers of Macedonie: did breake off this their reſt and diſpoſition to quietneſſe, and yeelding new matter of wrath and anger, it did enflame and ſet on fire their courages, which were before laid aſleepe, and had ſeemed to haue forgotten and troden vnder foote all former outrages and iniuries. For reportes came from all parts, that the enemies forces
                  Complaint of the Turks of Macedonie to Amurath againſt Scanderbeg. and the armie of Scanderbeg had ſpoyled and deſtroyed all things, and that there was not any thing left in the whole countrie vnwaſted, not the verie fieldes which had bene laboured and tilled, but that both houſes, townes, and all the countrie throughout, were either deſtroyed by the ſword, or conſumed by fire; and that all the peſants and inhabitantes were ſlaine and murthered, except ſuch as their haſtie and ſpeedie

flight had preſerued from their furie. That the armie of the Chriſtians (ouer and aboue diuerſe ſudden roades and light incurſions) had now twice freely and vnreuenged with enſignes diſplaied, and in full troupes ranged ouer the whole countrie, ſo charged and loaden with pillage and with the goods of the inhabitants; that with the verie money which would be made of that bootie onely, Caſtriot might well maintaine and holde warres with Ottoman for a long ſeaſon: that the affaires of the Chriſtians did daily flouriſh more and more: that their husbandmen did liue at eaſe, neuer hindered nor diſturbed from their labour and tillage: that they had plenty and abundance of all things. Contrariwiſe, that themſelues (beſides the feare of the enemy which did daily oppreſſe them) were in great danger & doubt of an extreme famine, which did alreadie threaten them, and was readie and imminent vppon them by reaſon that they had bene let and hindered by ſo many roades and inuaſions, from the manuring and ſowing of their ground.
            
            
               The Deſpot likewiſe filled the Turkiſh court with his complaints, and demaundedComplaint of George Deſpot to Amurath againſt Scanderbeg. the aide and ſuccours of his ſonne in law, affirming, that euen then when the Ottoman affaires were almoſt deſperate, his deuoire and induſtrie was not wanting, but that he had repulſed and borne off their dangers with his proper dammage, and the bloud of his owne ſubiects, at that time when it was ſcant in the power of the gods themſelues to prouide a remedie, for that miſchiefe which was imminent and readie to fall vpon them: yet that he with the bodie of his owne eſtate and kingdome, had preſerued the Turkiſh Empire from deſtruction, and that he ſitting ſtill, had borne and ſuſteined the whole forces of the Epirots. And for feare leaſt they ſhould haue ioined themſelues with the Hungarians (who attended and expected them on the other ſide of Myſia) he had oppoſed the bodies of his people, as a bulwarke and rampier againſt Scanderbeg: and by meanes thereof had drawen vpon himſelfe the violence of a long and daungerous warre, to the great & notable preiudice of his poore ſubiects. That he ſhould conſider with himſelfe in what eſtate the affaires of the Turke had nowe beene, if by his diligence (and whileſt himſelfe was buſied in the warre of Hungarie) he had not diuerted and kept backe the troupes of ſuch an enemie, ſeeing that Vladiſlaus alone with his owne armie only, had made his victorie ſo difficult and bloudy. That now by ſhewing himſelf to haue compaſſion of the Turkiſh fortune, he had drawen vpon himſelfe (beſides the hatred and auncient rancour & mallice of the Hungarians) the armies of Scanderbeg and all the reſidue alſo of his neighbours, enduring and bearing without cauſe, a moſt iniurious and vndeſerued puniſhment: being but a bad reward and recompence, for ſo great and notable a benefite: that it ſeemed moſt likelie, that Scanderbeg and not Amurath did triumph of the battell of Varna and the warre of Hungarie: conſidering the manner of his dealings, and howe that with huge and fell troupes he did enterpriſe vpon the borders & fountains, ſometimes of the one, ſometimes of the other, in ſuch ſort that naught elſe was to be ſeene, but all the ſhewes, ſignes, and tokens of bloudie warre, and hoſtilitie euery where and in all parts of the countrie. In briefe, that he being ſeated in the middeſt betwene the Hungarians & the Epyrots, (both of them moſt fierce and warrelike Nations) ſhould not be able to ſtand, or reſiſt againſt their force and violence, if his ſonne in lawe did not take care and prouide for his ſecuritie, whom in his diſtreſſed and moſt daungerous eſtate he had preuented with the merite of ſo notable and good ſeruice.
            
            The greenneſſe both of thoſe in the prouince of Macedonie, and the freſh remembrance of the Deſpot his good deſerts were of great force and efficacie, and did much moue all men; and they were vniuerſally of this opinion, and did affirme it openly, that now was the ſafeſt and the fitteſt time, and it was moſt needfull and neceſſarie to

abate and pull downe the ſtrength and puiſſance of Scanderbeg: for feare leſt by his roades made vpon the plaine countrey, and by the often moleſtation of the townes and villages, he might ſeeke occaſion to vſurpe vpon Macedony, and to make himſelfe Lord and Maſter of that prouince: that his malicious mind and the rage and furie of his ſtomacke, did ſufficiently ſhew it ſelfe of late, in that he had in a manner wholly diſfurniſhed and diſarmed his owne dominions, and left them without anie defence or garriſon, onely to ioyne himſelfe to Vladiſlaus with his greateſt force and puiſſance, and with an intent thereby, to aboliſh and extinguiſh the memorie of the Turkiſh name and Empire: that if this his fiercenes were not ſpeedily repreſſed, there was no doubt, but he would ſoone ſolicite and procure all the puiſance and power of the Chriſtians, to ioyne againſt them. Vpon theſe conſiderations, the Sultan was fully reſolued to make warres vpon Scanderbeg, and did thinke forthwith andVVarre determined againſt Scanderbeg ſpeedily to haue gathered his forces, and haue leauied an armie: but foraſmuch as the greater part of his better men had bene ſlaine and conſumed in the warre of Hungarie, and the miſfortune of Haly Baſſa did as yet continue freſh in his remembrance, and did put him in mind of that difcomfiture: beſides that he being now olde and growen in yeares, was deſirous to paſſe and ſpend the remainder of his life in reſt and quietneſſe; he bethought himſelfe of a deuiſe and inuention, not ſo ſtrange and new, as vaine and fooliſh: whereby he ſuppoſed, that as he had with notable arte and cunning, and with ſingular deceit and falſhoode, found good and happie ſucceſſe, to deceiue and beguile others; ſo he might likewiſe ouerreach and entrappe him whom by open violence and force of armes he could not conquer, nor bring vnder. In my iudgement it ſhall ſeeme neither ſtrange nor vnpleaſant to the mindes of thoſe that ſhall peruſe it, if I ad in this place, the manner and ſtile of the letters ſent from Ottoman, by which he endeuored to entiſe and allure the minde of Scanderbeg, and to trie him how to turne and wind him on all ſides.
            
               
                  
                     Amurath Ottoman, ſoueraigne of the Turkes and Emperour of the Orient:Letters of Amurath to Scanderbeg. to Scanderbeg his moſt ingrate foſter ſonne, neither wiſheth health, nor ſendeth greeting.
                  
                  All the honors and benefites, wherewith I could adorne, and raiſe thee to greatnes in my court, ſo long as thou wert with me, I neuer made ſpare of them, but beſtowed them bountifully vpon thee (ô Scanderbeg) of all men liuing the moſt vngratefull. I want fit words and termes to ſpeake vnto thee: ſuch is the multitude of thy crimes & diſloialties, wherewith thou haſt offended my maieſtie, and wounded my verie ſoule, that I know not well what kind of ſpeech to vſe vnto thee, to thee I ſay, who wert my domeſticall and houſehold ſeruant: for neither will any rough or ſharpe languages mollifie thy hard harted courage, (whoſe nature is ſo fierce and arrogant) neither doeſt thou deſerue anie gracious wordes or kindnes of ſpeech: who haſt mightily exceeded and excelled in all kind of fiercenes and beaſtiallitie. And (that thou mighteſt omit no occaſion to make thee hatefull and odious vnto mee) thou haſt growen to that madnes, that thou diddeſt caſt aſide all care of thine owne benefit, and the ſafetie of thy citizens, in compariſon of that loue and affection which thou diddeſt carrie to the Hungarians, who were lately armed againſt me. I could be content to let paſſe in ſilence other matters, and not to touch and handle thoſe wounds which thou haſt made, if ſo be my minde might be once perſwaded to forget them, or that ſo many deceites, or ſuch notable examples of an ingratefull part did deſerue to be concealed: neuertheleſſe, I hold it neceſſarie at length (though perhaps ſomewhat too late) in ſome ſort to admoniſh thee, and to lay open before thee thy ill deſertes, ſo farre leaſt the

furie of this thy pride and arrogancie do ſuddenly carrie thee away headlong to ruine and deſtruction, together with thy vnhappie and vnfortunate kingdome. And then thou wouldeſt be willing to make confeſſion of this the obſtinacie and error, at ſuch time as thou ſhalt not haue left vnto thee any helpe or remedie of thy affaires, being once brought to the exigent and extremitie of a moſt deſperate eſtate. We haue hitherto enough & too much endured theſe outrages, and too too much haſt thou prouoked the Ottoman Empire with thy great and intollerable iniuries: and yet haue I ſhewed my ſelfe too patient in ſuffering and tollerating ſo manie wronges and miſchieues. Doſt thou think that thou ſhalt be acquitted of that thy treacherie wherwith thou betraiedſt my armie in Hungarie? doeſt thou imagine that thou ſhalt goe vnpuniſhed for the withdrawing of ſo many townes from my obeyſance in Epyre, and for ſo many of my garriſons which thou haſt cauſed to be ſlaine and murthered? doeſt thou ſuppoſe that the other thy miſdeedes lately done and perpetrated, ſhall go free and vnchaſtized? as the armie of Haly Baſſa deſtroyed, ſo manie inuaſions and fierings of my territories, and the tumult of the warre of Hungarie, which to the vttermoſt of thy abilitie, euen of late, thou diddeſt further and ſet forwarde: beſides the ſpoyling of my father in lawe his dominions, becauſe he would not ſuffer thee to haue a paſſage through his Countrie? I would thou wouldeſt once at the laſt remember thy ſelfe moſt wicked wretch, and not continue any longer in expecting what wilbe the end and iſſue of this my diſpleaſure and iuſt indignation. Take heede that theſe ſlight enlargements of thy proſperitie, doe not ſo animate and encourage thy diſordinate appetite, and draw thee on with fooliſh deſire to that paſſe, that thy fortune (being hereafter made much more miſerable) doe moue euen thoſe that hate thee (my ſelfe eſpecially) to the pitie and compaſsion of thy hard and wretched eſtate. If there be leſt any curteſie or humanitie in thy deſperate and graceleſſe mind, remember thy ſelfe yet at the laſt, of the bountifull benefites which thou haſt receaued of me, and giue me no longer occaſion to repent me that I haue beſtowed them ſo vnthankefully. Although it be an vnſeemely and vnciuill part to obiect vnto any man the good & liberalitie that hath bene ſhewed him; yet is it a token of too too great ingratitude ſo ſoone and eaſilie to forget the merite of fore-paſſed benefits: wherefore I cannot but be ſorrowfull for thy forrune (ô Scanderbeg,) and take pitie vpon thy vnhappy eſtate. For ſetting apart the ſafetie of thy ſoule (whereof as a man paſt all hope, and vtterly giuen ouer of the Phiſitian, thou takeſt no care nor makeſt any account or reckoning) not yet to ſpeake any thing of thy contempt of the lawes of Mahomet, and of the ſmall eſtimat which thou makeſt of this diuine Prophet: was there any one thing of all thoſe vaine & blind delights, wherein the thoughts of men do take a pleaſure, which I haue not moſt bountifully yeelded vnto thee, who art now caried away with the baſe and vile regard of thy poore and ſorie kingdome? Hadſt thou not plentie of armour, horſes, great and huge traines of ſlaues, aboundance of gold, ſiluer and ſuperfluitie of all other things, which do commonly allure and entiſe all eſtates and ages to affect them? Diddeſt thou euer want any fit or continuall occaſions to exerciſe thy vertue, or to aduance thee to the glory of great eſtates, and places of charge, either in peace or warre? or to any kinde of honours which were fit and agreable to thy yeares? In ſumme, who, in all my courts, was a greater fauorite, and more in my grace then thy ſelfe? was there either ſtranger or naturall ſubiect, who amongſt my moſt inward and ſecret friends was more pleaſing and acceptable vnto me? How carefully and diligently did I prouide to haue thee nouriſhed and brought (vp from the time thou wert firſt brought vnto me) in knowledge and learning, in good manners and diſcipline? & how willingly and continually did I aduaunce the forwardneſſe of thy vertue, which

I ſaw to grow and encreaſe daily? ſometimes by recompences and rewardes, ſometimes by all poſſible meanes of praiſe and commendation? And as for the honor and renowne of armes (then the which nothing is to be accounted or helde more honourable or commendable,) therein I made thee ſo glorious, that in all kinde of ſeruices whatſoeuer, neither did I take notice of any ſouldier in regard of thee, neither did I ſeeme to ſet by any of my Captaines in compariſon of the grace and honor which I did vnto thee. For all theſe my merits and good deſerts, thou (ô Scanderbeg) haſt now at length well rewarded me: hauing ſhewed thy ſelfe to be ſuch a one, that it ſeemeth I haue not exalted the man I tooke thee for: but that I haue noriſhed a plague and peſtilence within mine owne houſe and familie. But be it that the loue of thy natiue countrie did wound thy ſoule, and ſollicite thee to doe as thou haſt done; if thou hadſt required me to reſtore the ſame vnto thee, doeſt thou thinke that I would haue denied it vnto thee, ſeeing that ſo often and vndemaunded (if thou liſt to remember it) I did freely and voluntarily make offer of the ſame vnto thee? But thou notwithſtanding haddeſt rather to haue it of thy ſelfe by thy owne miſdeedes and iniquitie, then as a benefite receiued from me, or as a gift proceeding from my bountie. Keepe it therefore ſtill in the name of God: neither ſhall I be diſcontented therewithall, and I proteſt vnto thee (ſo great is my clemencie towardes all thoſe that haue beene in any ſort familiarly knowen vnto me) that I doe nowe freely pardon all former faults and offences, not for any merit of thine owne (which is iuſt none at all) but I doe it becauſe euen in the middeſt of this publique hatred and diſlike, it pleaſeth me to call to minde both the manifolde benefites which thou haſt receiued from me, and that firſt faith and loyaltie which I did once finde in thee, when thou wert with me: for that of longer time and continuance was the good ſeruice which thou diddeſt me, then the offences wherewith thou haſt wronged mee. Both Croy, and the ſtate of thy father (although thou haſt ſeized vpon them by fraude and treacherie) doe I permit thee to enioy frankely; on this condition, that thou doe voluntarily reſigue or reſtore thoſe other townes of Epyre, wherein thou haſt no right nor intereſt, and which doe in equitie appertaine vnto me, who haue heretofore purchaſed them by the fortune of warres, and by mine owne vertue. Beſides that thou doe preſently and without delay repoſſeſſe my father in law of all the goods of the Miſians as farre as may be, and what is wanting to ſupply and make good with money: and that from hencefoorth (during thy life) thou holde it no leſſe crime then fellonie, to offer any violence, either to him or to anie other whom we repute to be our friends: or by any manner of meanes whatſoeuer to grace, aide, or comfort our enemies; in ſo doing, thou maieſt for euer ſhunne and auoide the malice and hatred of the Turkes, and ſo ſhalt thou haue my good grace and fauour neither more nor leſſe, then thou haſt heretofore and in time paſt, if ſo be thou haddeſt not rather (though then all in vaine) to ſeeke place for repentance, when thou haſt bene beaten with the rod of thine owne miſerie, and when thine owne preſumption and audatious obſtinacie ſhall haue drawen me thither in perſon to take the reuenge thereof in a moſt mercileſſe and implacable maner. Thou knoweſt well the puiſſance of my forces, and thou art not ignorant of the force & ſtrength of mine army. Thou haſt before thine eyes a notable example of the calamitie of Hungarie, and therefore needeſt not further admoniſhmēt. For a concluſion, whatſoeuer is thy determination I would at the leaſt that thou write vnto me. Thou maiſt haue cōference with Airadin
                     Airadin. 
                           •
                        . gent for Amurath with Scanderbeg. our agent (a man both ſecret & faithfull) and of whom thou ſhalt vnderſtand the reſidue of that which I would not commit to writing. Farwell, if thou be well aduiſed:
                  
                     from Andrinople 
                        the 15. of Iune, and of the generation of Ieſus, 1444.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Scanderbeg gaue no credit to theſe vaine and fruteleſſe letters, but both they and heSubiectes of Scanderbeg willing to haue peace with the Turkes. that ſent them were equallly ſet at naught & neglected. Notwithſtanding ſome there were of opinion, that this deuiſe of Amurath was without any fraud or guile, and they did aſcribe it to a certen kind of feare and neceſſity, alleadging that the Sultan had bene induced to make theſe offers and conditions of peace for doubt of the warre of Hungarie, and through the vnweldines of his age, which was then growen verie great. Moreouer that the tender age of his ſonne Mahomet, being as yet vnfit and vnſufficient for the charge and burthen of the Empire, did giue vnto the father great cauſe carefully to bethinke himſelfe of the future eſtate of his childe, meaſuring the forces of Scanderbeg, by the late ſlaughter of Haly Baſſa; and being as much feared and terrified, by reaſon of the ſingular faith and fidelitie which he ſawe ſo many people in Albanie beare vnto him, and the good will of the Chriſtians which did daily encreaſe towardes him: that in the meane time neuertheleſſe, he did but diſſemble and make an outward ſhew, whileſt with a fained kind of feare, he demaunded of Scanderbeg the reſtitution of thoſe townes, and a parte of Epire, and the reparation of the wrongs which had bene offered to his confederates: that he did ſet downe ſo manie conditions without reaſon or equitie, to the intent he might obtaine ſuch as were reaſonable and commodious: and that there was no doubt but he would be contented to accept of ſuch a peace, and to yeeld vnto ſuch termes of ſubmiſſion, as Castriot himſelfe would ſet downe, and preſcribe vnto him, without that he would make any further queſtion, either of the loſſe of Epire, or of the warres of Miſia, ſo that the Albanois could be content to abſtaine from armes, and to aſſure him of peace and quietnes. Wherfore, to make peace with Ottoman vpon theſe termes, and to conclude an abſtinence from warre for a time; could not but be greatly for their honor and aduantage, and the rather, for that himſelfe was the firſt, that did motion and inuite them to a parley: that therefore it would not be otherwiſe, but that many and great commodities would thereby redound to all the inhabitants of that prouince: that the accidents and iſſues of warre are verie doubtfull: and it was a point of ſmall wiſedome: neither were they well aduiſed who would preferre troubles before reſt and quietnes: neither ought any man to ground the courſe and ſucceſſe of his good fortune, vpon the firſt beginnings of his good happe and proſperitie: that the Hungarians had more often and more happily foughten with the Turks, then had the Albanians: yet being now ouerwhelmed with their late miſfortune, they might in vaine frame their complaintsSentence. and record their vnſpeakeable dammages and loſſes: that therefore it was farre better by ſome acte and ſhew of courteſie and humanitie, to make a frend of an enemie: then to incenſe him more and more by diſdaining and refuſing the peace which he profered them ſo franckly.
            
            Theſe diſcourſes being thus debated in the preſence of Scanderbeg (albeit in partScanderbeg excepteth againſt the meſſenger and peace of Amurath they had ſome appearance of truth) yet did he preſently impugne & contradict them: ſeeming to bewaile and complaine againſt the follie of the Epirots, that they onely of all the nations of the world (to their owne exceſſiue dammage) ſhould be the laſt that would take notiſe of the wiles & deceites of Ottoman: that it was a ſtrange thing, that the vaine, idle, and impertinent letters of Amurath ſhould meete and encounter with a beleefe and credulitie farre more vaine and ſottiſh, & ſhould purchaſe any credit or faith among them: or that the wits of his people could be ſo dull and ſenceleſſe as to thinke that Airadin (being a Spie and Intelligencer) ſhould be reputed as one ſent vnto them in the name and credit of an ambaſſador. Beſides, admit there were no danger nor deceite in this matter, but that all things were according as Amurath had written, yet what lightnes and inconſtancie were this, to giue faith and credit to their

enemy rather then to their owne actes, and the eſtate of their owne affaires? And that the fortune of an other rather then their owne, ſhould make them to chaunge their counſailes and determinations concerning the peace & the warres: true it is (quoth he) that Amurath is in the declining of his life, and that the Turkes at the battell of Varna haue receiued a mortall & deadly blow. Beſides that other accidents do inuite the Barbarians to deſire reſt and quietneſſe: but what ſhould theſe things giue any occaſion to the Albanians, either to abate or to looſe their courage, or to receiue ſuch conditions of peace, as an enemy whom they had vanquiſhed ſhould dare to preſent vnto them who were the vanquiſhers? Neither was it any thing to be regarded that they imagined that ſome of thoſe conditions might be allowed and other ſome reiected: for they could not any way accept of peace but it would be moſt ignominious, neither could they ſo warelie or circumſpectly handle the matter, but that the Sultan would ſoone perceiue both the fearefulneſſe of their mindes and the difference of their meanes: but admit that peace were made, and let it be imagined that Amurath would ſit ſtill and be glad of quietneſſe, till the tumultes, now growing vpon the late ouerthrow of the Hungarians, were throughly appeaſed: and till ſuch time as he had quenched the flame, that was now beginning to be kindled: it might be till then the Epirots ſhould enioy the benefite of that peace, notwithſtanding afterwardes there was no other likelihood, but that he would turne the whole violence of the wars, vpon their neckes, and with his full forces would ſeeke to oppreſſe them, when they ſhould in vaine obiect vnto him the violating of the articles of agreement concluded betweene them. Neither was the age of Amurath ſo impotent and decrepit, that it would make him vtterly vnapt and vnable for the warres. For it was the counſell and wiſedomeSentence. of a Generall, which ought to be reſpected, not his bodily ſtrength & puiſſance: and the prudence of the leaders was a matter in all ages more vſually to be redoubted, then the promptneſſe of the hand, or raſh temeritie and fooliſh hardineſſe in vſing of the ſword. That in his weake and feeble body, did remaine a ſpirite, ſound, quicke and watchfull to all aduantages & opportunities, & a hart full fraught with mortall hate & extreme mallice. And though that Ottoman himſelf would not be dealing with them, yet it could not be but they ſhould find enemies. He forgot not alſo to ſhew them, that ſmall and ſhort could be the profit of that peace which they ſhould make with one ſo old, and who was now drawing to his laſt end, that the fierce and hautie courage and the reſtleſſe minde of his ſonne Mahomet would aime and attempt greater matters: ſo that they ſhould be ſure of peace, when warre was moſt for their profit: & they ſhould not faile of warre when they would be glad of reſt and quietneſſe, by meanes whereof that which they ſhould do, ſhould not be for the benefit and good of the Epirotes, but for the profit and aduantage of the Turkes. What reaſon therefore had they to deſire peace, ſeeing that the victorie was euen already in their hands, and that the enemy himſelfe did ſeeme to auouch no leſſe, but openly to confeſſe it: wherefore then ſhould they not follow the proſperous winde, and pleaſant gale of their good fortune, and enioy the occaſion which was ſo freely offered them, whereof, if the opportunitie ſhould once ſlide away or be let paſſe: in vaine would they repent hereafter that they had not laid better hold vpon it, that it was a ſhame for them now to ſpeake of compoſition: when the woundes lately receiued in the battell of Haly Baſſa were not yet cured, that they ſhould firſt recouer the Seate of their anceſtours, and aſſure the libertie of ſo many peoples their Subiectes: that then they ſhould finde the oportunitie to accord, either by propounding or accepting honeſt and honorable conditions of peace and compoſition, is it poſsible, that the remembrance of the diſcon
                  •
               iture of Vladiſlaus ſhould giue them ſo notable an impreſſion of feare, and terrour

that ſuch an accident and chance of warre ſhould alienate the mindes of the Epirotes from that warre more then the Hungarians, who had ſuſtained that ouerthrowe, for the report went amongſt the common people, that Huniades did burne in a vehement deſire to reuenge the loſſe and ignominie of the battell at Varna: and that he did ſecretly plot and deuiſe the meanes to raiſe a new armie.
            Vpon theſe reaſons alleadged, all men were wonderfully encouraged, and in thisSubiects of Scanderbeg reſolued to holde warres with Amurath. as in all other matters, they were obedient vnto Scanderbeg: his people alſo were verie much aggreiued, & repented them that they had opened their mouthes in that matter which was not to his liking, all being vnwilling that he ſhould haue any conceipt, that they in any wiſe, or in any matter concerning his ſeruice would refuſe his aduiſe and counſell, which they had euer followed in the field and in the Campe. Whereupon the Prince of Albania hauing firſt of all called the Turkiſh Ambaſſadour to his preſence, he held him in a long diſcourſe, ſometimes apart, and ſometimes in full aſſemblies of his ſubiectes: by a long narration of his loſſes and damages, both publique and priuate: and complaining himſelfe greatly of the diſloialtie and periurie of Amurath. And thus hauing gratiouſly entertained and bountifully feaſted him for fiue dayes, with a cheerefull and glad countenance, full of confidence and aſſurance, for feare leaſt he (which was ſent for a ſpie) ſhould coniecture or imagine any kind or apprehenſion of feare: he led him in his owne companie, and ſhewed him all the rampiers, and fortifications, and all the courtes of garde of his men of warre, giuing him alſo a ſight of the forme and manner of his campe, and then returned him with an anſwer in writing to this effect.
            
               
                  
                     George Caſtriot, otherwiſe Scanderbeg, the Champion of Ieſus Chriſt, and Prince of the Epirots, to Ottoman Prince of the Turkes, ſendeth health.
                  
                  The time was, wherein (as thou writeſt) thy ſelfe diddeſt once ſurmount me inLetters of Scanderbeg to Amurath. number and multitude of benefites: but now will I vanquiſh thee in modeſtie and temperancie of ſpeech: for I hold nothing more baſe and ſeruile, then not to abſtaine (euen againſt a deadly enemie) from leud ſpeches and diſhoneſt termes. For this cauſeSentence. I haue both ſeene and entertained thy meſſenger, and haue receiued thy meſſage in all good and frendly manner: and to ſpeake the truth, thy letters haue giuen me cauſe and matter of laughter, rather then of wrath or anger: conſidering that euen in the beginning and entrie of the preamble, thou aduentureſt to taxe me of ſo great ingratitude and infidelitie, and yet preſently after ſeeming to be moued with a more tender kind of affection, thou alledgeſt vnto me, the loſſe and perdition of my ſoule, whereas thy ſelfe being a moſt vehement and obſtinate defender of an inuerterate and grounded error, art wholly ignorant of the wretched end and deſtinie that doth attend thee: from that matter, without obſeruing anie rightes of warre, or good forme of proceeding, moſt vnaduiſedly and imprudently (I will not ſay impudently) as a vanquiſher to one vanquiſhed thou doſt propound and ſet me downe many conditions of peace, and ſo ſtrange, that hardly can any free eares endure to giue them the hearing. Aſſuredly Amurath, although ſo outragious ſpeeches might arme the moſt patient man liuing to returne the like againe, yet will I impute part of them to thy aged yeares, andSentence. to thy naturall diſpoſition, (ſeeing it is a propertie incident to old men to be lauiſh of their tongues) and the reſidue will I attribute to thy griefe & diſcontentment, which it is very difficult and hard to moderate: but eſpecially I am content to ſuffer it, becauſe it is no part of my meaning or deliberation to contend with thee in vaine diſputes and reproches, but by iuſt armes and with the courage of true enmitie. Notwithſtanding to what purpoſe, I pray thee, ô Ottoman, doeſt thou take on ſo both before

God and man, as though that I had giuen thee & not thou to me the firſt offence. Doeſt thou count this to be infidelitie, that I reuolted from following of thee, being compelled thereunto by neceſsitie? doeſt thou obiect this for a crime and reproch vnto me, that I recouered my Countrey by vertue and induſtrie? But go to, let it be ſo, neither doe I greatly care to be held guiltie of this treſpaſſe: the benefites alſo ſhewed me, which thou ſo at large and ſo orderly doeſt reckon vp, I my ſelfe could bee verie well content to remember them: were it not that the knowledge thereof doeth draw with it the dolorous remembrance of an infinite number of great and greeuous miſchiefes and calamities, the which, if the one ſhould bee compared and recompenſed with the other, aſſuredly the greatneſſe of the deſertes and merites would ſoone be buried and ouerwhelmed vnder a greater heape of the miſchiefes and miſdeedes. But I hadde rather ſhame ſhould make mee bluſhe to heare thy ſelfe (as thou doeſt recount them,) then that I ſhould be driuen to rehearſe or to recite them. Yet one thing there is, which (who ſoeuer knoweth it) cannot but wonder and greatly maruell at, and that is, how either I could haue the power to ſuffer and endure them, or thou the heart neuer to be ſatiate or ſatisfied, in doing of ſo many cruelties, and in the continuall and daily practiſes of ſuch mortall and deadly hatred. My fathers kingdome moſt wrongfully and iniuriouſlie haſt thou detayned from mee: my bretheren haſt thou cauſed to be murthered moſt cruelly: and my ſelfe (not doubting or ſuſpecting anie ſuch matter) diddeſt thou of late moſt wickedlie vowe and deſtinate to the death: and yet for all this doeſt thou (O Amurath) thinke it ſtraunge, that my minde, (being euen then not vnmindefull of libertie) hath ſought out ſome meanes to eſcape and winde it ſelfe out of ſo hard bondage and ſubiection? How long diddeſt thou thinke that I would haue endured thy ſo inſolent and proud gouernment? Yet did I for a long time ſuffer many things, neither did I at any time refuſe the yoke in thy ſeruice. All my life time did I expoſe my ſelfe to all perils and daungers both publique and priuate, both of mine owne diſpoſition willingly, and at thy commandement, to ſhewe my obedience and duty vnto thee: euery day did I heare ſpeaches diſperſed concerning thee, and amongeſt my friendes and familiars, I heard no other talke ordinarily, then of thy ſnares and trappe
                        •
                      layed for me: and yet was I perſwaded for a long time, that all thy wordes and deedes were free both from fraud, malice, and treaſon, till ſuch time as thy wicked and blouddy counſailes and deuiſes did diſcouer themſelues moſt apparauntly. Then began I for the time to diſſemble alſo: carying a watchfull care and regard continually vpon thy ſub
                        •
                     leties and pollicies, till I might finde ſome honeſt and conuenient meane to enfranchiſe my liberty. Thou haſt not thereby any cauſe to be agreeued or to complaine, ſeeing, that (as the ſaying is) thou art wounded with thine owne weapon: yet are theſe but trifles (O Amurath) in reſpect of thoſe things which the hope and deſire of my heart hath conceiued, and doth ayme at. Leaue off therefore henceforth theſe thy ſharpe threates and menaces, and deſiſt from obiecting vnto vs ſo often the lamentable miſhappe and misfortune of the Hungarians. Each man (good Sir) hath his owne courage, and each one his owne nature. As for vs, whatſoeuer fortune it ſhall pleaſe God to ſend vs, wee will take and beare it patiently. In the meane while, neither will we take any conſell of our enemy of that we haue to doe, neither will we ſeeke or intreate for peace from thee: but relying vpon the diuine fauour and clemency, we will endeuour to triumph ouer thee, with a moſt glorious and triumphant victorie.
                  
                     Adieu:
                     From our Campe the twelfth of Iulie. 1444.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Ottoman hauing peruſed the contentes of Scanderbeg his letters, and learning of Ayraden by word of mouth the reſt of his cogitations and deliberations, was nothing

well pleaſed neither with the one nor with the other: but on the contrary, the fierce and liberall ſpeach of the man, and his wonderfull truſt and confidence (which he knew did not proceede of nothing) did ingender in him mighty feare and terror, rather then ſharpen his anger and diſpleaſure which he had formerly conceyued: and he tooke it as a manifeſt preſage and augurie of the difficulty of the warre of Albanie. Notwithſtanding, that he might not bewray vnto his people any appearaunce of feare or cowardize, it is reported that in ſmiling wiſe (oftentimes ſtroaking of hisAmurath his ſcorneful and deſp
                     •
                  tefull ſpeaches vpon the receipt of Scā
                  derbeg his letters. beard with his hand) he ſhould vtter theſe ſpeeches: Thou doeſt couet (moſt vnhappy and vnfortunate wretch) thou doeſt couet ſome memorable and famous kinde of death, and thou ſhalt haue it (beleeue me) thou ſhalt haue it, we our ſelues will ſee thy obſequies perfourmed. And without expecting thy commaundement (moſt mightie king of the Albanians) we will honour and reuerence thy funerals with our preſence, leaſt that hereafter being in hell, thou doe complaine that thy end was ignoble and diſhonourable. All this notwithſtanding, the imaginations and thoughts of the Sultan were very vncertaine and irreſolute in the middeſt of theſe difficulties. For the rumours which aroſe daily from the part of Huniades, and the often meſſages of the vnfaithfull Deſpot of Miſia, that pernicious old wretch, who was now infamous through his double treaſons, and by the enuious deſtinies was reſerued, euen till that time, for ſo many miſeries and calamities to the Chriſtians: theſe conſiderations (I ſay) did tranſport and cary away his mind elſe where, and did hinder and trouble him from bending all his forces, and turning the waight and burthen of the whole warre vppon the kingdome of Epire. Meane while neuertheleſſe, to the intent the late iniury offered him by the contempt and refuſall of his friendſhippe and confederacy, might not reſt without ſome preſent kinde of puniſhment: he concluded that if he did nothing elſe, yet he would trouble and moleſt the peace and quietneſſe of Scanderbeg, though he were not able vtterly to aboliſh it. To this effect he imagined that he had a fit and conuenient oportunity by the negligence of the Chriſtians, who (as he heard) were growen very careleſſe and ſecure, through their manifold good fortunes and happy ſucceſſe in the wars, and that Scanderbeg hauing diſmiſſed his army, did keepe the field with his horſemen onely; who did daily and careleſlie range abroade farre from their Campe, here and there diſperſed and ſcattered for deſire of prey and pillage.Feriſey ſent againſt Scanderbeg by Amurath. For this cauſe hee cauſed Feriſey to be ſent for, who was one of his Baſſaes, a man of a ſtirring and fierce diſpoſition, and of a quicke and ready ſpirite. To him hee gaue in charge nine thouſand horſe, all choſen and picked men, and hauing heaped vpon him many great and large promiſes, in caſe he returned with victorie (as hee wiſhed and deſired) he commaunded him to enter into Epire, with all the ſpeede and ſecreſie that might be, that his comming might be felt before it was perceyued by the enemy. The reaſon that made Ottoman at that time to ſend no greater forces, was either for feare that delay and protracting of time might worke their dammage and diſaduantage, or that the rumour of his comming being blowen abroade and diuulged, might awaken the Chriſtians, and giue them time and leyſure, both to aduiſe themſelues, and to eſchew the perill▪ by addreſſing and preparing new ambuſhmentes, as the euent afterwardes made manifeſt, to fruſtrate and diſappoint the traines of him that was a maſter in ſuch arts and ſubtelties.
            But whileſt that I doe ſo confidentlie ſette downe all theſe matters touching theVarietie of opinions touching Amurath his profeſſion of a religious life. counſailes of Amurath, both concerning his manner of mannaging forraine warres, and the adminiſtration of his eſtate, I doubt not but many will maruell at this my iudgement and opinion in that it is repugnant and contrarie to others. And it maie be they will be inquiſitiue to knowe, what ſhould make mee ſo to differ and varie

from the common opinion, ſeeing that it is a matter yet freſh in memory, and many alſo haue committed no leſſe to writing, iuſtifying the ſame to all poſteritie: That Amurath in his latter dayes, immediately vppon the battell of Varna, meditating and lamenting, ſometimes vppon the miſeries and inconueniences of Princes, and ſometimes vppon the temeritie and inconſtancie of Fortune, after hee had orderedHaly Baſſa gouernour of Mahomet the ſonne of Amurath. his domeſticall affaires, and appointed Halie Baſſa for gouernour to his eldeſt ſonne Mahomet, hee preſently depriued himſelfe of his Crowne and Empire, and leauing Andrinople, and the care of all publique matters, and retayning with him but a very ſmall number▪ as the companions of his counſell) hee retired him ſelfe into Aſia where he vowed and profeſſed a religious and a godly life, according to the ſuperſtition of his forefathers. Neither did hee forſake that kinde of life, till ſuch time as the Deſpotte of Tranſiluania, namely Huniades, was come before Sophia: and that the cries and daily exclamations of the people, did reuoke him▪ alleadging that Mahomet by reaſon of his young and tender yeares, was not able to ſupport and beare the heauy burthen and charge of the eſtate, and that the credite and authority of Halie Baſſa, was not of ſuch force in the Campe, as might make the ſouldiours to obey and reſpect him. Certainly I cannot but maruell from whence this erro
                  •
                ſhould proceede, eſpecially in an Act happening ſo late, and within the time of our remembraunce. I wil not aduenture to condemne thoſe graue, wiſe, and learned Authors, of raſhneſſe and temeritie, nor to conuince them of vntrueth and falſehood: yet this one thing I dare auouche for certainetie, and maintaine it of mine owne knowledge, that the letters of Amurath aboue written, were ſent from Andrinople, the chiefe ſeate of the Ottoman Empire, vnder the name and title of Amurath, and that both Feriſey and many other Chieftaines did attempt vppon the countrey of Epire, by his commaundement and appointment, after that he hadde in vaine ſought for peace of Scanderbeg.
            
            But this errour proceedeth not from thence, for in the order and accompt of the times, will not be found anie confuſion or diſagreement, if wee ſhould graunt that theſe things did paſſe, before that euer Amurath did giue ouer and renounce his Empire. But herein my minde cannot be throughly ſatisfied, to ſee that the death of the Sultan ſhould be ſo vnaduiſedly tranſlated from Epire into Aſia. For in deed, there is nothing more contrarie to the trueth, and there was neuer any one heard of, that durſt maintaine or allow the contrarie, but that the ſiege of Croie did make an endAmurath made his laſt end before Croy of his aged yeares, and all ages enſuing will giue the honour of the death of Ottoman, vnto Scanderbeg, as being conſumed and extinct through pure conceipt and melancholy, and through impatiencie of griefe: for that hee could not preuaile againſt Croie. But the diſcretion and good iudgement of the Reader, will eaſily finde out theſe particularities, and the probability of the whole trueth of thoſe matters, by the diligent computation and conference of the times.
            But returne wee againe to Feriſey, who in great ſecreſie was entred into the FrontiersFeriſey cometh into Epire. of Macedony, and did in vaine promiſe vnto him ſelfe the reward and honour of the victory, which he had before conceiued in his minde, puffed vp with ſo great and a vaine hope. And therefore ſtanding very carefully vppon his guard, he marched on, approaching daily nearer the enemy, in manner and countenaunce rather of a Robber, then of a true and iuſt warriour. And yet coulde not hee for all that preuent the newes of his arriuall. For Scanderbeg being admoniſhed of all thinges by the Garriſons, that were diſpoſed in diuerſe and ſundry places, or (as others write) by a ſpie, comming from the Court of the Sultan, ſodainely (as a man that went euer furniſhed and appointed to all caſualties and accidents of warre) taking the occaſion of

time and place. He firſt of all ſeized vppon a certaine ſtreight and narrow valley namedThe valley of Mocrea. 
               Mocrea, (which was the onely place where the Turkiſhe Captaine was able to paſſe) and he diſpoſed it full of ſouldiours, all hardy men and well reſolued. The Baſſa began now to approach, and the huge thickneſſe of the duſt raiſed by the treading and trampling of their horſes, did euidently diſcouer that the enemy was neare at hand. Our men keeping their ſtand, did attend with no leſſe ſilence the diſcouery of the enemy, til ſuch time as they ſaw them entred into the hollow vallies, and enuironed with high and craggy rockes full of woods, and that they were entangled on all ſides in theBattell of Mocrea againſt Feriſey. thicke and huge forreſts. Then iſſuing out vpon them with great fury & violence, ſodainly and vnexpected, they preſented them ſelues to the enemy. There were of footmen about the number of one thouſand fiue hundred, beſides two thouſand horſe at the leaſt. But theſe were reſerued to a further and better peece of ſeruice. The Turkes (who had enough to doe, and were ſufficiently beaten with the diſcommodities and diſaduauntages of the place) were on all ſides aſſailed, both before, behinde, and in flanke, by the Infantery, who killed and ſlew them at their pleaſures. They notwithſtanding not forſaking their ranckes, but defending themſelues with great hardineſſe, as long as there was any hope of victory, did ſtoutly continue in the ſame place, where the enemy had firſt charged them. But the horſes did rather hurt and hinder then benefite or ſuccour their maiſters, and were in the end the loſſe and ouerthrow of the riders. For (being as men beſieged) they receiued and tooke more wounds by far, then they could giue or inflict vppon their enemies. And yet when as all appearaunce and likelihood of eſcaping this daunger was cleane taken from them, euen then did they ſhew themſelues more valiant and hardy then euer: & they maintained the fight with the greater obſtinacy, almoſt all of them keeping the ſelfſame place to the very death, where they had once ſet footing and taken poſſeſſion, whileſt they were aliue: Some few only being excepted, whom either the ſhameful deſire of life, or a more vrgent reſolution taken vpon the place (for they ſcorned to die ſuch a kinde of death, the deſire whereof was more fooliſh and contemptible, then honeſt or commendable) did make them to humble themſelues on their knees, and to lay down their armes, which made the conquerors to ſaue their liues and take them to mercy. There were of them taken priſoners 760. but of thoſe which were ſlaine, the number was much greater. Thus the Barbarians making haſt to the prey, became themſelues to be an eaſy prey to theirVictory of Scanderbeg againſt Feriſey. enemies giuing vnto the Chriſtians a ioyfull teſtimony of their miſconceited & falſe imagined victory. Feriſey ſeeing the vantgard of his owne army encloſed & ſurpriſed, and the enemy buſily fleſhing themſelues in their ſlaughter, & plying themſelues vpon this occaſion, as hauing gotten a fit ſubiect for their glory, hee turned bridell with the reſidue of his troopes, and being ſmally mindfull, either of his Princes inſtructions, or of his owne naturall fiercenes, he was vtterly vnwilling in ſo ſodaine and vnloked for an accident, and in a place of ſuch diſaduauntage, to make any further triall (to his coſt perhappes) of a worſer Fortune: doubting both the danger and the number of the enemies to be greater then he ſuppoſed. Hee therefore turned his backe to the Chriſtians, and in his retire hee cried out aloft, that it was more commendable in an expertSentence. Captaine to ſaue ſome, then to loſe all, eſpecially in ſuch a place where (euen as dumbe beaſtes) they muſt giue their throates to the cutting. True it is that there be ſome, who write, that he was ſlaine in the fight by the handes of Scanderbeg. But the horſemen of the Albanois, did not ſuffer their retraite to bee altogether without bloudſhedde, but keeping continually in the taile of them as they fled, they did kill many of them which ſtragled and ſtayed behinde, and they preſſed vppon them hard, purſuing them continually, till ſuch time as they grewe to be ſomewhat wearyed, and

depriued rather of ſtrength, then of will and appetite to chaſe and follow them. Theſe matters being thus diſpatched, and the Turkes put to flight, without any great hurt of his owne companies, Scanderbeg with all thoſe troopes which he had with him, did inuade the territory of the enemy, filling and ſatisfying the deſires of the ſouldiers with the ſweete contentment of prey and pillage.
            The misfortune of Feriſey was ſeconded with the like deſaſter & miſhap of Muſtapha, no leſſe vnhappy & vnfortunat. For the Ottoman vnderſtanding of the rough entertainment giuen by the Albanois to his forces, & that their flight was not only profitable, but more then needfull, and that their fortune (in this caſe after they had bene enforced to take that oportunity) had deſerued no iuſt cauſe of blame or reprehenſion, to be layd vpon them: he hauing his mind maruellouſly troubled and perplexed, and being vtterly impatient of all reſt and quietneſſe) night and day, imagined and caſt with him ſelfe touching Scanderbeg, bending all his counſells and the vttermoſt of his deſpite and malice, how he might worke his ruine and deſtruction. Beſides, his thoughts affected nothing more (he being vtterly ignorant of his owne miſhap) then one day to ſee the fields of Epire, where he did hope to find ſome matter to execute his long wiſhed and deſired reuenge of ſo many outrages and iniuries both of old and lately committed: in ſuch ſort, that ſome ſecret force and operation of the heauens, did ſeeme to draw on the fate of his old age, which (of it owne nature) was fearefull faint and timerous:Sentence. Old age naturally ſaint and timerous. but the troubles which were reported to be as then imminent from the Hungarians, did not permit and ſuffer him, freely as then to diſcharge his rage and choller againſt the Epirots. The glorious old fellow with the like humour of wrath and malice, did not for beare to reproch and menace Huniades, ſaying, that this was not the firſt time, that the tumults and troubles of Hungarie, had ſaued and preſerued the ſtate of Albany: neuertheleſſe, becauſe he could not ſuffer nor endure the bloud of his ſouldiers ſo lately ſhed, nor that the bodies of ſo many valiant warriers, ſhould lie on the earth without any reuenge, and eſpecially becauſe he was perſwaded that the profitable example of the former, might keepe others hereafter from the like ſurpriſe, & learn them to be wiſer: and for that the troupes of Feriſey ſeemed to haue bene vanquiſhed, not by any proweſſe of the Chriſtians, but onely by the diſaduantage of the place: he committed the care of this buſineſſe into the hands of Muſtapha, of whom afterwardsMuſtapha ſent againſt Scanderbeg with an Army of 15000. Turks. he did often, (but not with any great good ſucceſſe) ſerue himſelfe in thoſe quarters. Him he commaunded to make a ſupply, and to fill vp the companies of Feriſey, and to encreaſe their numbers with a new ſtrength of 6000. horſe, he enioyned him moreouer, and expreſly charged him in any caſe not to enter neither more nor leſſe into the ſtreightes and paſſages of Epire, where the enemy held him ſelfe in ambuſhment, and where the perill was moſt to be redoubted, and that vppon no occaſion, nor for the hope of any good ſucceſſe whatſoeuer, he ſhould not hazard himſelf to the fight or force of the enemy: but that without any more adoe, he ſhould onely waſt and ſpoile their borders, and to hold him ſelfe contented with this glorie, that the trees and the fieldes of the Albanois, had in ſome ſort felt the force and violence of his victorious and conquering ſword: and that their countrey was burnt, waſted, and conſumed by the fire. Theſe and ſuch like goodlie admonitions, did the Sultan giue to Muſtapha, as though a man could preſcribe vnto the hearers, what they hadde to doe when their armors are once put vpon their backes. Notwithſtanding when the time came that this ſhould be put in execution, the carefull diligence of the Captaine did not let paſſe or neglect any one point of this charge which had bene giuen him: but as occaſion ſerued, hee added to the ſame many good reſpectes, after hee came to conſider the nature of the countrey, and to haue a view of the ſituation of the place. For

ſcarcely had he diſplaied his enſignes within the confines of the chriſtians, but for bearing to march on with his Campe at large, through the open field, he firſt of all ſent forth three hundred horſe to beat ouer the plaine champion, and to diſcouer farre and neare all the paſſages, and to ſound the couerts and ſecret places which might ſerue for ambuſhment; enioyning them, that if they ſaw any likelyhood of daunger from the enemy, they ſhould ſpeedily retire themſelues to the body of their forces, or elſe drawing them on by litle and litle, they ſhould ſuffer them to preſſe and follow hard vppon them, till they were trained neare to the place appointed for their retraite. In ſo doing they ſhould be ſure to deale ſafely, and they might happe to entrappe the wily foxe, being entiſed ſo ſmoothly to the ſnare: both for that his forces being the weaker, they ſhould haue no cauſe to feare and redoubt them, and becauſe they had litle reaſon to thinke, that albeit his numbers were at the greateſt, yet in ſo ſodaine an occaſion, hee ſhould be able to ſtirre abroade with any great ſtore of forces. Now when theſe skoutes had well and diligently ſurueyed all quarters, and hadde vppon their returne made report, that all was ſafe and ſure; the Captaine Turke retayning with himſelfeMuſtapha enskonſeth his army in the borders of Macedony. foure thouſand horſe, enskonſed and fortified the place (where he meant to abide) in forme of a Campe, both with large rampiers and trenches, and with men of an hardy and good courage, partly thereby to aſſure the pillage, and partly to preuent and withſtand all the hazards and chaunces of variable and vnconſtant Fortune. A certaine ſmall height or mount of ground riſing, and mounting it ſelfe in manner of a little hill, did make their fort ſomewhat the more defencible, and leſſe acceſſible for the enemy. Hauing taken this order for his campe, he placed ſome for ſecrete ſentinelles and watches vppon the tops of certaine high mountaines, with certaine tokens & ſignals to giue notice of the comming of the enemy. This done, the reſt of his horſmen he licenſed to the ſpoile, abandoning the countrey to their greedy auarice & cruelty, which by their continuall bloudy roades and inuaſions, brought all things to incredible ruine and deſtruction. But he had firſt giuen them in charge, that whoſoeuer did not at the firſt ſound of the trumpet, and when the retrait ſhould be ſounded, preſently retire himſelfe within the campe, he ſhould be reputed as an enemy. Now was that goodly and pleaſant country harried, ſpoiled, and layd waſt: now were the trees and plants rooted vp and deſtroied, by the rage and ſword of the Barbarians: the medows & paſtures did ſeem (as it were) to bewail and lament: & the flames of the towns and villages (which were openly ſeene fired and burning euery where on all ſides, did ſeeme to cry and call for ſome to work their reuenge. Al the ſeed corne in the ground being beaten downe and troden vnder foote, with the trampling of their horſes, (for it was in Autumne) the innocent and harmles earth did now make ſhew, that it ſhould defraud the poore and vnfortunate labourer of his pains and trauell. Nothing was left free or vntouched which the ſword or fire could conſume or deſtroy: of moueables & cattels of ſmall value, and litle reckonning which belonged to the poore people, there was good ſtore and plenty to be found, but of men and inhabitants very few or none: by reaſon that the enemies were their next neighbours, ſmall was the number of them that remained in the countrey villages, and the moſt part of thē with their wiues, children, & all their families, and with the chiefe & choiſeſt of their ſubſtance, were ſhifted and fled away into the next walled townes, and ſtrong fenced holdes.
            In the middeſt of theſe exploits, whileſt the fierce Barbarians (iniurious & odious euen to God himſelf) licenciouſly and without any great profit, doth follow and purſue this maner and kind of conqueſt, and whileſt he ſpendeth and conſumeth his time & labor in courſing vp & downe here and there for the deſire & couetiſe of gaine and commodity, Caſtriot in the meane time, howbeit he was ſomwhat with the lateſt enformed

of this inuaſion, with 4000. horſe, & 1000. foot, was now arriued to the valleyScanderbeg marcheth againſt Muſtapha, with an army of 5000. men. of Mocrea, and his ſouldiers with great ioy and gladnes were entred within theſe valleys ſo well knowne vnto them, and which were as yet wet & moiſty with the bloud of the Turkes. There (whileſt euerie one of them is going vp and downe, ſecretly viewing his old and wonted lodging, and whileſt the watchfull and carefull mind of their Generall reſting in ſuſpence and as it were in vncertaintie, is deuiſing with him ſelfe what may betide in thoſe places ſo ſolitarie and full of ſilence: behold euen in that inſtant a certaine Epirote, a man of great courage and worthie of better fortune (being then newly eſcaped from the enemie, and marked with many great wounds, with the bloud yet running downe warme in great abundance, euery man being abaſhed at the ſight) came and ſuddenly caſt him ſelfe at the feete of Scanderbeg, imploring his ayde and helpe: and with a braue and chearefull countenance he encouragedThe ſpeeches of a peaſant wounded by the Turkes vnto Scanderbeg. the ſtanders by, and thus incenſed them, ſaying; That the fieldes were deſolate, all things being turned topſey tur
                     •
                  ey by the Turkes: who being ſcattered and diſperſed in all partes here and there about purchaſe and pillage, did dreame of nothing but their prey and bootie: and that without anie great paine or daunger, they might make all of them in particular to yeeld an accompt and reckoning of their iorney ſo vnaduiſedly vndertaken. At the firſt Castriot ſeemed to be ſomewhat cheared concerning his counſailes and determinations, by reaſon that theſe tydings ſeemed to giue fitte occaſion and oportunitie for his affaires: but after that hee had more particularly enquired of the peaſant touching the eſtate of all things: howe the Campe of the enemie was ſeated, and in what manner he carried him ſelfe: then extolling and prayſing the prudence of Mustapha, he began to admire him: and from thencefoorth he iudged that it would ſtand him vppon, from that time forwarde to be better aduiſed, and to looke vnto him ſelfe and his affaires more nearely and narrowly. Hereuppon being not willing to attempt anie thing raſhly, calling his armie round about him, and ſtanding in the middeſt ſo as he might well be heard of them all, he ſpake vnto them in this faſhion.
            I was wont (my companions and copartners in Armes) to giue counſell, and toOration of Scanderbeg to his ſoldiers, conſulting with thē vpō the maner how to aſſaile Muſtapha. 
               ſet downe the courſe and order of our affaires: but nowe it ſtandeth both you and me vppon, to take counſell together touching the ſtate of our matters, and the manner of our proceedings againſt the enemie: and this euerie one of you will eaſily acknowledge, if you do but looke into the euent of matters: the which (in caſe where reaſon is not of ſufficient force) is the chiefe maiſter and director. We were giuen to vnderſtand, that the Turkes as robbers and free-booters without any order or conduct, without any regard, did wander vp and downe the fields, flying hither and thither, as men that did feare any thing more then our comming. For this cauſe by my perſwaſion and procurement, & vnder my conduct, here are you come with this honorable intent and purpoſe, to inuade and ſet vpon them with your forces: it is not needful that I tell you what new counſels and directions the happy & oportune comming of this man hath brought vs: you haue heard himſelf recount, what the enemie doth, & how they do demeane thēſelues. One thing there is which no man can denie, if you conſider the purpoſe and drift of Muſtapha, both in the faſhion of his encamping and in the fortification and defence thereof with men well armed & appointed: you ſhall ſoone vnderſtand that he carieth not towards you the countenance nor mind of a robber, as (it may be) you ſuppoſed, but of a moſt aduiſed & warie enemie. For this cauſe in my opinion it is requiſit, that you carrie yourſelues more conſiderately with a better deliberation againſt your enemies, then (it ſeemeth) you were determined. Let vs leaue them alone that are abrode on foraging, leſt that in offering occaſion to their

Captaine to iſſue out of his trenches, who looketh for no better aduātage, we do giue them the oportunitie of an eaſie victorie againſt vs: for whileſt we out of order, diſperſed, and in diſarray, ſhall thinke to purſue them as they be ſcattered and diſordered, it is to be feared leſt we (being double charged by the enemie) be ouerthrown by thē, and without all remedie cut in peeces: it is better that we iſſue forth all at once, with our whole puiſſance, and that we breake in vpon the rampiers of their fortreſſe: the which if our valor and reſolution (as it is accuſtomed) ſhall happen to carrie, or if we may put their Generall to flight, or may get his head (he being ſlaine) to preſent and make ſhew thereof to the reſt of the Barbarians to appall them (which God almight for his mercy grant vs) there is no doubt, but without any danger, you ſhall (to your endleſſe honor) attaine to your deſire in each of theſe reſpects. For, the reſidue of theſe free-booters (ſome of them being excluded and ſeparated from the ſuccours of their companions, and others of them being on all ſides beſieged by your forces) they will be at your mercie, either aliue or dead, as your ſelues ſhal pleaſe to diſpoſe of them. But in any caſe (my good ſoldiers) take you heed that the filthie auarice & deſire of pillageGood & neceſſary counſell in time of ſeruice. Sentence. do not carrie you away in the ſacking and ſpoile of the campe: for many are the examples, that with great ſhame and diſhonor this hatefull humor and affection of couetouſneſſe hath oftentimes taken away the victories out of the hands of the victors, & hath giuen it to the enemy, when they haue bene quite ouerthrowne & diſcomfited.
            
            This counſell of the Generall was vniuerſally liked and allowed, and it was put in execution and followed with the conſent of all the ſoldiers. The troupes therefore being marſhalled and ordered according to the Art and skil of armes, they were drawne forth of the ſecret and cloſe vallies into the open and plaine fields, & they did now diſcouer thēſelues to the wards & ſcouts of the Turks: who from the tops of the mountaines, by the fiers mounting vp on high, did giue notice of their comming to thoſe within the fortreſſe. Then was heard the ſound & noiſe of the trumpets, to the great griefe of thoſe men of armes, who were diſperſed abroad in the champion, and were buſied in ſpoyling and pilling of the countrey. Many of them retired vppon the ſummons, and were receiued within the trenches, before that our men could get neare them, and others as they were making haſt to enter, were ſore troubled and terrified. The noiſe and cry of the enemies ſoldiers, ſounding and fearing them, with the name of Scanderbeg. Many (whom the ſodaine and ſpeedy comming of the Albanois, did finde without at the entry of the Fort) were excluded and ſhut out. And being ouercharged with the ſpoile and prey of the countrey, they found them ſelues likewiſe charged with their enemies. On all ſides was the aſſault giuen to the trenches, and atScanderbeg aſſaileth the Turkes within their fort and trenches. the firſt charge (in a manner) their cariages and baggage, which they hadde made as a Barricado to their fort, and the Targatiers that guarded the place, were ouerthrowen and caſt downe, with an exceeding great noiſe and confuſion, both of thoſe that were excluded, & of our men, who ſtriued pell mell to enter with them. All of them made way indifferently and alike, and all places were full of enemies mixt together. The preſſe was ſo great, and the place ſo ſtraight, that there was no vſe of dartes nor yet of ſhot. The fight was more hand to hand, and they found it more aduauntage to vſe the ſword, and certaine Maſes of iron (a ſhort kinde of weapon which the Turkes did often vſe in battell.) It was a ſtrange kinde of fight, to ſee the Turks fighting with their ſwords in one hand, and their fatall booty in the other. So greedy is that people of catchingCouetouſnes naturally in the Turkes. & proling of any thing whatſoeuer. The Chriſtians encreaſing ſtill in fury and fierceneſſe, did eagerly preſſe vppon them more and more, and without intermiſſion, did on al parts put them to vtterance, filling the whole place with feare and ſlaughter, till ſuch time as Muſtapha (who kept in the ſafeſt place of his Campe, and did performe

rather the part of an encorager thē of a ſoldier) ſeeing no hope of ſafetie left by armes, and being conſtrained to yeeld to his misfortune, he ſhifted himſelfe from the dangerVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Mustapha. by the ſwiftnes of his horſe, at one of the ports of his camp which was fartheſt off frō his enemies. Immediatly hereupon the conflict began to be more moderate and leſſe cruell, with leſſe ſlaughter & bloudſhed, by reaſon that ſome caſting away their weapons did ſubmit themſelues to the Chriſtians, & the reſidue partaking in the neceſſitie of their Captaine, did ſhift for their liues with quicke ſpurring of their horſes. Manie (whom the earneſt deſire of their profit had drawne far from their fort) miſdoubting the ill ſucceſſe of their companions, by the cries and noiſe of the enemie, which they heard a far off, did endeuor to ſaue themſelues by flying: but there was ſcant any one of thē that eſcaped: for diuerſe great troups of archers lay in waite vpon the paſſages, who annoying thē with the abundance of their arrows, did by that meanes diſcharge their anger vpon them. Some hold that the whole power of the Turkes (excepting Muſtapha and a few of the principall, who were beſt mounted) was ſlaine in that battell. But in my opinion they come nigheſt to the troth, who write, that there were ſlaine about 5000. men, but a far leſſer number taken priſoners, which amounted not at the moſt to aboue 300. and the moſt of thē mightily disfigured or maimed by their many and grieuous wounds: becauſe that the ſoldiers being incredibly incenſed vpon the ſight of the pillage gotten frō their fellowes, and the extreme ſpoile & deſolation of their countrey, were caried away & moued to vſe the greater furie and crueltie towards them. Of the victors there were wanting but 20. horſemen, and 50. foote, who were rather ouerrun with the horſes then ſlaine by the ſword of the enemy. Thus the Albanois being now poſſeſſed of the campe, the enſignes, the baggage, & the cariages of their enemies, they inuaded alſo and ouerrun their territories: where, with a prize and bootie more aſſured and of better certaintie, they recompenced that loſſe & dammage which had bene receiued by the Turkes, with a greater vſurie and aduantage.
            About the ſame time that theſe things were ſo happily atchieued againſt the infidels,Lech or Luke Zacharie Lord of the towne of Dayna vpō the riuer of Drinon in Albanie. it is reported that Lech Zacharie (of whom we haue before made ſome mention) was vnfortunately murthered by Lech Ducagin the ſonne of Paul. This man was a perſonage who made himſelfe famous through the happie and proſperous ſucceſſe of his wicked actions, yet borne of a father who was a good man, and moſt vertuous. Other reaſon I find none of his ſecret hatred and malice, nor any occaſion of his conſpiracie againſt him, but onely a damnable deſire of Empire and dominion: a ſweete yet miſchieuousDeſire of dominiō a diſeaſe naturally growing in men▪ Sentence▪ Lech Zacharie murthered. maladie, naturally grounded and rooted in the mindes of mortall men. For theſe two Princes being next neighbours each to other, and Ducagin perceiuing the other to be without iſſue, & hauing no hope of any lawfull heires, he thought belike that the ſucceſſion of his eſtate, would eaſily fall & eſcheate to him that could firſt and ſooneſt ſeize vpon it: whereupon he both depriued him of his life, and at the ſame inſtant he iniuriouſly vſurped a great part of his ſigniory. Yet could he not abſolutely & fully accompliſh his deuilliſh intent, which he had ſo wickedly begun and attempted. For the Daynians (who inhabited the capitall towne & chiefe fortreſſe of that countrey) by their conſent, faith and fidelitie (the onely meane wherein they could make ſhew therof) did teſtifie their loue and affection which they bare to their Prince. And whereas the Ladie Boſſa the mother of him that was ſlaine, being very old and aged, was not a litle penſiue and ſorowfull in that ſhe had ſuruiued her ſonne, they defendedHe meaneth the Gouernour of Scutary or Scodra. her eſtate with great loyalty, till ſuch time as ſhe (induced thereunto by the counſell and practiſe of others, and by the perſwaſion of her friends) or imagining that the infirmitie of her aged yeares, and the weake ſpirit of a woman was not ſufficient to go through with ſo great a charge▪ eſpecially the ſtate of her affairs being ſo troubleſome

and tumultuous: ſhe conueyed her ſelfe to* Scutary or Scodra, and reſigned both herThe antiquitie named it Chalcedon, afterwards Scodra, now Scutarie. ſelfe and the ſurplus of her eſtate which was left her, into the hands and power of the common weale of Venice, caſting vpon them the charge and whole burden of all the quarels and contention which was like to enſue and growe betweene them and the neighbour Princes and Seigniors about the right of her dominions.
            See now how fortune prepared her ſelf to make Scanderbeg famous & renowmed on the one ſide by the armes and forces of Italie, in that ſhe bred a iarre betweene him and the Venetians: and on the other ſide by Myſtapha, who in the preſence of Amurath as an vpright iudge (although enuious againſt his enemy) with a great diſcourſe and abundance of good words (both to couer his owne misfortune, & to excuſe the fault of his companions) did highly extoll the inuincible proweſſe of this perſonage, and his incomparable experience in the Art militarie: oftentimes repeating that it was needfull to prouide other maner of forces, and with a more mightie kind of warre toMuſtapha excuſeth his ouerthrow vnto Amurath. tame his furie and fierceneſſe: that this was not the way to ſound the mind, & to try the ſtirring thoughts of Scanderbeg by ſuch rodes and inuaſions, and by the ſpoyling and waſting of the fields: that theſe were meanes rather to incenſe and animate the harts of the Albanois (who were a nation of a braue nature, and of a high corage:) that theſe ambuſhments and wiles of warre were not to preuaile againſt him that was his craftsmaſter in ſuch ſubtilties, but that they would always redound to their ruine & confuſion: and more then that, by the courſe and cuſtome of ſo many daily victories, by litle and litle they ſhould ingender a contempt of the name & maieſty of Ottoman among the Chriſtians: that (in his opinion) the beſt way was either altogether to abſtaine & giue ouer frō making war vpon him, or elſe, to frame themſelues to follow the wars with ſo full reſolution, that they might at once and without any more a do, vanquiſh and ſubdue this enemie, and ſo make a finall end & concluſion of the warre of Albany.
               
            
            Theſe reaſons and allegations of the Baſſa (though the Sultan did take ſmall pleaſure in the praiſes of his aduerſary) could not ſeeme to proceed of puſillanimity or want of corage, ſeeing he had before his eies the like misfortunes of all thoſe, whom he had at any time ſent and emploied againſt Caſtriot. Somtimes Haly Baſſa, and ſomtimes Feriſey (who of all others was leaſt faulty) did put him in minde of their calamities, more ſingular and notorious, & they did excuſe vnto their Prince Amurath, the vnfortunat vertue of Muſtapha. Wherefore he alſo changing his mind (a common & vſual thingSentence. Aduerſe fortune maketh men wearie of warres. that the croſſes of Fortune and aduerſity doth ſoone cauſe men to wax weary of wars) concluded to giue himſelfe ſome reſt from this toileſome exerciſe of armes, and from thenceforth no more to feed the enemy with the bloud of his ſubiects, but determined to ſurceaſe from war, till ſuch time as himſelfe, poore old man who ſeemed to threaten more danger with his beake then with his talents, guided and led on by his ſiniſter & vnhappy deſtiny, went thither in perſon to ſeeke the end of that glory, which he vainly promiſed to himſelf, and the fruit of that victory which he had moſt idlely conceiuedMuſtapha ſent with another armie againſt Scanderbeg for the defence of the Turkiſh confines. in his thoughts. Yet did he in the meane time command Muſtapha to leauy new forces and ſent him again into Epire, but with expreſſe charge, not to ouerrun nor endamage the enemies countrey, nor vpon any occaſion whatſoeuer to aſſaile Caſtriot, but onlie to gard his ſubiects and his frontiers from all moleſtations and incurſions, & without any care taken for the purchaſe of conqueſt or victory, to containe him ſelf within his limits, and not be drawen forth to any ſeruice whatſoeuer. And ſurely we muſt needs thinke, that God did wonderfully prouide for the good and welfare of Caſtriot, in that he inſpired the minde of ſo mighty and redoubted an enemy, with ſuch a thought andWarre between Scanderbeg & the Venetians. reſolution, euen at that time, when he was entred into a new war againſt the Venetiās.
            The comming of Muſtapha and the newes of the maſſacres of the prince of Dayna,
               
being reported at one & the ſame inſtant to Scanderbeg, made him diuerſly diſtracted in his thoughtes and cogitations, and did greatly perplexe his minde. Notwithſtanding the Barbarian (with whom it was an ordinarie matter to be vanquiſhed) did not ſo much trouble him, but the horrible accident of that Prince his ſingular friend: and his end no leſſe cruell then lamentable, did ſo oppreſſe his heart with grief, that it was thought it would go neare to kill him. Beſides this, his ſorow was much aggrauated when he heard of the determination of the Lady Boſſa, and that the Venetians had vndertaken her cauſe, and made it their owne proper quarrell: for true it was, that the gouernors of the places next adioyning had fortified all of them, & principally the town of Dayna, with ſtrong and great garriſons. Behold here now the occaſion of their diſſention,The cauſes of the warre betweene Scanderbeg and the Venetians. and the originall of the quarrell: the Prince of Epire found himſelf aggrieued with the Venetians, in that they would ſeeme to pretend any right to the ſtate of him that was dead, & wold chalenge it vnto them ſelues, ſeeing that the reſignation which the mother had made vnto them was of no force, concerning thoſe goods which her ſonne in his life time had ordained to be left vnto him: and there was no reaſon, that the raſh wilfulnes of the mother, ſhould be any lawful preiudice or make voyd the intent and meaning of the ſonne. For it was euident & apparant, that there was a former compact paſt betweene him & Zachary, that he that was the ſuruiuer of them twaine, ſhould be the others ſucceſſor, and enioy his dominions: & this their agreement was confirmed by a ſolemne oth betweene them: what the right of law was in that caſe, either for the one or the other, I leaue to the lawyers to debate it, & true it may be, that the diuine power by the fortune of the warre did equally deuide their controuerſie. But here in the meane time may alſo good Chriſtianlike minds ſee the fruits & effects of ambition and auarice. In this doubtfull ſtate of his affaires, Scanderbeg being more carefull now then euer, did continually keepe neare the forces of Muſtapha, and courſing vp & down euery where with a very ſmall numbar: (ſometimes by aduenturing him ſelf too farre, and ſometimes by faining of flight, and by retiring of his colours in diſorder) in vaine did he ſeek to prouoke the wylie General of the Turks to iſſue forth to the fight, the which (to his coſt) he had once made proofe of. But now ſeeing that he refuſed the combat, wherby he was out of all hope either of doing of any exploit, or of any meanes to ſurprize or circumuēt him: he there left all thoſe forces which he had with him vpon the borders of the enemy, to preuent all new occaſions of tumults, and to repreſſe the inſolencie of the Turks: & himſelf bending all his thoughts to the preparation of the war of Daina, with a very ſmall company attending him, tooke his iorney preſently towards Croy. There (knowing that the deciding of this debate was not likely to be otherwiſe then by force of armes) he ſpeedily commanded a publike leuie of ſoldiers: and himſelf riding all ouer the prouince with ſome of his moſt notable & ancienteſt Captaines, for the raiſing of men, he aſſembled a mighty armie. And then without any delay (before that thoſe of Daina ſhould haue the leaſure to prouideThe ſiege of Daina. themſelues of corne) he cōpaſſed their citie with his forces round about, girding them in with a ſtrong and ſtraight ſiege, and omitting nothing that was to be done (ſometimes by gentle perſwaſions, ſometimes by rough intreatie) he employed all his ſtudy and indeuors, to ſolicit them within to yeeld themſelues to his deuotion: for he was in great doubt, leaſt if this oportunitie of ſeizing vpon the towne did ſlip from him, the newes thereof flying in the meane time to Venice, wold animate and ſtir vp the Senators of that citie more earneſtly to take vpon them the defence therof, & ſend thither freſh ſuccours and ſtronger forces out of Italie. He refrayned notwithſtanding frō the ſpoyling of the country (which is cōmonly the firſt miſchiefe that foloweth vpon the ſiege of any place) for doubt, leſt the minds of the Danians being more eagerly bent, ſhould be made the more conſtant and reſolute to continue faithfull to the enemy: neither

did he aſſay with artilery to batter their wals, nor to force the town by Eſcalados or aſſalts: but only debarring the inhabitants from all maner of renuing & refreſhing themſelues with victuals or munitions, he threatned them with the danger of famine, which was not far from them, and with the diſcommoditie of a long & tedious ſiege: by meanes whereof (when they ſhould hereafter be conſtrained to ſubmit themſelues vnto him, then all too late imploring his mercy and compaſſion) they ſhould feele all theſe extremities, which the iuſt rigor of a conqueror ſhould impoſe vpon them. TheThe Venetians prouide for the reliefe of Dayna against Scanderbeg. Gouernors of thoſe prouinces which were ſubiect to the Venetians, & the Captains of the townes neare adioyning being aduertiſed of the ſtate of the beſieged, gaue notice to the Signiorie of Venice, and hauing commiſſion returned vnto them with no leſſe ſpeed & celeritie, they leauied ſuddenly in great haſt ſoldiers of all ſorts, both Albanois and Italians (with all which kind of people the next garriſons were ordinarily ſtuffed by the order of the Venetians) and with theſe they marched on with full purpoſeLech Duſman & Peter Span againſt Scanderbeg. to ſuccor the Dainians. Theſe troupes were greatly aided and augmented by the cōming of two perſons, by nation Albanois, Lech Duſman, & Peter Span or Spaniard. Theſe men had ſworne and promiſed to Scanderbeg their continual ſeruice & deuoit againſt the Turks, and they neuer failed him: but the confederacie and amitie which they had contracted for a long time before with the Signiory of Venice (by reaſon that they were neare neighbors to Driuaſta, and ſome other places of the Venetian iuriſdictiō,Driuaſta. beſides the bond of innumerable benefits receiued frō their eſtate in times paſt) did now bind thē to their aſſiſtance, and were the occaſion of their preparations to do them ſeruice. Scanderbeg was no whit abaſhed at the difficultie and greatneſſe of this warre, but did receiue theſe newes with great ioy and gladneſſe, and without anie further delay deuided his forces, which exceeded the number of 14000. men: he appointed to employ againſt his enemie onely 7000. horſe, and 2000. foote. The reſiſidue (hauing prouided for all occaſions) hee left to hold the ſiege before Dayna. The which (notwithſtanding the rumour of the enemies approach) he determined notto leaue or to abandon. Thus the vndaunted Chiefrain by his ſingular prudence, hauing ſeperated his forces into 3. partes, did thereby occaſion his aduerſaries, through a vaine & fooliſh kind of hope, to triumph ouer him, and to grow the more in heart and courage againſt thē. For the Dayniās ſeeing Caſtriot to be abſent, did think now that they were no longer beſieged, for their courts of guard at the portes, were not ſo ſtrong as was vſuall, but they grew to be neglected, the wals were not ſo well manned: and oftentimes might the ſouldiours of the enemy without, ioyntly with the citizens within, haue entred into their gates which were diuerſe times left open. To be briefe, they growing, in a maner careles of al things, only the imminent danger of famine did ſeem to perplexe them, which neither was to be contēned by their audacity, nor auoided by their valor and magnanimity. Notwithſtanding the honor & reputation of their faith which they had once paſſed & promiſed, did aſſure their corages, & did bind them to endure the rigor of all difficulties. Beſides the aduertiſements touching their confederats (who aduanced them ſelues with great iourneis to mitigate theſe miſchieues & to deliuer them from this miſery) did greatly comfort their afflicted ſpirits, & made them to conceiue an aſſured hope of deliuerance. Moreouer perſwading themſelues that Caſtriot was not able to make head againſt ſo great a puiſſance, they did look euery hour in great care and expectation to ſee ſome meſſenger, and to heare ſome certaine newes of the victory (which in their opinion they did promiſe vnto their owne fancies.) So isSentence. it for the moſt part with all men, who (the more power they doe in their mindes attribute vnto fortune) with ſo much the more deuotion are they obedient vnto her.
            You need not doubt but that Muſtapha was exceedingly ioyous of theſe troubles &

tumults in Epire, and by reaſon of the abſence of Scanderbeg, his courage which was before abated, did now begin to returne & to be reuiued, & a certaine ſecret obliuion of his former misfortune, had now aboliſhed the remēbrance thereof out of his mind. Faine would he haue aſſailed the garriſon there left vpon the borders, and willingly would he haue made a ſacrifice to the iuſt wrath of his Prince, and to his owne ambition of thoſe ſouldiers, whom he ſuppoſed to be weakened by the abſence of their Chieftaine, and the reſt of their companions. He had an infinite deſire to be made a partner with the Venetians in this glorie and triumph ouer his deadly enemie: and he was more intentiue to the preſent aduantage and opportunitie, then mindful of the charge and commaundement of his Soueraigne. But on the other ſide, the ſeueritie of Ottoman, and the ſundrie examples of others, (whoſe diſobedience had bene moſt grieuouſly puniſhed) did with hold & ſtay his doubtfull and variable mind. Laſt of all, though he were partly perſwaded that the Sultan would not diſallow his reſolution, grounded vpon ſo good an opportunitie, yet he tooke this to be the ſureſt way, that men ſhould rather deeme him negligent, by the command and direction of his lorde and maſter: then fortunate, by his owne pride and temeritie.
            In the middeſt of all theſe tumults, whileſt the hoaſt of the Venetians being aſſembled at Scutarie, did there conſume the time in the prouiſion of things neceſſarie, Scanderbeg had paſſed ouer the riuer of Drynon with his army (which was an euident ſigne of his hardineſſe and aſſurance) and preuenting the counſells of his aduerſaries, he marched on reſolutely to encounter them euen within the bowels of their owne dominions,Scanderbeg marcheth againſt the Venetian ar
                     •
                  ie▪
                and as a man may ſay, vpon their owne dung hill. The Venetian could not endure this brauado, but diſlodging incontinently with his armie, he paſſed on to affront him preſently: now did the cries of the ſouldiers, and the rebounding ſound of the drums & trumpets on either ſide bewray the approch and cōming of the enemie. Then did euerie man take a good courage to himſelfe: & cheerefully did they make ſhew of their fierce and coragious ſtomacks. The very eies of the ſouldiers ſeemed to flame with fury, & on either ſide was heard a mighty noiſe (an argumēt of their wrath and choller). Then were praiers, vowes, and ſhewes of deuotion in the mouthes of the leaders, & alſo of the ſouldiers, and euery man ſhewed himſelfe a good Chriſtian and recommended himſelfe vnto God. Either part did hold their armes to be iuſt & lawfull, and ech did aſſure themſelues that they were in the right, & that they had the better cauſe & quarrell. The intent of euery of them was only to repulſe the iniurie, and all of them ſeemed to haue like reaſon for the warre: the Prince of Albanie, to recouer the poſſeſſion of the towne, detained from him contrarie to all right and equitie: and the others to defend and protect thē, who had choſen them for their protectours. The former were encouraged through their merits & deſerts in ſo many valiant acts & exploits daily atchieued vpon the Barbarians, & through the remembrance of their honor & renowne lately gotten vpon Muſtapha: the latter though they were wel prouided for all things needfull for a greater warre, and though they might (not without good cauſe) promiſe vnto themſelues the hope of victorie, yet (if they ſhould happen to haue the worſt) they were not for all that ſuch as would be diſmaied or ſtoupe to the fortune of the enemy: for euery man knew the vnuanquiſhed power of the Venetians, & that they were able continually to ſupply new & greater forces to maintaine the quarrell, & to bring the warre to a better iſſue: in ſuch ſort that this enterpriſe of Dayna was like to be the confuſion of the Duke of Albany. Yet did the hard & miſerable eſtate of the beſieged, greatly perplex them, becauſe they were certified that there remained a ſtrong power before the city. By this time were the armies come in ſight, and nowe did approach the daie of good or ill fortune to the one ſide or the other:

immediatly there followed a ſtrange & ſudden ſilence in both armies, ech of them reſting themſelues with great quietneſſe. The enſignes being faſtned on the earth, the Marſhals did preſently make choiſe of a fit place to encampe in, where both the ſouldier might lodge moſt at his eaſe, and the leaders (by their often exhortations) might cōfirme thoſe which were reſolute, & encourage others who were not fully reſolued. The gouernment of the Venetian army was committed to Daniell Iurich of Sebenca, a man of an aſſured experience and practiſe in deedes of armes (the common people callDaniell Iurich he was Voiuada, or gouernor of Scutarie. him the Voyuada:) he hau
                  ••
               g appointed euery man to his place, and hauing prepared all things readie to the combat, thus beganne to ſpeake vnto his ſouldiers.
            
               Such is the folly and temeritie of men, that they thinke all things to be lawful forThe oration of Iurich Generall of the Venetian armie. Sentence. them, when their thoughts are once tickled with the proſperous ſucceſſe & encreaſe of their fortune. Hereof it proceedeth, that the mind hauing no power to cōmand it ſelfe, & being altogether impatient of her preſent proſperitie, & wandring ſometimes here, & ſometimes there, it troubleth the cōmon reſt of others, & for her owne pleaſure doth moue & procure warres: till ſuch time as in the end by a miſerable & wretched iſſue, it receiueth the iuſt chaſtiſement of her vaine conceite & imagination. An example hereof (my good friends) is here repreſented vnto vs in this our enemie, no leſſe proud then preſumptuous: who by his vnhappy audacity & his exceſſiue fortune is now growen to this point, that he dareth to raiſe warre vpon warre, and to moleſt thoſe Princes of whom (if he will conſider the benefits he hath receiued) there is not any one thing, excepting his temeritie, but he may attribute it vnto them wholly. But the good hap of his affaires hath now ſo peruerted his ſenſes, that it behooueth vs not onely at this time to take armes publiquely, but in priuate alſo to hate him mortally. Behold & turne aſide your eies to the pitifull eſtate of the Dainians, to the intent the iuſt wrath of their iniurie, & the honeſt care of your friends, may animate your courage. You ye citizens of Scutarie, haue many of your children, many of your brethren, many of your kinſmen, friends & allies both Sclauonians & Italians (all of them hardie & good ſouldiers) encloſed & ſhut vp within that garriſon, where being mewed vp by diſloialtie of the enemy, & being brought to the vttermoſt point of all extremities: they haue no other hope remaining, but only in your valure & vertue. Long time haue they attended you in ſorrow, in ſuſpence, in great care & expectation: longing & looking aloft from off their wals, that either your powers ſhold now reſtore them to their libertie: or elſe hauing loſt all hope of cōfort, they muſt be enforced ſhamefully to ſubmit thēſelues, & to leaue their liues to the mercy of Caſtriot, & vnder the view of his pride, who is ſo inſolent & vnmercifull in his victory, as his like is no where to be found, as one who hauing bin of a long time nouriſhed vp amōg the Barbarians, doth excell in all barbarouſnes & inhumanity. For (to omit other matters) can there be any greater temeritie then this? can there be any folly more notable then by ſo leud an example to debarre men frō the libertie of protecting of others in the right of their own goods & poſſeſſions? And by meanes thereof moſt wickedly to purchaſe to him ſelfe al that he can ſeize vpon, & vnder this vaine pretence of I know not what cōpact & agreement, to excuſe his greedie deſire of cōmand: abrogating by this meanes, and taking away from men all the rights of their libertie? His ambitious mind is enraged that the Venetians ſhould be preferred before him by the Dainians: & he impugneth the voluntarie mind of the mother in the diſpoſition of the heritage of her own ſonne deceaſed: but you may ſee how the malladie & infirmitie of his owne mind, and the vehemency of his deſpight hath ſo blinded and inueigled him, that being tranſported with enuie, he runneth headlong to his own deſtruction: for he could not endure to put off the care of this warre, till ſuch time, as (hauing chaſed away this enemie the

Turke, who is daily at his dores) he might haue bin the better able to vnite all his forces & to haue come with al his whole power to execute his hatred againſt the Venetians: neither hath he bin ſo well aduiſed as to ioyne battell againſt vs with any great forces, though it be in ſight of the towne beſieged. But he (this expert warrior) hath ſeparated his forces here and there, ſhewing himſelf therin a more vpright iudge to you, then to himſelf, & to further your cauſe more then his own. And whilſt that the ſiege of Dayna on the one ſide, & the care & doubt of Muſtapha on the other, doth not ſuffer his mind to enioy any reſt or quietnes, he hath reſerued this army not as a fit enemie able to encounter with you, but as a ſacrifice rather to be ſlaughtered by you. Wherfore ſeeing you are ſo many braue warriors, againſt an handful of robbers: goe to thē, and charge them valiantly & ceaſe not till you haue vtterly ouerthrowen them. Let your valure & prowes enforce their fooliſh & vaineglorious hearts, either by loue or by conſtraint to acknowledge & confeſſe, that thēſelues are guiltie of the iniuſtice of this warre, which they haue vndertaken ſo iniuriouſly. And theſe being once chaſtiſed for their folly, you ſhal not need to take any further care, nor to redoubt thoſe their forces which are remaining before Dayna. For then, purſuing the good ſucceſſe of this battell, we may at one and the ſame inſtant preuent their purpoſe by going to charge them firſt, and they within iſſuing out vppon their backes, ſhall encloſe and hedge them in on all ſides, by meanes whereof we ſhall finiſh and bring to an ende, a moſt notable peece of ſeruice, and exceedingly famous.
            
            
               The oration of the king of Epire was more milde and not ſo sharpe and inuectiue, neither was it ſo replenished with ill ſpeeches tending to the diſgrace of others, but (as ſome ſay) it was neere to this effect that followeth.
            
            
               Whether the cauſe of this preſent warre be iuſt or not, it is not now time (my goodThe oration of Scanderbeg to his armie.friends quoth he) to make any queſtion, ſeeing we are come armed into the field, nether is that now to be debated on, when we are in view of the enemie: conſidering eſpecially, that my ſelf was the man that made you to take armes, with whom you neuer yet had iuſt cauſe to be agreeued, either for refuſing any war that was lawfull, or for ſeeking any quarrels which were vnlawfull & vniuſt. But ſeeing it is ſo; that in all humain affaires nothing doth more torment the conſcience of good men, nor is more curiouſly reſpected by men of warre before they come to fight with their enemy, thē to enquire the iuſtice of the quarrell, & that they may be reſolued whether they ſhall not contend with God, aſwell as men: for my part (my good citizens) I am content therfore that if any of you do thinke that my motion, in the vndertaking of this war, be to be condemned of raſhnes or temeritie, or if you do thinke me to be too greedie and deſirous of new warres & troubles: I ſhall be well pleaſed I ſay, neither will I hinder it, if preſently you truſſe vp baggage, and that we returne euery man to his home. For I am not he that would traine you by force to hazard your perſons I know not wherfore: neither do I deſire, in this troubleſome eſtate of my affaires and chiefeſt tumults of Epire, of an obſtinate minde to ſeeke new quarrels and cauſes of contention with the ſegniorie of Venice. If therefore my attempt and purpoſe be exempted & free from blame, and the cauſes of this warre doe ſeeme vnto you iuſt and neceſſarie: then is it your part alſo, and none but you haue reaſon (as being intereſted in the cauſe) to effect by your vertue and couragious perſeuerance, that the happie end & euent do ſhew and teſtifie your armes to be accompanied with right and equitie. For nothing can be more reprochfull to him that is nobly minded, neither can anie thing be more repugnant to the dignitie and maieſtie of a Prince, then to ſuffer by timorouſneſſe and puſilanimitie, his right to be vſurped by an other: and to holde (as a man would ſay) his finger vnder his girdle, when he knoweth his right is not to be had, but by

force of armes. There is none of you but knoweth the hartie amitie and the inwarde conuerſation which was euer betweene me and the Seignior Lech Zacharie, whoſe death (being no leſſe cruell then grieuous) hath ſtirred on all parts ſo many troubles, and that he and I (induced thereunto by other mutuall affection) did with one conſent, ſet downe this as a lawe inuiolable, that which ſoeuer of vs two ſhould firſt deceaſe without iſſue, ſhould be ſeized (by the compact and the right of ſuruiuorſhip) of the other his heritage & dominions. Now the Venetians haue gotten his lands, and I am left heire only of his teares to lament the iniquity of his fortune. Did not I by this agreemēt hazard the renouncing of my own patrimony, if my accident (as the danger of death is cōmon to all men) had taken me firſt away out of this life? I haue no reaſon therefore, neither am I determined to giue ouer the warre, except (God being againſt me) I be put to the worſt, or that I be inueſted in the quiet poſſeſſiō of Dayna: for none but fooles can blame me for this war, whereunto ſo good reaſon, & ſo honeſt a cauſe doth perſwade me. Let no man maruell to ſee me in armes againſt Chriſtians, againſt the Venetians, againſt my next neighbors, ſeeing they haue giuen me ſo iuſt an occaſion, & themſelues haue in a manner, put the weapons into my hands. True it is, we do with a ſtreight ſiege preſſe the towne & countrie of our owne kinſmen, of our owne bloud & alliance; but yet we do it not with ſo ill an intention as they imagine, neither are we lead thereunto, either vpon a greedie deſire of cōmaund & Empire, or delight of murther and bloudſhed: but only to wring that citie out of the hands of our aduerſary, and to draw the vngratefull inhabitants (at the leaſt) to a confeſſion & acknowledgement of their error and obſtinacie. We are come to fight with the enemie, who hath firſt prouoked vs by diuers acts of hoſtilitie. Reſolue you therefore in your courage with an aſſured & honeſt reſolution to maintaine your honor and reputation. It may ſeeme that the ſouereignty of Dayna being propounded for the reward of the cō
                  queror ſhould giue ſufficient & ample occaſion to take armes: but let not (I pray you) any ſuch conceipt enter into your thoughts, for theſe are cōmonly the baites to allure ambitious minds, & they are entiſements of the baſe popular & vulgar ſort. The only deſire of praiſe and commendation is ſufficient to animate & ſtirre on thoſe which are valiant: and yet if you obtain this daies victory, al ſhal be yours without controuerſie. For the enemie being chaſed away, and the beſieged ſeeing their hope to be fruſtrate which they had in their cōpanions, & being preſſed with extreame famine, they will ſoone open their gates to receiue you in as cōquerors. As touching the victory, I need not ſay any thing vnto you, who haue always accuſtomed to be victors: if they againſt whō you are now to make proofe of your valure be a new enemy, ſo is it a new kind of glory that doth now attend you. Doe the Venetians ſurpaſſe you in number? be it: the honor which you haue purchaſed in ſo many battels, where you haue alwaies bin the leſſer number, hath euer heretofore made you famous: the free and gentle heart doth diſdain to ouercome when euery mans deuoire cannot be ſeene, & where he can not purchaſe particular praiſe and commendation: againe, what aduantage haue they in that their number is greater then ours? Seeing as there is amongſt them diuerſitie of languages, variety of habits, & a different vſe in armes: ſo is there as great diuerſity and diſagreement in their mindes and courages: and as their army is compounded of many and ſundrie Nations, as Sclauonians, Italians, Albaneezes: ſo are they diuerſe in faſhions, and with a confuſed kinde of ignorance followe vnder one and the ſame colours: their crie and noyſe in the fight will be of diuerſe and ſundrie ſounds, and much leſſe auaileable will be the encouragements of their leaders. March on therefore (my good ſouldiers) and in the very entrie and beginning of the battell, valiantly doe you beate backe, repulſe, and diſperſe theſe enemies, who are better diſpoſed to

the flight, then to fight: and ſee that you doe nowe renewe by the honour of this dayes iourney, the glorious renowne of ſo manie trophees and victories which you haue heretofore gotten and obtained vppon the Turkes. Neuertheleſſe I would not that you ſhould carie your ſelues towardes theſe as againſt other enemies: but rather that you vſe more moderation and leſſe choller, and that being inclined to mercie and clemencie, you doe labour rather to haue them all priſoners, then to haue them ſlaughtered in the fieldes. In anie caſe doe you not, either through intemperate furie of warre, or the heate of your anger and indignation, pollute and defile your victorious handes with the bloud of thoſe, who ſhall yeelde and render themſelues to your mercies. For it is not with Barbarous, fierce, and ſauage Nations that we haue now to deale, but with Chriſtians, againſt whom we are to contende according to the rights and lawes of armes, with equitie and iuſtice, and onely to repulſe iniuſtice, and to liue in reſt and quietneſſe.
            
            The great modeſtie that Scanderbeg made ſhew of in this his ſpeech, did the moreThe affection of the ſouldiers of Scanderbeg after his oration. vehemently animate the minds of his ſouldiers, and made them the more affectionate vnto him: for that (being a matter rare and ſeldome ſeene) he did in the ſame bewray himſelfe to be both reſpectiue of their good, and no leſſe carefull for the enemie. For this cauſe, flocking about their Prince, they praiſed & applauded his counſell, ech of them affirming: that they were readie to make proofe of their reſolution, and to offer themſelues to all hazarde and fortune of battell, not for the defence onely, but for the increaſe alſo and augmentation of his renowme and glorie: that the armes of the Venetians were not ſo to be redoubted: that their opinion in attributing much vnto them, ſhould make them in the meane while, to forget their owne dutie and deuoire: that if the diſhonour and ignominie, offered by the Danians, ſhould by their faintneſſe and ſlouthfulneſſe remaine vnpuniſhed, the iniurie would be common to all his ſubiectes: and that it was not for their honour now to be diſcouraged, in the middeſt of ſo great broyles, and at this time wherien they were buſied and ſurcharged with the weight and burthen of a double warre: that men ſhould not be able to doe any thing worthie of honour and commendation, if euerie idle conſultation, ſhould reſtraine and ſuppreſſe the vehemencie of their courages: and if they ſhould examine euerie particular with a kinde of blockiſh and ſlouthfull deliberation, that the hardie man and he that is valiant ought to aduenture himſelfe, and to march on reſolutely, and to beare off all daungers with head and ſhoulders: and that it becommeth not him to looke into matters with too much curioſitie, to augment his owne feare, nor by a ſtrict examination of things, to interprete and reueale vnto men, thoſe miſchiefes which are hidden from them: that many high and difficult affaires haue beene ſurmounted and ouercome by the furie of the reſolute ſouldier, and by the fierceneſſe of his courage once ſtirred and enflamed: whereas a mind free and quietly diſpoſed would not dare to aduenture vpon them; that a man ought alſo to relie and caſt his care wholly vpon God, who aſſiſteth continually in the warre that partie whoſe cauſe and quarrell is iuſt and rightful. And neuertheleſſe if their ſafety did only depend vpon their own valure, yet the ſtate of Albany ſhould be ſufficiently defended & protected, only by the faith & mutuall amity of her owne peoples. Moreouer that Amurath was withheld & kept doing by the warre of Hungary, & that they knew the power & puiſſance of the Venetians to be great: but withall they were not ignorant, that the Italians, the farther they are drawn frō home, the more ſlowly do they march on, & proceed the more vnwillingly. Theſe with many ſuch like ſpeches were vttered confuſedly amongſt the whole troupe of ſouldiers according to euery mans diſpoſition: with this intent and purpoſe alſo, that their Prince (hearing their deuiſes) might

take the better notice of their good willes and affection, and might ſhewe them the better countenance: he (prayſing and extolling the affection of euery of them) ſpeaking aloud vnto them in manner of ieſting and merriment, ſmiling he tolde them, that nature was much to blame in that ſhe had not placed theſe noble and generous ſpirits of the Albanois, in a higher and better fortune.
            This done, Caſtriot cauſed his ſouldiers to go and refreſh themſelues: and then hauing taken ſome repaſt, and all matters being throughly prouided for, about midday, with a mind cheerefull and confident, he drewe forth his troupes into the field. The archers and others which were lightly armed, he placed in the front before the enſignes:Order of the armie of the Albanoys. then (with the corſlets and thoſe whoſe armes were more weightie) he made the two wings, appointing vnto each of them 2000. horſe: to Tanuſee was giuen the middle battell, wherein likewiſe amongeſt the men at armes were mingled certaine foot men. As touching the rereward or for any ſupplies, he tooke no care at all, becauſe he had determined to make it knowen that he accounted the victory ſure his own: and that the enemie was much more eaſie to be vanquiſhed, then the Venetians did ſeeme to make ſhew of, either by the aſſurance of their countenances or by their furie and forwardneſſe at the firſt charge. As little regard did he take to the garding of his campe, for he left the ſame all emptie, and with ſo fewe to defende it, that hardly could he haue held it againſt the meaneſt companie of any theeues or robbers. This ſo reſolute an aſſurance of this Chiefetaine could not haue beene exempted from the blame of temeritie, were it not that he had appointed the ſtrength and force of his retraite in thoſe companies which held the ſiege before Dayna: for if contrarie to his expectation he had ſeene the enemy to haue had the better, his purpoſe was to retire thither to that campe, becauſe neither the number of his ſouldiers, nor the ſituation and nature of the place, did profite him to fortifie his owne campe: yet in my iudgement was this a counſell farre vnworthie of the wiſedome and the prudent inuention of ſo great a Captaine: ſeeing that if his troupes had happened to haue beene broken, their flight in this manner had bene much more dangerous and pernicious, then their courage and obſtinacie in the fight could haue wrought their aſſurance. For the Venetians being victorious and purſuing them in the taile, and the paſſage of the riuer Drynon being made more difficult in ſo great an affray, and ſo confuſed a tumult, muſt needes haue deſtroied and ſwallowed the moſt of them that remained: wherfore the truth is, and we muſt needes confeſſe, that the opinion of his owne vertue not accuſtomed to be vanquiſhed, did make him to place his hope in himſelfe onely. The VenetiansOrder of the armie of the Venetians. in the ſame manner likewiſe did affront their enſignes with their pykes, who were Italians, and their wings they diſpoſed in the ſame order as did the Albanians. Daniell himſelfe tooke the charge of the right wing, which he enuironned with a ſtrong guard, or garriſon of Sclauonians, of which he had made choiſe of purpoſe. Certaine men at armes Italians were placed in the head, and in the rereward of this battallion. Colla Humoy of Scutarie, who was the ſeconde man, and next to theColla Humoy. Generall in this armie, had the leading of the left wing, and being accompanied with his owne citizens, did make head againſt Moſes and his ſouldiers the Dybrians. Andrewe his brother and Symon Volcathagne had the guiding of the middleVolcathagne. battell. In briefe, all the rankes were filled indifferently with ſouldiers of ſundrie ſortes, ſeruing rather for an hinderance and impediment, then for anie defence or good aſſurance. The Venetians were litle leſſe then thirteene thouſand men, andThe battell betweene the Venetians and Scanderbeg. with this number was this battell foughten. The fight was begunne by their pykemen, who at their firſt encounter were repulſed by the archers: but when they once came to approach and ioyne neere ech to other, and that the vſe of their arrowes did

ſerue to little purpoſe: the Targatyers, couering them ſelues with their targets and the reſidue of thoſe which were light armed, came to the ſword and fought with the enemy hand to hand. In the meane time Scanderbeg couering the Archers with his troupe of horſes, and cauſing them a little to retire them ſelues, gaue them the meanes to vſe againe their bowes more conueniently. The Pike men for that they were ſafely armed with good and ſtrong corſelets, had aduentured them ſelues the more hardly, and came to aſſault the enemy the more cruelly, whereby they put their fellowes in good hope of victorie. There began the wings to ioyne on both ſides with high & mighty cries, which madethe very aire to reſound againe: The Albanois exceeded the other in number and goodneſſe of their horſe, yet was the place indifferent to them both, and no more for the vantage of the one, then of the other: for the place where this field was foughten, was in the middeſt of a goodly large plaine and champion, and neare adioyning to the riuer of Drynon. The Venetians being for a while equall to the enemy rather in forces then in courage, did for a long time maintaine the fight about their Generall with variable and doubtfull fortune, till ſuch time as the Prince of Albanie and certaine horſe with him, charging them in the middeſt did breake through the battell, by meanes wherof (many being wounded and great numbers of them being diſperſed and diſordered) all hope of the victorie had bene taken from the Venetians, had it not bene for the Illirians: who rallying them ſelues on all ſides, and trouping together in groſſe (as the agillitie and quickneſſe of that nation is ſingular) they made head againe againſt the enemy, and with a greater ſtrength did reaſſure the corps du Garde of the Venetian Generall, valiantly keeping of the enemy; yet, ſo as they ſeemed rather to ſtand vpon their defence then any way to offend their aduerſarie. The mayne battels on both ſides ſtood ſtill all this while and kept their ground, ſeeming rather to take a view then to entermeddle in the fight, ſo long as the wings or points being in fight did with doubtfull euent encounter each other. But aſſoone as Tophia ſaw the right wing of the enemy hardly beſtead, (he taking courage by the former example of Scanderbeg) with a troupe of his beſt horſemen, and part of the infanterie, preſently charged vpon the middeſt of the left wing of the enemy, bringing them alſo into a new feare and confuſion. For the Illirians (who were placed in the front to beare the ſhocke of the enemy,) were not able to endure the charge, but made preſently to the right wing, and there ſtood vpon their owne defence, betraying their companions on the one ſide, whom they had forſaken: and on the other ſide, they brought by their comming the greater difficultie vnto Scanderbeg, who was there ſtriuing and inforcing him ſelfe to breake through the corps du Gard of the Illirians. The like alſo did their footemen after their departure, for being not able to make their partie good againſt the Albanois horſemen; they ſcattered them ſelues here and there, and hauing their beſt aſſurance in their legges, they made them the meanes of their ſafety: which was the occaſion alſo that the horſemen of Scutarie, (being left naked & open to the enemy) ſaw them ſelues ſodainly diſabled & broken by the Albanois: for both their leaders and many others were taken priſoners, who being abandoned and forſaken of their footemen, and deſpairing of ſafety by hauing any farther recourſe to armes, did yeeld them ſelues to the diſpoſition of Scanderbeg his ſouldiers: this made the other companies alſo greatly to feare, leaſt that Scanderbeg hauing once broken through that battell of the Illirians) which he had already charged, ſhould afterwarde charge alſo the backe of the wings, and ſo encloſing them on all ſides might preſſe them the more furiouſly.
            But the ſucceſſe of the vanquiſhers fell not out according to the fearefull imagination of the vanquiſhed (ſo mightily doth proſperity oftentimes dull the minds of men.)
               
For the leaders when they ſaw themſelues to haue this aduantage, tooke no greater regard of any other thing, but held themſelues contented, that they could preſent vnto their ſouldiers, as it were in ſhewe and triumph, their enemies bounden and captiue. Caſtriot likewiſe not regarding the common ſouldiers, but diſdaining as it were the bloud of the inferiour and priuate ſort, did wholly enforce himſelfe to enterpriſe vpon the Generall, but a great and ſtrong troupe of horſe did hinder him from approching neere him, and by that meanes diſappointed him of his purpoſe. The fight thus continuing on all handes, Moſes (who had charged vpon the left wing of the Venetian armie, where they of Scutarie ſerued) did draw all men to the regard and beholding of the fight on that ſide. Great was their labour and their daunger: for either partie ſhewing themſelues both ſtout and inuincible, did maintaine the fight egerly and couragiouſly; and they did ſo vnceſſantly contend ech to force other, as though the fortune of the fight had depended vpon them onely. It ſeemed that they were not very vnequally matched, and in that reſpect they fought for a long time with like aduantage, and hardly could it be diſcerned whether partie had the better. But at length the ſtrength and force of the Dybrians ſeeming to be weakned with faintnes and wearineſſe, and both themſelues and their horſes being well nigh tyred with continuall fighting, as men vanquiſhed willingly they would haue giuen ouer, and they were almoſt readie to leaue the battell, had it not beene for Moſes their Colonell, who ſharpely reprehending them, euen as they beganne to recuile, did ſometimes blame their faintnes and wearineſſe, and ſometimes did accuſe them of feare and cowardice: and being thus in point of being almoſt vanquiſhed, he taught them howe to vanquiſh and to be victors ouer their enemies, crying out in this manner vnto them.
            What a ſhame is this (my friends?) how lewd and foule an example is this of yourEncouragement of Moſes to his ſoldiers. vnwonted feare and timerouſneſſe? Is it poſſible that the Dibrians can forſake their ranckes and places aſſigned them, as long as they be liuing? or can they be content to loſe their honor and glorie purchaſed by armes, and to giue it to their enemies? where are thoſe ſouldiers which diſcomfited the forces of Haly Baſſa? who tamed the pride of Feriſey, & abated the puiſſance of Muſtapha? and who with the ſpoiles of the Turks, haue enriched the houſes of the Albanois? Where is now the fiercenes of your haughtie and proud courages? where be thoſe your looks which were ſo full of threats and menaces within your campe? where be thoſe your promiſes of victorie and triumph? is this the way to recouer Dayna to Scanderbeg? is this the way for you to prepare your entry into the towne which you haue beſieged? what, did you neuer proue the vertue and valure of any enemy till now? haue you not found them any where elſe to be ſtout and valiant, and did you neuer ſee the ſwordes brandizing in any place but here onely? Behold howe your fellowes and companions are on all ſides victorious, and they do alreadie in ech quarter of the field, recount the frutes of their valure and hardineſſe. Tanuſee (hauing taken their Captaines and caried them bound into the campe) hath either diſperſed, or vtterly defeated and deſtroied the middle battell of the enemie: ſee (I pray you) how Scanderbeg hauing broken the ſtrength and bodie of the Sclauonian troupes, doth now paſſe away the time in binding them together like beaſtes, and taking of them priſoners: onely we here on our ſide haue nothing but feare and terror, and the memorie of our flight, moſt ſhamefull and diſhonorable.
            
            The ſouldiers ſeeing themſelues ſo ſharply reproued and rebuked by Moſes, tooke hart to themſelues, and their courages were ſo enflamed with a moſt ardent deſire to repaire their fault, that a man would haue iudged them not to haue bene the ſame men, but that both horſe and men had bene chaunged euen in an inſtant. The conflict being then renewed, the fortune of the fight grew likewiſe to be chaunged, and

the Scutarians by litle and litle beganne to be repulſed, yet did they for a while hold good, by meanes rather of their multitude and great number, then through any hardineſſe or greatneſſe of courage. At the laſt Humoy coniecturing (by the former ſpeeches of his enemie) his brothers miſfortune (the griefe whereof, through verie impatiency, made him ſcarce able to holde his weapons) forgot his companions and went (though all too late) to ſuccour his brother, where ſtriking into the middeſt of his enemies: in ſo doing he both aſſured the victorie to the Dibrian, and left alſo vnto the poſteritie an euident teſtimonie, how needfull and requiſite it is for a chiefe or GenerallSentence. to keepe amongſt his troupes: and how greatly it importeth the good order and ſafetie of his companies to enioy the benefit of his preſence: for no ſooner was he departed from his charge, but they were ſuddenly diſperſed on all ſides, turning their backs to the blowes & furie of their enemies. Likewiſe on the other ſide, the Generall of the Venetians being now forſaken and left deſtitute of the ſtrength of his corps dugarde: yet holding ſtill good, and keeping his troupes cloſe & in order (more through pure ſhame, then for any ſtrength or puiſſance that he had:) he ſuſtained the force of the enemie, and maintained the fight continually. But when he once perceiued that his ſouldiers were on all ſides put to a doubtles flight, and that all of them made default alike: himſelfe alſo ſetting ſpurres to his horſe for companie, (leaſt he ſhould be made a partner with the others in their miſfortunes) prouided by ſpeedie flight forThe victory of Scanderbeg ouer the Venetians. his owne ſafetie. Scanderbeg all at leiſure purſued thoſe that were ſcattered ouer the fieldes, becauſe that the long and continuall trauell of his ſouldiers did greatly detaine and hinder them, by reaſon the battell had bene foughten with that obſtinacie, and held out to that extreamitie, that they were hardly able to haue continued fight any longer: yet as wearie as they were, they did not for all that ſuffer their flight to be free and without any diſturbance: for Scanderbeg had publikely commaunded, that all the enſignes ſhould purſue after them, and follow the chaſe euen to the gates of Scutarie. It may be that this great Captaine being led on both with anger and with glorie, did hold it a goodly matter, that theſe enemies (who ſtood in infinite and thicke numbers vpon the walles, ſhould now ſee him and his armie to be the conquerors. In many places did they light vpon the tayle or rereward of thoſe that fled, and a great number of ſuch as made the leaſt ſpeed, came into the handes of thoſe that followed them: for they were commanded not to kill any of them when they were once come verie neare and within the view of the towne: then making a ſtand with their armie in order, they continued there a long time with their colours wauing al aloft in the wind: hereupon, the victors aſſembling themſelues in troupes not farre from their companies thus arranged, with high cries and exceeding ſignes of ioy; they preſented their priſoners before the eyes of the townſmen, who were wondefully ſad and penſiue at this miſfortune and affliction, concerning them ſo neare, both in publike, and particular. On the one ſide, the grieuous ſight and miſerable condition of their friendes and allies, did ſuggeſt vnto them new prickes of warre and deſpight; on the other ſide their late loſſe did confound and abate their courages: and furthermore, the care of the Captiues (which ſtaied and withheld them, did keepe them from attempting or doing any thing againſt the enemie, for doubt leaſt it ſhould incenſe the vanquiſhers to vſe the priſoners with more extreamitie.
            After that Scanderbeg had permitted his ſouldiers (all at their pleaſures) to reioice themſelues in the honor of their victorie: he cauſed to ſound a march (for the day was then well neare ſpent) and euerie man prepared himſelfe to the retraite, & tooke their way to the ſiege before Dayna: but vaine was the hope and conceit of Scanderbeg, in that he thought the inhabitantes would haue opened their portes and receiued him

forthwith, as his ſubiects, and haue ſubmitted themſelues vnder the lawes and conditions that it ſhould pleaſe him to impoſe vpon them: for albeit the ſudden diſcomfiture of their friendes and confederates, and the neceſſitie of victuals, encreaſing daily within the towne, did redouble both the griefe and the care of the Daynians, by reaſon that the companies of Albanois, left before the place expreſſely for that intent and purpoſe, had hindered them from foraging or making any other prouiſion: yet did they not conceiue any one diſhonorable thought within their hearts, for the redemption of themſelues from ſo many miſchieues and wants which oppreſſed them. But euen in the middeſt of theſe extremities, prouiding and diſpoſing all things with notable conſtancie and ſingular good diſcretion; they began more ſparingly then they had accuſtomed, to ſhare out the munition and victuals vnto the ſouldiers, allowing either of them ſo much onely as ſhould ſuffiſe to ſuſtaine their faithfull ſoules, and (as the ſaying is) might hold bodie & ſoule together. As for the aged perſons there was no order taken for them, becauſe it was ſuppoſed ſuch perſons ſhould not want anie meanes, wherewithall to helpe themſelues, either by the naturall ſtrength and ſituation of the place, or by their fidelitie which was of all other the moſt aſſured rampier.
            Now when Caſtriot had ioyned his victorious troupes, to thoſe which lay before the towne, he pained himſelfe (but in vaine) to repreſent vnto their grieued heartes, the motions of vaine feare. With great ſhewes and oſtentation, with many reproches and high cries, he cauſed the enſignes and colours gained from the enemie, to be ſhewed vnto them: great numbers of captiues ſad and ſorrowfull, were led round about the towne, with their eyes caſt downe to the ground, for ſhame that they ſhould be ſeene in that plight by their allies and friends, (who ſtood in thicke troupes vpon the walles, and who at ſo hideous a ſight did ſhead abundance of teares.) For there were many among the captiues, who were of kinne and nearely allied to the beſieged, as may be eaſily perceiued by that which hath bene before recited. Now Scanderbeg knowing that his perſwaſions were of no force nor efficacie towards men ſo throughly reſolued: he began to treate with them for the yeelding of the towne, and with a certaine kind of confidence all aſſured, he demanded that the garriſon of the Venetians might be yeelded into his hands: but his raſh demaund had a notable anſwer,The liberall and free anſwer of the Danians to Scanderbeg. well beſeeming the vertue of franke and free citizens: telling him, that he ſhould deſiſt from terrifying their eares and their eyes with ſuch ſights and menaces: that their faith was not grounded vpon ſo light a foundation, as that they would meaſure them ſelues rather by a new accident of croſſe and peruerſe fortune, then by the ancient habit of their mindes and diſpoſitions: that they had all of them determined (if they could not otherwiſe do) to leaue vnto their good Princes, an eternall teſtimonie of their vnfortunate faith, by the witneſſe of their diſmembred bodies: and that neither the loue nor affection which they did beare to their owne, nor the captiuitie of their confederates was ſuch, that they ſhould hope thereby, to extort from them any ſuch action of pietie, which might tend to their ſtaine and ignominie, and ſuch, as the priſoners them ſelues (if they were put to the queſtion) would not require to be vſed towards them. Moreouer, that they were in good hope that their Seigniours the Venetians, would not ſuffer either the bonds & captiuitie of the one to be perpetuall, or the ſiege of the other to be of any long continuance: that he ſhould take this their example as a true proofe and enſignement, that the faith of anie people ought not toSentence. change and turne with the wind, nor to follow the inſtable and vnconſtant fortune of Princes.
            
            It was a wonderfull ſigne and token of liberalitie and naturall clemencie in Scanderbeg,
               
in that (ſeeing his reaſons and demaunds ſo neglected and reiected by the BurgeſſesScanderbeg his curteſie and magnanimity to the Venetian captiues. of Dayna, and all hope taken away to obtaine the towne, by reaſon of this their obſtinacie) yet he ſhewed not any kind of diſcontentment (as the moſt part of Princes are naturally inclined) neither had he recourſe to any termes of wrath or furie, or deſire of reuenge, and leaſt of all did he exerciſe any crueltie vppon the priſoners, whereas he might haue vſed them as himſelfe had liſted: but contrariwiſe he commaunded preſently that they ſhould be vnbound, and hauing gratiouſly entreated and cheered them, he ſet them at libertie, and ſent them away to their owne houſes. It may be that this politique and ſage Captaine did this of purpoſe, which his intent though it be not to be allowed, yet the deuice and inuention is much to be commended: for that being notable any other way to ſubdue the walles of the Danians, he might at leaſtwiſe vanquiſh them by this courteſie and humanitie; and might gaine thoſe by gratious vſage, whom neither rigour nor force could any way remoue from their determination and purpoſe. Two onely of the priſoners, men of the chiefeſtAndrew Humoi, Simon Volcathagne priſoners to Scanderbeg. marke and qualitie, named Andrew and Volcathagne he detained ſtill with him, as certen pledges of the league and amitie like to enſue ſhortly, and as ſureties (though in vaine) to preuent the fiercenes of the Scutarians. Theſe men were kept vnder good gard within the fortreſſe of Petralba, where they were both reſpectiuely and bountifully receiued and enterteined
            Theſe things being thus atchieued, he had a new deuiſe in his head to bring the towne vnder his ſubiection: to the intent therfore, the thing which he ſo affectionately deſired, might be brought to ſome good end and perfection, he enterpriſed an action, whereby he might with more facilitie and commoditie not only further & aduance the ſiege of Dayna, but the meanes of the whole warre betwene him & the Venetians.
            There was ſometimes a towne named Baleze, of which as then there was nothingBaleze. remaining but a ſmall ſhew & the ruines only: it had bene ſomwhat renowned, not for that it was founded by any man of name or memorie, but onely for the antiquitie thereof: it was ſeated at the foote of the mount Sardonicke (which the common peopleThe mount Sardonikor Marra
                     •
                  ay. Surſcod
                     •
                  a. of the countrey call Marranay,) neare about it is a certen countrey called Surſcodra diſtant from Scutarie twelue miles, from Driuasta fiue: and fifteene from Dayna. Scanderbeg was determined to reedifie and repaire that place which had of old bene ruinated by the Barbarians, and (as ſome ſay) by that ſcourge of God Attila. This ſame place being fortified and defended with a good garriſon and ſome other forces, he was of the opinion, that he might by the benefit thereof, more freely annoy the Venetian territorie, and keepe the beſieged from hauing any releefe or ſuccours, by reaſon, that the enemie ſhould be buſied on all partes with ſo many occaſions: for this purpoſe he cauſed it at one inſt
                  •
               nt to be renewed, partly with walles, and parlyBaleze reedified and fortified by Scanderbeg. with palliſſadoes and other fortifications of timber worke; and hauing founded it in manner of a towne, and furniſhed it with men: he appointed Ameſe his nephew, and Marin Span or Spaniard, (a perſon by birth of Albanie, & a man of approued prudenceAmeſe and Marin Span. Gouernours of Baleze. and fidelitie) to haue the ouerſight of the worke, and to ſee it brought vnto perfection. This done, he repaſſed the ſame day ouer the riuer Drinon, to proſecute the ſiege of Dayna, which for no occaſion of time or other affaires, he would ſuffer in no caſe to be intermitted.
            The fortifications and walles of the new fortreſſe being finiſhed, and many bulwarkes being raiſed within it as ſeemed moſt expedient, Ameſe being a young man and impatient of reſt (both his owne peculiar reputation, and the freſh renowne of his vncles vertue, animating his youthful mind hereunto) becauſe he had ſomewhat happily made certaine rodes and light inuaſions vpon the plaine countrey, he imagined

that he ſhould be as fortunate in all other matters of greater weight and importance. And therefore he caſt in his minde, with a full reſolution to ſurpriſe Driuaſta, which was a towne there neere adioyning: this made him that from thence forward he hadDriuaſta. no other thought daily then to make readie his companie, though he disfurniſhedAmeſe purpoſeth to ſurpriſe Driuaſta. the new fortreſſe of the garriſon, for he thought that his commendation ſhould by this act be the more augmented, if (before any ſuccour were ſent from his vncle, and ere that he knew any newes thereof) he might ſuddenly ſend vnto him the markes of ſo notable an exploit, by the ſpoiles of the towne once conquered and ſubdued: and that it would be a ſecret argument that his vncles valure were now in the wane, and did as it were, waxe old vnder the wals of Dayna: ſo fondly did the boiling heate of this young mans courage puffe him vp with hope, vainely promiſing vnto himſelfe all the fauours of fortune. But Marin (whoſe induſtrie Scanderbeg had made choiſe of, and had made equal with the other, for the ſurer preſeruation of the new fortreſſe, hauing therein ioyned moſt vnfortunately, the prudence of the one with the temeritie of the other) Marin (I ſay) being an old and expert ſouldier, by reaſon of his long practiſe in matters militarie, and being more venerable for his age: fearing, that if openly he did withſtand the wilfulneſſe of this youth, there might grow ſecret diſlike and enmitie betweene them (a moſt peſtilent miſchiefe in the adminiſtration of anie affaires.) For this cauſe he thought that he would in the very beginning breake off this enterprieſe, by alienating of the deuotion of the ſouldiers from him ſecretly, and by that meanes would diſappoint him of his purpoſe: but afterwards when he ſawe that the affections of them all in common, and that the inordinate lycenſe of the ſouldier did encline more to the other partie, he reſolued in the ende to ſpeake his minde openly & freely in the preſence of al the whole company, to the intent himſelfe might be diſcharged from that default which was likely (by another mans counſell) to ſucceede vnhappily: and therefore (as the ſpeech is) in theſe or the like termes, he gaue him this admonition.
            Certenly Ameſe; Scanderbeg hath left thee heere a greater croſſe vnto me then theMarin Span his ſpeech to Ameſe. Venetians our enemies▪ for now that we haue other matters to looke vnto, by reaſon of the heat of this warre throughout all the country: I am conſtrained and driuen to a new ſtrife and contention, cauſing ſome ſecret hate or diſlike betweene vs, becauſe that thou art growen to haue a vehement ſuſpition leaſt I (of a deſire to contradict thee or through the ielouſie of thy youthfull glorie and reputation,) doe ſeeme to diſſwade thee from this thy enterpriſe. But why do I impute any fault vnto my ſelfe, ſeeing both God and men will ſufficiently acquite me, for that this my counſell in this caſe and concerning this accident, either (being neglected) ſeemeth not to haue bene wanting, or (being followed and allowed) cannot well be reprehended? The loſſe will ſurely be thine owne and no mans elſe, for in this action (whatſoeuer thy intent be) it is not the citie of Driuaſta, but thy ſelfe and thy vncle, that thou goeſt to aſſaile: thou doeſt but haſten to abridge the daies of thy owne friends and fellow citizens, and to bath the enemies ground with the blood of thy ſouldiers. Haue we to this end repaired this new towne? haue we fortified it with ſuch ſtrong companies, and with a garriſon of ſo many braue men, to the end it ſhould be ſo ſuddenly diſarmed and diſfurniſhed of her forces? and while we fooliſhly ſeeke after others, our own fortreſſe ſhould be left and deliuered as a prey vnto our enemies, who expect and attend for nothing elſe? Say that this place were not to be regarded, yet is there any of you that will thinke that townes will be ſurprized with ſo ſmall a mumber of ſouldieres, who would ſcarcely ſuffice to defend them? eſpecially the towne of Driuaſta, which (as it is large and populous▪) ſo (for in this reſpect we may commend our enemy

it is likewiſe excellently well prouided both of armes and of men couragious and valiaunt. If I be not deceiued both you and the enemy doe expect one and the ſame thing. Firſt their old men and other of the weak and vnable multitude, from the battlements of their wals, will make a ieſt at your fooliſh preparations, and at your vaine deuiſes in ſeeking thus to take their city. And then their young men, who (being fierce and luſty) do deſire nothing ſo much as to come to fight with you, iſſuing forth of the towne, will force vs to leaue the aſſault, and will chaſe vs away with ſhame and ignominy, or elſe leauing their ports open to receiue vs, ſodainely and vnaduiſed they will ſurprize and ſet vpon vs, and ſo reuenge the late loſſe of their companions, and the iniuries of the Scutarians. Then will other townes take courage vnto them, and thoſe who are now ouercome and vanquiſhed, will become to grow hardy, and nothing at all to redoubt vs. Lay aſide therefore (I pray thee Ameſe whileſt all things are well and whole) this your pernicious forwardnes and audacity: and do not cauſe the reuerent and honorable name ofthy vncle, by ſo great an indignity to be diſgraced & rent aſunder, by the mouths of thoſe that are his aduerſaries and ill willers. Stay a while, and attend till that God fauour thee, in preſenting thee ſome other matter of more abundant and greater glory, and with greater ſafety and ſecurity. Then will I be the formoſte man, not to perſwade thee only, but to cauſe thee to take armes, and will alſo accompany thee. No man will be vnwilling to follow thoſe enſignes which are fortunate. Reſtraine therefore the broyling heat of this thy courage (though it be hard to be reſtrained) learne of thy ancients, firſt thy ſelfe to beare the yoke, which thou deſireſt to impoſe vpon thy enemy. For youth being vncapeable of good counſell, (let me ſpeakeSentence. freely what I thinke) is oftentimes as hurtfull vnto it ſelfe, as vnto thoſe which are his enemies. It is rather to be drawen then to beled to any thing, & of all the burdens that are laied vpon men, the vnaduiſed wilfulneſſe of youth is the moſt dangerous. Wars are to be managed by counſell and good aduiſe, and let the wiſeſt Captaine cary him ſelfe in all his actions, neuer ſo ſagely and aduiſedly, yet hardly and with great difficulty doth Fortune anſwere his deſerts, or ſucceed accordingly.
            
            The graue and prudent ſpeeches of this perſonage, were ſufficient to haue changed the mind of this yong ſouldier. But becauſe in the haſtineſſe of his owne temerity, and the raſhneſſe of his owne counſels, hee had already ordained and prouided all thinges which were expedient and neceſſary for that enterpriſe; it ſeemed vnto him a matter of more diſhonor, to giue ouer (by diſcretion) the attempt which he had vndertaken, then (with misfortune) to put the ſame in execution. Hee reiected therfore this wholſome and ſound admonition, and preferring the worſt before the beſt, he held it leſſe ſhame and diſgrace, to follow his own humor (though it were to his loſſe and hinderāce) then by reforming himſelfe vpon the admonition of an other, to take that choiſe which might be for his benefit and aduantage. Beſides the credit which he had purchaſed with the companies, and the readines of the cōmon ſouldiers obedient to his command did animate his fooliſh deſires, and did withhold his doubtfull eares from harkning vnto any good aduertiſements. To that therefore which Marin Spaniard had perſwaded ſo aduiſedly, firſt of all he replied with great inſolency, that his vncle hadAnſwere of Ameſe to Marin Span. 
               left either of them with like power, commaundement, and authority: that hee was not appointed there to gouerne himſelfe either in peace or war, at the liking and arbiterment of another: that he ſhould looke to his owne companies: and that for his part, it was in him to command his ſouldiers at his owne will and pleaſure. Notwithſtanding within a litle while after, when his choller was a litle cooled by ſpeaking, and that the vehement and immoderate paſſion of his mind, was ſomewhat ſetled and abated, then began his tongue to be much more modeſt, and his ſpeaches grew more

               milde and gracious. For he told his colleague & companion, that he would willingly approue and allow of his opinion, were it not that the affaires of Baleze and Driuaſta might both at once be directed and ordered, & that neither of them would hinder and diſturbe the other: that their forces were ſufficient both to guard the one and to cary the other: and that he did not ſo inconſideratly vndertake this attempt, but that he very well knew what he did: that he would ſurprize them of Driuaſta ſodainely and vnprouided: that he ſhould finde the youth of the towne out of armes, the gates vngarded, and the wals without ſentinels: beſides that, there were many of the inhabitants which (if they were ſummoned to yeeld) would gladly hearken vnto him. But admit that all things do fall out more difficult then he expected, that then he meant not to be ſo obſtinate as to make there any long abode, to the preiudice of his ſouldiers. And in ſaying this he tooke Maryn by the hand, praying him to be of good courage, and to hopewell of his ſucceſſe. Thus hauing recommended his affairs vnto God, he diſplaid his enſignes, and ſo marched chearefully onward. Of thoſe which remained behindeAmeſe marcheth to ſurprize Driuaſta with Marin for the gard of Baleze, they were ſcant fully 2000, not that any man was enforced to accompany them in that iourney, but becauſe that the Albanois were more exerciſed in labor and trauell, then in lying idle and at reſt: and the ſouldiers had no kinde of warre more agreeable, and familiar vnto them, then the aſſaulting and ſurpriſing of townes and holdes.
            Now albeit Ameſe did haſten on with all poſsible celerity, and did conceale his attempt as much as might be, yet could he not preuent the newes of his comming. For the Driuaſtines being aduertiſed of his approach, (as men that could ſoone deſcry any ſuch purpoſe) and at the very beginning of the war of Dayna, did ordinarily keepe and maintaine great courts of guard in certaine places about their towne, and a great number of mē, purpoſely to watch in armes: they were notwithſtanding at the firſt greatly aſtoniſhed, and mounting vpon their wals, they made preparation of all ſuch things as were requiſite to repulſe the enemy, bringing from all partes ſtones and ſuch other munitions, which were fit to be throwen downe vpon them and to annoy them. But afterwardes when they had a ſight of the enemy, as they drew neare the towne, they grew ſodainely to be both better encouraged and leſſe carefull; contemning both the ſmalneſſe of their numbers, and their Captaine all alike. Notwithſtanding the good countenance which they made, did nothing at all apall or diminiſh the confidence of the yong Chiefetaine, but he ſummoned them within the towne (in the name of Scanderbeg) with many faire offers and promiſes, to render the ſame vnto him. But being rudely repulſed and with many ſharpe tearmes reiected: (hee reſting as yet in ſuſpence and doubtfull, and being withall caried away with choller and indignation) retired himſelfe about a mile and a halfe from the towne, where all in vaine, according to the variable and diuerſe opinions of his ſouldiers, he beate his braines, deuiſing by what means he might bring the towne to reaſon, ſeeing he had no ordinance wherewithall to batter them. Thus did he ſeeme both to conſult and to beſiege the towne, all at one time. In the meane time to aſſure his troups from a ſurprize, but principally from towardes Scutarie, he placed skoutes and watches round about the place where hee was encamped.
            Whileſt theſe things were thus in doing: the Driuaſtines with a worthy and verie commendable care did bethinke themſelues, how to free their towne from the doubt of this ſiege, & their concluſion was (whatſoeuer became thereof) to hazard the combate, before the enemy ſhould attempt to force their wals and rampiers. The author of this their reſolution was Andrew Angell, one of the chiefeſt men of accompt within their towne, noble by his owne worthy actes, and well knowen by the honor which

he had gotten by his long practiſe in armes. This man (hauing ranged his men in good order ofbattel at the lower gate of the city, which lieth on the weſt towards the plaine, & the wals of the city being well manned, and the ports ſtrongly garded, before that he ſalied forth vpon the enemies) he began to encorage them with this language.
            If euer quoth he (my good ſouldiers) it were needleſſe and ſuperfluous to encorage
                  The Oratic
                        •
                      of Andrew Angell to the Driuaſtines. men that are valiant and magnanimious, now is the time: and this is the day wherein I ſee your comming hither ſo readily and chearefully, doth make ſhew thereof moſt apparantly: conſidering that euery one of you, leauing the preſence & company of his father, mother, and wife, and the embracementes of his tender infants, doth offer himſelfe here ſo willingly without any perſwaſions or entreaty. Now ſeeing our fortune by ſo notable a ſpectacle hath brought vs to this, that wee are driuen to combat both before and for our wals, will not you (my good companions & moſt louing citizens) imitate the example of your aunceſters, and maintaine the welfare of your town, your countrey, your houſes, your temples, and your altars? To what end ſhould I recount vnto you the manifold triūphs which they gained vpon their enemies, & which you your ſelues haue yet freſh in your memory? Let it ſuffice of a great many to recite a few, ſeeing the ſhortneſſe of the time will not permit any long diſcourſe. I remember well that I haue heard it reported by my forefathers, how Barach a Turkiſh CaptaineDriuaſtines their valiant exploites againſt their enemies. in the raigne of Amurath the firſt, with 20000. horſemen, inuading this our territory in the beginning of the warre, did make this demand vnto our citizens, That the keies of the towne ſhould be deliuered him, vppon ſuch conditions as he would propound vnto them. But they not willing to ſubmit them ſelues vppon ſuch tearmes: and he falling to the burning of the country, and deſtroying of the fruites with fire & ſword, the people (I ſay) of Driuaſta came vpon them in full troups as they were here & there diſperſed; in ſuch ſort that (many of them being left engaged dead in the fieldes, and many of them being made priſoners) they enforced the reſidue to betake them ſelues to flight: and hauing by this meanes obtained a notable victory, they returned into the towne rich and triumphant. What ſhould I tell you of Steuen ſurnamed Herceck, Duke of Boſina, who in like manner being entred within our limits, with an army of fiue and twenty thouſand, vnder pretence of the like expedition; firſt ſummoned the towne to yeelde vnto him: but our braue Driuaſtines, by their ſtout and lofty refuſall, put him in ſuch rage and fury: that he preſently ſent forth his troupes to ouerrun the countrey, and make hauocke of all things? But what did our citizens? they went to encounter him with a good company both of horſe and foot, they charged him with great furye, they brake and diſcomfited him, and they purſued after him in chaſe ſo greedily, that beſides a great ſlaughter of the enemies, and many enſignes gained, they returned triumphant and loaden with prey and booty into the town: honoring their countrey by the preſeruation of their liberty and them ſelues, in their glory and reputation. March we on therefore (my good friends) and let our ſelues be the meſſengers to our ſenceleſſe enemies, of that aunſwere which our towne ſendeth them with ſo great vertue and reſolution. Let vs take from theſe few ſtraglers or robbers their vaine and fooliſh hope of winning of towns with ſuch weak forces and ſo ill accompanied. What thinke you of the ſtout reſiſtance of Dayna, before which Scanderbeg him ſelfe with ſo great an army, hath for ſo long a time bene buſied? Will not this be a wonderfull touch of reproach and infamy vnto all of you, that his nephew ſhould haue a Commiſſion ſo baſely to ſurprize vs with ſo ſmall forces, the which will be ſcant able within a while to defend their owne fortreſſe? Behold their puiſſance and ſtrength is nothing, not able to make any reſiſtance: their diſcipline is ſmall or none at all: and their Generall is a mā of no experience. Whatſoeuer was of any reckoning or reſpect

in all their army, all that hath Scanderbeg himſelfe before Dayna: as for this mignion, onely his owne vnpatiency ofreſt and quietnes hath brought him hither, and he hath none with him, but the very skumme and dregs of his campe, and a mingle mangle of the moſt raſcall ſort of all their ſouldiers.
            
            This ſhort ſpeach did ſo animate the Driuaſtines, that all of them at once began toDriuaſtines ſally forth of Driuaſta againſt Ameſe. make a noiſe, and with a loude voice they willed him to lead them on againſt the enemy. Then began the trumpets to ſound, and with great cries and clamours, they iſſued forth of the towne, and the others (who were vpon the wals) going & comming ech in their ſeuerall charges, with the like noiſe from aloft, did encreaſe the bruite of the alarme. The hue and cry of this tumult comming ſo ſodainely and vnprouided, whereas the Ameſen troupes doubted no ſuch matter: ſtroke great terrour into their court of guard: but afterwardes when they perceiued ſo many armed men to diſcouer themſelues on all parties, and that the Driuaſtines with like fury, did make right towards them (where they were encamped) they wiſhed Ameſe ſpeedily to mount on horſebacke, with a troupe of thoſe who were in beſt readineſſe, and with whom, making head directly againſt the enemy, he might for a time put them to a ſtand, and hold them in skirmiſh, til ſuch time as the reſidue of the companies (who were ſcattered here and there ouer the countrey) and thoſe alſo who were within their trenches, (being altogether vnited & arranged in order of battell) might iſſue forth with their enſignes diſplaied into the field, and be incorporate with the reſidue all in one But the ſage conduct of the expert Chiefetaine on the aduerſe part, troubled the vntimelie counſell of this young nouice, and apprentice in the art Military: For he hauing deuidedConflict between the Driuaſtines and Ameſe. his troupes into three parts, ſent away ſpeedily certaine Italians (who were intertained to be there in garriſon continually) and part alſo of the horſemen to inuade the campe on the vpper ſide thereof. The reſt of his ho
                  •
               ſe (being for the moſt part archers and peſants) he ſent to ſhut vp the paſſages of their campe, and to keepe them from entring, both to hold out and exclude the one, and to ſurprize and intercept the other. Himſelfe with the third troope making head againſt Ameſe, did at the firſt onſet ouerthrow his battallion and put them cleane from all reſiſtance: and the Chiefetaine himſelfe being disfurniſhed of his guard, and in great aſtoniſhment, was enforced to the flight: notwithſtanding, making himſelfe way through the ſquadron of Archers, he ſaued himſelfe amidſt the open fieldes with the reſt of his companions. Then began the cry to be renued on all parts, and on the one ſide the diſcomfiture of their captaine, and on the other ſide the ſodaine approach of the enemy, did take away from the gards all meanes to rally them ſelues together, and to renue the fight. Finally, the forces of the enemy being reioyned and vnited, they made towards the Fort, where (after long debate) the aduantage fell to the Driuaſtines: and all things enclining to fauour them, the Ameſens did abandon the defence of their trenches, and on diuerſe ſides flying and fighting all at once, they retired them ſelues into the plaine. Angell made no reckonning to purſue them, nor to ſacke their campe: but thinking he had done enough in depriuing them of the victory, cauſed to ſound a retraite, and led backe his compapany with great reioyſing into the city: But the ioy of this good and happy encounter did not long continue to the inhabitants. For Ameſe hauing gathered his ſouldiers together from their flight, and thinking vpon this diſcomfiture (the ſhame wherof was greater then the loſſe) and ſeeing himſelfe fruſtrate of all hope to gaine Driuaſta, heeAmeſe ſpoileth the countrey about Driuaſta. turned the impatiency of his anger elſe where, not ſparing any thing whatſoeuer could be found, either for encreaſe or recreation, but both the houſes were burnt and ruinated, and all ſorts of trees and plants were cut down and deſtroied. Nothing was left vntoucht, except a few Oliue trees, (the abundance and fertility of the which, doth

make that towne to haue great traffique, and to be much eſteemed:) all theſe ſpoilings and ruines notwithſtanding, and for that Ameſe ſpoiled (a good waies off from their Ports) the Driuaſtines though their hardines had once ſucceeded happily) yet would not they againe be drawen into the fields, fearing that if they ſhould range abroad too farre, their returne might be hindered, or they might fall into ſome ambuſcado, and ſo ſhould they giue an account for their too too great forwardneſſe, and their ouermuch hardineſſe might coſt ſome of them full dearely.
            I hold it not amiſſe here to lay downe in ſome ſort the deſcription of the towne ofThe Towne of Driuasta. 
               Driuaſta, not much renowmed neither for her foundation, nor for her antiquity, albeit the credulous error of the inhabitaunts doth moſt obſtinately attribute the originall thereof to the Romains, alleadging that they were the firſt founders of the ſame. Herein do they moſt glory, in that they affirme themſelues to be a Colony of the Romains, and they do preciſely maintaine, that from thence they had their deſcent and original. For my part, I ſuppoſe that the humor of theſe men, ſo deſirous of glory, is rather to be pardoned, then that their opinion is any way to be credited. For neither are there any teſtimonies of good authority to ratifie this perſwaſion, neither are there any monuments to confirme it. The like fortune alſo hath Antibara, a towne of verie goodAntibara. accompt in theſe our daies within the ſayd countrey, and (not without cauſe) doeth it complaine of the vngratefull ſilence of the ancients. Notwithſtanding the ſeat of Driuaſta (in my iudgement) ſeemeth not vnworthy (if reaſon may perſwade vs) to haue a Colony there erected, both in regard of the pleaſantnes of the place, and of the aboundance and commodity of all things, which may allure men to inhabite or manure it. For the territory of that city is moſt fertile and fruitfull, yeelding all things which mans life in reaſon can wiſhe for. On euery ſide there are great ſtore of ſprings andScituation of Driuaſta. fountains, ariſing and deſcending with a pleaſant noiſe from the hils adioyning, which by nature are ſo orderly mounted, as if they had bene diſpoſed by artificiall workmanſhip: and moſt wonderfully doe they adorne and beautifie the plaine countrey. The aire (on what ſide ſoeuer you turne your eies) is exceedingly healthfull, and it doth ſeaſon and temper all things, ſo as it maketh them to proſper ſingularly. The Citie is ſeated vpon the diſcent of a mountaine, bending towards the South, and extending towards the plaine (where it is watered with a brooke called Clire) which may more iuſtly be tearmed by the name of a riuer, by reaſon that the ſtreames thereof do neuer faile, for any drought or diſtemperature of the ſommer whatſoeuer. The circuit of the wals and trenches is aboue two miles in compaſſe. The fortreſſe or caſtel (being ſeated vpon the top of a mountaine) by nature and by art is moſt defenſible: it both commandeth and defendeth the city. From Scutarie it is diſtant 8. miles, and from Motry 27. This towne hauing beene raſed by the Gallo grecians in the declining eſtate of the Romaine Empire, was reedified & reſtored by Helena, a moſt chriſtian Princeſſe deſcendedHelena the wife of Negmana king of the Miſians. of the bloud royall of the houſe of Fraunce, and who was eſpouſed to Simeon Nemagna, king of the Miſians and Sclauonians. This Lady being very deuout & vertuous, did reſtore (beſides this) many other townes neare adioyning, which had bene likewiſe ruinated in that country. Shee builded alſo both in Epire and Sclauonie, many Couents, Monaſteries and religious houſes, & endowed them with great liuings and poſſeſſions, as is manifeſtly to be ſeene, by the marbles engrauen with ſuch teſtimonies, beſides other monuments and memorable markes of her bountifull and princely deedes. But returne we to our purpoſe.
            The choller of Ameſe being fully diſcharged vpon the plaine country of the Driuaſtines (which he had made in a maner deſolate) he had no deſire to returne anie more to Baleze, becauſe being aſhamed of his aduenture, hee was loath (after the triall of his

miſhap, and the proofe of his imprudency and temerity) to come in his preſence, to whom he had refuſed to giue eare, when time and place ſerued. And he now repented (though all too late) that he had contemned his good counſell. He turned therefore another way, & marched with his companies directly towards Dayna: ſhunning moſt vnaduiſedly the reprehenſion of his fellow Marin, to endure the diſpleaſure far more dangerous, and the frowning countenance of his vncle, whom he had moſt grieuouſly incenſed. For Scanderbeg hauing had tidings brought him by ſome, dwelling neare the ſame place, how all things had paſſed, aſſoone as hee knew of his comming, he ſent for him to his preſence, and openly in the ſight of all his companies (which was hardly digeſted of the young gentleman) in extreame choller hee conuinced him asScanderbeg reproueth Ameſe for his temerity. guilty of all the fault that had bene committed. He accuſed him (and as his debtor) he challenged him, demanding of him the innocent bloud of his companions, which he had cauſed to be ſhed through his folly, terming him with a loud voice both raſh and arrogant, that without any commiſsion from him had plaied ſo fooliſh a part. He obiected vnto him moreouer, that at his departure from Baleze, he commanded him no ſuch matter. That he ought to haue taken & interpreted his ſilence, as a manifeſt prohibition & an apparāt argument, that his will was not to haue any ſuch proceedings. Afterwards when he had examined the ſouldiers which were preſent at that ſeruice, and was by their report certified that the matter was altogether concluded and executed without the aduiſe & conſent of his companion, his fury grew then to be much more vehement, and his minde being full of wrath and indignation, he perſiſted in this ſeuerity, ſaying: that it grieued him ſo much the more, becauſe, beſides the temerity of the act, he had added a more grieuous and inhumaine fault, in deſtroying by a moſt miſerable example, the fieldes of the citizens, & in vſing cruelty with ſword and fire againſt their trees and buildings. But Ameſe as one confounded (hauing not anie thing to anſwere for his excuſe) replied not a word: but ſtood ſtill ſilent, only turning him ſelfe a litle aſide to his companions: good God (quoth he) there is nothing moreSpeeches of Ameſe vpon the reproach of his vncle. infamous then a man that is vanquiſhed: for he muſt on the one ſide, accept to endure the inſolency and triumph of his enemies: and on the other, the fearefull countenance and wrathfull viſage of his friends. Hereupon the whole companies aſſembling themſelues about Scanderbeg, did humbly entreat him to mitigate his wrath, and to pardon him his diſpleaſure: alleadging, that the youth of his nephew was enough chaſtized, and his misfortune was ſufficiently aggrauated with the bitter ſpeeches he had giuen him, and that themſelues (as well as other) were culpable of the ſame offence. By meanes of theſe interceſsions made by his ſouldiers, was their Generall ſoone intreated and pacified: ſo familiar and curteous was his nature and diſpoſition.
            The end of the third Booke.
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               SCanderbeg leauing Ameſe to continue the ſiege before Dayna, goeth him ſelfe againſt Muſtapha. The citizens of Scutarie raze the fort of Baleze, which is forſaken by the Epirots. Muſtapha marcheth againſt Scanderbeg. The combat of Paule Maneſſey an Epirote with Caraguſa a Turke. The battell of Oronichea betweene Scanderbeg and Muſtapha, wherein the Turkes are vanquished and Muſtapha is taken priſoner. Peace concluded betweene the Venetians and Scanderbeg, whereupon he breaketh vp his ſiege before Dayna. Amurath reſolueth to go in perſon againſt Scanderbeg, who maketh prouiſions to reſiſt him. An armie of Turkes ſent into Epire to beſiege Sfetigrade, vnto whom Scanderbeg giueth an ouerthrow by a notable ſtratageme. Amurath him ſelfe commeth to the ſiege of Sfetigrade.
            
            
               WHileſt the Chriſtians were thus ſtirring and troubling each other by ciuill tumults, rather then by true and proper warres: and whileſt Scanderbeg all idle, did conſume his time, and (as it were) waxe olde before the walles of Dayna, Amurath being fully informed of all things in particular, both by Muſtapha (who had of a long time bene very deſirous to try the fortune of battell) as alſo by the common fame and report: his brains were continually beating and deuiſing vpon diuerſe counſailes. One while would he commend the oportunity, ſeeming ſo fit and excellent for the vtter confuſion of his aduerſary: another while, he would admire at his inuincible fortune and proſperity. And here withall (which was a ſpeciall point that kept his vnreſolute thoughts in ambiguity and ſuſpence) he doubted leaſt theſe enmities of the Chriſtians were but faint and colorable quarrels, and that their tumults were but fained and diſguiſed. Thus whileſt this Prince in the vncertainety of his thoughtes and penury of counſell, doth continue carefully diſcourſing and debating of matters, ſtill coniecturing one thing by another, by litle and litle the occaſion ſlipt out of his handes, by reaſon that the anger and diſcontentment of the Venetians became to be ſomewhat mitigated and aſſwaged: yet the often and frequent importunities and perſwaſions of Muſtapha, (who ſought nothing but fight and warres, in hope to deface and aboliſhe the ſhame of his former ouerthrow) did mightely prouoke the Ottoman, and draw him finely on to betake him ſelfe to moſt vnfortunate and pernicious armes,

wherefore the Sultan hauing highly commended the affection and good will of his Baſſa, he ſent vnto him ſpeedely a meſſenger with letters, the tenour whereof was as followeth.
            
               The warre Muſtapha, which thou doeſt ſo earneſtly demaund, now from henceforthThe letters of Amurath to Muſtapha. we doe freely graunt it thee: if thoſe reportes bee true which are brought vs concerning the tumultes of the Venetians. Thy vertue and thy valour ſhall winne thee honour and reputation vppon this enemy: yet ſee thou be well aduiſed and carie thy ſelfe diſcreetly, and let not a light beleefe and vaine credulitie cauſe thee to take armes, which afterwardes, when thou doeſt leaſt thinke, thou ſhalt bee enforced to laye aſide with ſhame and diſhonour. Peraduenture it is but an apparance of a counterfeit and deceiptfull warre, which is now betweene the Chriſtians: and thon mayeſt bee deceaued by their diſſembled contentions. Looke vnto it, and conſider this, that (as the common ſaying is) there is no quarrell ſo ſhort, as that of the father againſt the child. We (who are abſent) can not giue counſell to one preſent, nor yet doe wee aproue a fonde deſire of fight without good cauſe and inducement, which may moue thee thereunto. It is thou, that oughteſt to haue an eye, and to diſcuſſe by thy ſelfe particularly before thou take armes, all that which after (when thou haſt taken armes) is to be put in execution. Thou haſt good ſtore of ſouldiours freſh and reſolute, and thy enemy is partly wearied with paines and trauell, and partly weakened with his many battels. The reſt we referre to thy ſufficiencie and diſcretion, for we will not hinder thee from enterpriſing any thing, which ſhall ſeeme vnto thee to be for our honour and aduantage.
            
            After that Muſtapha had obtained leaue of Amurath to begin the watre, prouiſion being made of all things for his Campe: he conceiued in him ſelfe a wonderfull courage, thinking by one onely peece of ſeruice, to ende and determine all the toyle and trauell of the whole warres: and from thence foorth he did not (after the faſhion and manner of thoſe which deale cloſely and cunningly) conceale his preparations: but openly and apparantly bearing him ſelfe both in countenance and behauiour as an open enemy hee, ſeemed to bee the man that durſt and would hazard the fortune of a battell in any place where the Albanois would offer and preſent it vnto him. In the meane while the garriſon which was left vppon the confines of Macedonie, had ſent word in poſt haſt to Caſtriot before Dayna, enforming him particularly of the whole caſe as it ſtood, and making knowen vnto him the whole eſtate of their affaires. Whereupon this Prince in a good reſolution (as an expert ſouldiour, that vſed no leſſe celeritie then cunning in all his actions) preſently diſpatched away an other freſh poaſt: by whom he charged them that in any caſe, they ſhould not giue the Baſſa any occaſion or opportunitie to come to fight with them, but retiring their troupes ſometimes to the thickets and woodes vpon the mountaines where they might be ſecure of the enemy; and ſometimes vnder colour of a timerous and fearefull flight, they ſhould abuſe him, and by little and little protract the aduenture and hazard of fight: till ſuch time as him ſelfe (being arriued thither with his companies,) ſhould giue order for all things, what ſoeuer ſhould be needefull to accompliſh their deſire and purpoſe: and that then they ſhould not faile, ſpeedely and aſſoone as they perceiued him to draw neare, to ioyne them ſelues in one with his traine and to follow him: to the intent, that where him ſelfe ſhould be in perſon, there alſo might be the enſignes, the ſquadrons, and the whole force and ſtrength of the Campe. This done (albeit it greeued him greatly to ſee him ſelfe withdrawen from the of ſiege Dayna) calling Ameſe (his friend and faithfull companion in all dangers and perils) vnto him, he gaue him in

charge to haue a carefull eye vnto the ſiege: and he ſpake vnto the young man not onely by way of counſell, but alſo by entreatie: praying him not to alter any thing in his abſence, nor in any wiſe to make any attempt againſt the beſieged, hauing bene ſufficiently warned and inſtructed by his owne former diſgrace. And he willed him not to bowdge nor ſtirre a foote from before the walles, but ſo to gouerne him ſelfe, that they within the towne, might not either make any prouiſion of victuals, either haue any meanes to refreſh them ſelues. Hereupon (out of the armie which hee had there, and which by this meanes was greatly diminiſhed) he made choiſe of fiue hundred horſe, and a thouſand fiue hundred foote of the beſt and moſt picked ſouldiers, with which he purpoſed to ſtrengthen the old garriſon, againſt the new emotions of the Turkes. Theſe ſouldiours which had the foyle at Dryuaſta, were commaunded and enforced to ſtay at the ſiege vnder the gouernement of their young Gouernour, which greeued them at the very hartes: for each of them deſired, and all of them in generall did inſtantly requeſt the Prince, that he would permit them to make amendes of their former default, by ſome vertuous act of freſh marke and memory: and by the purchaſe of ſome new honor, to aboliſh the remembrance of their late diſhonor. Notwithſtanding not any of them had their requeſt graunted, both by reaſon of the preſent eſtate of his affaires, which diſſwaded him from taking all his forces with him: and alſo for that he could not in this caſe gratifie ſome of them without a certaine diſcorde and diſcontentment of the reſidue: and becauſe there was not any of thē but did eſteeme himſelfe to haue aſmuch valour as any one of his companions, he tooke none with him but the very chiefe and ſtrength of all his armie: namely the old ſouldiours, and ſuch as were beſt hardened, or moſt able to endure in armes: for well knew this moſt expert Chieftaine, what difference there is, betwixt the beſieging of the walles of a towne, where men lying incamped idle with their handes in their boſomes, doe onely waite by time to enforce and bring a place to reaſon: and the ſeeking in open field, neare at hand, and in the face of the enemy by the fury of fight and mortall blowes, to purchaſe honor and glory, not eaſily to be gained or without great difficulty.
            
               Scanderbeg was ſcant diſlodged from before Dayna, but the Scrutarians, being fullyThe Scutari
                     •
                  s go againſt Baleze. enformed both of the ſtirring of the Turks, and of their deliberation, as alſo of the departure of the Albanois, they aſſembled their troupes with all poſſible diligence, and with great prouiſion of artillery for the ſeaſing of Baleze: for they confidered, that as long as the garriſon of Albany was not remoued thence, nor that place cleared from their enemies, they ſhould haue perpetuall war within their owne territory, & not be able to breath themſelues from their roads and inuaſions. Vpon this occaſion, neither more nor leſſe, then as a company of hungry wolues, almoſt ſtarued for want of food, which perceiuing the negligence and abſence of the ſheepherds, do ruſh without feare vpon the fearefull flocke, and do diſperſe & diſmember the poore ſheepe being ill garded: In like maner the Scrutarians, hauing bene at all times very vigilant & attentiue, and now hauing intelligēce of the departure of Scanderbeg, that he was far remoued, being called to another warre of great importance: ſodainely with all their forces and prouiſions, they made haſt towards Baleze, and there began the reuenge of the iniuries and griefes, which they had endured: litle had it wanted but the garriſon hadMarin Spa
                     •
                   forſaketh Baleze. bene ſurprized, if it had with obſtinacie attended the comming of the enemy. But as ſoone as Marin hadde diſcouered that they went to bring the Canon againſt the place: truſſing vppe their baggage, both hee and all his ſouldiours conueyed themſelues ſecretelie to Dayna, leauing nothing but their bare and emptie neaſt, and the naked Rampiers: for the Scrutarians (who by this time had paſſed and gotten ouer

the brooke of Clyre, and were not aboue two myles from Baleze: where they neither ſaw nor encountred any thing, but a ſolitarie and wilde countrey, hearing neither voyce nor rumour of any perſons, nor ſeeing any token or appearance of watch or gardes vpon the walles. This ſo new and ſtraunge a caſe, and this great ſilence, ſeeming to them verie ſuſpitious, did at the firſt ſhew, make them fearefull and full of horrour: but afterwardes, certaine of their companie being ſent foorth to diſcouer the enemie, and hauing brought word backe, that they were departed thence: their whole armie approched the fort without any feare. The ſight of the place ſo ſolitarie, and the diſlodging of the garriſon did mightely diſpleaſe thoſe, which were of great and hautie courages, ſeeing that there was nothing but the poore walles for them to bend their forces againſt, and the Towne onely, without any liuing creature in it. Aboue all others, Humoy (of whom we haue before ſpoken) was in a great rage and choller: by reaſon of the exceſsiue deſire which hee had by ſome like match and good hap, to be reuenged for his brothers captiuitie, (for the truth is,) it vexed him extreamely, that he could by no meanes obtaine his deliuerance of Scanderbeg. And it may be that he went thither (as amitie and friendſhip doth make the mindes of men very vigilant) to the intent at the ſurpriſing of this place, he might get into his handes, ſome pledge and raunſome of good worth, thereby to make an exchaunge for the perſon of his brother, who was detained priſoner. On all ſides did the ſouldiours clime and leape ouer the walles, for the razing and ouerthrow of the which their ordinance was not needefull to do them any vſe or ſeruice. For the ſtones cleauing but ſlenderly together by reaſon that the morter was in aBaleze razed by the Scutarians. manner new and lately layed, and being beaten downe with barres of iron, and torne vp without any great labour, they did eaſily enough tumble downe of them ſelues alone: in a ſmall ſpace therefore was all ouerthrowen and ruinated. The reſt which was made of wood, pallizadoes, and other ſuch like defences, were not long able to continue againſt the fire, which was put vnto them, and did altogether conſume them: the ſouldiours cabbines and all other fortifications likewiſe were troden vnder foote and layed euen with the ground. Thus the Scutarians of an ouer haſtie deſire to ſatisfie their hatred and malicious mindes, by a dead kinde of reuenge, left that towne moſt deformed and hideous to looke vnto: in doing whereof they were the cauſe but of their owne dammage and greater griefe and calamitie, in making it the ſubiect of future reuenge to their enemy. There were ſome of the companie, whoſe counſell was, that they ſhould march with their forces before Dayna, both to chaſe the enemy from the ſiege, and to trye the fortune of battell, ſeeing that all things ſeemed to encline to them, and to promiſe them victorie, Scanderbeg beeing abſent from his armie. But the ſmall number of their forces made them that they durſt not doe it: beſides ſome others there were, who would not in any caſe agree to hazard and aduenture any further, then the Generall and gouernour of Scutarie had giuen them in charge and commandement. Wherefore they turned their enſignes and retired their troupes home towardes Scutarie, without hauing done any thing worthy of glorie or commendation, either by the purchaſe of any bootie or priſoners, or by the ſlaughter of any of their enemies.
            On the other ſide Maryn hauing brought his garriſon backe to Dayna, did reuiue in Ameſe a griefe to ſee the misfortune and ſhame bee fallen to them in publique, and yet priuately he did euen ſmile through a kinde of contentment, which he tooke in his owne particular miſhap: in that he ſeemed not onely and alone, thus ſhamefully to be foyled and repulſed by the Dryuaſtines, but that his colleague and

copartner was enforced to become alſo a companion with him in the like griefe and misfortune: the conceipt whereof made this young Prince in the open view and hearing of his ſouldiours, to ſpeake vnto them in this manner.
            This is well (quoth hee my friendes and felowes in armes.) Let vs ſtill be pitifull,The cōplaint of Ameſe. let vs ſtill bee mercifull and compaſsionate towardes our enemyes, till ſuch time as this fooliſh pitie and vnaduiſed clemencie, haue vtterly ruinated and confounded euen our ſelues: let vs (to our owne deſtruction) let looſe the bandes of the Scutarians, and ſet at libertie our priſoners, to the intent they may afterwardes againſt vs and our liues, more freely execute their outrage and crueltie. What may my vncle thinke when he ſhall ſee the deformed ſhape of this Towne, and her walles diſmantelled and ouerthrowne by thoſe, whom hee hauing of late taken priſoners in the fieldes and neare the bankes of the riuer Drynon, did ſo curteouſlie and gratiouſlie in the open view and ſight of each man reſtore to libertie, and ſend home free without raunſome to their owne countrey, to the intent they ſhould now a new take armes againſt him, and renew the old fierceneſſe and rancour of their hartes? Go too then, let vs pardon the Driuaſtines, let vs forbeare to touch or inuade their territorie, whileſt that we our ſelues doe finde all kinde of hoſtilitie executed againſt our perſons. We are now come to this paſſe, that whileſt we carie our ſelues with ſuch clemencie, and are ſo proue to pardon our enemies, we doe animate and ſtirre vp the armes of all the world againſt vs: and breaking the bonds, wherein other are tyed, we do bring the yoke of bondage vpon our owne neckes: this entreatie ought the enemy to finde, when he is at our mercy: That as we ought not to exclude all ſhew of pittie and compaſsion from them, ſo ſhould we not be tranſported ſo farre to pittie them as to be more pitifull then ſtandeth with reaſon: wherein can any man finde him ſelfe iuſtly agreened with vs, if we vſe that which right and the law of armes doth permit vs? There is no man can lawfully accompt or call thoſe cruell, with whom he ſtandeth vpon tearmes of like enmity, and betweene whom there is equall contention both of life and death.
            
            Thus on the one ſide did matters paſſe on with complaints, and murmurings. OnThe proceedings of the warre, betweene Muſtapha and Scanderbeg. the other ſide Muſtapha hauing ſent forth his ſouldiers into the countrey, did not ſuffer the Garriſon of Scanderbeg to be at reſt, but by their continuall and daily roades and inuaſions which they made vppon them, they did more and more terrifie them. For the Albanois ſhunning the fight continually, did ſtand vppon their defence, ſometimes relying vppon the ſtrength of their trenches and fortified places, rather then vppon their valour and force of armes. And ſometimes ſallying forth in ſmall troupes, and faining a flight, they (by a kind of mocking and skorning of the enemy) did entertaine him and gaine time vpon him. Wherefore Muſtapha perceiuing, that all his endeuours were in vaine, and that there was ſmall hope to oppreſſe the Garriſon, hee had no deſire, to make any attempt againſt their fort, and as vnwilling was he to purſue them in their flight for feare of ambuſcadoes and ſuch like pollicies, which were vſuall and familiar with his enemy. Onelie with good aduiſe he ordayned and prouided good guardes and ſentinelles, and imployed the reſidue of his ſtrength and forces to waſt and ſpoile the countrey neare adioyning vnto him; till ſuch time as being enfourmed of the comming of the Prince of Albanie, hee retired the whole ſtrength and force of his armie, and went to encampe him ſelfe within litle leſſe then two myles of the enemie. The place which they made choiſe ofOronochea. for the battell, is called Oronochea, and is in the vpper Dibria, vppon a certaine faire plaine, yet of no great breadth, and about ſixe miles from Croie. Scanderbeg with his freſhe and new forces, were likewiſe entred into the Campe of the Epirots,

where he was no ſooner arriued, but he cauſed proclamation to be made by the ſound of Trumpet, that no perſon ſhould iſſue foorth nor depart thence, without eſpeciall leaue and licenſe: and immediatly he ſet euery man a worke about the fortifying of the Campe: Muſtapha in the meane while on his part not ſtirring nor mouing any whit at all. On both ſides therefore all was quiet and peaceable: by meanes whereof the Albanois hauing ſufficientlie ordered their affaires, and hauing ſtrengthned their armed forces, with ſtrong and well defenced rampiers: they began to fortifie likewiſe the fortreſſe with armes, men, and ſouldiours: and Scanderbeg making a generall view and muſter of his companies to know the number of his men, and the certaintie of his forces: the old bandes were three thouſand and fiue hundred horſe, and ſix hundred foote ſtrong. For albeit Caſtriot had left there, little leſſe then fiue thouſand men at his departure (when he went to make preparation for the warre againſt the Venetians:) yet afterwardes he drew foorth a great many of them vpon diuers ſpeciall reaſons and good conſiderations: the whole number therefore of their forces being reckoned and accounted then preſent, were neareThe number of Scanderbegs forces againſt Muſtapha. about ſix thouſand fighting men, with whom hee purpoſed to affront the forces of Muſtapha and to hazard the fortune of that glorious triumph, and yet were not all of them employed: for the vigilancie and circumſpect prouidence of this pollitique chieftaine, would not permit that his fort ſhould remaine naked and empty without defence (what ſoeuer chance ſhould betide him) but he ordained 300. choſen men for theOrder of Scanderbeg his armie againſt Muſtapha. gard and cuſtodie of the ſame. His army very aduiſedly and vpon good conſideration did he deuide into wings: the fore front of the which, cōſiſted altogether of horſemen, whom he made the chief force and ſtrength of both the battallions, placing in each of them a thouſand and fiue hundred horſe, for feare and doubt leaſt his footemen, (being vnable to indure and beare the charge of the enemies horſe,) ſhould at the firſt onſet be diſordered and ouerthrowen: and this was the cauſe that he placed but very fewe of them in the backe of his two winges: the greateſt part of his infanterie (being reſerued in the middle battell, which was likewiſe couered and ſupported with fiue hundred horſe, to the intent the battell, being not troubled and diſordered at the very firſt encounter, on all partes, both on the one ſide and on the other,) the horſemen ſhould make head againſt the horſe of the enemy.
            Whileſt the Prince of Epire with the ſtrength and body of his armie, thus ordered and arranged, did containe his ſouldiers in great ſilence, and not ſtirring his enſignes, but attending the diſmarch and ſetting forward of the enemy: Behold aThe combat of Paule Maneſſey and Caraguſa. certaine Turke, disbanding and ſeuering himſelfe from the reſt of his company, (whoſe name was Caraguſa) preſented himſelfe in the middle ſpace of the field, which lay betweene the two armies, and gaue a ſigne of defiance challenging ſome one of them to the combat: from thence aduancing him ſelfe neare to the ranckes of the Chriſtians, with a high and loftie voyce, he called for the moſt hardy and aduenturous perſon in all their companie, to aſſay him ſelfe againſt him body to body. At the firſt there was a generall ſilence, and no man gaue him a word, but euery one ſtood mute, as men who were, no leſſe doubtfull to refuſe the challenge for feare of ſhame and diſgrace: then to accept the combat, the hazard whereof was ſo daungerous: but Paule Maneſſey (who was knowen to bee a verie readie horſeman, and an excellent man at Armes) did not any longer tollerate theſe brauadoes of the Barbarian againſt his nation and countrey-men: all the companies ſeeming to caſt their regard vppon him and to attend no other thing, as if hee eſpeciallie were the man, whom this challenge did concerne, and to whom the fortune of this fight did belong and appertaine: He therefore aduauncing

himſelfe roundly and in great fierceneſſe, with a ioyfull countenance went to ſeeke out Scanderbeg, to know his mind and good pleaſure in the matter: of whom he was both verie highly commended: and his courage and good hope very much & vehemently augmented and animated by meanes of thoſe good ſpeeches which Scanderbeg gaue him: for he willed him in a good houre and vnder the true conduct of thePaul Maneſſey encouraged by Scanderbeg to the combat. 
               great God to march on, both to purchaſe to himſelfe particular praiſe and commendation, beſides immortall fame vnto his memorie: as alſo by the good and fortunate encounter of this ſo haughtie and memorable an act, to begin and lead the way vnto his companions to a glorious and happie victorie, leauing a worthy preſident for them to imitate, and which the whole armie in generall could not but follow with great ioy and gladneſſe, vpon the happie preſage of his new gained honor and reputation. Hereupon thoſe of his own cornet flocking on all parts round about him, beganne to praiſe, to extoll and commend him, as if he had alreadie gotten the victorie. Then he making no longer ſtay, (but only whileſt he was arming & furniſhing him ſelfe with ſuch things as were neceſſarie and ordinarie for the fight) ſuddenly mounted on horſebacke, and forthwith gallopping into the open and plaine field, and addreſſing himſelfe towards the barbarian, (which there attended him) he called vnto him, and with an high voice, and wordes well fitting and beſeeming an enemie, he willed him to prepare and make him readie to the combat. The Turke bad him ſtay a litle, onely to giue him the hearing of a worde or two, which he deliuered in this manner.
            The victorie betweene vs, our valure and our fortune will decide and determine:Speeches of Caraguſa to Paul Maneſſey. 
               but as touching the lawes of the victory, for that we our ſelues are to take ſome order: If ſo be the deſtinies haue ordeined thee this day to haue the honour of my loſſe and ouerthrow, I will not refuſe (being ouercome by right of armes) but thou ſhalt freely diſpoſe both of my ſlaughtered carkaſſe, and of theſe my ſpoiles: in like caſe, if it happen that thou be vanquiſhed and doeſt fall vnder mine hande, I will that the like right be done to me, to diſpoſe of thy bodie at my pleaſure. And this let our Generals ratifie and confirme, for feare leaſt either in the heate and furie of our fight, or after the deciding and adiudging of the combat, ſome tumult and vproare doe ariſe betweene our battels, in fauour of the part of one of vs. Heereunto Paul gaue him this aunſwere: That for his part he did allow of the lawe and condition of the combat,Anſwere of Paul Maneſſey to Caraguſa. which he (as it ſeemed) fearefully did demaund to be obſerued. For where the ſpirite reſolute and full of courage doth once yeelde to the others fortune, all the reſidue by order of law and good right ought to be at the pleaſure of the conquerour. That he ſhould therfore fight ſecurely and without feare: that he needed not to doubt of anie other enemie beſides him, whoſe bodie (if it once became ghoſt leſſe vnder his hand) ſhould there alſo remaine to be diſpoſed of, at his free pleaſure and election. And albeit himſelfe could be content to bequeath the vnprofitable reliques of his dead carkaſſe amongſt his fellowe ſouldiers, to bewaile and lament his misfortune: that yet Scanderbeg would not ſuffer that thoſe members (which had ſhewed themſelues ſo faint and ſluggiſh in the combat as to be vanquiſhed) ſhould be brought backe and receiued into his campe.
            
            The audatious replie of this caualier, and the ſlight regard and account which he ſeemed to make of his life, did ſo appale and aſtoniſh the Barbarian, that it made him in a manner to repent himſelfe that euer he prouoked him. Imediatly the ſumme of their agreement being confirmed and ratified by the Chieftaines, and the two combatantes left alone in the middeſt of the fielde: euerie man had his eies fixed vppon them. Thoſe who were preſent at that fight, being diuerſely affected with doubt

and hope, did ſtand & abide rauiſhed with a maruellous care concerning the ſucceſſe and euent of the combat: for in ſhew and tauleneſſe the two champions were neere alike. Both were of a meane ſtature, and of equall yeares and age, neither of them being of a ſlouthfull or heauie conſtitution, nor yet of too youthfull or ouerhot and haſtie a diſpoſition. Ech of their armes were alike: firſt their launces and their ſhields, which were barred all ouer the midſt with bars of ſteele: by their ſides they had cemitaries after the Turkiſh faſhion, and great & heauy maces of yron: their bodies were armed with curaſſes, and their heads with helmets. Ouer their armour they had verie rich caſſockes made of ſilke, ſhining very bright & gliſtering: the which, albeit they did no way profite or further them to the victorie, yet did they adde a kind of grace and ornament vnto them. Both of them being thus appointed, and either of them bewraying a kinde of fierceneſſe and cruelty both in their countenance and courage, they tooke the field ech oppoſite againſt other, then ſetting ſpurres to their horſes, and fetching a ſtrōg carreer (with their lances in the reſt to encounter ech other) the Chriſtian knight running at the head of the Paynim, ſtroke him aboue and ouer his ſhieldPaul Maneſſey killeth Caraguſain combat. into the right eye, and pierced the ſame quite through: with which wound, he tumbling frō his ſaddle to the ground, the other diſmounting ſpeedily, diſarmed his dead carkaſſe, & cut the head from his bodie: and thus loaden with the ſpoiles of his ſlaine enemie, he quickly mounted againe on horſebacke to returne to his fellow ſouldiers, who breaking forth on al ſides out of their ranks where they ſtood embattelled, with exceeding ioy and gratulations did conduct him towards their Generall. Scanderbeg hauing receiued him with many gratious ſpeeches and infinite praiſes and commendations,He is rewarded by Scanderbeg. euen there in the fields and in the preſence of the whole armie, did reward him with a rich cote of armes of gold tiſſue, and with a great demeſne and liuelihood in token of his vertue. Then for that the time did vrge him to beginne the battell and to commit the hazard of the fight to the greatneſſe of his fortune: he thought it good to encourage his ſouldiers, and thus he ſpake vnto them.
            
               If the glorious actes and deedes of armes, do any thing moue the courages of menOration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers. who are valiant and hardie: I do thinke (my good ſouldiers) that euery one of you is ſufficiently animated by this excellent teſtimonie of vertue in a particular priuate perſon: and the rather for that it ſeemeth the heauens could not haue afforded you a more notable example before your eies, nor haue giuen you a better occaſion to ſpurre and to prouoke you, then this happie beginning and theſe firſt frutes of victorie, which is ſufficient both to encourage you to a more braue and ſetled reſolution, and to abate and diſmay the courage of our enemies. Go you to therefore and paſſe on hardly in this path of honour, which hath bene troden out vnto you: and by a commendable kind of emulation, do you immitate the act of your fellow in armes, whoſe hands you may ſee yet ſmoking with the bloud of that infidell. The carefull regard & diligence of your companion hath vowed it ſelfe for you, hath vowed it ſelfe for the victorie: his valiant and puiſſant arme hath offered vp a ſacrifice for you, that you likewiſe without any bloudſhed at all ſhould follow after him in the like, and (by the fauour of God) ſhould march ouer their bodies which are dedicated to deſtruction by your handes, and ſo you may enioy the ſpoiles which are promiſed to your valure and deſertes. Let vs therefore giue the onſet, and charge preſently vppon the enemie: he was the firſt to challenge you out of your rankes, let vs be the firſt to challenge him with our whole battell. Let vs force him into the field which ſeemeth to be fatall vnto him, whileſt that feare and griefe haue depriued him of all ſtrength, and whilſt that a generall aſtoniſhment doth preſſe the hearts and minds of their people with a moſt ſad and ſorrowfull ſilence.
            
            
               Aſſoone as he had thus ſpoken (their bodies hauing beene before refreſhed) about the ſeuenth houre he cauſed the trumpet to ſound, and in the verie inſtant he marched forwarde in battell array. Behold a notable and wonderfull kinde of hardineſſe in this man: marke well his reſolution moſt worthie of an inuincible vertue, and deſeruing to be admired of all poſteritie. This Chiefetaine (the onely fine ſouldier of his time) with ſo ſmall a troupe of men, brauely diſdayning the great forces and mightie puiſſance of his enemie, durſt in open and plaine fielde with armie againſt armie, aduenture the hazarde of ſo great and doubtfull a battell: not ſeeking by the helpe or furtherance of anie politicall inuention, or of anie martiall deuiſe and ſtratageme, to ouerreach and circumuent his enemie he had the courage and audacitie to be the firſt that ſhould forgoe his trenches, and putting himſelfe vpon the field, to giue the brauado to ſo ſtrong an enemie: whom (as if he had bene vnready or vnwilling to come on, or as one readie to flie awaie) he ſeemed to force and compell forth to the conflict. In this maner with a maruellous clamor and mightie crie (made by his ſouldiers) he now beganne to aduance himſelfe towardes the fort of the enemie: but that Muſtapha came forth to meete and encounter him, at firſt with a ſquadronThe battell betwene Muſtapha and Scanderbeg. tumultuouſly aſſembled, and afterwardes with all his forces. But like as in feare and terrour they did ſet forwarde, ſo were they aſſoone and eaſily repulſed at the verie firſt onſet, and ſcarce were they all come foorth of their trenches, and placed in good order of battell, but that manie of them ſuddenly betaking themſelues to flight, did flocke backe againe in troupes, making haſt to get within their fort, moſt baſely and cowardly ſeeking to fence and warrant their liues with the ſtrength of their fortreſſe and rampiers. Which thing being perceiued by the Turkiſh generall, and that neither the enſignes nor the ſouldiers did keepe their ſtande, nor any order; to the intent he might the better encourage them by the regard and example of his owne forwardnes, he cried vnto them to follow him, and where they ſhould ſee him to make way, there the enſignes ſhould follow and come after him. And therewithall bearing himſelfe cloſe with his lance in the reſt, he broched his horſe with his ſpurres, and with head and ſhoulders gaue in vpon the front of the enemy with a full & firme reſolution, either to carie away the victorie vnto Amurath his lorde and maiſter, or elſe to ſell his life dearely. Many of his leaders and captaines followed him, and a good number of his owne battallion: and the reſidue alſo beeing aſhamed to leaue their Chiefetaine in time of neede, by little and little came to ioyne with him, and oppoſed themſelues to the force and violence of the Chriſtians: ſo that in diuerſe and ſundriie places gathering and trouping together, they did mainetaine the fight to the vttermoſt of their powers. Thus on all ſides were the battels reenforced, and the fight beganne ſpeedily to be renewed, yet was there not anie appearance of the change and varietie of fortune both to the one partie and to the other (as is commonly ſeene in ſuch fights) but alwaies and on all partes a like, were the infidels without any hope of victorie, the Chriſtians euer ſurmounting them by the continual encreaſe and proceedings of their good fortune: ſo firmely had the ſucceſſe of the two firſt champions from the verie beginning, wrought and confirmed the fortune of both the armies, and had engrauen in the mind of ech man ſuch an impreſſion of hope or terror, that it made them either fearefull or aduenturous. Moſes from his ſide, ſometimes aduancing & ſetting forward with his horſe, and ſometimes bringing on his footemen againſt the Turkiſh enſignes, did ſo diſorder them, that he eaſily broke in vpon them with great force & violence. They on the contrary ſide, who were oppoſed againſt him being vanquiſhed, rather by a certaine fatall deſtinie, then by any valure & prowes of the Chriſtians, and being ſcant able to ſhun & auoide

the blowes and wounds which were giuen them did ſeeme as men in bonds & alreadie vanquiſhed, rather then fit to bind and vanquiſh others. Paul Maneſſey fighting in the middle battell beſtirred himſelfe notably, leauing after him whereſoeuer he went a maruellous ſlaughter of the circumciſed. By this time were their rankes broken on all ſides, neither horſemen nor footemen continuing in fight, or keeping their place in battell array: but all being confuſed and mingled one with another, and the greater part well neere, of the Turkes hauing their horſes ſlaine by the footmen Albanois, with their lances in their handes, came to ſerue as footemen alſo: but on the one ſide, their bodies being vnaccuſtomed and not vſed to fight on foot: and on the other part the diſcommoditie of their armour being great, did much endammage and hinder them. And by reaſon that their own forces did more & more decreaſe and diminiſh, they imagined that our numbers did multiplie and increaſe; neuertheleſſe, being blinded with ſhame, they did ſtill abide expecting and attending the ſucceſſe of their Generall, who on the other ſide was as buſily occupied. For he (being accompanied or aſſiſted with all the moſt notable & valiant men of his armie, & hauing made head againſt the middle battell where Scanderbeg himſelfe remained) did thinke to haue repaired the forme and good hap of all the reſt of the ſquadrons. Sometimes the preſence of Paul Maneſſey did greatly vrge them, for that by the glorious and honorable opinion, which they had in their champion lately ſlaine, their fearefull thoughts and cogitations, did meaſure all things in their enemie, to be greater then they made ſhew of: ſometimes againe their hearts were incenſed and inflamed with wrath, according as either the deformed image of their ſlaine champion, or the ſhadowe of his dead bodie vnreuenged, did ſeeme to appeare before their eyes, and to preſent it ſelfe to their remembrance. Moreouer the great rewardes and recompences (which was the greateſt and chiefeſt inuitement to pricke them forwarde) propoſed and promiſed by Muſtapha to him that could kill this enemie (whom they hated grieuouſlie) did encourage his people to be the more deſirous and forwarde to endaunger themſelues:Paul Maneſſey aſſailed by the Turkes. by meanes whereof, manie being reallied and aſſembled in troupes about Paul alone, they preſſed vpon him to the vttermoſt of their powers, and as men that cared not for anie of the reſt, him onelie did they ayme and ſhoote at. There was not anie one of them but did ſtriue, euen with the hazard of his owne life, and with deadly wounds to purchaſe the pretious reward of that head which was ſo highly prized. But the obſtinate proweſſe of this Cauilier, cauſed the fonde and fooliſh deſire of the Turkes, to turne to their owne pernitious and extreame dammage. For being well garded with a troupe of ſuch as were moſt hardie and valiant, he was able enough to ſuſtaine their furie and violence, and to contemne their vaine preſumptions. At length perceiuing a farre off, that one of the Barbarians had disbanded himſelfe from the reſt of his troupes, and was verie hotte and importunate vppon thoſe of his companie, he turned himſelfe towardes him, without anie word ſpeaking: and hauing gotten neere vnto him, he diſcharged ſo full a blow with all his ſtrength ouerthwart his head, and redoubled one or two ſtrokes vppon him, that he ouerthrew him headlong off his horſe, making him to take the meaſure of his tombe vpon the hard earth. When his champions ſawe him lie dead vpon the ground, they beganne preſently to turne the bridle, neither caring to reuenge his death, nor to warrant his body frō the outrage of the enemy. This made the Epirots (when they ſaw them to ſtande as it were in a ſtudie, and certaine of them flying) to preſſe vpon them the more fiercely, and to charge them with the greater fury, giuing them no time to breath, but handled them rudely, till hauing them in full chaſe, they left all the aduantage & honor to the conquerors. Paul purſuing them ſtill as they fled,

did gleane and take vp ſome of them that made leaſt ſpeed, and with bitter and biting termes, he thus tauntingly exclaimed vpon them. Whether flie you (ſaied he) youSpeeches of Paul Maneſſey to the Turks as they fled. baſe companions, are you ſo forgetfull of all good fellowſhip: hath not Caraguſa here, neither brother, coſin, nor ſo much as a friende, amongeſt ſo many of you: who in honour of his corps (that lieth here dead and disfigured) will vouchſafe to reuenge him, which is the laſt good you can do him, being paſt all your aide and helping? Behold me: ſee me (I ſaie) who doe here now call vppon you, and giue you the defie, whom of late your ſelues did firſt of all prouoke, in hope of a wrong conceited glory. Abide, ſtaie a while, take with you the bloudie ſpoiles of your companion, which ſo voluntarily I doe proffer vnto you.
            
            But the Turkes (more mute and dombe then fiſhes) had minde of nothing but of ſpeedie fight and running away: and with an infamous kinde of ſilence, did neither approue nor reproue the tauntes and reprochfull ſpeeches of the enemie. And thus within a while, hauing by litle and litle gotten the aduantage and libertie of the open field, they did quickely vaniſh out of ſight, ſo as hardly could they heare the ſound or noyſe of thoſe that chaſed them: onely the archers did trouble them with great obſtinacie: as for the reſt of the troupes, they abſtained from purſuing them, becauſe wearineſſe and extremitie of trauell had dulled both the force and the ſpirits of theThe dewſe of the Turkes in their enſignes. Chriſtians. Notwithſtanding hauing gathered vp the enſignes & half moones, which lay euery where diſperſed ouer the field (for the Turks in their ſtandards & enſignes doe beare this for their deuiſe) the ſouldiees with wonderfull great ioyes making the aire to reſound, & with their pleaſant clamors, and rude riming ſongs, did euen ſtriue and contend who ſhould carie them to the tents of Scanderbeg. For all had gone well on that ſide a good while before: and the Turkes being either ſlaine, did lie diſperſed ouer the fielde in great heapes, or being reſerued (according to the right of armes) with their hands faſt pinioned behinde their backes, did giue euident and open teſtimonie of their owne bad deuoire, and the clemencie of their enemies. Muſtapha
               Muſtapha Generall of the Turkes taken priſoner. himſelf with twelue others likewiſe of the moſt principall and chiefeſt perſons, were brought priſoners vpon an Hungarian horſe, in great pompe and triumph: to the intent he might be ſeene of all men, making the ſight to be ſo much the more worthy and notable, and mitigating as it were, the misfortune of the other priſoners. For the pernitious humor of ambition, and a peſtilent deſire to purchaſe vnto himſelfe the greater glorie, by the proofe and triall of his reſolution, had caried him furiouſly into the ſquadron of Scanderbeg, where (being encloſed and deſtitute of all aide & defence of his ſouldiers, and of all the meanes, either to eſcape away free, or die honourablie) the vnfortunate Chieftaine made choiſe to cōpound with the loſſe of al other things, yea and of his libertie alſo, for the ſauegard and preſeruation of his life onely.
            I can not ſay certainly, whether in all the time of the warre held with Amurath,
               The victory of the Chriſtians. there were any exploit atchieued more notable, or more fauored by the diuine power then this: So worthily did this iorney make ſhew of euery man his good courage and deſert: neuer was there any leader nor any ſouldier, nor any other perſon of what degree ſoeuer, that did euer returne more honorably charged with reputation and glorie, either in publique, or in priuate. The report is, that there were ſlaine of the enemie 10000. And that there were taken onely 82. priſoners, and 15. ſtandardes. This happie and fortunate ouerthrow, coſt not the Albanois much bloudſhed, for he loſt (as they ſay) ſcarce 300. men. The campe of the enemy did greatly enrich the Chriſtian ſouldiers, for that the Turkes, who had ſoiourned certaine monthes vppon the marches & borders of the prouince, had gotten together & purchaſed good ſtore of pr
                  •
               ie & booty: there were alſo found very goodly ſpoiles vpon thē which were ſlain,

and a notable number of good horſes: but albeit the ſouldiers helde themſelues reaſonablie well ſatisfied with pillage, yet for all that, was not the wrathfull and fierie courage of Scanderbeg ſufficiently appeaſed: but that immediately and aſſoone as he had refreſhed his troupes, that part of the day which remained, he ſpent and imploied it in ſacking and ſpoyling the territories of the enemie. And in this ſort continuing the courſe of his late victorie, ſetting fire on all things both farre & neere: that which could not be deſtroied by the ſworde, was burnt and conſumed by fire. Neither did the very meaneſt or worſt ſort of the ſouldiers, returne from thence empty and without bootie: for wherſoeuer they found any thing good and worth the taking, they forgot it not behind them. And beſides, they brought away a wonderfull manie of beaſts and cattell: ſo that, what with the wearineſſe of their exceſſiue trauell, & what with the abundance of their bootie (wherewith they were ouer charged) ſcarcely could they get home to their campe, before an houre within night. The reſidue of the night was ſpent in taking their reſt, which they paſſed very ſtill and in great quietneſſe, without any bonfires, without any noiſe and clamors, or any other ſhewes or tokens of their victorie: and the reaſon was, for that the Prince of Epyre ſhewed him ſelfe more ſad and penſiue then he was accuſtomed, becauſe of the newes that Baleze was ouerthrowen and raſed. Therefore all thoſe within the campe (who were anyScanderbeg is penſiue for the razing of Baleze. thing diſcreetely and ſoberly diſpoſed) framing their countenances altogether to ſadneſſe and melancholie, did conforme themſelues to the ſame humour ioyntly with him: ſometimes confirming him with good and pleaſing ſpeeches, and ſometimes raging with hatred and mallice againſt the enemie. But the agreeued thoughts & penſiue imaginations of this Prince would admit no comfort nor accuſtomed reſt ſo long and ſo often as he called to remembrance the outrage and ingratitude of the Scutarians, in regard of the benefites and clemencie which they had taſted and receiued from him.
            
               Scanderbeg therefore hauing appointed and left (according to his cuſtome) two thouſand horſe, and a thouſand foote for the gard of the frontiers: the next morningScanderbeg ſpoileth the territorie of the Scutarians in reuenge of the razing of Baleze. by the breake of daye he departed with the reſidue of his forces; (taking with him both the priſoners, and wellneare all the beſt and choiſeſt of the bootie,) and ſo tooke his way to the ſiege of Dayna: where when he had learned by Marin Span more certainely and particularly how all things had paſſed, he made no longer abode, then whileſt he renewed and repaired his troups: and then immediately and without delay with freſh forces (which caried with them the extreame loſſe and calamitie of the inhabitants of Scutarie) he paſſed ouer the riuer of Drynon: and diſperſing his horſmen ouer all the countrey; whatſoeuer he found tilled and ſowen in any place or quarter (for it was in the end of autumne,) all was deſtroied, waſted and ſpoiled: the vineyardes cut vp cloſe by the ground, and moſt of their trees that bare frute were felled downe: the peſants and ruſtickes themſelues were not ſaued from ſlaughter, but as many of them as were found to reſiſt againſt the enemie, were put to the ſword, and the reſidew were ſacked and euill entreated. From thence turning his furie vpon the other townes of the Venetian territorie, he purſued them in ſuch ſorte that they had good cauſe giuen them, to curſe that raſh exploite of the Scutarians againſt Baleze. Moſt of the inhabitants and al the forces which remained within the countrie did reuolt and adioine themſelues and take part with Scanderbeg, rather then they would taſte of the rigor and diſcommoditie of ſuch ruines and deſtruction.
            Thus we ſee that Scanderbeg did largely blame and reprehende the immoderate choller of his Nephewe, but he could not acknowledge the infirmitie of his owne paſſion. He deteſted the indiſcretion of a young courage, but he could not temperate

and moderate his owne anger and impaciencie. The countrie being thus ouercome, made deſolate and brought vnder the dominion of a ſtrange lord, he now alſo began to growe terrible to the townes and places of chiefe regard. Notwithſtanding the extremitie and rigor of the cold winter now beginning to approch, and the continuall falling of the raine without ceaſing, did driue him home againe againſt his wil, and made him retire into his tents to winter vnder the wonted walles of Dayna. During theſe troubles and alterations, the gouernours of the Venetian prouince, and the magiſtrates of Scutarie, being by meanes hereof in maruellous diſtreſſe and perplexitie, (but eſpecially in regard of theſe forces which were ſhut vp within Dayna, whom they well knew to haue beene brought to the laſt point and extremitie of want and neceſſitie) diſpatched letters to the Senate of Venice, containing the miſerable eſtate of their confederates.
            About the ſame time there arriued into the campe, certen infidels with great andMuſtapha & the other priſoners ranſomed for 25000 Ducketes. rich preſents vnto Scanderbeg, for the ranſome of his priſoners: and they agreed vpon the payment of fiue and twentie thouſand Duckates. Thereupon was Muſtapha and all his companions deliuered: and the Turkes (hauing bene bountifully feaſted, and entertained verie honorably, (as if all rancour and enmitie had bene vtterly forgotten and layed aſide:) had guides appointed them (ſuch as were verie skilfull in all the paſſages of the countrey,) both for their ſafe conueiance and better aſſurance on the way againſt the violence of the Chriſtians. The money leuied and made by their deliuerie, was wholly diſtributed amongſt the ſouldiers by Scanderbeg: his deſire being, that they ſhould be made partakers of the reward, who had bene partakers of the trauels & danger of the warre. Al this while there was not any attempt made againſt the towne by reaſon that the rigour of the colde and froſtes, did not permit them thereunto. The defendants hauing abandoned the care and remembrance of al things,The conſtancie of the Daynians. ſaue of their faith and fidelity only, did abate nothing of their former wilfulnes & obſtinacie. Many and infinite diſcommodities had waſted and conſumed their forces, but yet they reſerued ſtill one and the ſame minde and courage, and their ſpirites did ſeeme daily to waxe more liuely and reſolute though their bodies were greatly enfeebled and their ſtrength much abated and diminiſhed. Thus did a ſmall Hamlet ſtaie the force and violence of a moſt excellent and ſoueraigne Chiefetaine: and he that was a conquerour inuincible in ſo manie famous battelles, ſawe himſelfe ſurmounted by the conſtancie of that place onely. Yet did not the ſhame hereof, neuertheleſſe any whit deterre Scanderbeg from purſuing his attempt: but he was the more reſolutely determined to winne them by famine if he could not otherwiſe bring them to reaſon. There were at this time certen ſecret ſpeeches, and vncertaine rumors amongſt the common ſort: that the Seigniorie of Venice was verie willingA treatie of peace betwene Scanderbeg & the Venetians. and enclining to a peace, by reaſon whereof, Scanderbeg bare himſelfe more mildly and gratious towardes the enemie: and in thoſe roades and incurſions which were made thenceforth vppon the countrie, the Albanois did diſcharge their choller and mallice with more gentleneſſe and leſſe extremitie. Not many daies were paſt, but that newes were brought of certaine Ambaſſadors ſent vnto him by the order & direction of the Senate at Venice, to entreat a newe agreement of peace and amitie betweene them, and the time of their comming was hourely expected. Scanderbeg therefore (according to the vſage and cuſtome of great perſonages) hauing ſent the chiefe of his nobilitie with a great traine to meete them, entertayned them moſt honorably: and hauing feaſted them in verie ſumptuous and bountifull manner, theConditions of peace offered to Scanderbeg. next day he gaue them full audience to deliuer their charge and commiſſion. The effect whereof was this, That the Prince of Epire ſhould breake vp his campe before

               
                  Dayna and withdraw his forces, becauſe it had bene once receiued into the gard and protection of the Venetian ſtate: and that therefore the ſoueraigntie and abſolute iuriſdiction of that towne, ſhould fully and peaceably reſt and continue in their handes; that Scanderbeg in liew and counterchaunge thereof ſhould haue the whole rightBuſegiarpeni being a part of the Demeſnes of Scutarie extending from the riuer Drynon towards Scutarie, and lying more conueniently for Scanderbeg then the towne of Dayna. Oration of Scanderbeg vnto the Venetian ambaſſadors vpon the concluſion of peace betwene them. and Seigniorie in a certen countrey, lying vpon the riuer of Drinon, with all that circuit of land which was called Buſegiarpeni. This conditiō of the peace was no ſooner propounded, but it was preſently accepted by the Albanois: and without any delaie or refuſall, he held himſelfe well contented and ſatiſfied with that which the Ambaſſadours had appointed vnto him: wherefore the peace being concluded and agreed vpon, and the aſſurance and all things elſe well and orderly diſpatched; a generall ſilence being commanded (for that this worthie and magnanimious prince did prepare himſelfe to make ſome ſpeech vnto them, and to giue them ſome notable ſhew and token of his magnificence, liberalitie, he thus began to ſay vnto them.
            My hartie wiſh and deſire is, that that prince were yet liuing amongeſt vs, whoſe death was the beginning and firſt occaſion, both of my iuſt griefe, and of theſe weariſome warres which I haue had with you: for whileſt I ſought to recouer from you the poſſeſſion of Dayna, ſtayned with the blood of our Citizens, by the miſhap of an vniuſt warre: I would not at this time haue ſeene this prouince of Chriſtians and of our friendes and allies to be ouerwhelmed with ſo many miſchieues: but I would haue gloried in the obſeruation of peace and amitie inuiolably with that moſt honorable and worthie Senate, the interruption and troubling whereof at this preſent, (happening vpon ſo ſmall, and trifling a cauſe) my hart will not of a long time but greatly grieue at. But this breach and debate grew vpon another occaſion: for your taking of armes is to be excuſed, in that the diſloialtie of others by their ſiniſter and peruerſe counſels, did eaſily eſtrange and alienate from me the hart and good affection of that * Ladie, and moſt malitiouſly and with a certaine affectation of flatterie, didBoſſa. conceale that which was agreed betweene Lech and me, and were the authors that Dayna did yeeld it ſelfe into your protection. It was not you therefore with whom I found my ſelfe ſo much agreeued, neither did I take armes to conuince you of iniuſtice, nor yet to impute anie ambition or greedie deſire of Empire vnto the Venetians, whom as yet, no age did euer heare to haue enterpriſed or authoriſed any warre, that was vniuſt and againſt equitie. But one thing there was which did not a litle diſpleaſe me, that you had leſſe truſt and affiance in me then was requiſite: and whileſt you gaue care, and builded vpon their tales and reportes, you thought me to be ambitious, and to be led with a deſire of trouble and contention. I therefore (ſeeing that right was not to be had but by armes onely, did lay hold vpon this occaſion of the warre, which was in a manner, caſt vpon me, and euen as it were put into my handes. But now moſt gladly doe I laie aſide my weapons (God himſelfe being willing to haue it ſo) & more then that (if your ſelues had not required it) euen this territorie which by the ordinance of the Senate you haue giuen me in recompence of Dayna, and for the confirmation of this our league and amitie, holding my ſelfe well ſatisfied onely in the good will and francke offer of your Senate, and doe willingly embrace the good will and friendſhippe of thoſe liberall and magnificent princes. As for any other thing I neither deſire nor accept of: but (if occaſion ſerue, and neede be,) all this territorie which I haue, my whole eſtate, and my goods and ſubſtance, yea my very life, will I vow and conſecrate for you, for your children, and for the maieſtiePeace proclaimed betweene the Venetiant and Scanderbeg. of your Empire.
            
               Scanderbeg hauing finiſhed his ſpeech, tooke order that Heraulds ſhould be ſent throughout all the Prouince, to publiſh vnto the people the glad tydings and ioyfull

newes of this peace ſo much deſired: the ſiege alſo was broken vp and raiſed, and the ſconces and other fortifications made during the ſiege were beaten downe and razed: the ſouldiers in all mirth and ioy (laying aſide all hatred and malice both in publique and in priuate) did friendly entertaine and welcome thoſe of the towne, and did inuite them into their tentes and pauillions. Immediately alſo vpon this treatie Andrew and Volcathagne, were deliuered and permitted to goe at large where they thought good: all other things which had bene lately taken from the Scutarians and their neighbours: as villages, caſtels, fortreſſes and ſuch like, they were rendred and redeliuered to the ambaſſadors. The day following (after many triumphes, and many goodly ſhewes (as the manner is publiquely had and ſolemnized) the Ambaſſadors were diſmiſſed, but not without many rich and ſumptuous preſents.
            Then Scanderbeg being naturally of a liuely and ſtirring diſpoſition, (and beingScanderbeg leauing the ſiege of Daina marcheth to the ſpoile of the Turkiſh territorie. impatient of reſt, and not able to endure idlenes) preſently he led his troupes to the Turkiſh frontiers: with intent to waſt and ſpoile them, as he was vſually accuſtomed: where gathering in one the olde garriſon and the reſt of his companies, with both incorporated together, he ſeemed to haue a good and faire armie: in ſuch ſort that a man would haue thought thoſe forces ſufficient, not onely to pill and ſpoile the fields, but to enterpriſe, vndertake and execute ſome great and notable good peece of ſeruice, ſo cheerefully and contentedly did ech of them follow on, to receiue the deſerued pay and ſtipend of their long ſeruice and warfare. For in thoſe daies the ſouldiers did not expect nor demaunde any other wages of their Generall then what they could get and purchaſe vpon the enemie by the ſword and force of armes. Hereof it grewe that the Princes (his neighbours) were wont (in way of mirth and ieſt) to callThe Turkiſh territory Scanderbegs treaſurie. the territorie of the enemie, Scanderbeg his treaſurie. Afterwardes parting his hoaſt into three ſeuerall troups, he entred on all ſides vpon the borders of the Sultan, where he ſpent two whole daies in ouerrunning, pilling, and harrying of the countrey: the ſouldiers being their owne pay maiſters for their paines, at the coſt and charges of the inhabitants: who went not ſcotfree without the loſſe of their liues, except ſuch as being baptized were become Chriſtians: and to thoſe alſo they left nothing, nor ſhewed them any other fauor, but gaue them their liues and their libertie. After the furie of the ſword, followed the rage of flame and fire; which being kindled in the houſes, did deforme and diſfigure all things, and burned all into aſhes in ſuch ſort that if the campe of Amurath had happened at that time to haue come into Epire; there was no hope for it to haue found any victuals to haue maintained them, ſo much as one day, except they had caried and brought it with them. The earth therefore being left all bare, naked and emptie, with the onely ſhew and markes of deſolation: Scanderbeg cauſed his enſignes to march homewards, & retired his armie within his owne confines. Then did he licenſe his ſouldiers to depart, and ſent them home to their owne houſes, after he had highly praiſed & commended the diligence of euerie one of them, excepting the number of three thouſand onely; which (being the ordinarie garriſon appointed for the defence of the borders) did alwaies continue there, and neuer remoued from that place: himſelfe with the reſidue of his citizens and his ordinarie gard, did take the way directly towards Croy.
            
            Tidings being brought to the Venetians of the peace concluded in Epire, and of the bountie of the Prince of Albanie, and the Ambaſſadors giuing him high praiſe and commendation: the Senate conceiued exceeding ioy, and an incomparable gladnes: for that their prouince (after ſo long and fierce a warre) might from thenceforth take breath and reſt themſelues. Then being willing to honor the vertue and magnificence of that Prince, with ſome ſhew and argument of their thankefull hartes, in a generall

counſell of all the citizens and gentlemen of that eſtate, by a common and publiqueScanderbeg & hupoſteritie made free of the citie of Venice, and appointed gouernour and lieutenant generall of the Venetian territories in Epire. Amurath conſulteth with his counſell concerning the warre againſt Scanderbeg. conſent, he and his poſteritie were created citizens of Venice, and enrolled in the number of the moſt noble families of their citie and common wealth: beſides (by the vniuerſall good liking of all the Senate) he was appointed ſole gouernour and lieutenant General, for their common wealth in thoſe quarters: and letters were forthwith ſent away to that effect, with diuerſe very rich and princely preſents.
            All this while there was nothing ſpoken of the Turkes, neither was it heard that they made anie roads or ordinarie inuaſions, or that they attempted any thing vpon the Epirots. For the rude diſcomfiture and ouerthrow of Muſtapha had ſo terrified and abated their courage, that Amurath durſt not ſtirre any further againſt the Duke of Albanie, fearing by ſuch like enterpriſes (as he had formerly and vſually aſſailed him) he ſhould rather augment and ſtrengthen his forces, then be able either to breake or to diminiſh them: ſeeing that ſo many and ſo great armies, (which euen till then had entred Epyre for the inuaſion of Scanderbeg) were for the moſt part either deſtroied, and left dead vpon the fields: or elſe ſhamefully diſcomfited and put to flight, or being brought into ſeruitude and captiuitie, did ſerue but as laughing ſlockes for their enemies to triumph ouer, and a fit matter for the encreaſe of their glorie and reputation. Suppoſing therefore that to be once reuenged of theſe diſgraces it was requiſite to make farre greater preparations, and to march againſt him with another maner of puiſſance, he ſpent whole houres and daies in diuerſe conſultations, ſtill prolonging the occaſion of that great honour which he had vainely conceiued, and promiſed to himſelfe by ſuch a iorney. But the report of the peace made with the Venetians, and the ſpoiling of his Prouinces, and ſo many diſcomfitures, one happening in the necke of another, comming to his eares, his heart being before mightily addicted and inclined to warre, was now much more incenſed and more ſharply pricked forward. Wherefore the old man (being thus full of care and thoughts) before he would decree any thing for the leuying of ſouldiers; cauſed certaine who were neareſt his perſon to be ſent for (whom they call Viſiers, and are thoſe of his priuie councell) toViſiers the Councellours of the great Turk whom, as one mad for verie anger, and full of furie and choller, he diſcouered in the end, the ſecret and long conceiued hatred of his hart in theſe termes.
            
               Hitherto (moſt worthy and truſtie Councellours) we haue both well nouriſhed &Orat on of Amurath to his councellours for the warre to be vndertaken againſt Scanderbeg much augmented the proſperous temeritie of this fugitiue: and being occupied with the vrgent neceſſitie of the warre of Hungarie, we haue ſo long deferred the due puniſhment of this our hate full enemie, that by the multitude of outrages and contumelious abuſes, he hath freely and without chaſticement, incenſed the maieſtie of the Ottoman Empire; ſuch as neither my eares can endure to heare reported, nor my eyes can abide the ſight of. His fierce and furious madneſſe, (I ſhame to ſpeake it) is encreaſed ſo farre and is growne to that paſſe, that he dareth with all his forces, to be aforehand with vs, in aſſaulting vs: and openly to condemne vs of faintneſſe and want of courage. What auaileth it heere to recount vnto you the miſfortune of Haly Baſſa? and the like miſchances of ſo many other Captaines and leaders? we neede goe no further to take a view and coniecture of the image of our eſtate, but onely by the miſerable prouince of Macedon, which (as I vnderſtand) by continuall roades, inuaſions and burnings is brought to that extreamitie, that from henceforth we haue little hope left to ſee therein any markes or tokens that it is our prouince, but filled rather and repleniſhed with our enemies: for euen of late did he enter it with an armie leauied of purpoſe, ſpending whole daies in the ſpoiling and diſpeopling of the countrey. How long ſhall we endure the attemptes of this wicked and ſeditious wretch? ſhall we ſuffer him ſo long till we our ſelues be fettered, and that he put irons vpon

our owne legs: it is high time that wee ſuppreſſe his pernitious endeuors; for feare leaſt by our negligence, this fire do increaſe: and then all too late (which my mind miſgiueth me) we do begin to frame our complaints, and ſeeke remedie all in vaine: conſidering that an enemie being once contemned and neglected, of a ſmall and meane beginning manie times doth amplifie and enlarge his forces, and lifteth vp hisSentence. head to the ruine of his aduerſarie. All things (my maſters) doe inuite you to the warres,, and do ſeeme to miniſter the meanes vnto you: for if there were no other reaſon to induce vs thereunto, yet neuertheleſſe, the onely regard and lamentable aſpect of the miſeries and calamities of our ſubiects, were not that alone ſufficient to ſolicite the courages of men braue and valiant? The daylie captiuities and impriſonments of ſo many our friends, the ſmoke of our townes and vilages on all ſides fiered and burnt (which do euen call and crie in themſelues for a reuenge) would they not make vs euen to bluſh for verie ſhame if we ſhould ſuffer them? Haue we ſo often heretofore reſtrained and repreſſed the rage of the Hungarians? haue we by continuall and memorable defaits, left Greece mourning in her owne ſorrowes & laments? haue we broken the forces of ſo many mighty and redoubted potentates & brought them euen to naught? and ſhall we now ſuffer (through a timerous kind of puſillanimitie) theſe troubles and tumults of Epire, to gather ſtrength and to encreaſe vpon vs? ſhall we yet endure to ſee that prouince (which of late was tributarie vnto vs) now to ſtand in contention and to braue vs by armes? what? hath the land of Albanie ſo ſuddenly of late engendred another ſort of Epirots? and is it poſſible that a new & vnaccuſtomed kind of enemie ſhould iſſue forth vnexpected againſt vs? I am determined once againe, to make triall if this nation be ſo fierce and vntameable: and if the hardie and haughtie courage of their obſtinate and proud Prince can be brought vnder the accuſtomed yoke of their ſubiection. We muſt not from henceforth ſtand vpon points of ſubtiltie and vaine pollicies; nor muſt we any more ſeeke to ſurprize this enemie by ambuſhments: neither doth the time now ſerue (by the diuerſitie of the Leaders and Chieftaines and by ordinarie troupes one after another) to fill their hatefull ſoile with the blood of our ſouldiers: for we ſee that one and the ſame kind of miſfortune doth follow both our leaders and our armies: and whereas we made choiſe of them to do vs ſeruice, they haue ſerued to endammage rather our ſelues thē our enemies. Shall we commit another armie to Haly Baſſa, or Feriſey, who beſides the wounds and the deformed reliques of their owne forces, haue brought vs not ſo much as one ſtandard or enſigne of the enemies? Shall we follow the vnfortunate aduiſe and counſelles of Muſtapha: and miniſter paye vnto the Chriſtians, and eaſe their charge in the maintaining of their forces: while he is caried onely with a deſire to extinguiſh and free the infamie of his bonds and impriſonment? We haue bene ſo often vanquiſhed, taken priſoners, ranſomed: and in briefe ſo often beaten and diſcomfited, that we haue reaſon from henceforth to abhorre, and to be aſhamed of our owne eſtate and condition: we muſt now therefore take vpon vs the charge of this warre, with our beſt meanes and the vtter moſt of our endeuors. It behooueth vs to vndertake it with ſuch forces, to employ ſo great a puiſſance, and to march into Epire with ſo mightie an hoaſt; that the countrey may be ſcant able to containe it, nor yet to ſuſtaine the force and violence of our armie. By this meanes without any loſſe or bloodſhed, ſhall we purge and clenſe all the countrey: and by a notable diſcomfiture of our enemies (being either expelled and chaſed quite away, or vtterlieſubdued and vanquiſhed) we ſhall reeſtabliſh thoſe townes in their auncient forme and faſhion: which by the diſloialtie of this fierce nation, hath bene withheld from vs: or if the peruerſe obſtinacie and obdurate ſtubborneſſe of this people (as it is likely & vſuall with

them) vpon a raſh and deſperate reſolution, and of an inconſiderate deſire to defende their Prince, do betake themſelues to armes: we will then vtterly deſtroy theſe wretched ſoules (who do euen long for their deſerued puniſhment) and with a ſingular reuenge (which we haue ſo long deſired) we will recompence them for the old wrongs and iniuries which they haue done vs, both in publique and in priuate. It is your duties (valiant and worthie men) to vndertake this warre, not as you were wont to doe againſt the Hungarians, or other enemies: but with a farre greater wrath and indignation, as againſt thoſe which are your ſlaues and fugitiues, and who (being moſt miſchieuouſly affected againſt you) haue now made ſhewe of their inſolent and hatefull mindes, which for a long time lay cloſe concealed and diſſembled.
            
            To this effect tended the clamor and continuall ſpeeches of this Orator, who fullAmurath reſulued in perſon to warre vpon S
                     •
                  an lerb
                     ••
                  , maketh preparations to that effect. of rage and choller, did inſinuate nothing elſe into the eares of his people: and they againe very attentiuely did hearken vnto him, approuing this his inuention for the warre of Epyre. And (being vndoubtedly perſwaded that it could not but fall out anſwerable to the honour and dignitie of his greatneſſe) all of them with one voice and conſent did agree that preparation ſhould be ſpeedily made, with al poſſible diligence for this iorney: leaſt, failing to make their prouiſions in time and ſeaſon, they might (through delay and negligence) looſe the occaſion and opportunitie of the ſpring. For the winter beginning now to waxe more milde, the tops of the mountains couered with ſnow, began to ſhew forth and to be diſcouered. Immediatly therefore, and without anie delay, commiſſions were directed, and proclamations made throughout all the Prouinces and Nations vnder the Turkiſh obeiſance, and throughout all the Realmes of his allies and confederates, and to ſuch cities and townes by name, as the Sultan thought conuenient
                  •
                that they ſhould furniſh him with ſo many thouſand of horſe and foote to be readie with all ſpeede, and to repaire vnto him to Andrinople: for as yet had not Greece loſt the feate of her noble and famous Emperors at Conſtantinople, neither had ſhe at that time cauſe to mourne and lament their dolefull funerals; happening afterwards at ſuch time as they came to be buried and throwen downe vnder the yoke and ſubiection of the miſcreants. The rumor of theſe preparations and huge prouiſions brought with it great feare and terror to the neighbour nations and adioyning townes of the Chriſtians: who being ſurprized with notable aſtoniſhment, were in wonderfull great doubt, where and vppon what place theSecreſie of the Turke in concealing his counſels. burthen of this warre, and the extreame puiſſance of ſo great forces would powre forth and execute their bloodie effects. For hardly was any man able to coniecture of the ſecret counſels of Amurath: not his owne inward and moſt priuate fauorites, except certen of his councellors, in whom (as we haue ſaid) the Ottoman had a ſpeciall truſt and aſſurance: for feare leaſt the enemies, being thereof aduertiſed, might prouide themſelues both of counſell and meanes to repulſe the violence of his attemptes. This putteth me in remembrance how in that firſt expedition of the Turkes againſt Scutarie, the Barbarians were diſcouered and ſeene before our walles in a manner before we hearde any thing of their arriuall. But in truth it is a policie verie ordinary and vſuall with this warlike nation; to giue out a lying and falſe rumor of ſome vaine tumult and attempt one way; whileſt they do bend their forces, & conuert the wholeThe policie of the Turkes to oppreſſe the Chriſtians. puiſſance of their redoubted armes another way: to the intent they may the more eaſily ſurprize & oppreſſe thoſe, who (being leaſt aduiſed) are caried away with a vaine kind of light beleefe and pernitious credulitie. But the fame and ſuſpition of theſe preparations cauſed a generall allarme and tumult on all parts: on the one ſide the Hungarians miſtruſting the infidelitie of their perpetuall aduerſarie, began to betake them to their armes which they had found ſo vnfortunate: and to raiſe their forces which

were ſore weakned by ſo many diſcomfitures and ouerthrowes. On the other ſide, the Greekes being in extreame diſtreſſe, and hauing their ſpirits diſperſed and deuided, by reaſon of their priuat domeſticall diſſentions: yet did they take a good heart and courage vnto them, for the defence and maintenance of the poore and weake reliques of their declining and decaying Empire.
            Notwithſtanding Amurath could not any way deceiue or ouerreach Scanderbeg,
               Scanderbeg maketh prouiſſon of reſiſtance againſt the Turkes. who by long practiſe and experience, being well acquainted with the diſſimulations of that Monarchy, had all his cunning ſleightes and diſguiſementes at his fingers ends. Neuertheles, ſome ſay that he had alſo intelligence therof from ſome who were neare the Turke, and his ſpeciall fauorits, by the diſcouery of certaine ſecret meſſengers, who albeit they could not report it in any certainety, yet did the Albanois eaſily beleeue it. And one principall thing that made him the rather to credit it, was the extraordinary idleneſſe and vnaccuſtomed reſt of Ottoman, becauſe euen to that day, he had not ſent any new forces, either to reuenge the outrage done to Muſtapha, nor for the ſecurity & defence of the limits and confines of his own country. Wherfore Caſtriot hauing laid aſide the care of the priuate and ciuill affaires of his eſtate, and being nothing at all diſmaied nor troubled in his mind for all that mighty and perillous tempeſt of war and vprore by the enemy, with a moſt ready and aduiſed reſolution, he prouided and accompliſhed in very good order whatſoeuer any other Chiefetaine (were he neuer ſo prudent and expert) could haue either foreſeen or executed in the like caſe or accident. For he diſpatched meſſengers out of hand with letters to al the Princes & nations his confederates amongſt the Epirots; to the intent that both themſelues might be ready in armes, & that they might arme others likewiſe, diſpoſing them in fit & conuenient places for the aſſurance of their townes and ſtrong holdes: both by good and ſtrong garriſons and fortifications, and by the prouiſion of victuals and munitions in good ſtore and abundance more thē ordinary. Becauſe the hugenes of ſo great a multitude, and ſo infinite numbers, did threaten all of them with like ruine and deſtruction, and with deſolation alike common vnto all of them: for that Ottoman ſeemed to imagine not his confuſion and ouerthrow alone, but the total ſubuerſion of the whole country of Epire. Himſelfe (not ſleeping nor being idle) after he had diſpatched Moſes & many others of his chiefeſt nobles, both to make a leauy and muſter of men, and to prouide corne ſufficient for the neceſſity of the time preſent, went from place to place, & in proper perſon, to viſite and ouerſee all things, and ſending forth daily new and often commandements, taking not any reſt neither day nor night, till he had bereft the enemy of al fit matter & occaſion, either of getting honor, or bringing dammage vpō him. And the better to compaſſe it, he cauſed the greater part of the husbandmen, and the common ſort of the people, who were vnfit for the field, (together with their families & all that they had) to retire themſelues into the walled townes. But all thoſe which were men of any ſtrength or ability, & were of age fit to beare armes, he retained to imploy them in diuerſe ſeruices of the wars. Neither did he forget the garriſon of Macedony: but they, and many other great troupes (aſſembled from all partes) and day by day repairing to Croy, when they came to be incorporated & ioyned in one, made a faire and goodly army. It remained now that he ſhould part his companies, and appoint themScanderbeg ordereth his forces againſt the inuaſion of the Turkes. to their ſeuerall charges. Firſt therfore he reſerued for his own regiment 10000. men, of thoſe whoſe ſeruice he had lately vſed in the warre of Venice, and at Chronichea, for with them he was aſſured, he might make head againſt the Barbarians, according as the oportunity of the place ſhould miniſter meanes vnto him. To the old garriſon of Croy (beſides the number of citizens) he added 1300. ſouldiers, all Epirots and men of approued valour, which made the Croians alſo to furniſh themſelues with all ſorts of

armour and munitions, ſeruing for the defence of their walles and the repulſe of the enemy, but eſpecially it encreaſed their courages, and the greatneſſe of their ſtomackes, which were faithfully deuoted to the preſeruation of their liberty. The ſame time therfore that the garriſon was brought into the towne, was the feeble ſexe of womenScanderbeg remoueth old perſons, women & children out of the citie. and children drawen forth without the wals, and none ſuffred to ſtay within, but the youth of the towne only, and ſuch as were fit for the wars. And yet were not they interrupted nor confounded with the baſeſt of the popular ſort, in whoſe harts and courages, commonly the liuely ſparks of honor and of liberty, did not enter and penetrate ſoone or eaſily. Thus did Scanderbeg with good & graue aduiſe and deliberation prouide for the importance of his affaires, becauſe that city was the chiefeſt place, and (as it were) the key of all his Realme, and the ſureſt fortreſſe to ſtay the courſes & attempts of the Turks: and vpon which depended the whole ſtrength, the hope and the preſeruation of the reſidue of the ſtate of Albany. But here might it be doubted, whether itQueſtion. If better that women and children ſhould be excluded or retayned in a towne beſieged? were better done, thus to take away the wiues and children from the ſight of the citizens, or to haue ſuffered them to continue there ſtill, conſidering that their preſence and countenances full of griefe, the ſight of their teares, and the hearing of their lamentations, the miſery and feare of their ſeruitude, and the infamy of bonds and impriſonment threatned vnto thē, are of far greater moment and of more force, beyond al compariſon to animate & to encorage men, then the bare remembrance of them away and abſent. But it may be notwithſtanding, that old and expert warriours, did hold it more expedient, and a matter of more certainty and aſſurance that they ſhould be abſent. For albeit in the eie of the regardants, this encoragement be in truth proper & conuenient in the middeſt of their trauels and perils, to make them hazard their liues liberally and without feare: ſo is it of no ſmall force and efficacy to make the enemy more hard and obſtinate, by reaſon that the vnmeaſurable deſire of the prey (which they hope for) doth driue and cary on the ſouldier with a more ſetled reſolution, and doth enflame much more ardently the corages of the Barbarians to giue the charge & to purſue it: making them to aduenture more fiercely, euen in deſpite of woundes, and to expoſe themſelues more furiouſly to the violence of the ſword: whereas (on the contrary) they goe on more coldly and temperatly, when they ſee nothing within the place, but the force and ſtrength of men ſtout and reſolute, when they ſhall ſee vpon the walles, none but ſuch as haue their hands thirſting greedily after bloud, and whoſe bodies are euen vowed and deſtinate to die without all care or regard of life.
            It was a pitifull ſpectacle to behold this mournfull multitude of the Croians, when they were to depart the towne, and to forſake their owne houſes & habitations, euery where was to be heard nothing but complaints and lamentations of women. There was no houſe, ſtreet, nor corner of the towne exempted or free from griefe & ſorrow: the market place did reſound with diuerſity of cries, ſome rebuking & ſome blaming their friends for their grieuing at their departure, others inuiting and procuring them to teares and exclamations. But the moſt notable marke and ſhew of the publique miſfortune and dolefull affliction was to be ſeene at the temples and in the Churches, for there was a moſt maruellous concourſe of people of all ſorts and conditions. Infinite were the vowes and deuout praiers and ſupplications, intermingled with aboundanceA notable deſcription of the lamentation of the Croians vppon their departure out of the city. of tears & lamentations, which were poured forth before the Altars. And that which made the ſight of this miſerable calamity to be the more hideous and terrible, was a cuſtome which this nation had in doing outrage to themſelues, by tearing their faces and beating their breaſts moſt pitifully. The like paſſion and vehemency of griefe did appeare in the graue women & ancient matrones, who (beſides the deforming of their vilages) thought it a moſt pleaſant thing to imitate the ſorowfulnes of the others. Nothing

was held ſhamefull, nothing was accompted too much or exceſsiue in this accident: but ſhee was reputed to haue deſerued moſt praiſe and commendation, whoſe diſcomfort was deemed to be moſt euident and apparant. There wanted not ſome alſo, who (according to the vſe and nature of mortall men, though not without ſingular impiety and wickednes) did exclaime vpon the diuine power, attributing to God the cauſe of their griefe and misfortune. At the length when their ſorrow (ſomewhat eaſed with their teares) began in part to be mitigated and appeaſed: the mothers (addreſsing their ſpeaches to their ſons) with oft repetitions would command them many things, euer and among embracing them and kiſsing them. Sometimes they would put them in remembrance of the good offices and kind entreaty with which they had vſed them in their infancy, and of the mutuall loue and affection which they had deſerued in recompence of their kindneſſe: and ſometimes would they ſhew their aged lockes, and their Venerable white haires. All of them were in one caſe and vſed like ſpeaches: the wiues ſhewing their ſucking babes vnto their husbands, did deplore & bewaile that from thenceforth they ſhould remaine in their dwellings in caſe of orphanes, and in pittifull eſtate of widdowhood. The aged fathers (as men confounded) and altogether ſilent for very griefe, and being in a wonderfull great care & perplexity for the life of their ſons, durſt not by ſpeaking vnto them, neither animate nor pricke forward their valiant hearts, who were of themſelues ſufficiently fierce & couragious. Neither durſt they diſſwade them from the trauels and dangers of armes, nor frō their deuoire & perſeuerance in their ſeuerall charges & duties, for doubt leaſt they ſhould be thought to prefer their affection to their children, before the loue and duty which they did owe vnto their country. But a general commandement being come from the Prince, that the town ſhould be diſcharged of this burdenſome company: & that they which were in armes, ſhould repair euery man to his charge, (telling them that in heaping vp of vaine plaints, and by their priuate conſultations, they did but ſpend & trifle away the time:) hereupon began the ſorrow to be renued, their cries and their teares began a freſh, neither more nor leſſe, then as if they had already ſeene the enemy to ranſacke and ſpoile al things, to draw and drag away their husbands, their fathers, and their mothers into cruell bondage: to raze and breake downe their wals, and to violate, pollute, and prophane their Churches, and all holy and ſacred myſteries. Hardly could the multitude be drawen from that which they had once embraced, and euery one would haue remained as the companion of his friends danger, and the partner of his fortune: notwithſtanding, ſeeing that the criers and other officers of the Prince, did now preſſe and importune them to depart, (then taking their leaue with their laſt kiſſes and embracements) all of them at length, each after other, with ſighes and groanes, left the ſight of that which they held moſt deare: and ſtill caſting backe their eies towards the city wals, they ſet forward on their way without any care or regard, where they ſet their foote, or which way they went. It is ſayd that they were tranſported into the townes of Epire, that lay vpon the ſea ſide, and in other places and cities vnder the obeyſance of the Venetians, and other their confederats: where likewiſe an innumerable multitude of husbandmen and laborers were retired, with their cattell, beaſts, and moueables, to the intent the enemy ſhould finde nothing to prey vppon, whereby he might be relieued or holpen.
            After that the multitude was ſent away, and that this trouble and tumult withinScanderbeg prouideth victuals, armour and munition for the war
                     •
                  . the towne was ceaſed, Scanderbeg ſpent the reſt of the day in dealing with the victuallers and marchants of corne, and other munitions, in appointing publique garners for graine, and diſtributing vnto euery ſouldier by the poll, victualles to ſerue him for a whole yeare. Beſides, he gaue away a great quantity of weapons, and an infinit number

of targets, to the intent by this his bounty and largeſſe, hee might preuent and aſſure the faith and deuotion of his ſouldiers: telling them (as he deliuered the ſame) that he gaue them with intent that they ſhould keepe them continually to themſelues: or (which he held more commendable) that they ſhould employ them againſt their enemies. Thus did he ordaine & take order for all things, and by ſundry gifts and preſents did he binde and allure vnto himſelfe the good will and affection of euery one. TheVranocontes gouernour of Croy. day following ſending for Vranocontes an Epirot by birth, and by him lately appointed gouernor of Croy (a man whom he highly loued and fauored, both for the merit of his anceſters, and for the proofe & teſtimony of his owne vertue) with him he debated concerning many things: and a long time enquiring and demanding of him, what he thought of the ſiege of Croy, and of the wiles and cunning ſleights of the Turks. Their conference being ended, he came forth into the market place, and there in the midſt of his armed forces, with a high and loud voice (appealing to the faith & loialty of them all in generall, and enioyning them to be haue themſelues wel and manfully) he recommendedEncoragemēt of Scanderbeg to the Croians, who inſtructeth them how to demeane thē ſelues againſt, the Turkes. vnto them the protection and ſafety of the city, & aſſuring each of them both of reward and recompence, in caſe they were faithfull and loyall, and of condigne puniſhment if he found them trecherous and diſloyal. He admoniſhed them chearfully to be haue themſelues in diſcharge of their duties, and the defence of the towne: and that with a ſetled and obſtinate reſolution, they ſhould repell the enemy from approching neare them: and not to ſuffer themſelues in any caſe to haue any conference or communicatiō with the aduerſary, nor to liſten, or to haue their ears open to any perſwaſions they ſhould vſe. That the Ottoman by ſuch deuiſes would lie in wait, & vnder colour of a mortall and pernicious peace, would deceiue them by ſuch illuſions and perſwaſions, if they did not looke well to themſelues, or if he found thē any thing willing to leane vnto him, or credulous to beleeue him. Contrariwiſe if he found them coragiouſly affected, and their ears deafe and ſtopped vp againſt his vaine flatteries and allurements: his firſt aſſaies being fruſtrat and diſappointed, his misfortune would make him in time to truſſe vp baggage, and depart confounded and vtterly aſhamed; except it did ſo fal out, that (as one deſperat and voide of hope) he were caried away with a furious deſire to ſee the end and ruine of his own people: and by a raſh & vnaduiſed hope (to ſatisfie the mallice of his wrathful courage) he would caſt himſelfe headlong into the manifeſt and euident danger of deſtruction. That their towne was ſo notably defenſible, and ſo exceedingly ſtrong by the naturall ſite thereof, that the very place alone (though the citizens ſhould in a manner ſit ſtill with their hands bound behind them) would eaſily contemne & ſet at naught al the violence that could be attempted againſtThe ſtrong
                        •
                      ſi
                        •
                     tuation of the city of Croy. it. Then what can I ſay more (quoth he) to admoniſh you? or wherefore ſhould I ſollicite or animate thoſe any longer, whoſe valour and fidelity being ſo often tried and approued, is well knowen almoſt throughout the whole world? in ſuch ſort, that were it, you had neuer giuen me any proofe & triall, nor left me any teſtimony of your conſtancy, yet neuertheleſſe I ſhould thinke it greater reaſon, that my citizens ſhould deceiue me, then that I ſhould any way diſtruſt their fidelity.
            
            
               Scanderbeg hauing finiſhed theſe exhortations to thoſe of Croy, he tooke his leaue ofScanderbeg iſſued from Croy to the Campe. all the company, & iſſued preſently out of the city. At his departure, infinit people, and in a maner the whole city did conduct and attend him, till he was paſſed without the Port: the which being ſhut vp with all ſpeed and diligence, he came to the reſt of hisMoſes ioyneth with Scanderbeg with his Regiment. forces which lay encamped in a faire plaine, in the open view and ſight of the towne. And immediatly after he had ſcoured the fieldes, he ſounded to horſe, and cauſed his campe to march, the which had not gone far, but he met with Moſes, who came vnto him accompanied with a goodly regiment of his owne and very well appointed. He

was newly returned from Sfetigrade, the which being ſeated vpon the Turkiſh frontiers,Sfetigrade fortified by Moſes was cauſe of great doubt and care to Scanderbeg: but the Dibrian had taken order for the fortification and defence therof, and had aſſured it with all things requiſit, both with men, munition, victuals, and certaine bulwarks according as he thought needful and conuenient. And he had remoued out of that place alſo all thoſe, the weaknes and imbecillity of whoſe age or ſexe, might work any impeachment or hinderance to thePeter Perlat gou
                     •
                  rn
                     •
                  ur of Sfetigrade. ſafety of the towne. The gouernment of the place he cōmitted to Peter Perlat, a graue and wiſe captaine, and one that was well experienced in armes and martiall affaires. But that which at the beginning was held to be moſt for the ſuerty of the towne, and ſeemed to be ordered with beſt aduiſe and diſcretion, did diſcouer it ſelfe in the end by the euent and iſſue, to be the loſſe and deſtruction of that garriſon: for that it conſiſted almoſt wholly of Dibrians: of which our Moſes had expreſly made choiſe out of all the forces of Albany, as of the chiefeſt and beſt ſouldiers among all the peoples of Epire. Scanderbeg did like ſo well of his deuiſe, that he commended him greatly, & then hauing ſo well fortified, and ſo abundantly furniſhed this place, he deliuered vnto him certain other companies (which he had there in a readines, and were prouided for the ſtuffing and filling of all the fortreſſes within the prouince) ſending both him and diuers others of his Princes and chiefe captaines, to ſee all places prouided for, with ſuch forces, as ſhould be thought needfull & neceſſary. So that there was not almoſt any, but had his particular charge and imployment; to the intent each one doing his deuoire with all diligence, there might not enſue any danger by delay or negligence. He himſelfe with a ſmall company of horſe, galloped to the gates of Sfetigrade: for he was in greater care and torment for that city onely, then any man can expreſſe or would imagine, as if by ſome ſecret inſpiration, he had forſeene the misfortune that was to come vpon it. Wherefore the better to ſtrengthen the courages of them of that garriſon, and to make them acquainted, and to arme them againſt the traines and cunning practiſes of Amurath, (which he feared and doubted as much or more then his open forces;) he entred into the midſt of the towne, where the ſouldiers were thickeſt and in greateſt numbers, and there in the preſence of many of the chiefeſt and moſt notable men of marke, (who ſtood round about him) he vſed theſe or the like ſpeeches vnto them.
            If you would haue wiſhed (you men and citizens of Sfetigrade) for a fit occaſion to
                  The oration of Caſtriot vnto the citizens of Sfetigrade. eternize your faith and fidelity, and by ſome memorable & ſingular example to make ſhew of your loialty, and to preſerue the remembrance therof euerlaſting & perpetual: God (infinitly good and omnipotent) could not haue preſented you at this time with a better nor fitter ſubiect & oportunity then this, that hath now called you to arms, and which hath cauſed you to take your weapons into your hands. In the former wars we fought for victory, for glory, for the reputation of our realme and country: but now we are to fight for the pulique ſafety of the common liberty, & for the wals and preſeruation of this your city and country: in defence whereof, it behoueth you to ſtriue with your vttermoſt forces and endeuors, leaſt the infinit praiſes and commendations, and that excellent honour and glory, which you haue happily deſerued and purchaſed by armes vnder my conduct, be now ſtained and blemiſhed with great ſhame and ignomy. The better and greater part of our good fortune conſiſteth in your vertue, becauſe the firſt attempt of Amurath preſently vpon his entry into Epire, & the firſt fury of the Barbarians (my ſelf will be the man who ſhall firſt acquaint you with this danger) will be addreſſed againſt you and your city: to the intent, that the ſureſt fence & bulwarke of the prouince being beaten downe and razed, he may the more freely lead on his forces into the heart of the countrey, which by this meanes will be the more expoſed to the violence of his fury. The firſt fruites therefore of this war, doth ſtay and attend for

you. Wherefore if there be any valour remaining in your hearts, and if the mindes of men ſo braue and valiant be any thing carefull or mindfull of liberty, you may eaſilie tame and abate the proud attempts of the enemy, and you may ſoone ruinat, and vanquiſh theſe arrogant and haughty ſtomacks. According to your cariage and behauiour wil the Ottoman begin to conceiue either feare and diſcomfort, or hope and good heart. If he find you ſo ſtout and full of courage, as I do now ſee you to be furious and reſolute, he will be in doubt leaſt he be encountred in all other places, with a greater violence and much more forceable and dangerous. So ſhall you teach him to forbeare and abſtaine from the other cities of Epire, & to reſerue himſelf to more eaſie exploits: making him vnwilling to preſſe you with any long ſiege: or elſe (if his age make him ſo wilfull & ſo vnaduiſedly obſtinat, as to ſeeke to force you) his troupes (I doubt not)The ſtrength of Sfetigrade ſhall waxe gray headed ere they depart. For ſuch is the naturall ſituation of this place, that it need not feare nor make accompt of any aduerſary how fierce & furious ſoeuer. Reſolue your ſelues therefore (my good citizens:) and by the firmnes of your determinations, and the conſtancy of your faith, doe you purchaſe vnto your ſelues and your country this immortall victory. Vpon the ſucceſſe of your vertue and proweſſe, (I do repeat it willingly) doth depend the faith and conſtancy of the reſt of the people of Albany. All men haue their eyes fixt vppon you, either to commend you or condemne you, or to follow and imitate your vertue. What need I vſe any further ſpeaches? that which is wanting, I had rather you (moſt worthy Dibrians) ſhould meditate with your ſelues, then that in aduertiſing you with ouer much care and curioſitie, I might ſeeme by many wordes to haue conceiued ſome ſecrete doubt and miſtruſt of your faith and loialty.
            
            The ſame time that Caſtriot with his forces here and there aſſembled from all partsAmurath leauieth a mighty army againſt Scanderbeg. of Epire, was making towards Croy, to take order for the ſafety and aſſurance of that city: the Turkiſh army which had bene leauied in Aſia, was tranſported into Europe, and by long iorneis was arriued at Andrinople, their numbers not exceeding 40000. For whenſoeuer the Sultan had any war in Europe, the moſt part of his forces were vſually leauied in thoſe quarters neare the ſame place: both for that the ſouldiers of thoſe parts are better acquainted & accuſtomed with the maners of the Chriſtians in their wars, and alſo for that their preparations may be there made more commodiouſly, & with greater celerity, as being at home and in his owne countrey.
            Whileſt the Ottoman forces did on all parts daily take head together, and that Amurath
               Amurath conſulteth with his Baſſaes for the māer of the proceedings of the wars againſt Scanderbeg. had almoſt ended his great preparations, and had aſſembled a great and mighty puiſſance, hee called a counſell of his Baſſaes and moſte expert Chiefetains, in the which they propounded and debated vpon diuerſe meanes and manners for the commencement and beginning of the war. Some held opinion that without any temporizing or further daliance, it were neceſſary to ſend before into Epire a running campe of horſemen (whom they call Alcanzi or Achimzi,) and whom we may wel reſemble toAlcanzi, aduenturers without pay. our aduenturers, (a moſt cruell and brutiſhe kinde of people, and giuen extreamelie to robbing and ſtealing.) And that theſe, as an outragious tempeſt comming vpon them ſodainely, and ſurprizing them at vnawares, with notable violence ſhould deſtroy, confound, and turne all vp ſide downe: and that the enemy (not carrying themſelues very wary and circumſpect) but vnder colour of fained fight, being deluded and deceiued by theſe troupes, ſhould be drawen forth to the fight, in ſuch ſort, that his maieſty following neare at hand (in proper perſon) with the groſſe of his whole army, might the more eaſily and entirely oppreſſe and vanquiſhe them. Others were ofa contrary aduiſe, perſwading him in any caſe to forbeare by ſuch meanes to prouoke, and incite the enemy: for feare either of giuing occaſion to the Chriſtians to prouide

themſelues of things neceſſary for ſo long and tedious a warre, or leaſt they themſelues might runne headlong firſt of all into their traines and counterwayes: that the late ſlaughters ſuſtained by others had ſufficiently taught them. Beſides that they had intelligence (which was now euery where and commonly reported) that the whole prouince of Albanie, being throughly prouided and prepared, was already in armes, their townes ſtrongly fortified, and their fortreſſes garniſhed with ſouldiours for their defence, and with other preparatiues in good quantitie: and that all places both paſſages and ſtreightes were purpoſely poſſeſſed and full of ſouldiours: that Scanderbeg with the reſidue of his troupes did dayly ride vppe and downe viſiting the prouince, and ſearching and viewing the thickettes and ſecret corners of the woodds and forreſtes, to the intent he might once againe conueniently and according to his minde lodge in them his happy and fortunate ambuſhments: that it was a moſt pernitious thing to imagine to preuaile againſt ſo cautelous and warie an enemy by warring in that manner: that they ought rather to take an other courſe of better aſſuraunce, and which the iſſue and euent might not yet once againe reproue and condemne, as it had done in times paſt. For what ſhould let (ſayd they) but that all of them might miſcarie vnder the ſword of the Albanois before that the ſame ſuccours ofa campe ſo heauily charged ſhould be able to retaine them. Wherefore to preuent the Chriſtians that they ſhould not by the bloud and ſlaughter of their people, preſate vnto them ſelues any good fortune in this warre, they held it better to march on with their whole armie all at once, to the intent they might at length deliuer the Empire of Ottoman, from the labour and burthen of this troubleſome warre. Neither of theſe opinions was allowed, but a third (indifferent betweene both) caried a way the matter, as being more fitte and commodious for the qualitie of that time, and for the honour and reputation of ſuch an enterpriſe. It was concluded therefore that the third part or little leſſe of the whole army, ſhould aduaunce foreward before the reſidue, ſuppoſing that that number would ſuffice, not onely to repell, and keepe the enemy from going forward (but if neede were) to ſet vppon them: and that by their ſodaine comming, they ſhould be able both to diſturbe the courſe of the enemies affaires and purpoſe, and conſequently to prepare a free paſſage for the army royall of his Maieſty.
            According to this concluſion, there were immediatly choſen & ſent away 40000.Amurath ſendeth part of his army before to beſiege Sfetygrade. light horſemen, whoſe ordinary armes were ſword & target, & lance, a plate of maile and a mace of iron. Their commiſſion was to march on directly, the next and ſhorteſt way towards Sfetigrade, and there to begin the ſiege of that place, according as they amongſt them ſelues ſhould aduiſe and deliberate. Amurath after his counſell was ended, commaunded the reſidue of his army to be muſtered, and to be raunged in order of battell. Infinite almoſt was the number of the leaders and commanders, forThe order and diuiſion of the Turke his armie. Flambur. Saniacke a Colonell of horſemen. Timariot a horſeman. Subaſſides a leader of horſemen. ordinarily their trouppes are deuided into diuers Regimentes, or charges, which they call Flamburats or Saniacks, and are gouernments of prouinces, vnder whom doe march the Timariots, which properlie are thoſe which haue a yearely fee or ſtipend allowed them. And euery Flambur hath vnder him alſo many Subaſſides or chiefes of companies, who are of a higher regard and accompt, and haue a larger ſtipend then the Timariots: and according to their qualities are allowed either a greater or leſſe number of horſemen vnder their charge. The foote bands likewiſe both of Aſia and Europe haue their order certaine, and are diſtributed into ſeuerall companies vnder their Captaines. In like manner the auxiliary forces, or extraordinarie ſuccours (which in time of warre are commonlie decreed, and ſent to the Grand Seignior) were not of any meane or ſmall number. Beſides there were a great multitude of

voluntarie men (as in all expeditions cōmonly there is no want of ſuch.) After all theſe followed about three thouſand men, all of them banqueroute and indebted, or for ſome miſdeede and forfeiture raſed and caſsierd out of the Prince his pay, with a great number alſo of other youthfull and luſtie gallants all which liue in hope and expectation, and doe ſeeke by ſome notable and valiant acte, either to aboliſh their former diſgrace and ignominy, & to be reſtored to their former eſtate & degree: or elſe to deſerue of their King and Emperour ſome new reward, or ſome militarie pay and ſtipend. The tent or pauillion of the ſoueraigne is continually garded by more then 7000. armed men, where of ſome were on horſebacke and are named Spachi, Sulaſtari
               Spachi. Sulaſtari. Vlufagi. Ianiſſari. and Vlufagi. The others (who are called Ianiſſaries & may be properly accounted of the Sultan his familie) are all footemē & like to the Macedonian phalange, or ſquadrō of pikemen amongſt the ancient Macedonians. Theſe were newly inſtituted & rayſed by Amurath, a moſt warrelike and martiall kinde of men picked and choſen of purpoſe: and them he commonly reſerued for the laſt refuge in fight, and for the ſecuritie and defence of his perſon: & by the valure of theſe, both he and his ſucceſſors haue obtained ſo many great & mighty conqueſts, & ſubdued all the leuant. Beſides all theſe, for the greater ſhew & oſtētation of his forces, there marched with them a moſt wonderfull & maruellous multitude ofſlaues & baſe perſons vnarmed: whom he had brought together & ioyned to his army, to terrifie rather then to imploy them againſt the enemy: and to the intent alſo that theſe being offered to the ſword & butchered (as a flock of ſheepe appointed to the ſlaughter) might ſo wearie and weaken the enemy by ouerlabouringA Turkiſh ſtratagem
                     •
                  . them ſelues in killing of them, as they might haue the better hand, & more eaſily preuaile againſt them: which is one of the greateſt and moſt notable ſtratagems that the Turkes doe account of amongeſt the whole number of their martiall pollicies. Two principall chiefs had the conducting of this army whō they call Beillerbiez
               Beillerbey. as a man ſhould ſay Lords of Lords (one of them being the chiefe commander of Aſia, the other in Europe.) It would be tedious to the reader, if I ſhould vndertake to recoūt and enroll euery particular by name: it ſhall ſuffice therefore for this matter, briefly in this place to haue ſet downe ſome certaintie concerning the ſumme and whole number of this army, wherein alſo (aſwell as in other points) there is ſom variance & contradiction which may in ſome ſort diminiſh the credit & truth of the thing in the opinion of ſuch men as do approue nothing, but that which is ſure and certaine. For ſomeThe number of the Turkes forces. there be who affirme, that the great Turke had in his campe 150000. fighting men: namely 90000. horſemē & 60000. footemē. Others ſay, he had but 120000. in al, deducting from the horſe 20000. & frō the foote 10000. For my part I hold it not much material, whether of theſe 2. opiniōs we cleaue vnto, & yet in my iudgement the greater number ſeemeth more likely, if we will make it anſwerable to the wonderfull preparations which were ſo long time forethought on, & in prouiding: and yet true it is, that this army was not ſo exactly ordered, nor the diſcipline therof ſo ſtreightly regarded, as it was vſually when the Turkiſh monarch marched into the field, & purpoſed to fight a battell: where cōmonly the true value & vertue doth liuely ſhew it ſelfe. For all the endeuors & all the preparations did tend & were ordeined for the beſieging of townes, & the battering of wals, rather thē for any ſeruices in the plaine & open fields.
            After that Scanderbeg had confirmed the courages of the Sfetygradians, and aſſuredScāderbeg viſiteth and encourageth all parts within his prouince. the eſtate of their affaires, ſo far as he thought it expedient: he remoued from thence to other places of his dominion: and viſiting all the prouince with ſingular vigilancie and quickneſſe of ſpirit, he did pricke forward & enflame the faithfull harts of his ſubiects, ſometimes by commending them, ſomtimes by preſents and gifts, and ſomtimes by the ſhewes and repreſentation of the horror and hugenes of the danger imminent.

               Moſes in the meane time had fortified all places with ſtrong garriſons, with prouiſiōs of corne, armor, & other munitiōs ſufficiēt, to abide any fortune & extremitie of war. Wherfore the care of all theſe matters being now laid aſide: Scanderbeg with all ſpeed went to his armie not farre from Croy, where they were commanded to attend his returne. The Dibrian with his companie did ouertake him on the way, and then ioyning their forces together in one, with great ioye and comfort they reſorted to the Campe. Scarce had they any leaſure to ſpeake vnto the ſouldiours, or to the Captaines, but that there came ſodaine and ſtraunge newes: and meſſengers from all parts arriuing one after an other, bringing theſe fearefull and ſorowfull tydings: That the enemy was come already, that the countrey was on all ſides of a light fire, andThe Turkes inuade Epire. that all things were in a miſerable eſtate and confuſion. They certified him (as feare maketh men credulous) and yet were they vncertaine of it, that Amurath him ſelfe was there in perſon, and had already filled and couered with armes, men, and horſes, both the mountaines and vallyes, and the champion and plaine countreys: and they inſtantly prayed their Prince, to prouide for the ſuretie of his troupes, and of his perſon eſpecially: and not of a pernitious and ouer much hardineſſe to attend in plaine field at the firſt comming, the furious violence of ſo puiſſant an enemy: that he would retire his ſouldiers into ſome place of a notable height & inacceſsible, from whence he might behold the vſage of the enemy, and ſo to deuiſe and reſolue vpon ſome ſure courſe, which ſhould be moſt for his profit and commoditie.
            Theſe ſpeeches did not much moue Scanderbeg, neither could theſe perſwaſionsScanderbeg with 5000. mē againſt the enemie. make him diſlodge from that place, whereof he had once made choiſe to encampe in: neuertheleſſe when he perceiued and vnderſtood that his ſcoutes did on all ſides returne vnto him with more then poſting ſpeede: and their reportes did agree all in one, ſaue that they differed in the number and quantitie of the enemies forces, of which they coniectured diuerſly, (for the Turkes were not yet ſeene nor diſcouered altogether: neither were they deſcended all of them into the plains: neither were their Batallions ſo vnited and ordred, that a true and certaine eſtimat could be made of their iuſt numbers:) Caſtriot thereupon chooſing out of his whole army, 4000. horſe, and 1000. foote, whom he commaunded to follow him and diſlodging as ſecretly as he could, from thence drew directly towardes Sfetigrade, where he knew that the enemies were to encampe themſelues. It was in the dawning of the morning in the twilight, that the ſouldiers had the ſigne giuen them to ſet forward. The day following notwithſtanding, when it was ſcarce the third houre of the night, they came to encampe within ſeauen miles of Sfetigrade, betweene which towne and Croy, were litle leſſe then 60. miles. There Scanderbeg hauing choſen a place ſure and commodious for his company, cauſed it to be entrenched round about, making it by that meanes more ſtrong and defenſible. Afterwards hauing diſtributed both horſe and foote into the ſeuerall quarters of the campe, he commaunded to ſet the watch and to place the courts of guard, and then ſecretely to ſearch out what places were fit to ſerue for ambuſcadoes: meane while he forbad all of them in generall to make any fires within the trenches. All things being thus diſpoſed and ſet in order, and euery man being commanded to vſe ſilence: he (taking with him Moſes & Tanueſe de Thopy) went to ſurueyScanderbeg goeth to ſuruey the campe and countenance of the enemie. and conſider vpon the forme and ſituation of the campe and countenaunce of the enemy: and with great ſecreſie, ſometimes through the thickets of the forreſtes, ſometimes by the ſecrete paſſages of the vallies, he gained the toppe of a certaine mountaine directly oppoſite againſt Sfetigrade, from the height whereof, hauing diligently noted and ſurueyed all things by faire day light, he tooke his way very quickely backe againe into his owne Campe. The execution hereof was not without maruellous

contrariety of opinions, for ſeeing the barbarians were encāped vnder the wals of the Towne, and were poſſeſſed both of the mountaines adioyning and of the fieldes vnderneath them: the chiefe leaders did not ſee any great likelihood or appearanceScanderbeg coſ
                     •
                  lteth vpō the manner of aſſayling the enemie. (without ſome notable loſſe of their men) how to execute any thing with good ſucceſſe, becauſe the daunger was manifeſt and imminent, that ſo ſmall a number charged with ſo great a puiſſance ſometimes in the plaine, and ſometimes in the deſcent of the mountaines, ſhould eaſily be broken & ouerthrowen. They doubted alſo (which was a cauſe neceſſarily conſtraining them for that time to abſtaine from all reaſon of fight) leaſt the reſidue of the royall troupes, comming vpon them ſodainly and vnprouided, they ſhould be all entangled, encloſed and ſhut vppe in the middeſt of them: and for the ſame reaſon they held it as perillous to call the garriſon forth to helpe them. It was held therefore more expedient and a courſe of more certaintie and ſafetie to ſeparate & deuide (if it were poſſible) by their ordinarie ſleightes the power & forces of the aduerſarie: and being once ſundred & deuided to draw them into places of greateſt diſaduantage. Nothing was done notwithſtāding for that day, becauſe the night (comming vpon them) did prcuēt their determination: only there were ſent forth certain ſcoutes on all ſides both far & neare, to diſcouer the approch of Amurath, and that the enemy ſhould lay no ambuſhmēts to entrap thē. The moitie of that night was allowed thē to take their reſt, the reſidue was imployed in diuers actiōs & affaires, for that the Prince of Albanie (changing his firſt lodging) went to encampe ſomwhat nearer the town, ſo that he was not now aboue 5. myles from the enemy: ſuppoſing & hoping that (being once entiſed forth to fight) the nearer he was to them the more eaſily they might be ouerthrowen. Wherefore after that euery man had ſufficiently reſted himſelfe & taken ſome repaſt: & all of them being ready at hand with ſtore of ſuch things as were needfull & requiſite, firſt thoſe places which were fit for ambuſhments, he filled with able and luſty men: and the thickets and buſhes he enuironed on all ſides with ſtore of ſouldiours, of which number ſuch as ſerued on foote, were placed in the wings and ſteepe of the mountaines not eaſie to be approched, or in the thicke of the woods and buſhes: himſelfe taking his place among the horſemen, kept at the foote & bottome of the mountaines all along the plaine, and in the crookes and turnings of the vallies.
            This done, he called vnto him Moſes & Muſache de Angelina (a gentleman of ſpecial marke, & one of the chiefeſt among the horſemen) whō hauing exhorted with many good and friendly ſpeeches, he ſent accompanied with 30. others (all young men bothA notable ſtratageme of S
                     •
                  ā
                  derbeg practized againſt the Turkes. hardy and couragious) willing them to allure forth the enemy out of their trenches, and to draw them within the daunger of his traines and ambuſcadoes. You muſt not thinke that Scanderbeg did forget to make choiſe of his companie out of the moſt worthy & ſufficient of all his bands both the men & their horſes: beſides they were diſguiſed in the apparell & furniture of ſimple ſouldiers, leaſt that their militarie habit (being any thing rich and ſumptuous) ſhould diſcouer their attempt, which he had an eſpeciall deſire to keepe ſecret. There was ſcant any of the ſouldiers but had an other horſe loden with corne, to driue before him, to the intent they ſhould be taken for forragers indeede, who returned from gathering it abroad. And that nothing might be wanting for the aduantage of this martiall pollicie & to beguile the enemy, they were enioyned to bend towards the town by ſuch waies as were leaſt vſed & frequented, & on that ſide where the mountaine was free, and not garded by the enemy: & that they ſhould make ſhew as though they ment that way to enter into Sfetigrade. Theſe leaders (being very expert & of a quicke & excellent conceipt) did not omit any thing of that which was commanded them: and the ſouldiers alſo with ſingular obedience & reſolution did follow thē moſt chearefully, not doubting any dāger that might befall them:

Vpon the dawning of the day, and by that time that the ſtarres began to grow outMoſes and others ſent to draw the Turkes ſorth to fight. of ſight by the breake of the morning, they were now come within little more then a myle of the tentes of the enemy: at ſuch time as the Turkes ſentinels hauing diſcouered them from aloft, began firſt by ſignes ſhewed in the aire, & then by their often cries & clamors to bewray them. They nothing troubled not abaſhed with their noiſe, did only haſten their pace ſomwhat faſter: (for as yet, neither needed they to feare any danger from the enemy, neither would their flight haue bene to any purpoſe.) At the lēgth one of the Turkiſh ſquadrōs being wakened by the ſentinels, & yet (by reaſon of their ſleepe being in ſome doubt) taking their weapons in their hand, they aduanced them ſelues forward & began to ruſh vpon thē, ſuppoſing them to be ſhepheards, or peaſants loden with corn. The Albanois diſdayning the ſmal number that came to aſſault thē, prepared themſelues with more courage then reaſon, to receiue them: notwithſtanding vpon their firſt approch, reculing a little backe, they turned their backes, faining them ſelues to be afrayde. The Barbarians coniecturing their feare by their flight, purſued after them with great ſpeede and charged them behinde in moſt rude & furious manner. Then they all at once ſtopping their horſes, turned about, and making head againſt them (with their ſwordes drawen,) they went on and drew neare to encounter them (as being enforced by neceſsitie either to incurt the laſt extremitie of danger;) or elſe by oppoſing their bodies and turning their faces to make reſiſtance and to repulſe the violence with which they were ſo egerly purſued: for that whileſt they held on this their diſſembled flight, they were in manifeſt daunger, their enemies horſes euen breathing cloſe at their backes: yet were not the Turkes any whit abaſhed for all this, but couering them ſelues with their large targettes, and meaſuring the enemy by their habite onely, they approched them, and were the firſt that gaue the onſetA shirmiſh betweene certain Turkes and Epirots. againſt them. One of them borne in Aſia, being of a mighty ſtature and wonderfull ſtrong made, marched before his fellowes with a heauy mace of iron, the which after he had oftentimes whirled about with his right hand to giue it the more force, with a mighty cry and clamor, and with an incredible violence, he threw it ouerthwart the whole troupe of the Albanois: the which (being cloſe knit and ioyned together) albeit they ſuſtained no harme thereby, yet could they not auoyd the force of the blow cō
               ming againſt them ſo violently and rudely. For being caried with a maruellous force into the middeſt of the troupe, a yong Dibrian tooke and bare the blow vpon his target: and therewithall the others following their fellow, the fight was begun ech aſſailing other with his Courtelax. The number of the combattants being almoſt equal & their armes not much vnlike, it was a very goodly and pleaſant ſight, and it gaue good grace vnto the combat. For the Turkes were no better armed then the Chriſtians, by reaſon they made ſuch haſt out of their trenches, and did in a maner contemne their eenemies. The weapons wherewith they were armed, was but a cimitary and a ſhield. In one point only the Infidels had the diſaduantage, and that was, that the very choiſe and beſt men at armes, and the floure of the youth of Albany was there in place, where as their company on the contrary were intermingled with people of no reckoning & men of valure both together: for that according as the skoutes had raiſed them confuſedly and in tumult, ſo did they iſſue forth both one & other to the fight. This was the occaſion that euen in the very firſt fury of the encounter, their fortune did appeare to be far inferior. For the Aſian (in whom conſiſted the ſtrength of the reſt) being ſlaine by the hand of Moſes, the others were ſuprized with an incredible feare, diſpairing not only of the victory, but alſo of their life & ſafety, if they had not ſpeedily ſome ſuccors from the campe. Wherefore by litle & litle retiring themſelues, in the end they beganThe Turks put to flight. to ſhew their backs: and (with change of fortune) by a moſt ſhamefull flight, forſooke

the field in the which but a little before, they had ſo hotly and fiercely purſued others. Albanois gaue them libertie to flye where they would, without giuing them any ill wordes, or in ſhewe of their victorie making any cry after the vanquiſhed, but gathering themſelues ſoberly neare vnto their captaines, without any regard had, either of the bodies or of the ſpoiles of thoſe which were ſlaine, they returned to their beaſts of cariage: & (as men that deſired, but to ſaue themſelues) they made haſt to driue them the way from whence they came. Their audacitie and courage was greatly augmented through fortunat ſucceſſe of this encounter, yet did they defer all their ioy, till ſuch time as they had accompliſhed a happy cōcluſion of the enterpriſe which they had vndertaken. It chanced that one of their company well knowen amongſt his fellowes, through his manifold good deſertes in the wars, found himſelfe to be greeuouſly wounded: in ſomuch that his continuall complaints, and the impatiencie of his paine proceeding of his wound, did greatly trouble the contentment of all the reſt, and did not a little diſcomfort his companions: for one of the Turkes with his ſword had thruſt him through the left ſhoulder ſo as he had not ſufficient ſtrength, either to carie his armes, or to guide his owne horſe. Moſes tooke great compaſsion of his griefe, and diſmounting from horſebacke, he tooke him downe with his owne handes, and ſet him vppe behinde one of the ſouldiours, to whoſe charge hee committed him, willing him to haue a care that he did not fall from behinde him, becauſe if he galloped his horſe, his handes were not able to ſuſtaine him: and that he ſhould make haſt with all ſpeede poſsible to carie him to the Campe, to the intent before any other allarme or tumult were rayſed by the enemie, he might be gotten within the tentes amongeſt his companions: as for the reſt of his fellowes, they were all ſound, and not one of them beſides him, returned hurt from the medly: Of the Circumſized there were fiue ſlaine and eight wounded, few to count of, but yet many in regard of their ſmall number.
            By that time that the horſe (whereon the two ſouldiours were mounted) had cariedThe Turkes campe in a tumult vpon the diſcomfiting of their fellowes. them quite out of ſight, there was heard a maruellous cry and noyſe in the Campe of Amurath: for thoſe which had bene wounded, at their returne filled all with their plaints and exclamations, and ſhewing their deformed and vnmeaſurable woundes, they ſet all the hoaſt of the enemy in a tumult and a rage: eſpecially ſuch as were of any affinitie to thoſe that were ſlaine. Wherefore (not reſpecting any cōmand made to the contrarie) they disbanded them ſelues on all ſides from their enſignes without any chiefe, without order and all diſcretion, according as their anger and deſire of reuenge enflamed them: but proclamation being made ouer the whole armie, by the commandement of their commander, that no man ſhould ſtirre or bouge, euery man retired: then they arranged them ſelues in order of battell before his tents, there attending his pleaſure. Their Generall did greatly doubt the accuſtomed ſleights and traines of the Chriſtians: ſuſpecting that vnder pretence of forraging, ſome notable deceipt and guilefull pollicie might be lurking: and the rather, for that the ſtrange largeneſſe of the woundes of his ſouldiours, did plainely argue that it was not the arme of any baſe or raſcall perſons, nor the ſwordes of countrey clownes that could giue ſuch ſtrokes and cruell blowes. He determined therfore to take out of his whole armie foure thouſand horſe, ſuch as were moſt fierce and venturous: to the intent the fewneſſe & ſmall nūber of his people might not ſtil cauſe them to returne with ſhame and diſgrace: them he enioyned both to ſcatter thoſe forragers, and to put them from their horſes: and then with diligent ſearch to raunge throughout all the mountaines, hils, valleyes, woods and ſecret places to diſcouer the ambuſhments of the Albanois.
            
            Neare about the time of theſe directions, the ſouldiour whom the Dibrian had ſent

with his hurt companion was arriued in preſence of Scanderbeg, and hauing deliuered his charge to ſome of his fellowes, who came to meete him, and willing them to haue a care to the curing of his wounds; himſelfe ranne vp and downe in the ſight of the ſouldiers, as one almoſt out of his wits: and calling manie by their names he cried with a loud voice, Arme arme, the enemy is comming, all their camp is in arms,
                  Alarme in the campe of Scanderbeg. they haue taken their allarme: and (pointing with his finger) he ſhewed them the duſt, as an argument of their comming. At the firſt, Scanderbeg was ſomewhat moued & abaſhed, fearing leaſt his people had miſcaried, for of all the troupe he ſaw but two onely returned, and both of them (as it were) ſhamefully flying: the one of them alſo halfe dead, embrued and polluted with the warme blood that yet iſſued from his wounds: and the other by the fooliſh crie and exclamation which he made, did ſhew himſelfe full of feare and ill aſſured. But after he vnderſtood by him how all things had paſſed; his ſorrow being turned into laughter, and his care into boldneſſe & confidence, he willed his men to be al of good courage, and that euery one ſhould be in a readines with his horſe & armor. By this time had our Sentinels (which were placedTurkes purſus Moſes and hit companie. vpon the height of the mountaines) diſcouered Moſes and the Turkes comming after him, ouer the plaine champion, euen readie to fall into their ambuſcado, and to be deliuered to the ſword of the Epirots. For at the firſt our men made no great haſte, but rode on, driuing their beaſts faire and eaſily, bending their courſe ſometimes here, ſometimes there, and rather attending for them, then flying from them: but as ſoone as they perceiued a farre off, that the Infidelles were iſſued foorth of their trenches: then leauing both their ſackes & their carriage, they prepared themſelues to a round and ſpeedie flight. Wherefore hauing poaſted ouer the plaine in a moment, they got to a hill which (on the North ſide being oppoſite vnto a certaine valley) did couer the center and bottome thereof, where our men lay cloſe, and couertly encamped: and before they were ouertaken with the danger, or that the enemy could preſſe too neere vpon them, they did ſecretly conuey themſelues among their fellowes, both they and their horſes ſo ſpent and out of breath with their continuall courſing and trauell, that it made ſhew they had fled in good earneſt. The enemie perceiuing that they were in a moment gotten out of ſight, & thinking (becauſe they were ſo ſuddenly ſlipt away from the top of the mountaine) that they were hidden in the bottome of the valley. They followed directly after thē without any feare or conſideration. But as they came neere vnto the place, to the intent they might more eaſily enuiron and encloſe them, both on the one ſide & on the other, all ſcattered & out of order, they prepared themſelues, ſome to gaine the top of the hill, and others by ſome meanes or other to enter into the valley. But at their arriuall notwithſtanding, hearing a great neighing of many horſes, they began to be aſtoniſhed, & to ſtand ſtill, without ſpeaking a word, but vſing ſilence for a ſeaſon, till ſuch time as the noiſe of the horſes being more certainly diſcouered, and growing more ſenſible to be heard, did manifeſtly diſcouer the ambuſcado of the enemie. Then did all things ſeeme greater vnto them by ſight of the eye, then they had imagined by the eare: and the vncertaintie of the danger being interpreted (as is vſuall) according to the greatnes of their feare, did eaſily perſwade this people (thus amazed & terrified) to betake themſelues to preſent and ſpeedy flight. AsTurkes fall into the Ambuscado of the Epirots. they were ready to breake & make away, Scanderbeg (cōmanding the trumpets ſpeedily to ſound, & putting them in a wonderfull feare as not expecting any ſuch thing) made head againſt them, & went to charge thē on the right hand, Tanuſee on the left hand; & the footmen frō a loft out of thoſe ragged & woddy places of the mountains, where they lay in ambuſh deſcending ſuddenly vpon thē, all at one inſtant, with great fury did beat them downe & ouerthrow them: neuertheleſſe they did abide, ſurpriſed

rather with a kind of admiration & aſtoniſhment, then of any certaine reſolution to endure the fight. But when they ſaw that neceſſitie did enforce them, & that the furieConflict betwene the Turkes and the Epirots. of the Chriſtians did vrge thē to do their beſt: then ſetting ſpurs to their horſes, with ſingular fierceneſſe they got poſſeſſion of the mountaine: where firſt lifting vp their lances, & caſting thē againſt the enemy (as if they had bin darts) for that the vprightnes of the place, the vneuennes of the ground, & being withall very ſteepe, did not ſuffer them otherwiſe to helpe themſelues with thoſe weapons: they kept the ſouldiers for a time from cōming neere them. But Peic Manuel being gotten vpon the hill onPeic Manuel. the other ſide, with a company of footmen (of which 200. were archers, & as many crosbowes) did ſoone beate them off the place & droue them downe with more then good ſpeed. Beneath were they beſet on all ſides with our forces, & aboue them did the intollerable violence of the ſhot ſo gaull them, that there was ſcarce any free place for the miſerable wretches to get forth. In this extremity, drawing forth their Cimitaries & deuiding thēſelues into two troupes, deſperately they ruſhed vpon their enemies, & (as men that had cloſed their eyes againſt all perils) with a greater ſlaughter of their companies they oppoſed themſelues to the blowes & ſwords of the enemy. But it was no difficult matter for the greater to beat back the leſſer nūber: & for men freſh & ſound, to put them to the retreat who were wery & ſore trauelled: eſpecially in the right ſide, where Scanderbeg himſelf with a groſſe troup, both of horſe & foot armed with pikes did ſtand in manner of a wall or ſtrong bulwarke. This was an occaſion that the Turks did altogether reſolue thēſelues to try the vttermoſt of their valure: & therfore ioining themſelues cloſe together in one ſtrong ſquadron, they gaue in vpon the left ſide, and with an equal & deſperate kind of fury, they made thēſelues way with their ſwords, euen through the midſt of our battallion: and thus purchaſing thēſelues a paſſage with great loſſe & bloudſhed, the remnant fighting & flying al at once, prouided for their owne ſafety. Then began a ſudden confuſion, and the Albanois forſaking both their ranks & the keeping of the mountain, (euery man forgetting all other matters) tooke care only to purſue the vanquiſhed, & made haſt to the executiō, laboring by all means poſſible to make the others alſo in their fight copartners of the like mortall calamity & bloudy ſlaughter. In that tumult (when they ſought to iſſue thorough the enemy) more were beaten downe & ouerthrowen, by their owne weight & the armes of their fellowes, then by the power of the aduerſary. Notwithſtanding there eſcaped of them litle leſſe then 2000. the reſidue remained behind for a gage, and their carkaſſes (whileſt they were yet panting) being diſpoiled, were left naked vponThe victorie of the Epirots againſt 4000. Turkes before Sfetigrade. the ground, in thoſe very places where their deſtiny had laid them. Of thoſe that fled about 80. were taken priſoners, the reſidue were not purſued aboue 20. paces or little more, becauſe of the ſudden retreat ſounded by cōmand of Scanderbeg, who cōtented himſelf with this victory: alleaging that if he ſhould ſuffer his ſouldiers to fulfill their own deſires to the extremity vpon their enemies, there was great danger leſt he ſhold pay dearely for this proſperity. There were won frō the barbarians 3. Enſigns or Cornets (for more had they not brought with thē). The horſes of thoſe which were ſlain being full 1000. or better, did greatly augment & enrich the booty: the reſidue were killed in the fight. Of the vanquiſhers, were 22. only wanting, & about 15. wounded.
            Thus did the Prince of Albany by a notable prey & victory reward & recompence the loſſe of his corne, vpon the bringing whereof into the campe of the Turks, lying before the towne, euery one of thē made great ioy & triumph, expecting hourely that theſe victuallers ſhould haue bin led thither tyed & bound to their appointed puniſhment, & to haue bin offered as a ſacrifice to the vnhappy ghoſts of thoſe 5. who were firſt ſlaine. But when they ſaw afterwards contrarie to their imagination, the maſſacre

and hiddeous ſhew & deformity of ſo great & goodly a companie: of pure deſpite and vaine indignation conceiued, they made great lamentation, and through extreme ſorowThe grieſe and trouble of the Turkiſh campe vpon the ouerthrow of their forces. they ſtood for a time (as men inchaunted and amazed) not without maruellous feare & trembling of all the armie, and doubting leaſt the Chriſtians animated with this proſperous aduenture, ſhould come on with the like ſucceſſe, to force them within their campe. For they ſuſpected that the numbers of our men were much greater, & that all the Prouince had bene in armes before them. Their chiefeſt care therefore was to ſet a good and ſtrong watch ouer all the army, and carefully to arrange euerie companie in order of battell, neere the tents of their ſeuerall commaunders, and to enuiron them round about: and accordingly the bands were parted into their places. Their horſes were kept ſtanding with their bridles on, as if they had bin aſſured that the enemy would haue viſited thē immediatly. But the Albanois was otherwiſe determined, neither did this victory cauſe him to be the more high minded, nor yet made him any thing the more loftie: but he redoubted as much the enemy, as they ſtood in feare & doubt of him: & he did looke euery houre that they ſhould attempt ſomwhat vpon him, to aboliſh the diſhonor of their laſt ouerthrow: and eſpecially for that the report ran firme & conſtant how the army roiall was at hand. This made Scanderbeg to looke to his buſines more carefully, & therfore the firſt thing he did, was (aſſoone as it grew dark night) quietly to truſſe vp baggage & to depart, encamping 5. miles farther from the enemy. The next day before ſunne riſing, he ſent Tanuſee towards Croy, with 50. horſemen & ech of them a varlet, both to haſten away thoſe forces, which he had left there with George Streeſe, and to haue the guiding of that conuoy which was ſent for the conueiance of the horſes and other pillage lately gotten from the enemie, into other places within the Prouince, where he willed they ſhould be tranſported for their more ſafetie and ſecuritie. In 7. daies ſpace was all this ordered & diſpatched, and the whole troupes vnited and incorporated. And yet about two daies before the arriuall of theſe ſupplies to the campe, there came in ſight 5000. Turkes vaunt currours of the armie royall: and a three houres within night they pitched their tentes before Sfetygrade. The day following, about the ſhutting of the euening, thither alſo came Amurath himſelfe in perſon, with the reſt of his armie and all his carriage.
            It was in the yeare of our redemption 1449. and the 9. yeare after that Scanderbeg
               Amurath commeth to the ſiege of Sfetigrade. 1449. had recouered his eſtate, & vpon the 14. day of May: (a time wherin the corne beginning to grow ripe, and the medowes full of graſſe, did yeeld abundance of food and forrage to campes lying in the fields:) the Barbarians do vſually & willingly obſerue that ſeaſon as moſt fit for the wars, eſpecially in forreigne expeditions. This was it alſo that moued the Ottoman expreſly to forbid his ſouldiers to waſte or ſpoile any thing within the enemies country, nor to tread down their corne, to the intent whē it ſhold grow ripe & be readie to reape, it might ſerue for the prouiſion of his army. The Ottoman at his arriuall before Sfetygrade did make a glorious ſhew & oſtentation of all his forces before the towne: and this he ſeemed to do not without any reaſon, but vpon good conſideration & aduiſe, both becauſe it is the cuſtome of that Nation, & to the intent he might by the ſight therof terrifie the inhabitants. Firſt of all, the ſquadrons of his footmen, & the Aſappy were ſet in order: after them the horſmen, the Tymariots,Aſappi, footmē commaunded vpon the Prouinces at three duckats a moneth. the Subaſſys, the Saniackes and other Chieftaines euery one in their place marching before him, went in this order round about the walles, making great triumph with military cries & loud clamors, which were ſeconded alſo with the thundring & cracking noiſe of the artillery & great ordinance. This done, they went to prouide their lodging, & faſtning their enſignes on the ground, pitched their tents in diuers places. The greateſt part of the infanterie and common ſouldiers, were encamped at the foot 
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
the neighbour woods neere adioyning the towne, for feare of ſome ambuſhmentes which might be laide behinde them. Afterwardes by a poſterie gate named the Dibran, he admitted the ambaſſadors into the towne. The Baſſa onely with three ſouldiersAmbaſſadors of Amurath admitted into Sfetygrade, deliuer their meſſage in an open councell. and two of his ſeruants, were receiued in, and they were conducted through the middeſt of the market place into the Church of the virgine Marie, where (the councell being appointed to be helde) none but the auncients and the principall of the towne were called or aſſembled: for all the younger ſort were excluded, leaſt that any mutinie ſhould ariſe among them. The Turkes Embaſſadour pretending that it was his part to ſpeake, becauſe he had procured the parley: at the very firſt, enforced himſelfe by a number of flattering and entiſing ſpeeches to purchaſe credite with the citizens, and to gaine their fauour and good liking. He beganne with the examples of many cities and Nations, diſcourſing in all points ſo well and eloquently, that you could not haue reprehended him in anie thing, ſaue onely (the more to terrifie them) he extolled beyond all meaſure & humaine capacitie, the power and puiſſance of the king his maiſter. Perlat made him aunſwere ſaying, That he had eloquentlyThe worthie anſwere of Perlat to the, Turkiſh Embaſſadour. and excellently well pleaded this matter, had it not beene to ſuch men whoſe courages were reſolutely determined, and whoſe hearts were vowed to the maintenance of their libertie. That all of them could be well and willingly content to yeeld to his demaunds, if either the bootleſſe threates and menaces of Ottoman and their enemies, could preuaile with their couragious hearts: or that the commaund or Seigniorie of Scanderbeg were grieuous and yrkeſome vnto them. But neither could they charge him for his part with any miſdeed or ill deſert, neither did they know wherein Amurath had benefited them, whereby they ſhould be drawen to preferre a ſtranger before a citizen, an enemie before a friend, or an Infidell before a Chriſtian. That the Sultan ſhould doe, aſſay, and enterpriſe what he could by armes: that he ſhould by the ſword ſeeke to terrifie the defendants: that he ſhould not ſpare to batter their wals. In briefe, that he ſhould firſt of all make a maſſacre of their bodies, and lay their dead carkaſſes in huge heapes, to ſee if the inhabitants terrified and feared with this ſpectacle, would then come vnto him vppon their knees, and proſtrate themſelues at his feete, to graunt them theſe conditions of peace and compoſition. That for the preſent he held it a thing infamous and meerely rediculous, to abaſe and ſubmit their heartes to ſo great an indignitie: before ſuch time as they had ſeene the enſignes of the enemie to make proofe of their valure againſt their wals and bulwarkes: before the ſouldiers had preſented them with any skirmiſh: before they ſaw any ſignes of lamentations, of wounds, or of bloudſhed among their owne people: and before ſuch time as they did perceiue, either the frame of their walles diſioynted, or their towne diſpoyled, and made naked of her flankers and defences. That Amurath ſhould doe much better to quite himſelfe of the daily cares and vnquietnes of the warres, to take his way back againe to Andrinople, to raiſe his ſiege from before the towne, and to ſpend the reſidue and end of his life and aged yeares, quietly at home, and not any longer to prouoke and incenſe by his armes, a people who is fatall vnto him: and whoſe faith and excellent fidelitie in the conſeruation of their libertie, and whoſe ſingular affection and deuotion to their lordes both in publique and in priuate, he had often tried and approued with ſo much bloudſhed, and the ruine of his owne ſouldiers and ſubiects. That he for his part, as long as his life laſted, would neuer forſake or abandon the deuoire and dutie of his faith once ſworne vnto his Prince: nor the towne which he had committed to his cuſtodie and protection. That he helde it ſufficient and ample recompence, and reputed it honor ynough for him, if he did either ſuruiue to ſee his countrie ſafe and preſerued, or (if it ſhould happen to come to ruine and deſtruction)

then ſhould the ſtrength of his right arme neuer ceaſe to ſeeke the reuenge of the publique libertie, till ſuch time (as keeping cōpanie among the dead bodies of his friends) his innocent ſoule did paſſe and depart away to the libertie of a better countrie.
            
            This his anſwer and the aſſembly did finiſh both at once: for the great men and magiſtrates of the towne there preſent, all with one voice and with infinite commendations,The Turke his meſſengers returne in raine from the town. (extolling the ſpeech of the Gouernor) did generally approue it, and concluded on it accordingly. The Turke his meſſengers holding it but loſt time to vſe any further ſpeeches vnto ſuch deafe eares: and ſeeing the aſſembly broken vp and diſſolued, they iſſued out of the temple: the Gouernour followed after them, accompanied with thoſe of his companie. And (becauſe it was neare dinner time) after he had feaſted and entertained them daintily with great magnificence and ſumptuouſly, conueighing them to the towne gate; he there diſmiſſed them, and they returned to their campe.
            The aſſurance and grauitie of the Sfetigradians, together with the prudence of their Commander being vnderſtood by the Ottoman did not a litle moue him. The like did the abundance of all good prouiſions marked within the towne by the Ambaſſadors: for it abounded in ſuch plentie, that they had not onely to ſuffice for their neceſſitie, but euen with exceſſe and ſuperfluity. And Perlat had cauſed them purpoſely to make ſhew thereof throughout the ſtreetes, in the view and ſight of the Barbarians:Policie of Perlat. to the intent that relation being made thereof afterwards to the grand Senior, it might take from him all hope to gaine the towne by long perſeuerance of the ſiege or by the diſcommoditie of hunger and famine. The Sultan therefore being mightily enflamed with anger and ſpite, that ſo ſmall and vile a caſtle, ſo paultry a hamlet, and a handfull (as it were) of robbers there incloſed, ſhould dare to preſcribe lawes vnto him for the warre: and to take vpon them to counſell him in his affaires, and ſpecially for that by an vſuall prouerbe (as it were) they termed themſelues fatall and vnconquered: and perceiuing now by theſe ſpeeches, that there was no other meanes and remedie for him to tame them, but onely by the rigor and extremitie of armes: he cauſed preſently to be aſſembled within his owne tent his Baſſaes, his councellors, & all other perſons who were of anie degree and reputation in war, to deuiſe ſecretly with them vpon the beſt & fitteſt meanes to aſſault the place: and hauing heard their ſeuerall opinions propounded in the councell, he debated and diſcourſed long and at large concerning the ſame: and thereupon order was immediatly taken by his commaund (for the parting and diſtributing both to one and other) of diuerſe things which ſeemed needfull and requiſite to that ſeruice. The reſt of the preparations, and the aſſault of the towne, was put off and deferred to the day following, becauſe the greateſt part of the daye was neare paſt and ſpent.
            The end of the fourth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               SFetigrade is battered, and aſſaulted by the Turkes. Scanderbeg giueth a Canuazado to the Turkish campe, making a great ſlaughter of the Infidels. Amurath appointeth Feribaſſa with an armie to reſiſt the inuaſions of Scanderbeg, for the ſafetie of his campe. The battell betweene Feribaſſa and Scanderbeg, and their priuate combat, wherein Feribaſſa is ſlaine by Scanderbeg, and the Turkes defeated. Amurath practiſeth the winning of Sfetygrade by treaſon, which he effecteth by a ſtrange accident. The garriſon of the Dibrians vpon a ſuperſtitious conceite, yeelde the towne to Amurath, who hauing fortified Sfetigrade, leaueth Epire, and returneth to Andrinople.
            
            
               THE arriuall of the Turkiſh Emperour, and the report of his huge and mightie armie, had alreadie filled with feare and terror all the people of Epire, eſpecially the Princes and Potentates next adioyning, who were in great doubt and care leaſt that ſo inſolent & redoubtable an enemie (hauing once ſwallowed vp this towne already beſieged) ſhould bring the others afterwardes to the ſame eſtate and condition, and reduce them to the tenour of the like calamitie. Wherefore accordingly as it was reſolued in their ſecret aſſemblies and conſultations, albeit they had before prouided for moſt things requiſite, both for the ſtuffing of their holds with ſtrong garriſons, & for the gard of the ſtreights & paſſages for their countrey: they ſent notwithſtanding from all partes Ambaſſadours to Scanderbeg entreating him not to ſuffer Amurath any longer to vexe and tyrannize ouer the townes of Albania at his pleaſure, and with ſuch impunitie. For if by any miſhappe the proud tyrant ſhould happen to haue his will of Sfetigrade, it was moſt certaine that taking the ſame as a happie preſage of his victorie, and as a baite of his fierceneſſe and crueltie, he would not leaue till he had brought them all vnder the ſame yoke, and to endure the like fortune: and yet they wiſhed him in the meane while to haue a care and good regard, not to attempt alone, and with ſo few men the forces of the enemie, nor ſo weakely accompanied to prouoke them to the fight,The Princes of Epire offer Scanderbeg their aid and furtheran e for the repulſe of the Turke. whoſe campe was ſo vnmeaſurable great and mightie: becauſe that could not be but with the ſingular inconuenience and greater perill of them all in generall. They offered him likewiſe armes, horſemen, munition, and whatſoeuer elſe ſhould ſerue their turne, for the remouing of ſuch a flood and deluge before that it ſhould endanger all of them to be ouerwhelmed with the rage thereof. That they thought themſelues ſufficiently

defended and in ſafetie, if they could at this time free & acquite him from the greatnes of that perill: vpon whom did depend both the peaceable and quiet poſſeſſion of their Seigniories and empire, and the preſeruation of them all in generall: as alſo the whole ſtrength and aſſured ſtay of all the prouince, and the perpetuall glorie of the Albanois.
            The Ambaſſadors thus charged with theſe inſtructions, and many other particular teſtimonies of the readie and perfect good will and affections of the confederates, tooke their way directly to the mountaines of Sfetigrade, where they knew that the Prince of Albanie had pitched his campe, albeit he were at that time abſent. For aſſoone as euer the troupes of the Ottoman were arriued in Epire; and that the bruite of ſo great a puiſſance, and ſo new an accident had filled the eares and mindes of euery man with feare and terror: Scanderbeg (accompanied only with Tanuſee, and George
               Scanderbeg ſecretly diſguiſed goeth about viſiting & comforting all the places of his prouince. 
               Streeſe, and tenne other choſen men of his garde: and (apparelled as he was wont) with the ſimple caſſocke of a common ſouldier, had ſecretly conueighed himſelfe from his army to goe and viſit thoſe townes of the prouince which were nigheſt to the daunger; and to confirme and ſtrengthen them in their faith and obeiſance, who were any thing diſmayed or diſcomforted, knowing well, (that in ſo new and freſh a caſe of danger, the mindes of men would be maruellouſly caſt downe and appalled, by reaſon of ſo ſtrange a commotion, and by the rumors (though for the moſt parte falſe) encreaſing daily: and that therefore he might greatly remedie the perplexitie & timerouſnes of their counſailes and imaginations: and thoſe which ſhould in any ſort ſtaggar and be readie to fall away, might be confirmed and reeſtabliſhed in their ancient vigour and courage, and in the accuſtomed conſtancie of their faith and loyaltie. Of all this which he had ſo purpoſed and conceiued, he forgot not, nor left any thing vnaccompliſhed. For beginning at Croie (as the chiefeſt place of his realme and his chiefeſt care) he ſent for Vranocontes to come vnto him to the citie gate with aScanderbeg encourageth Vranocontes & the Croians. certaine number of ſouldiers, and all the principall citizens (for he would not that any man ſhould enter within the towne) and there he enforced himſelfe with a kind of ſuperfluous care (according to the briefe inſtance and haſtie occaſion of the time) by the diſcourſe of many things to incite them, and (as a man might ſay) to ſpurre them forward in their deuoire. But he receiued from the Gouernor a notable anſwer: the recitall whereof (as well beſeeming and worthy of his ſound faith and loialty) I ſee no reaſon why we ſhould omit: or by an vngratefull kinde of ſilence, to defraud ſo great and honorable a perſon of his deſerued praiſe and commendation. For at theAnſwer of Vranocontes to Scanderbeg. firſt bluſh ſhewing himſelfe as one full of indignation & diſcontentment for his comming thither, he thus ſpake vnto him.
            It had bene much better at this inſtant (ô Scanderbeg) if the Croians had ſeene 
                  Amurath himſelfe, and the ſhew of that his glorious and excellent armie (which thou telleſt vs of) then to ſee thee heere as thou art at this preſent: for this is certaine that as thy ſpeech is nothing pleaſing nor agreeable vnto vs, neither in generall nor in particular: ſo is thy comming at this time no leſſe grieuous and diſcontenting vnto vs. For what could the ſight or the hearing of the enemy haue done, either more to haue troubled the mindes of men that are couragious, or to haue worſe offended the harts of thoſe that are fierce and generous? We are now at that point, and ſuch is our loue and deuotion towardes thee, and to the dignitie of the eſtate of Albanie: that as long as theſe troubles ſhall continue within this prouince: and as long as Amurath ſhall preuaile or haue any authoritie with his armed forces in Epire: it ſhalbe more pleaſing, and farre more acceptable vnto vs beyond compariſon, to ſee the face & countenance of the enemy, then to haue thy preſence and company: becauſe thou bringeſt vs nothing

but ſecret plaintes and doubtfull feares, as though we were enclining to a reuolt, or that we were like to proue diſloyall, wheras the preſence of our enemy could not but miniſter vnto vs good and fit matter to merit praiſe and commendation, and might yeeld ſome notable and worthie experience of our fidelitie, and be a perpetuall occaſion for the purchaſe of renowme and glorie.
            
               Caſtriot knew not what to ſay here againſt, but only to purge and excuſe himſelfe: telling him that he came not thither to vſe anie exhortations vnto them, but onely to aduertiſe them how all things ſtood. And thereupon after he had embraced the Gouernour, he tooke his leaue both of him and of his ſouldiers, and ſo paſſed onwardes to other places: where finding all things according to his deſire, he left them as hee found them: and retyring towards his armie, he came to his campe ſomewhat before day, being extremely wearie through the long trauell of his iourney. Yet aſſoone as he perceiued that the Ambaſſadors of the league did there attend him, he had ſcarcelyAmbaſſadours from the Princes of Epire to Scanderbeg, offering him aide againſt the Turkes. taken time to refreſh himſelfe, but that he gaue them audience in the full and open aſſembly of his Captaines and other the principall perſons of his campe, willing them freely to make knowen the ſumme of their Ambaſſade which they had in charge. The which being declared and heard, Scanderbeg by the common aduiſe of all in generall, both highly commended the willing mindes of their Lords and maiſters: and gaue them great thankes for their good affections, and eſpecially for that they ſhewed themſelues to haue, the ſafetie and reputation both of his perſon and of the countrie of Epire in ſuch care and recommendation. As touching the ſuccours which they offredAnſwere of Scanderbeg to the Ambaſſadors of the Albanian Princes. him, his anſwere was: That they ſhould be of good courage, that his intent was not for that time to vſe any greater forces againſt the enemie, nor (all things being as yet in good caſe) to diſarme the flankes of his confederates: but he would wiſh them in the meane while to be ready prepared, and to haue a good eye to the Ottoman: for that it was very difficult to diſcouer the enterprizes and counſels of one ſo trecherous and diſloial: that aſſoone as good occaſion were offered him to enterprize any thing, he would not faile ſpeedily and beyond their expectation, with ſuch forces as he had to inuade him: & when the neceſſitie of his affaires ſhould exact it, or that the importance of a greater danger, or the occaſion of a ſet battell did require it: that then he would vſe their aide and readie ſuccours as farre forward as his owne forces. Theſe things thus diſpatched, the tables were couered after the ſouldiers faſhion: and after that they had refreſhed themſelues, and had bene honorably rewarded with great preſents: about the ninth houre of the morning they were licenſed to depart.
            Whileſt that matters did thus paſſe on by conſultations: and that Scanderbeg rather with wordes then deedes did ſeeme to inuade the Turkiſh Prince; the other beganne the battery againſt Sfetigrade, which though it had bene long deferred, yetSfetigrade battered by the Turkes. was it fully concluded & agreed on. He placed therefore two pieces of artillerie of exceeding greatnes (for he had brought no more with him) vpon a certaine high place directly againſt the towne, where the walles were moſt open and diſcouered. Three whole daies together did the thundering of the cannon continue; by which time hauing made a large and wide breach, the Sultan imagined preſently, that his enſignes the next morning would haue cleared the breach: and (by reaſon that it was of a great largeneſſe) both the flanckers, and the wall being on all ſides beaten downe and ouerthrowen, he was fully perſwaded, and did in a manner promiſe to himſelfe: that his ſouldiers might eaſily enter the towne: and that (notwithſtanding any reſiſtance or deuiſe which the defendants ſhould vſe againſt them) they ſhould not be able to hold them out, but that they would get the poſſeſſion of the place. Of all this, Scanderbeg had notice the ſame night by his eſpials, and by ſuch as were appointed to keepe the

watch in ſeuerall places thereabouts: and therefore giuing a neere coniecture of the ſecret intent and purpoſe of Amurath: he was at the firſt in ſome doubt and miſtruſt, leaſt they within the towne being preſſed with the exceeding multitudes of the aſſailants ſhould not be able and of ſufficient power to repulſe them: beſides that the ruine of the wall on that ſide, did augment this his feare and ſuſpition. Wherefore after he had debated many matters in his mind, he concluded at length, that he would diuert and take vpon himſelfe ſome part of the perill and of their labours: & that he would ſomewhat eaſe the beſieged of their trauels. About midnight therefore (taking withScanderbeg approcheth nearer to the Turkiſh camp. him victuals for one day onely and no more, and leauing all the reſt of the baggage in his campe) he went to entrench himſelfe within fiue myles of the enemie, in the ſame place where he had laſt layed his ambuſcado. But he ſent before him, two of the chiefeſt of his nobilitie Muſache, and Gnirize de Vladrenne (men of a notable and ſingular conceipt and ſubtiltie) to take a view of the camp of the enemie, and to marke what courſe they would take in the aſſault: he himſelfe in the meane time abode there ſtill without any noiſe, till ſuch time as they returned, that he might then reſolue vpon his proceedings accordingly.
            About the ſeauenth houre in the morning was the returne of theſe gentlemen to their Generall: and at the ſame time, the Aſappi and Ianiſſaries (men that contemned and regarded no perils) were brought foorth of their trenches: and being armed of purpoſe with a notable reſolution, they marched vp the mountaine. The horſemen for all that they could doe, were not able to get aboue ſome three ſteppes aboue the bottome and foote of the hill, by reaſon of the ſteepeneſſe and roughneſſe of the place:Sfetygrade aſſaulted. and therfore ſtanding there aloofe, and ſhooting with their arrowes towards them, they did rather feare then repell the defendants at the breach, whileſt the raskall multitude and vile and baſer ſort of the Turkes, were drawen on to preſent themſelues to the firſt furie of the Chriſtians: to the intent that they being tyred and wearied with the killing of theſe ſlaues and raskals: and the citizens being otherwiſe occupied and drawn away with eſcaladoes, from the defence of the places aſſigned to their cuſtody,A ſtratageme vſuall amongſt the Turkes. the others might afterwards find the leſſe reſiſtance, and with the geater eaſe make themſelues maiſters of the rampiers, which by this meanes might be diſfurniſhed of all defence. This was it that was attempted on that ſide where the violence of the cannon had made the breach. But the ſudden mounting of the place being of it ſelfe naturally vpright and ſteepe riſing, did eaſily beat backe the aſſailants; who at ech ſtroke that was giuen them (were it neuer ſo litle) were turned vpſide downe by the defendants: who alſo had ſpent all the night in repairing and fortifying of the breach, by caſting vp a rampier or countermure in faſhion of a platforme: which they trimmed with plancks, boords, and baskets made of oſiers, and well ſupported and borne vp with ſtrong poſtes faſtened round about, and with great heapes of ſtones: ſo that the verie height and downefall of the place, did make their dartes and other ſhot (being but weakely throwen and deliuered) either to flie ſtaggering and without any force: or to be beaten downe backewardes vpon thoſe which preſſed forward: who could ſcarcely find any ſtay or reſt, or any plaine or ſmooth place to get themſelues footing, as they preſſed to the aſſault, nor yet to ſtop and ſtay their bodies as they tumbled and rolled downe when they had the repulſe. On the other ſides of the towne, and eſpecially towards the gates where the place was more plaine and open, and where the riſing and falling of the ground did ſeeme more eaſie and pleaſant for the ſouldiours; there the Aſappi with their targets and pauiſhes were placed round about in the forefront: behind them were appointed two great and choſen ſquadrons of hargabuſſiers and croſſe-bowes who with the thicke ſhowers (as it were) of their quarels

and deadly bullets, might make them within to quit and abandon the defence of their walles: to the intent the Ianiſſaries, who followed after them, might the more eaſily carie the place, and make themſelues maiſters of the towne by the helpe of their ſcaling ladders: with the which they preſſed forwarde ſo furiouſly, and with a countenance ſo reſolute and obſtinate, that forgetting all care and feare both of wounds, or yet of death: ſome of them whole and ſound, others wounded and may med in their approch to the walles, were now gotten vp and had laid hold vppon the toppe of the battelments. For on that ſide, the walles had not felt the diueliſh rage and furie of the Cannon: neither had they any other helpe or receipt (as it appeared) to carrie the place but onely by a ſcalado. But notwithſtanding all this their labour and ſtriuing, by how much the higher they were gotten from the ground in skaling of the walles, ſo much the leſſe force had they to keep their ſtand. For many of them being ouerborne with their proper weight, and the burthen of their owne heauineſſe, did tumble downe to the ground with their heeles vpwardes, and their ladders vpon them, the ſame being broken with the ouergreat weight of thoſe that clymed on them. Others hauing their fingers cut off, were enforced to forgo their hold: and ſo their weapons falling firſt out of their hands, themſelues followed after, and their bodies tumbled likewiſe. But the chief and principall furie of the fight was with ſtones and ſuch like, which being caſt downe from alofte with exceeding great noyſe and offence, did mightily both ſpoile and encomber the aſſailants, their armour, and all other their furniture. How beit though there fell continually innumerable with their heades downewards, yet was the number of the aſſailants nothing diminiſhed, but ſtill there came others freſh and luſtie in the place of thoſe which were wounded or wearied, who ſucceeding into their roomes, did ſtill maintaine the aſſault, ruſhing furiouſly ouer the carkaſſes, and through the bloud of thoſe that lay dead, with a greater deſire of reuenge, then of any great hope to preuaile: and without any apprehenſion or feare of death, and with an herrible noiſe and tumult, they made haſt to ſeize on the battelments, and by their ouermuch haſtineſſe & ſtriuing to mount ech before other (euerie one not being able to get vp with the firſt) the one of them did (as it fell out) hinder and hurt the other. Concerning the beſieged, as they had no want of armes and munition, ſo you may imagine that their force and ſtrength did no way faile them: beſides that, the place did greatly fauor them in all points, and did ſeeme to yeeld ſuccour vnto it ſelfe. Moreouer they had certaine pauiſhes and thicke plancks extended in the forme of bucklers to keepe off the ſhot and blowes of the enemie, to the intent that the ſouldiers ſtanding behind them cloſe and in couert, might the better maintaine the defence of the places aſſigned them: and euerie man might the more frankly employ himſelfe to the diſcharge of his deuoire and dutie. Many of the Turks might haue bene taken aliue, by reaſon that their ladders being exceeding long and high, their bodies were euen aboue the toppes of the walles: and ſome of them alſo hauing left their armour behind them were mounted vp vnarmed: becauſe the waight therof would haue hindred them, if they had come otherwiſe to the aſſault. But no man had any mind or care of the liuing more then of the dead: for feare leaſt if in the heat and furie of the fight, they ſhould haue had anie deſire to reſerue the enemies for theirTurks repulſed from the aſſault of Sfetigrade. priſoners, or to couet after gaine and bootie, the towne might haue bene fooliſhly loſt by their negligence and auarice. This was in a maner the whole proofe of the valure and deuoire ſhewed by the Barbarians in the firſt and ſecond aſſault, from the which ſeeing themſelues repulſed with ſhame and ignominie: and beginning now to perceiue their bootles and vaine aſſaies, and their fooliſh deſire how they ran headlong to ſeeke their owne deaths, euerie man comming to conſider his proper wounds, and

the ſtreames of bloud which ran downe their bodies: then (their corages being ſomewhat abated) they began to mitigate their furious and beaſtly fiercenes, their blowes grew to be more faint: and they fought not with their wonted ſtomack, their choller was well cooled, and they went not ſo hotly on to the aſſault, becauſe by litle and litle their forces failed them: and (as it is commonly ſeene) men going continually vpwards and mounting ſtill aloft, do waxe faint and weary, and do looſe their breath in going. Notwithſtanding the Baſſaes & other the roial leaders being at their backs, ſolliciting and encoraging them, ſometimes with good words, and ſometimes with rough ſpeeches and menaces, did enforce thē (weary as they were) to paſſe on againſt the enemy: and if any were ouerſlow and lazy in their march, they would with blowes driue and force them on, beating them with cudgels or baſtinados in moſt cruell maner. Wherupon thus conſtrained, they went on again to the aſſault; & drawing on their fainting and wearied bodies againſt the enemy, they came to the wals almoſt tired: where they continued in fight, though to no great purpoſe, til by litle & litle growing to be ſpent, they yeelded vp their miſerable ghoſts in the ſight of the Chriſtians. Many of them (as their ſoules were departing from their bodies) being dragged away by the feete, their fellowes (whileſt they endeuored by ſo charitable a deed to conuay them to their tents & to ſaue them from the fury of the citizens) prouiding for others better then for their owne ſafety, were themſelues mortally wounded from the wals: by meanes whereof they tumbled and fell vpon their companions half dead & almoſt breathles: and were reduced to the ſame, if not to a worſe plight & condition. The Sfetigradians the meane while aloft vpon the wals making ſhew by their loud clamors and pleaſant ieſts, that they were the victors, did with open mouth mocke & deride the aſſailants, which did not a litle exaſperate their griefe, and renue the ſorrow of their miſchaunce.
            The Sultan himſelfe being not able to endure this iniury, nor to ſuffer it without reuenge,Feribaſſa ſent with a new ſ
                     •
                  pplie to renué the aſſault. ſent a ſupply of 3000. men vnder the leading of Feribaſſa, who being one of his moſt ſufficient captains, was gretly renowmed for the great ſtrength & dexterity of his body and of his mind: and he furniſhed him with an infinit number of ſcaling ladders and other warlike engines of all ſorts. Immediatly hereupon the noiſe grew to be appeaſed within the towne, and their ſtill ſilence arguing a new feare & doubt, did recall the ſoldier to a more difficult and harder peece of ſeruice, & to the beginning of a new labor. Wherfore both the ſpirits and the eies of all men were intentiue to receiue, and to repell the aſſailantes, and to trouble them in their proceeding, keeping them aloofe from the wals at the beginning, with force of arrows, quarrels, harguebuſſe, & all other kind of ſhot, whereby they might be hindered from making their approches. But perceiuing that notwithſtāding al their deuoir, they marched cloſe on with their enſigns without all fear, and that they made roūdly to the wals; they threw downe vpon them huge peeces of timber, and ſtore of ſtones both ſmall and great, beſides artificiall fires, as baskets and fagots nointed with oile and pitch, and ſo ſet on fire: in ſuch ſort that the Infidels being ſore terrified with the fiercenes of the fire, whileſt ſome of them haſted to quench it, and others to auoid it, they could not preſent any great number of ladders againſt the wall: and of thoſe which were ſet vp, the moſt part were burnt and fired. During this contention and confuſed noiſe, their commander himſelfe with part of his troupes, ſomewhat remoued from thence, hauing ſlaine ſome of the defendantes, had raiſed vp ladders againſt that part of the wall, where fighting eagerly & incenſing his ſouldiers with often admonitions, he encoraged thē to enter in on that ſide which was almoſt naked and void of defence. There wanted not in the ſoldier obedience nor readines, nor in the common ſort forwardnes or corage: but of themſelues they were ſufficiently enflamed. For al of them pricked on with an exceeding fury, & almoſt enraged,

as if the one of them had enuied the other) they did ſtriue to purchaſe the credit to be the firſt man that ſhould enter: well knowing what high fortune and rewardes, (beſides the crowne due vnto him that firſt got vpon the wall) were prepared for that man that could attaine therunto. But Perlat with a good number of Dibrians, running ſpeedily to the place, and filling it with freſh men in ſtead ofthoſe which had bin ſlain, did ſoone diſappoint both the exhortations of the Turkiſhe commander, and the endeuors of the ſouldiers. For bringing a whole ſhoure and tempeſt (as it were) of ſhot vpon them, both the aſſailants were by that meanes oppreſſed, and all their engines and other prouiſions were broken in ſunder and diſperſed. Therupon began the cry to be renued within the towne, & the Infidels were repulſed with greater fear then danger: for but 30. were ſlaine of that cōpany, and about 18. of them wounded. Notwithſtanding, they deſiſted not frō purſuing the aſſault by all other means, till ſuch time as they heard the retrait ſounded: and yet was it only a meere obſtinacy and a moſt wilful humor that made thē ſo to perſeuer: and ſhame rather then corage preſſed them forwards on al parts: ſo that the Chriſtians had good and ſufficient leiſure to refreſh them ſelues.
            But the ſodaine comming of Scanderbeg did ſoone after yeelde them ſome more aduantageScanderbeg goeth to inuade the campe of the Turke before Sfetigrade to refreſh them: for the approch of their friends gan now to be diſcouered, & the thicknes of the duſt with the great noiſe made through the trampling of their horſes, did euidently bewray their comming to the eies and eares of euery man. The long ſtay of our men (for before their arriuall the aſſault had continued more then 3. long houres) grew vppon this occaſion: becauſe after many opinions debated in counſell, it had bene aduiſed as the ſureſt and ſafeſt courſe, that the firſt onſet to be giuen vpon the enemy, ſhould be protracted a while: till ſuch time as the Turkes hauing left their tents void & empty, ſhould employ the forces of their whole camp againſt Sfetigrade, and that euery man ſhould be buſied in his particular charge and duty, ſuppoſing that then would be the fitteſt time to make them yeeld an accompt of their expedition, and to quit the aſſault which they had vndertaken. But the prouident Ottoman was not found ſo negligent and ſleeping, neither did this Emperour (being ſo wiſe and polliticke) ſhew himſelfe faulty in ſo groſſe an ouerſight & abſurdity, as to make head with his chiefeſt ſtrength againſt the towne, and to leaue his back bare & open in the mean time to the mercy of the Albanois. For the truth is, he had placed a ſtrong & mighty court of gard about 500. paces from the wals: in the midſt whereof himſelfe ſtood enuironnedAmurath his pollicy and great prouidence. with his ordinary gard, both as a ſurueior and encourager of his people; and beſides he had prouided a ſtrong battallion of yong men purpoſely picked and choſen to the number of 15000. all horſemen, to whom he had giuen in charge to courſe vp and downe, and to diſcouer all places, and on all partes, for feare leaſt ſome ſtur and tumult might be raiſed behinde them at their backes. Nowe Scanderbeg hauing gotten within 2. miles of the enemy with 7000. good horſe, & 3000. foote, he had according to his cuſtome, made a deuiſion of his companies, appointing Moſes to lie in an ambuſcado with all his footmen, and 2000. horſe, to preuent the diuerſe inconueniences which might fortune to befall him. He himſelfe with the reſt of his horſemen, taking the wide and open champion, did march on with great fury and violence againſt the enemy, and with a great and notable cry before he came to the encounter, he added corage to the beſieged, & diſcomforted the aſſailants. Therewithall the Battallion roiallConflict of Scā
                  derbeg with the Turkes. of the Turkiſh horſemen, which (as I haue ſayd before) ſtood there ranged to that intent and purpoſe, with all ſpeed went to meet him, and with a ful careere made head againſt them. The Albanois nothing abaſhed at their great multitude, but keeping cloſe in good order of battell, went to the charge with ſuch brauery, that at the verie firſt onſet, they beate them backe and diſordered them: and many of them being entermingled

in fight together, did with their ſwords or cimitaries rudely and fiercely entertaine each other. The Infidels holding good for a time, by reaſon of their numbers only, did within a while recuile all together, and caſting away all ſhame by a fearefull kinde of flight, by litle and litle did ſeeme to confeſſe, that the Epirots were no men for them to deale withall. Whereof as ſoone as their Prince had knowledge, and ſeeing that he fought on all ſides with ſo great misfortune and bad ſucceſſe, (as if God himſelf had bene againſt him) he commanded preſently to ſound a retrait: and pointing with his finger to the ſmall number of the Chriſtians, he ſpake thus vnto his ſouldiers.
            What a ſhame and reproach is this (ꝙ he?) what? hath ſo ſmall a troupe of theeues
                  Speeches of Amurath reproching his ſouldiers flying from Scanderbeg. and robbers had the power to make & ſee you turne your backs? Nay, I my ſelfe haue ſeene it alſo, which (if you were men of any valour) would make you bluſhe for verie ſhame. What? haue your enemies, euen the Gods at their command? and do they cary victory with them in their boſomes? and haue you nothing but your ſwordes (and thoſe vnprofitable) and your hands dead and without life, and your bodies feeble and ſubiect to the ſword and iniuries of your enemies? Behold how they do yet abide you and ſtirre not a foot from you, wherefore ſtay you? Can you endure that a handfull of ſuch baſe & infamous perſons, ſhould preſent them ſelues as conquerors before your eyes, whom you are able to ſwallow vp whole both horſe and armes? Reuenge your owne bloud (my ſouldiers,) and if the common reputation doe any thing at all moue you, reuenge the deaths of your fellowes and companions, at leaſtwiſe your owne priuate wrongs and iniuries.
            
            Vpon theſe his ſpeaches and exclamations, all of them ſodainely turned their faces towards the enemy, & euery man (leauing al other buſines) ran confuſedly on all ſides: and thoſe alſo which were on the mountaine deſcended to charge the Albanois. But the Prince of Epire would not attend them though they were almoſt breathles & out of order: but retiring ſpeedily to the place prouided for his ſurety, he kept the aduauntage which he had gotten in that encounter, without any loſſe except of one only, and 3. wounded: and ſo came & ioined himſelfe with Moſes, holding that the only way for his ſafegard from the enemy. Of the Turkes there were ſlaine ſome 60. or better, of which number (men ſay) that Scanderbeg ſlue fiue of them with his owne hands. The Barbarians did not purſue them far, becauſe the Sultan doubted of ſome ſecret traine or counterwaits: and the rather, for that he had ſome apparaunt ſigne of the other troupes in the ambuſhment: wherefore he commanded them againe to a ſecond retrait. It was a notable ſight to ſee how in one and the ſame inſtant, the Barbarians on the one partGarriſon within Sfetigrade ſallie out vpon the Turkes. did charge vpon the Chriſtians, and on the other part themſelues were charged at the backes by thoſe of Sfetigrade. The Turkes ſcoffed at Scanderbeg as he retired from the fight, and being not able to hurt him with their ſwordes, they proſecuted him with taunts and villainous ſpeaches. But Perlat on the other ſide was much more troubleſome and deſpitefull vnto them, and did more grieuouſly importune their companions: for he not onely angred thē by the hearing of his quips and fine girding ſpeeches, but he vexed them alſo with good ſtore of blowes at their backes both with pikes, ſhot, and other kinde of weapons. For as ſoone as he perceiued, that at the only name of Scanderbeg, they gaue ouer the aſſault, and deſcended a pace downe the mountaine, he (embracing the occaſion offered him with a traine of three hundreth men quicke and well armed) iſſued out vpon them with a great clamour, and playing vpon them with his ſhot as thicke as haile, he went on beating, killing, and chaſing them euen to the foote of the mountaine.
            Thus was that day moſt vnfortunate to the Ottoman and all his enterpriſes, for that time fell out to be vaine and vnprofitable. The aſſault was broken off, the enemy was

not ſeized vppon, but without any loſſe vaniſhed out of ſight. The audacity of the defendantes was augmented and encreaſed, and the moſt part of the Turke his readieſt and beſt ſouldiers, lay dead before the walles of Sfetigrade, beſides the incredible hauocke and ſpoile of his munitions and artillery, and other prouiſions for the aſſault. For the number of thoſe which were ſlaine in that iourney, was reckoned to be fullNumber of Turkes ſlaine and hurt at the firſt aſſault of Sfetigrade. three thouſand: and more then foure thouſand hurt and wounded, and infinit engines and inſtruments for the warre, were broken in peeces and conſumed with fire. This victory coſt the towns men the loſſe only offorty men: but of them that were wounded the number was very great: yet was there an ineſtimable quantity both of armes and other baggage found before the walles, and caried into the towne, whileſt the enemy was buſied in the purſuite of Scanderbeg, which was ſome amends for the loſſe and dammage they had ſuſtained. For that day the Turke gaue no other attempt, but retiring him ſelfe from before Sfetigrade, he ſpent the whole night in ſorrow and ſadneſſe, ſilent and melancholicke. On the other ſide the Prince of Epire holding him ſelfe ſufficiently contented with this good and happy ſucceſſe, in that this diſcomfiture and repulſe of the enemy, did yeelde ſome time of reſpite to the beſieged, he made no longer ſtay there, then whileſt his ſouldiers muſt of neceſsity to breath themſelues. But he imediately after returned to his firſt campe where hee had left his baggage at his departure, and there his people refreſhed themſelues both with ſleepe and victuals. The next day early, the firſt thing hee did, was, to ſend away meſſengers, who rode poſt to cary the ioyfull newes of the victory of Sfetigrade, both to Vranocontes, and to the other townes and peoples vnder his obeyſance. He him ſelfe the day following with two hundred horſe onely, taking his way through the height of the mountaines, went to take a view of the demeanour and countenaunce of the enemie. All things were there in quiet, and the towne at good reſt: by meanes whereof, being returned to his tentes, he ſoiourned there two dayes longer, and the third day truſsing vp his baggage, he remoued his camp into the vpper Dibria, & there entrenched him ſelfe in a place ſtrongly ſeated and well defended, about fifteene miles from Amurath. The principall cauſe that moued him ſo often to remoue from one place to another,Stratageme of Scanderbeg in often remouing of his campe. was (as I take it) either for feare leaſt the ſouldiers (abiding long in one place certaine) might accuſtome them ſelues to ouermuch idleneſſe: or leaſt the enemy might thereby take ſome courſe and occaſion, either by ſome draught layed, to ſurprize his perſon, or to guard him ſelfe the better from thoſe traines which the enemy ſhould prepare to entrappe him.
            
               Amurath all this while being exceedingly malcontent for the vnhappy euent of this firſt aſſault, and badly digeſting in his ſtomacke the rude repulſe ſuſtained bySfetigrade again battered. them of Sfetigrade: after hee hadde now ſufficiently tormented his thoughts, with vaine conſultations, griefes, and complaintes, once againe hee called together the miniſters of his rage and vengeaunce, charging them diligently to conſider of the ſite of the place, and on what ſide the towne might be beſt inuaded and offended. The place being once aſsigned, he appointed the ordinaunce to be planted againſt it, and then conſumed three whole daies in battering the towne on that ſide, thinking to haue diſmanteled it by the the force of the Canon, but their labour was all in vaine: for albeit on that part the flankers of the wall were beaten downe, and though fortifications which had bene made by hand, did tumble to the ground, yet the excellent and naturallSfetigrade, her naturall ſtrength and ſituation. ſtrength of the place, would not ſuffer it to be forced, neither by any violence or induſtry that could be vſed againſt it. For if it had bene laid wholly open, and no man there to defend it, yet had it not beene poſsible but with great difficulty, as (the ſaying is) by creeping both on hands and feete, for the moſt nimble and actiue perſons to approach

it, much leſſe for men armed and carrying their furniture with them. So craggy, rough, & ful of woods were the mountains, ſo raggedly & vneuen did they ſtand, ſundered each from other, with ſuch variety of turnings and windings in and out, and ſo ſteepe were their bottoms and downefals: that they made the towne being ſeated vpon them, both inacceſsible and impregnable. And againe on the other ſide where it ſeemed more aſſaultable, though the wall might eaſily of it ſelfe haue bene battered, and a breach made, yet right oppoſite againſt it, there preſented it ſelfe a certaine belly of ground, ſwelling (as it were) or riſing vp with a knob in forme of a Boſſe, which running out from the backe of the mountaine, did ſo fitly couer and ſhadow the wall, that from the place where the enemy lay encamped, it was not poſsible to plant their cannon, nor to manage their artillery in any ſort to offend them. But for that both the getting vppe at the firſt approach was very difficult, and becauſe the towne was too neare a neighbour vnto them, they did attempt it though often, yet in vaine: for the beſieged by their ordinary ſallies (being helped with the fauour of the place, did daily hinder them of their intent, breaking the engines all in peeces. And beſides, with their Cannon ſhotte and other artillery from the walles, they did in great ſafety and ſecurity diſappoint the enemy of their purpoſe, and diſturbe the endeuours of the aſſailaunts. Thus on all ſides was their labour loſt, and there was no appearance or hope of any good ſucceſſe, which might encourage the aged Sultan to come to the end of his deſires. Yet was he reſolued to purſue the ſiege to the laſt point: and byAmurath reſolueth to conſume the garriſon of Sfetigrade by often and light skirmiſhes. often and continuall skirmiſhes, to trauell, toile, and weary out the defendauntes without ceaſing: affirming, that this was the beſt and likelieſt way to conſume their forces, and to bring them to nothing: and that though the firſt dayes aſſault had coſt him dearely, yet hadde not the Chriſtians made any great good market, conſidering their ſmall numbers, and that hee both durſt and would make further proofe of that way, though not by the venture and hazard of a generall battell, both becauſe the enemy did by his continuall and dayly inuaſions and canuazadoes keepe him in awe: and the remembraunce of his late diſcomfiture and ouerthrowe, did daily renue his ſorrowes. Thus were the townes men neuer aſſailed, but onely by looſe and light skirmiſhes: and the Ottoman forces did onely watch and lie in waite for ſome good occaſion, amiddeſt their often incurſions, ſodainely and vnprouided to ſurprize the citie. Neuertheleſſe they left not with their ſhotte cach to annoy other aloofe and a farre off: neither did they intermit or giue ouer any of the other ordinary ſeruices accuſtomed and vſed in the ſiege of townes.
            Little or none at all was the dammage and hurt ſuſtained all this while, either on the one ſide or the other: neither was there any exploite done worthy of memorie. There was no new aſſault giuen to the walles, neither were the ſcaling ladders anie more vſed, till ſuch time as certaine Ianiſſaries, ſecretely gotten out of their campe, did perceiue that there was one place of the towne on the other ſide thereof, which being abandonned and vndefended, the inhabitantes thought not needefull to be manned, by reaſon both of the height of the place, which was naturally defended, and in a manner inacceſsible: and the knoppe of the hill being ſeuered and deuided, andTurkes thinke to ſurprize Sfetigrade. ſodainely diſtoyned from the mountaine. The matter being reported vnto the Sultan, did make him exceedinglie ioyfull and glad: and therefore liking well of the oportunity, he ſent very many, ſome at one time, ſome at another, who by creeping hauing gotten vp to the toppe, were now a ſufficient number able to make a reaſonable good troupe or ſquadron. By good happe the gouernour him ſelfe went the rounde at that time, to ouerſee and view the rampiers and fortifications: who being ſpeedily aduertized of the daunger by the next Sentinell, and court of guard, went presently

to the place, accompanied with a good number of choſen ſouldiours, and with great prouiſion of munition both of ſhotte and armour. And at the firſt he kept himſelfe cloſe, regarding and beholding the bold enterpriſe and aduenture of the enemy: and he could not but greatly wonder at their hardy and audacious attempt, or rather at the great folly of this people, who durſt ſo to hazard their liues, without all care or feare of daunger. Hereuppon to the end hee might vſe guile for guile and (as the ſaying is) cut them ſops of the ſame loafe, and giue them drinke of the ſame cup, hee held him ſelfe ſtill and quiet behinde the rampiers, marking how euery one of them was buſily occupied at their worke, with their ladders raiſed vppe againſt the walles, and ſome of them already mounted, and others yet climing towards the top. Therewithall ruſhing forth againſt them with his onely preſence, hee ſo terrified and amazed them, that leauing their armor and weapons, and many forſaking their companions (according as each mans feare did leade and aduiſe him,) they began to flie before that any ſhot came to touch them. Many of them as they fledde to ſaue themſelues, were oppreſſed and beaten down with ſtones: all the reſidue in a manner, were moſt miſerably cruſhed and bruſed with falling from their ladders, tumbling downe headlong from the top to the bottome of the ſteepe mountaine: in ſuch ſort that their bodies were ſo ſtrangely battered and disfigured, that at their returne to the campe, they could not be knowen nor diſcerned by their owne fellowes, for that ſcant there appeared any ſhew or ſhape of humaine forme to be ſeene in them. Of the defendants, not any one that had any hurt or dammage. And during all that time, there was not heard in a manner, ſo much as one ſigh within the towne: for with very good aduiſe and conſideration all the day long they would ſpend their time towardes the place where the battery had bene made, and when the darke night came on, then woulde they fill vp and repaire the breach, with great ſtore of earth, ſtones, and other ſtuffe, ſtrengthening it with fagots, poſtes, and ſuch like.
            Whileſt they did thus by light skirmiſhes and conflicts incenſe ech other; & that theScanderbeg ſcoureth the countrey. Turks did rather enflame the choller of the defendants, then any way diſcourage or apall them: Scanderbeg accompanied with 2000. horſe did ſcoure ouer all the country, leauing no corner nor place vnuiſited, to ſee if he could any way finde the oportunity to entrap the enemy, either as they went on foraging, or ſeeking for freſhe water, or (which he was in hope of and might haue happened) that he might meete with ſome of their companies, ſent forth by the Sultan to ouerrun, ſacke, and waſte the countrey: but he was euer deceiued of his expectation, for I neuer heard, that either then or at any other time during the ſiege of Sfetigrade, any ſuch thing was enterpriſed or vndertaken by Amurath. Wherefore Scanderbeg ſeeing that all his draughts did turne to ſmoake, and that he could finde no fit matter, whereupon to diſcharge his choller, he returned to his campe more agreeued then he went forth.
            It was now the two and twentieth of Iune, about two houres after noone, that Scanderbeg (as one that hadde of a long time beene kept faſting from the bloud of the enemy which hee ſo eagerly coueted) mounted againe on horſe backe, and taking with him Tanuſe and fiftie other tall ſouldiours, he went about his ordinary andScanderbeg goeth to viewe the armie and demeanour of the Turkes before Sfetygrade. wonted taske: namely to vnderſtand ſome newes of the enemy. Now it happened as he beheld their Campe from aloofe: that he found all ſtill without any ſtir or noiſe, nothing being to be ſeene that caried any ſhew or countenaunce of enemies, but the enſignes and ſtandardes onely: the men lay wallowing all along vnder their tentes, pell mell amongſt their horſes, (for it was at that time when the Sunne being in Cancer, and in the extremity of heate did burne and broile their bodies moſt intollerably.) Caſtriot therefore ſeeing them in this plight, turned his face to them in his companie,

and with a ſmiling countenaunce (as the report goeth) ſpake vnto them in this maner.
            O what a goodly ſight haue we here my friendes! See here the Emperour of the
                  Speeches of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiours touching the ſecuritie of the Turkiſh army. Orient, euen Amurath the terrour and feare of nations: ſee here this armie the Conquerours of the world, who haue ſo often adorned & beautified their Barbarous houſes with the ſpoyles of Hungarie, the treaſures of Aſia, and the wealth & riches of Morea: ſee (I ſay) how they now lye buried and ouerwhelmed with ſleepe, and ouercome with ſloth and griefe, hauing bene lately vanquiſhed by the garriſon of Sfetygrade, by a Towne of ſo ſmall force and eſtimate, that they ſeeme to be in caſe rather of men beſieged, then of ſuch as beſiege others. Hardly can any minde be ſatisfied with this ſight, to ſee how filthie and vncleane a ſhewe they make on all partes, reſembling very beaſtes and brutiſh creatures. O that the great Princes of Chriſtendome were here now preſent to behold them: I doe not thinke, but doe fully aſſure my ſelfe of it, that ioyntly with me they would ſhed teares when they ſhould come to meaſure the indignitie of their misfortune by the infamous eſtate, and by the vile habite, and baſe ſhewe of the vanquiſher. For your partes (my good ſouldiours) as you cannot now behold this filthie ſpectacle propoſed before your eyes, without the ſingular diſdaine and contempt of theſe baſe miſcreants: ſo (I pray you) let the remembraunce of this ſight be ſo deepely engrauen in your ſtomackes, and imprinted in the very bottome of your harts: that they may continue ſtill mindfull of your libertie. Go to then, let vs make haſt while the day yet laſteth, and whileſt the repreſentation of this ſpectacle, remaineth freſh in our memory: let vs returne to our campe to take vp our enſignes & to arme our cōpanions, whileſt our enemies thus laid along all at their eaſe, ouercome with ſleepe & drowſineſſe, do offer themſelues as a prey to our ſwords and do inuite vs and giue vs ſuch oportunitie to the cutting of their throats.
            
            This ſayd, he pricked forward and being fully repleniſhed both with hope and choller, he returned to his Campe, where without giuing any reſpite vnto his ſouldiours (ſcarce ſo much as a litle to refreſh them ſelues) and cauſing them to carie victualles for one day onely and no more: with ſingular diligence he willed the enſignes to be diſplaied, and commaunded all the companies to followe him with all celerity. For the guard and cuſtody of the Campe, he left onely fortie ſouldiers: for the reſidue of thoſe that ſtayed behinde, were but vanlettes, and men of ſeruile condition. A litle before the Sunne ſetting, the earth began to be couered with a darke miſt, during the which, the Princ of Epire with a ſoft and eaſie pace was gotten neareScanderbeg his order and policie in marching with his arme. the Turkiſhe army, but he euer hadde ſome horſemen continually riding and ſcouring the countrey before him, to ſuruey and regard all places round about, and after their ordinary and accuſtomed manner of ſearching (by turning and winding, here and there on all parts, to ſound euery forreſt and daungerous place, leaſt there might haue bene laied ſome ambuſhment to ſurprize and beguile him, who was his craftesmaiſter in ſuch traines and artificiall ſleights of policy. For this expert Chiefetaine, either was continually in feare and doubt, or elſe he did purpoſely faine and diſſemble a kinde of feare by a certaine ſingular dexterity of his ſpirite, to the intent hee might make his ſouldiers more wary, circumſpect, and aduiſed, and the more attentiue to all accidentes whatſoeuer. And this was the reaſon (as the report is) why he was wont
                  Saying of Scanderbeg. commonly to haue theſe ſpeeches in his mouth. That many more excellent captains & triumphant armies, haue bene ouercome & vanquiſhed by ſurprizes then in open and ſet battell: that he had rather fight againſt ten men reſolutely, and openly being prouided for them, then againſt two vpon any vncertainty & ſuſpition either of place or any other inconuenience. Becauſe that all things whatſoeuer which are doubtfull

are more ſuſpitious and fearefull, and vpon aſuddaine do ſeeme more hard and difficult.
            
            When Scanderbeg was come within a quarter of a league of the enemy, he made a ſtand, being not minded to aduaunce his enſignes any farther, till he had firſt ſentMoſes with two other ſouldiours goeth as aſpie into the campe of Amurath. two ſouldiours (to whom he had promiſed a good ſumme of money) to the tentes of Amurath to ſee and vnderſtand the doings of the enemy. Moſes likewiſe voluntarily tooke vpon him with a gallant and chearefull courage ioyntly with them to be an actor in the matter: for that he thought there was not any great confidence to be repoſed in their skill and ſufficiencie. Immediatly therefore leauing their horſes (for that being on foote they might the moreſafely deceiue the Turkes ſentinels) he being diſguized in a varlets garment & a Sclauonian ſword by his ſide went chearefully on, and was ſoone out of ſight, with both the other ſouldiers, who followed him without any feare at all. They in the campe when they ſaw that Moſes did not ſpare to aduenture himſelfe in that enterprize, conceiued a ſingular hope in the matter: neuertheleſſe they ſtill expected in great perplexitie (by reaſon of the darkneſſe of the night, which made them ſomwhat both in feare and doubt) what would be the end of this attempt, and to what ſeruice they ſhould bedrawen, when this worthy ſpy ſhould returne to make report what he had ſene. Neither did the Dibrian deceiue them of their expectation, for I may iuſtly ſpeake it) he did not onely compaſſe all the trēches & fortificatiōs of the infidels, to take a view & notice of euery thing: but he went euen through their inmoſt courts of gard, paſſing & ſearching the moſt ſecret places of their campe. I am not ignorant, that ſome haue aſcribed the proofe of this hardy and audacious fact vnto Standerbeg, of which for my part, neuertheleſſe I will not robbe nor depriue Moſes: relying in this matter (though there be no great certainty thereof) vpon the pluralitie ofScanderbeg went as ſpy into the Turkes campe lying at the ſiege of Croy. opinions which do defend it: how beit that this was not the firſt time that Moſes merited this commendation, neither was this peculiar to him alone. For it cannot be denied but that euen Scanderbeg did aduenture himſelfe to the like hazard (eſpecially during the ſiege of Croy, with the like courage and good ſucceſſe, I will not ſay, counſell and good aduiſe ſeeing in this caſe there is not any thing in a maner gouerned and guidedGenerall of an army not to be commē
                     ded for aduenturing his perſon ouer hardily. A rare thing to ſee fortune, and vertue in one mā to be alwayes ioyned together. by reaſon, but by meere chance and fortune. And therefore I dare not much commend in a Generall of an army that valour or vertue which is careleſſe & ſo prodigall of his life and ſafetie. How beit fortune her ſelfe ſeemeth to haue exempted Scanderbeg from reproofe and blame in this behalfe: in that ſhe did continually ſo accompany and ſecond the endeuors & heroicall cōceipts of this worthy perſonage, that it was a thing very ſeldome ſeene in that age, & it was a ſpectacle both rare & ſingular to ſee a happy iſſue & euent ſtill ioyned with counſell & wiſedom, & that vertue ſhould be ſo attēded by fortune. But we ſhall haue occaſion elſewhere to entreate of this matter: let vs now returne to our campe with Moſes: who being perceiued a far off by the court of garde (for the moone was then at the full and did ſhine all night) they went to meet him and receiued him with infinite ioye and gladneſſe, and ſo conueyed him to the generall. Then might you ſee the priuate and common ſort of ſouldiours mingled pell mell with the nobles and chiefe commanders, all of them running in great deſire to vnderſtand what he had ſeene, what he had learned, and what likehood he brought either offeare or hope. When it it was knowen that all was well, and that matters ſtood in good caſe, and this ioyfull newes being diſperſed & publiſhed to euery one of them: Scanderbeg knew that the wiſhed houre did now approch for them to march on againſt the enemy: he beſtirred him ſelfe therefore on all ſides, and you might haue ſeene him ſometimes there amongſt the rancks and ſquadrons of his armed ſouldiours,

taking order, both for the men and their armes. Now diſpoſing of ſome in the vauntgard, and others in the rereward, each one to his charge. And there withall he encouraged them with many braue ſpeeches and exhortations.
            Although (ſayd he) my good friends and companions, both the preſent time and
                  Oration of Scanderbeg to his army being to giue a canuazado to the Turkiſh campe. all things in a manner round about, eſpecially your valour and proweſſe ſo often manifeſted, may ſummon me now to be ſilent: yet the noueltie of the courſe which we now take, and this vnaccuſtomed faſhion of fight, which now we are to begin (it may be) will giue you cauſe to think, that my ſpeeches are not needles nor impertinent conſidering that it behoueth you now at my command to yeeld ſome new teſtimony of your auncient vertue againſt the enemy in the darknes of the night, and not as heretofore you were wont, in ſet battell open and orderly raunged. This is the cauſe, that I do now freely ſpeake vnto you, and as inſtantly as poſsibly I may, I do pray and entreate you, I do exhort you, and I do require you, that euen the night it ſelfe may ſhew you to be mindfull of your noble courage, & to be mindfull of your honor & reputation which you haue purchaſed and continued ſo many yeares. For now cannot I be either a beholder or encourager of the valour or of the ſloth of any of you, onely the moon-light ſhall be the witneſſe of your valure, and your valure muſt animate and encourage you. Notwithſtanding the ſucceſſe and iſſue alſo of this nights ſeruice will giue an open teſtimony of your deuoire, and my ſelfe wilbe the particular iudge of your ſeuerall deſertes, when I ſhall ſee your victorious handes bring me the bloudy ſpoyles of our dead enemies, their enſignes encountred and conquered before their trenches, and the heads cut off from the carcaſſes of their ſlaughtered bodies.
            
            Theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches did he vſe vnto his ſouldiours, as it were in ieſt and meriment, admoniſhing them notwithſtāding in any caſe to abſtaine from the pillage of their campe, leaſt in thinking to ſatisfie their vile & couetous humour, their booty might happen to proue fatall vnto them, and be the occaſion of their death and deſtruction: that nothing could be more pretious, neither could fortune offer any thing of better value to the braue ſouldier then the throat of the enemy.
            This done, and hauing made their praiers and vowes of all ſorts vnto God for the obtaining of victory, about the fourth houre of the night, hee cauſed his enſignes toScanderbeg giueth a canuado to the Turkiſh campe. march, but the clattering of their armour, and the neighing of the horſes, did diſcouer their comming to the skoutes, before that they came to the tentes of the enemy: and they giuing the allarme to their Captaines, filled all parts with diſorder, tumult, and confuſion. Vpon this ſo ſodaine and vnexpected a noiſe, the tents of the Graund Seigniour himſelfe were ſtriken with feare and terrour, and the old man being ſoone awaked, as a man amazed and deſtitute of all counſaile, did prouide as well as he could vpon ſo deſperate an accident. But Scanderbeg for all this, neither ſlacked his courſe nor abated his fury: and although he perceiued by this tumult, that all the campe was in an allarme, and that the ſouldiers did runne in and out to the gardes, and paſſages of the campe, yet did he not diminiſh any part of his fury and fierceneſſe formerly conceiued, but with high cries and wonderfull noiſe, he inuaded their trenches and fortifications. The firſt quarter that was aſſailed, was where certaine ſouldiers of Aſia lay encamped, who being by chaunce the firſt that were encountred, had their tents and lodgings ouerthrowen in an inſtant, and themſelues as they ſtood vpon their defence being partly ſlaine & partly put to flight, did draw on the like fury and deſtruction vpon others that ſucceeded in their roomes. For many who had taken armes in great haſt & tumult, came to make head againſt the enemy, but being not able to make their party good, by reaſon they were vnequall to our men both in number and in fierceneſſe, they were quickly cut in peeces, or driuen to forſake the place. From thence the

Chriſtians paſsing further on, they found diuers tents and pauillions voyde and emptie, which they cauſed to be fired, and the cordes being cut in ſunder, they left them thus ouerthrowen in poore eſtate. Thus did Scanderbeg a long time continue victorious without any loſſe or bloudſhed of his men, till ſuch time as a ſtrong batallion of Turkes being rallied and gotten cloſe together, did come forth and aduaunce forward from the hart and ſtrength (as it were) of the Campe to repulſe the ſhame and ignominie of this diſhonour. Then began the fight to be doubtfull and ambiguous, the place was couered with dead bodies, and dyed with much bloud. For the Generall of the Albanois making head againſt them with a troupe of harguebuſsiers and crosbowes and all his companies of archers, and bearing them off brauely at the firſt encounter when they came to charge him: he gaue them ſuch a volley of ſhot both with bullet and artillerie, and he handled them ſo rudely, that growing at the very beginning to be aſtoniſhed, and the night redoubling their feare, they ſtood a while in a doubt whether they ſhould preſſe forward or returne backward, neuertheleſſe truſting to their number wherein they thought them ſelues the ſtronger (for there were more then 14000. fighting men:) they reſolued at length to try the extremitie and laſt hazard, neither would the Albanois in any caſe quit the place which he had once ſet foote on: but marching ſtill on with obſtinacie & perſeuerance, he prepared himſelfe both to giue & to take blowes with like hardineſſe & reſolution. For albeit he could not pierce any further into the campe of the enemy (becauſe the thicknes of the preſſe and multitude trouping cloſe together) did hinder them: yet would he not for any danger whatſoeuer giue ouer this occaſion of ſo notable a victory. Wherfore ioyning cloſe with the enemy, & ſetting foote to foote, ſword to ſword, & target to target, they came to encounter together man to man, and hand to hand, all of them taking good heede to keepe them ſelues from entermingling with the enemy, for feare leaſt in this confuſion and in the darke, they ſhould not be able, to diſcerne their friends from their foes. And their fight did ſeeme in ſhewe and reſemblance to be in the nature of a particular combat, for ſo eger and furious was their fight, that they ſeemed like mad men, and ſo vehement was their hatred which they bare each other (not ſo much in publique as in priuate) that euery one did imagine the enemy then before him, to haue bin predeſtinat vnto him, and therefore each man did his beſt and the vttermoſt of his endeuours to lay hold on the bloudy ſpoyles of his enemy.
            Now did it appeare on all ſides how notably the late oratiō of Scanderbeg was fixed & imprinted in the memories of his ſouldiers, and what effect his particular preceptes & inſtructions had wrought in their harts: For on all ſides the Circumcized yeelding vp their ſoules, did ſigh and grone vnder the hands of the Chriſtians, and their throats (as they were cut a ſunder, did euen crackle & make a noyſe through the aboundance of bloud which like ſtreames, iſſued from them: ſo ardent a deſire had euery one of the Albanois to ſhew vnto his Prince the heads ſeperated from the carcaſſes) as the certain & euident pledges of their faith which they had giuen him, & the aſſured markes of their prowes & vertue. But our men did not lōg enioy this libertie of killing & maſſacring: becauſe the Turkes (ſeeing how their batallion was preſſed & ill entreated) did now retire on all ſides, both thoſe which were whole, & thoſe that were wounded, all together: and they conueyed themſelues into the moſt ſecure and ſafeſt places of their campe euē to the lodging of their Prince. By this time their whole army being drawn out of the ſeuerall quarters of their campe, & orderly raunged) as the time & tumult would permit) they made towards the place of the combat, where purpoſing to haue done their beſt againſt the Chriſtians, their comming was not ſo furious and ſo violent as it was in vayne and vnprofitable, for they euen vpon the firſt flight of their enemies,

being partly wearied and partly ſatisfied with the ſlaughter, were departed. And albeit they were ſcant a mile from thence, yet durſt none of them be ſo hardy, as to follow after them for feare of ambuſhments. They remained therefore and abode ſtill in that place, till ſuch time as the morning light did diſcouer the horrible butchery, and the ſorrowfull obiect of the dead bodies of their companions, which them ſelues did bewaile with warme and bitter teares. It is generally agreed that there were ſlaine 2000. and more then 500. hurt and wounded: for two and fortie of the ChriſtiansNumber of Turkes ſlaine in the canuazado. which lay buried amongſt the heapes of their dead enemies, whom afterwardes being found (though their bodies were ſtone cold and their eyes pale (as in dead men is vſuall) & though their members ſtiffe and cold had loſt their vſe & ordinary functions by the departure of their happy ſoules) yet theſe miſcreants neuertheleſſe, through a vaine deſire of reuenge moſt inhumanly tearing them in peeces, did endeuor to ſatisfie their rage and malice, vpon the deafe and ſenceleſſe trunkes of their dead carcaſſes.
            This meane while the Prince of Albanie had gotten ground, and being paſt cleane out of ſight and hearing of the enemy; he cauſed his army to make a ſtand in a certaineThe fayre valley. valley which the inhabitants call the fayre valley, and was about fiue miles from Amurath. There did he make ſome ſtay, to the intent both to breath his companies, and to ſet his troupes in better order by the benefite of the day light, as alſo to prouide for thē that were wounded, whom viſiting one by one, he did gratiouſly comfort, and without any reſpect of the dignitie of his eſtate, with a ſouldiourlike regard (as one that had bene but a meane footeman) him ſelfe did handle and looke vnto their woundes. All things being well and diligently ordered and diſpoſed, he diſloged thence with hisScanderbeg returneth to his Campe. enſignes diſplayed, and came to his Campe about the eleuenth houre of the day a little before noone. He had made the leſſe ſpeede, becauſe the wounds of his ſouldiours did much hinder him: ſo likewiſe did the extremitie of the heate, and the burthenſome cariage of the preye and booty gotten from the enemy. Beſides there was a great number of priſoners both good and bad: for whatſoeuer was found within the enemies tents was taken and caried away. Amongeſt the reſt of the pillage, there were 230. horſes and ſeuen enſignes: but the heades of the Turkes, cut from their bodies, which the ſouldiours held and caried in their handes, as the notable markes of their priuate vertue, did ſingularly grace & beautifie the fight of this triumph. And Scanderbeg forgot not both with high praiſes, and rich preſents and rewards, to honor all of them openly and in publique. The priſoners were ſent into the next townes there to abide, till ſuch time as they were ranſomed. The enſignes with certaine moueables and riche ornaments, were ſent vnto the Princes his aſſociats: the reſt of the ſpoiles were graunted and parted amongeſt the ſouldiers. After this for a while was the campe in goodScanderbeg encampeth in Emathia. reſt and quietneſſe, and they had leyſure to repaire their forces with new ſupplies. The third day being paſt, they remoued with bag and baggage, and all their cariage into the plaine countrey of Emathia, where they encamped.
            The wrath and anger of the Turkiſh Emperor did ſo far preuaile with him, that the ſame being conuerted into rage and meere madnes (both for the peruerſe misfortune and ſlaughter of his people, and through the deformed ſhape and aſpect of his campe: and ſeeing no other meane nor matter of reuenge, he diſgorged the rage and fury of his heart (yet all in vaine) againſt the beſieged, and againſt the wals of their city. ForSfetygrade aſſaulted for 3. dayes together by the Baſſa of Romania. three daies together did the Baſſa of Romania, with a great and puiſſant preparation, enterprize vppon them, and as often was he repulſed, and with notable great loſſe ouerthrowen and beaten backe. By meanes whereof, as the hardy and couragious fierceneſſe of the defendants was encreaſed more and more, ſo did a vehement indignation and broyling rage more and more torment the heart of the Sultan. And

though his body were euen waſted and worne out with age, yet the exceeding vigour of his ſpirite (ſuruiuing within him) did euen reuiue and quicken it ſelfe a new, through the remembraunce of the worthy exploites, and the notable deedesSpeeches of Amurath to his ſouldiors: encouraging thē to a new aſſault of Sfetygrade. 
               of armes which he had atchieued in times paſt. He told his ſouldiours, that the euents of warre are diuers, and that the vnconſtant humour of fortune doth not ſhewe it ſelfe in any thing whatſoeuer, morevnſtable and variable, then in armes and martiall matters: that all difficulties by deliberate obſtinacie and continuall ſtudy may be eaſily ſurmounted: that the ſtrongeſt Townes and fortreſſes are but weake and feeble: that rampiers and all fortifications are of no force nor of long reſiſtance: In briefe, that all things are eaſie to be compaſſed and effected, whereunto men doe frame their mindes, and intende their thoughts, and apply their continuall trauelles and endeuours. With theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches animating his people, and giuing them therewithall large promiſes of huge and exceſsiue rewardes (ſuch as he had neuer made the like to any ſince the time of his comming to the Empire) the appointed a new aſſault to begin the next day following.
            Nothing of all this was concealed or hidden from Scanderbeg, but dayly aſſoone as the Turke had decreed or determined vpon anything: he was ſpeedely aduertiſed of it, both by eſpialles which he had abroad of purpoſe, and alſo by the diſcouerie and relation of the Paynims themſelues, of whom many did dayly flye vnto him,Turks fly from Amurath to Scanderbeg. either for that they were wearie of the Turkiſh tyranny & dominion, & did deſire to follow that good fortune which ſeemed (as it were) to ſmile vpon this Prince fauoured by God him ſelfe: or (as it often happeneth) being drawen thereunto through the inconſtancie of their owne diſpoſitions. More then this, the franke and liberall nature of the Epirot, and his admirable prudence did ſo rauiſh the hartes of all ſuch as did repayre vnto him: that if any of them came vnto him, with an ill and fraudulent intent, and with a purpoſe and reſolution to deceaue him, they would ſoone alter their minds: ſo ſuddenly would he vanquiſh them with the regard of his bounty and with this clemency and benignitie. Now Scanderbeg vpon notice had of Amurath his determination, made no longer ſtay but till the returne of Moſes, whom he had ſent to leuie certaine new men for the ſupply of thoſe whom he had loſt in the former ſeruices. The reſt of his troupes in the meane time ſtood ready ordered and raunged for the fight, as if they had bene to charge and giue battell preſently, and as if the enemy had bene in ſight to encounter them.
            The day being come which Amurath had aſsigned for the aſſaulting of the Towne, early in the morning the enſignes being brought cloſe vnder the walles, and the alarme giuen, the aſſault began euen by the breake of day. On all ſides where the Towne was approchable was it enuironed round about, and all places were couered with armed forces. For the monarch of the Turkes hauing publiſhed and made it knowen, that this aſſault ſhould be the laſt that he would attempt: he laboured tooth & nayle, and employed & bent all his forces & puiſſance againſt the defendants. And in the meane while to the intent he might preuent the ſodaine commingFeribaſſa appointed with an army to reſiſt the inuaſiōs of Scanderbeg, during the aſſault of Sfetygrade. of Caſtriot from troubling (as he was wont) the courſe of his furious deſsignes & endeuours, he gaue vnto Feribaſſa that braue warriour, (at his owne inſtant & earneſt requeſt) an army of 12000. horſe & foote, for the encountring of ſo daungerous an enemy, that making head and oppoſing him ſelfe, againſt the violence of his inuaſions, he might keepe him ſtill doing: ſo as his other troupes might not be diſturbed nor withdrawen from the Towne, nor the aſſault diſcontinued. The ſufficiencie of thisFeribaſſa his praiſes and cō
                  mendations. chieftaine was great and notable: he was of a very good conceipt, & aduiſed, & full of courage, as one whom the continuall practiſe of deeds of armes had brought to haue

the reputation of a moſt worthie ſouldier and an excellent Captaine. Hauing receiued his charge and ordered his forces, he neuer ceaſed courſing vppe and downe of all ſides, and ſending foorth his ſcoutes to diſcouer euen the moſt remote and fartheſt places from the campe: and in great impatiencie both of choller and of reſt, and as being grieued and diſcontented, that ſo faire an occaſion of honour and commendation, ſhould be ſo long delaied and detayned from him, he did attend and expect the enemie with a ſingular deſire and deuotion: and did wiſh that he had euen then beene there before him. So mightily doth the immutable deſtinie of the heauens inuegleSentence. and blinde our eyes, and the licentiouſneſſe of vnaccuſtomed libertie, that it maketh vs oftentimes more hardie and audatious then either in reaſon or neceſſitie is requiſite. And ſo was it with Ferybaſſa, who being an vnskilfull iudge of his owne ſtrength and puiſſance, had long ſince determined to trie himſelfe in priuate and particular combat againſt Scanderbeg,
                vpon the firſt opportunitie that he could get in the tumult of armes, and in the furie of the fight.
            By this time was a great part of the towne beaten downe, and certaine of their fortificationsAſſault to Sfetigrade. ouerthrowen. The Turkes likewiſe had filled the walles with ladders and with all ſortes of weapons: but eſpecially with long and great hookes did they aſſaile and preſſe vppon them which ſtoode vpon the walles, whileſt that others (though all in vaine) did not ceaſe, by hollowe caues and mynes digged through the earth, to haue made themſelues way into the towne. There wanted not alſo ſome who caſt balles of wildefire into diuerſe quarters of the citie, (for as yet were not Mortyers in vſe, or not knowen at all:) but ſoone was the fire quenched by the inhabitants, who without ſparing their liues, did carefully guarde and defende the walles on all ſides. But the chiefeſt ſtirre and whole daunger in a manner was towardes the great gate, where the Mahometans by the helpe of a great number of ladders, and long plankes and bordes heaped together, had raiſed vp (as it were) a certaine tower or plotforme, by the which manie might get vp at once, and hauing once gotten good footing, they might afterwardes ayde themſelues both with their ſhotte and dartes, to make the defendantes to forgoe their places. The number of the enemies reſorting thither did ſo increaſe continually (aſſoone as they ſawe this matter intended) as if they had nowe founde the way to enter into the towne. Some brought great and long beames both to ſtrengthen and to enlarge this newe building: others made them ſecret lodgings in couert cloſe adioyning to the walles, and then brought diuerſe inſtrumentes, as pick eaxes, barres of yron, and ſuch like, to digge and vndermine the wall. They prouided likewiſe ſtore of arrowes, dartes, ſtones, and other flying weapons, by which they might oppreſſe the defendauntes from the toppe of this their building. Nowe beganne the heate and furie of the aſſaylelantes on ech ſide, in the other partes of the towne by little and little to waxe colde: and thither was drawen all the daunger and violence of the conflict. Beſides that the tumult and horrible crie of them without did make all things ſeeme more fearefull and terrible. Feare and diſpaire mingled together, had mightily ſeized vppon the hearts of the Chriſtians, who were very buſily occupied in the defence of this place; when they ſaw the matter brought to that iſſue and extremitie, that the enemy could neither be remoued, nor yet hindered from the obſtinate purſuite of their endeuors. For by how much the more they were repulſed and beaten downe and ſlaine, by ſo much the more did their numbers ſtill encreaſe: and freſh men continually ſucceeding in their roomes, did by heapes mount vpon the walles, not giuing them any time of reſt and breathing, or anie intermiſſion; in ſuch ſort that the defendants did not only now want weapons to repell them, but their force and ſtrength began to faile them.

Perceiuing therefore that their reſiſtance did ſmally auaile them, and fearing the imminent daunger leaſt the towne on that ſide ſhould be wonne by the enemie: they ſent ſpeedily to call the Gouernour. But the brute and terrour running from one to an other, was alreadie come to the eares of Perlat, and had ſummoned him to make haſt thitherwarde: by meanes whereof thoſe that were ſent to call him, found him neere at hande, and comming to the place withall poſſible ſpeede and good diligence, and accompanied with a good troupe of citizens. For all the people both olde and young, being as men confounded and amazed, neither more nor leſſe, then as if they had heard that the towne had beene alreadie taken by the Turkes: yet (being in ſuſpence, and vncertaine of the matter) they ranne thither ſighing and ſorrowing, yet deſirous to ſee the iſſue of this lamentable ſight and ſpectacle. The preſence of this hardie and ſtout Chiefetaine, did at the verie firſt onſet beate them off that were mounted vppon the wall, and certaine ſtandardes of the Turkes, which were found raiſed vppon the rampier, were quickely pulled away, and with great crie and clamours caried into the market place, to the intent the ſight of this bootie might encourage and hearten their companions, and free them from their former care. One thing yet remained of eſpeciall importance, and that was, to breake in peeces and to beate downe this maſſye heape of woode, and thoſe great beames of timber which lay ſo neere the wall: vnder the couert whereof (as we haue ſaide) the ſouldiers being lodged, did both vndermine the foundations with pickeaxes and iron barres, and did furniſh the aſſaylants with diuerſe thinges needefull for the aſſault. Beſides the enemie yet ſtanding firme aloft vppon this tower, and preſſing the defendants with a furious and eger fight, did hold them continually in allarme, and in ſmall ſecuritie. To remoue this inconuenience, they got together manie heapes of great and huge ſtones, which they cauſed to be rouled downe vppon this building, caſting downe alſo withall great quantitie of oyle, vineger, and ſeething water, all of them boyling whot, which they continued ſo long, that with the force and violence thereof, and with the often ſtroakes of the ſtones, and other things caſt from aloft, both the plankes of this tower, and the whole frame, by which the ladders were ioyned and helde together, beganne at length to be broken, and to be laide euen with the grounde. In like caſe the other engines and inſtruments of the enemie, were broken and buried vnder the ruines of this frame: beſides more then a hundreth common ſouldiers, and with them alſo two of their chiefe Captaines, were cruſhed to death and ſmothered by the deadly fall of this building. The towne being freed and deliuered from this feare, the tampiors being newly repayred, and the walles furniſhed and guarded with freſh ſouldiers (for that there was ſcarce any one left either vnſlaine or vnwounded of thoſe that were placed there at the firſt) the Gouernour with his traine went ſpeedily from thence to oppoſe himſelfe elſewhere againſt other attempts of the enemie. For by this time the like debate and conflict was riſen in other places, and the Turkes did preſſe ſo hard to get the aduantage of the walles, that the towne ſeemed to be in as hard an eſtate, and in as great a daunger as before. Within a while after the Gouernour his departure, the Mahometans (which had beene repulſed and beaten backe from the aſſault, by the freſh ſupply of our men that came againſt them) hauing for a litle while withdrawen themſelues from the wall: aſſoone as they knewe that the Gouernour was abſent (imagining that the former heate of the Chriſtians was ſomewhat abated) they beganne once againe to goe in hande with their former worke, and to vndertake the taske which they had beene forced to leaue vnfiniſhed. Raiſing vp therefore once againe their beames of timber againſt the walles, which were yet

fuming with the bloud of their companions, they ſeemed to giue the defendants a new repreſentation of their forepaſſed daunger. But their laſt aſſayes were no more fortunate then the former, by reaſon of the ſudden arriuall of Perlat, who with little labour ouerthrewe this worke but newe begunne: and the ſtuffe being ſcarcely yet brought together for that intent and purpoſe, was quickly diſperſed and caſt to the ground.
            In the middeſt of theſe contentions and varieties of fortune at the aſſault, there preſented it ſelfe another kinde of fight, farre more notable and more worthie to be regarded, the which was able to haue withdrawen the thoughtes, and to haue ſtaied the handes both of the one ſide and the other, and to haue made them (as if all armes had beene laide apart, and all choller and rancour quite forgotten) not to purſue their attempt, but to ſtande ſtill wholly attentiue to the ſucceſſe of their companions.Scanderbeg commeth to inuade the Turkiſh campe For now was the Prince of Epyre approched neere with his armie, and (being come almoſt within ſixe hundreth paces of the enemie) he was determined ſuddenly to breake in vppon their campe. On the other ſide, Ferybaſſa was readie prouided to receiue him with the forces which the Sultan had giuen him to that purpoſe. For he did not thinke that the Albanois had anie other intention, but onely by a faint and falſe allarme to hinder the aſſault that was begunne, and to make the Turkiſh bandes to retyre from the walles euen in the chiefeſt of their furie: wherefore to preuent him in this point, he made towardes him, and would not ſuffer himThe battell betweene Scanderbeg and Feribaſſa. to paſſe forwarde, till they had debated vppon the matter. Scanderbeg feigning a kinde of feare, beganne ſoftly to retyre drawing on the enemie (who ſtill followed him) ſome ſeuenſcore paces farther: and then with all his forces, well ordered to the battell, marching againe forwardes directly againſt him, he charged him moſt furiouſly. The Turkiſh Captaine (who had beene euer deſirous of battell) did not in anie ſort refuſe him: but hauing ſeene the ſmall number of the Chriſtians, who were but nine thouſande men, or little more, (for Scanderbeg had left the reſidue of his troupes, being but fifteene hundred at the moſt, with Muſache, about a mile and a quarter off for the ſafegarde of the others, if anie misfortune ſhould betide them) he oppoſed againſt them all his footemen and foure thouſande horſe, whom he placed in the front before them: and with theſe he made head againſtStratageme of Feribaſſa to encloſe Scanderbeg. the Albanois, and receiued them to the ſhocke. The reſt of his horſemen with a wylie and fine ſtratageme, he cauſed ſecretly to withdrawe themſelues from the bodie of the armie, and a farre off to fetch a compaſſe about, to the intent they might get behinde the Albanois at their backes, and ſo, (hauing them encloſed and entangled on both ſides) they might ſhut vppe the paſſage, and bereaue them of all meanes and poſſibilitie to ſaue themſelues, and perhappes alſo take Scanderbeg aliue. But this olde beaten and expert ſouldier did preſently diſcouer the deuiſe: wherefore leauing Moſes to maintaine the fight of the middle battell, himſelfe with a troupe of horſemen moſt readie and reſolute, ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, turned aſide to the right hande: where at the firſt ſight, hee ſtaied the courſe of the enemie that haſtened to haue encloſed him, and afterwards comming to handie ſtrokes, and preſſing rudely vppon them, he made them giue ground, and in the ende to change their determination, and to looke to their owne ſafegarde. There were of the Turkes more then foure thouſand horſe, whereas the Albanois did not fully make two thouſande. Neuertheleſſe, for a while the hope of the victorie reſted indifferent on both parties, and their courages were equall, though their fortune were not alike, for that there fell a farre greater number of the circumcized. Muſache likewiſe (hauing beene called foorth by ſome of the Albanois) had now charged the Paynims on the

left hand, and with all his forces kept the reſt of them there employed. In this manner both the armies, being deuided tripartite, did repreſent on the one ſide and the other, the forme of three ſundrie fightes and combats. Moſes behaued him ſelfe wonderfull aduiſedly, and ſeemed to vſe rather pollicie then force againſt the enemie. For neither would he giue the bridle to the furie of his ſouldiers, nor would he aduenture them to the hazarde ouer haſtily: till ſuch time as he perceiued that the two winges beganne to haue ſome likelihoode of good ſucceſſe, and had made an entrance to the victorie: to the intent he might reſerue the ſtrength and vigour of his men freſh and luſtie. Till then therefore he helde the rankes of his battell firme and cloſe ioyned together, and with a kinde of ſubtiltie ſeemed to temporize and to prolong the fortune of the fight, till the comming of his companions. This made Feribaſſa the more fierce and inſolent, and to preſſe vpon them without any intermiſſion: and oftentimes would he vſe to encourage and hearten on his ſouldiers with theſe and ſuch like ſpeeches.
            
               On, on, (my good ſouldiers) vſe the fauour of the gods, take the benefit of the victorie, whileſt the ſwords of the Chriſtians doe ſtand (as it were) amazed, and whileſtEncouragement of Feribaſſa to hu ſouldiers in the battell againſt Scanderbeg. their forces doe growe faint. Goe we on to ſeeke out theſe heads which are vowed to the ſlaughter, and to cut in peeces their curſed bodies. See how they faint on all ſides: ſcarce can we diſcerne any tokens of enmitie in our enemies, neither doth their countenance, nor their voice, nor their geſture make anie ſhewe that they haue a minde to ſtande vppe long againſt you. Or (it may be) that they doe purpoſely delay the combat, and attend the comming of the night, becauſe (as theeues and robbers) they are vſed to the night. It behoueth you to aide your ſelues with the light, and you muſt keepe them from this policie, and take that opportunitie out of their hands, euen now whileſt we do exceede them in number, and do ſurpaſſe them in valure. If we ſtaie for the night, the leſſer numbers will be equall to the greater, and the cowards will match the moſt valiant and hardie. But what do I blame theſe, or why doe I preſſe vpon them, whoſe obſtinacie will ſoone ceaſe and vaniſh as the ſurges of the ſea, when the tempeſt is gone and paſt? We muſt cut off their head, and then the bloud of the other (as it is but vile and baſe) ſo is it of no force nor reſiſtance. Where is this wicked fugitiue, the author of ſo manie miſchiefes? I my ſelfe alone will diſpatch him of his life without the hazarde of any of you, if it be my good happe to encounter him in the battell. And I will ſacrifice the bloud of this ſauage and wilde beaſt, (whom ſo many theftes and robberies haue made inſolent) to the ſoules of our ſlaine brethren, friendes, and kinsfolkes. I haue (my friendes) of a long time bene of this minde, and this my deſire is not of any ſudden or new affection. It is long ſince that my thoughts did ayme at this combat: and my ſpirit hath beene euer enflamed to ſeeke the puniſhment of this wretched, vnhappie runnagate. I will once make proofe whether this my ſword can cut well or not, whether that bodie of his be penetrable, or that it be fatall to thoſe that encounter him. And I will ſee from whence he hath that corporall ſtrength and vigour: and in what this happie warriour (whoſe fortune hath beene of ſuch long continuance) doth excell and ſurpaſſe all others.
            
            In this manner did the Barbarian ſpeake vnto his ſouldiers, and then ſwelling with pride and furie (more then was befitting a Generall of an army) he went vp & downFeribaſſa chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat. ſearching and ſeeking amiddeſt the preſſe, and caſting his eies on all ſides to ſee if he could finde out Scanderbeg: and his minde being ſet on nothing elſe, he made ſignes with his hands and with his voice, ſtill calling and demaunding for Scanderbeg. The ſouldiers were nothing diſcontented with the hearing of theſe vauntes: and albeit

the prowes and valure of the Chriſtian Captaine, did ſeeme vnto all of them to be inuincible, yet did they attende neuertheleſſe with great deuotion (as the cōmon ſort isSentence. deſirous of nouelties) to ſee the ſucceſſe of ſo notable a ſpectacle. Beſides they were in hope, that (the aduantage of the fight and victorie falling to the one or the other of them) it would be an occaſion that the bloudines of the fight would be the ſooner determined, and their labour would be the more ſpeedily at an end. Many of them notwithſtanding,Ferybaſſa diſſwaded from the combat by his owne men. whoſe minds were more intentiue to higher matters, and who were reſpectiue of their honour, did diſwade Ferybaſſa from this combat (yet with gentle perſwaſions leaſt they ſhould ſeeme to haue imputed cowardice vnto him,) and they ſhewed him (as well as they could,) that the triall of this combat, was no leſſe perilous
                  The office of a Generall to conſult and to command rather then to fight. then ſtrange & without any preſident or good example: that the Generals of armies ſhould not in their owne perſons make themſelues the obiect of a ſight, whereof they ought to be the beholders and the iudges: that ſuch contentions were proper vnto ſouldiers, and were the offices of particular & priuate perſons, that the charge of great Captaines was to giue counſell, and to commaund rather then to fight and to handle the ſword: that if occaſion were, there would be ſtore enough of others found who would valiantly vndertake this enterpriſe, rather then that he by this ouer hardie fierceneſſe and immoderate deſire of danger, ſhould leaue at ſixe and ſeuen, and commit to blind chance and fortune the honor of the victory, which they had in a maner ſure and certaine.
            
            
               Ferybaſsa hauing his eares ſhut to all theſe reaſons and perſwaſions, and litle or nothing regarding this good and wholſome counſell, with a mind & humor quite contratie, ſet ſpurres to his horſe: and being attended with a ſtrong ſquadron of horſmen, went to call for Scanderbeg, and with a loud voice willed him to prepare himſelfe to his defence. The king of Epyre, albeit he had before heard almoſt the whole diſcourſeScanderbeg prepareth him ſelfe to the combat with Ferybaſſa. of his aduerſarie: yet not remitting for all that the heate and fury of the battell already begunne, but either diſſembling, or in reſpect of his royall dignitie diſdayning him, he would ſcarce turne his face towards him. But when he ſaw the victorie already enclyning vnto him, and that the barbarian did ſo preſſe and importune him: then his fierceneſſe being augmented with the new and happie ſucceſſe of that aduantage, he refuſed not the challenge: but being all beſprinckled and embrued with the bloud of his enemies, he went well accompanied to meete with Ferybaſſa. The fierce and auſtere countenance of the Epirot, whom the Mahometan had prouoked to preſent himſelfe there before him: the wings of his owne legions being then in rout and diſorder, and the loſſe of ſo many of his ſouldiers, might haue ſufficed to diſſwade this raſh and temerous Turke, and to haue bethought himſelfe better. The view and pitiful regard of his misfortune, ought to haue terrified him & ſpeedily to haue ſuppreſſed all deſire of entring into combat. Neuertheleſſe whither it were the neceſſitie of his deſtiny that did conſtraine him, or that the feare of ſhame & infamy did reſtraine him, he ſhewed not any change of his firſt reſolution, nor bewrayed any alteration of his courage. Now in an inſtant both the one part & the other ceaſed from fighting, and the fury of the ſouldiers was ſtaied by their Generals, in ſuch ſort that betweene both the armies, there was not heard or perceiued any noiſe nor any ſhew of malice and enmitie.Speeches of Scanderbeg by his Nobles entreating him not to combat with Ferybaſſa All things were ſtill and quiet, except certaine of the Lords & chiefe Captaines of the Albanois, who inuironning their Prince, did endeuour ſometimes by praiers and petitions, and ſometimes by their importunity to entreate him: that he would not meddle with the clamarous and rayling beaſt: and they told him moreouer, that his head only after he were ſlaine, did appertaine to their Generall, but that his ſlaughter belonged vnto them & was their dutie: that it ſhould redound more to his honor

and more aduantage the eſtate of Albanie for the Ottoman to ſee, that the ſouldiers of the Epirots were to be compared for their valure with the Captaines and leaders of the Turkes: and that there was no compariſon betweene their Generals. Beſides that it was not conuenient, that ſo great a Prince ſhould aduenture the reputation and honour of ſo many honourable exploites, and the glorie and renowme purchaſed by ſo many yeares: in combatting with one that was but a ſlaue and bondman to Amurath. That it could be no increaſe or augmentation of honour or fame vnto Scanderbeg to ouercome this barbarian, whereas Feribaſſa by this act might grow more triumphant and glorious, then by all the deedes and demerits of his life before paſt. All theſe perſwaſions notwithſtanding, Scanderbeg hauing highly commended and extolled their ſingular affection and good wils towards him, whileſt he was preparing himſelfe to the iouſt: he thus replyed vnto them.
            God defend (quoth he my friends) that as long as this hand of mine can handle the ſword, and as long as this bodie of mineretaineth his wonted ſtrength and vigour,Anſwere of Scanderbeg to his Nobles, diſſwading him from the combat with Feribaſſa. that any of you ſhould carrie away from me the ſucceſſe of this aduenture: the which (whatſoeuer it be) I referre to him that is the giuer of all victorie. Reſerue therefore theſe your offices of good will to ſome other ſeaſon when you ſhall ſee me aged and ſtricken in yeares, when my limmes beginne to faile, and when I ſhall aſſure my ſelfe that my ſtrength doth decay. At this time you ought to haue a care, leaſt whileſt you ſhew your ſelues too carefull of my life, you doe enuie my honour and reputation. And what would the enemy ſay if (according to your requeſt) I ſhould yeeld you the hazard of this combat: but that my holding backe and refuſing of the fight were but a meere diſſimulation of my cowardice, and a true confeſſion of a fearefull and faint heart, and that I durſt not encounter him, nor were comparable vnto him. For (to anſwere your obiections) it is not amiſſe ſometimes for a Generall of an armie to vndertake a combat as well as a priuate ſouldier. That glorious combat of Alexander the Great with Porus king of the Indians was it any diminiſhing to his honour and reputation? Did our aunceſtors euer diſcommend the fight that was betweene Pyrrhus and Pantachus? I will not here ſpeake of the Marcelli, the Torquati, and the Coruini, who with the ſingular glorie both of themſelues and their citizens, haue ouercome their enemies that challenged them to the combat. Theſe are the hands that muſt vndertake this hazard: for me it is that the enemie calleth with ſo many menaces and brauadoes: to me it is that this cruell beaſt ſpeaketh. I could do litle if I ſhould refuſe him in ſuch a matter, and he might thinke me very vnkind if I ſhould not ſatisfie his deſire in ſo honeſt and reaſonable a requeſt. He is a man of ſufficient worth to feele the weight of this my ſword, whom Amurath thought ſo worthy to haue the charge and commaund of ſo great an armic.
            
            This ſaid, he ſent preſently one of his guard to tell the Barbarian that he ſhold make readie to receiue him: and immediatly he preſented himſelfe vpon the place aſſignedThe combat betwene Scanderbeg and Feribaſſa. for the conflict, being conueyed thither with many acclamations and high clamors of his ſouldiers. The inequalitie of the combattants (the Turke not being comparable in valure to his enemie) and his ſhort and ſpeedie ende, (for he was too too ſoone diſpatched) did make the ſight and ſpectacle leſſe delightfull, and made the combat leſſe notable then otherwiſe it might haue bene. For at the firſt courſe and encounter with their launces, Feribaſſa being ſtriken through the face into the head tumbled downe to the ground, and left both his life and his horſe both at once. Scanderbeg takingFeribaſſa ſlain by Scanderbeg. no regard either of his bodie or of his ſpoiles, but returning preſently to his cō
               panie, willed them to renue the fight, and to inuade the enemie a freſh. But the infidels being enraged, would not giue them the leaſure: for aſſoone as they ſawe their

Generall laide on the ground, at the firſt they made towardes his corps with their troupes cloſe and firme together, thinking to haue guarded his bodie from the outrage of the enemie, and to haue dragged him away by the feete. But being not able toVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt the armie of Feribaſſa. effect it by reaſon that the Chriſtians ſuddenly comming vpon them, did hinder their attempt, they thought it better to withdraw themſelues, and to carrie the newes of their miſfortune vnto their ſoueraigne: and therfore turning their backes, they fled away with might & maine, which the Albanois perceiuing (who were come thither with a full reſolution and good deuotion to haue charged them) many of them, eſpecially the vauntcurrers fell to the chaſe, till ſuch time as the retraite being ſounded, cauſed them to returne. Scanderbeg ioyous and glad of this victorie, after he ſaw that all was quiet and that there was nothing to be ſeene but the footeſteps of the enemie, and the earth waſhed with the blood of their cold carcaſſes, preſently ſent the common ſouldiers to gather the pillage whileſt himſelfe with the reſidue of his beſt and braueſt ſouldiers arranged in order of battell, ſtood vpon his guard for feare of ſome commotion that might be made from the campe of the enemie.
            This ouerthrow and vnhappie diſcomfiture being firſt reported, and afterwardsAmurath fortifieth his campe againſt future inuaſions of his enemie. perceiued by the Sultan, did ſo ouerwhelme his heart with griefe and ſorrow intermingled with feare, that he ſtood mute for a long ſeaſon as if he had bene in a traunce: for he ſawe himſelfe ſo fruſtrate of his hope and expectation, as if all the powers of heauen had conſpired againſt him. But the violence of his paſſion by little and little leauing him, he prouided by reaſon of this accident, and tooke order for all matters ſo fully and in as good ſort as any Generall (were he neuer ſo prudent and expert) could poſſibly haue done. Firſt therefore he placed ſouldiers on all ſides, charging them diligently and carefully to eſpie the driftes and counſels of the enemie: then drawing downe certaine ſmall peeces of artillerie from before the towne, he planted them towards that part of his campe where the townes men did moſt vſually ſally out vpon him, and which was moſt ſubiect to the iniuries and inuaſions of the enemie. Moreouer hauing augmented and reſtored the troupes of Ferybaſſa with a ſupply of foureNumber of Turkes ſlaine in the battell betweene Scanderbeg and Feribaſſa. thouſand men (for ſo many had bene ſlaine in the fight betweene him and Scanderbeg) he appointed them for the defence of the trenches and fortifications of the camp, expreſly charging and enioyning them, that no man ſhould ſet his foote without the trenches to oppoſe himſelfe againſt the Chriſtians, till ſuch time as they ſawe them entred within the campe: and that then they ſhould make ſome barricado at the place, and playing vpon them with the peices (which were placed there of purpoſe) they ſhould oppreſſe them with the force and violence thereof, rather then with the hazarding of their bodies againſt them: ſuppoſing by this meanes, that both his ſouldiers ſhould be the better preſerued, & that ſo he might happen to recompence them both for his forepaſſed and future loſſes ſuſtained at all times in ſeuerall conflictes. Thus did he make prouiſion to preuent all inconueniences, ſo as the ſiege and aſſaulting of the towne ſhould not be any way interrupted. Notwithſtanding the courage of the Mahometans was mightily decreaſed and diminiſhed, their ſtrength beganne to faile them, and the force of their blowes ſeemed to waxe faint and feeble, after they once ſaw that the fortune of the fight did ſucceed ſo vnluckely againſt them, and that contrarie to their hope and expectation, the fauor of the field did ſeeme to ſmile vpon the aduerſe partie: and principally for that the vertue and fortune peculiar to the prince of Epire, had gotten him the good will and liking of many euen of their owne company: eſpecially them who meaſuring matters by their ſucceſſe and euent, do variably frame and conform their faith accordingly. For I find it recorded, that the ſame day of the diſcomfiture of Ferybaſſa, more then fiftie Turkes left the ſeruice of Amurath,
               
and came and yeelded themſelues to the Chriſtians. The honor of this iorneyTurkes flee to the Chriſtians. ſeemed to encreaſe and (as it were) to yeeld a kind of nouriture to the forces and courage of the Sfetigradians: whereof they gaue a large and blooddie teſtimonie to the aſſailants: who continuing more freſh and fierce then before, had made another aſſault againſt the towne, notſuffering the beſieged at any time to breath and reſt them ſelues, till the darke of the night ſo long and earneſtly deſired, did ſeperate and part them aſunder, cauſing euerie man at the ſound of the trumpet, to retire to his quarter ſore wearied and wellneare tyred with their extreame labour. This daies iorney coſtNumber of Turkes ſlaine at the 2. aſſault of Sfetigrade. the grand Seignior the liues of ſeuen thouſand ſouldiers at the leaſt, an euident ſigne of his miſfortune: and more returned hurt then whole from the aſſault. Of the defendants there wanted 70, beſides ninetie two wounded verie dangerouſly, by meanes whereof their numbers daily diminiſhing, many of them grew to be troubled: fearing leaſt at length, the towne being diſſurniſhed of menne to defend it, ſhould be brought to that iſſue and extremitie, as to yeeld to the will and pleaſure of the enemy. This made them to apply all their ſtudie, care and endeuors more intentiuely then euer, to the repairing of their walles, to the building and raiſing of their rampiers, platformes and Gabions: to the intent the ſouldior ſtanding cloſe and in couert, might the leſſe aduenture his bodie to the blowes and ſhot of the enemie. One thing notwithſtanding did greatly comfort and encourage them though they were ſhut vp and ſorely trauelled: and that was: to ſee their Prince continue his good fortune and proſperitie: and that the armie of the infidelles was ſo harried, weakned and beaten with ſo many ſlaughters and rough diſcomfitures, that it was greatly diminiſhed and empaired.
            I come now to Scanderbeg and his people, whom I left making their benefite all at pleaſure of the victory which they had gotten, and gathering the ſpoiles of the dead bodies before that the Ottoman troupes deſcending from the mountaine, did giue ouerThe returne of Scanderbeg to his campe. the aſſault. This done, he retyred himſelfe with tryumph for his double victorie, to his campe, where he ſpent the reſt of the night in ſinging of ſongs and other ſports. The bootie carried away was ſo maruellous, that the ſouldiers ſeemed not to care for it: but eſpecially they had ſuch plentie of horſes, that there was not any of the ſouldiers in a manner, but had ſome giuen them. Many of them were giuen to the Princes neere adioyning, with other rich and coſtly preſents purchaſed from the enemie. Moreouer there were infinite marchants which came purpoſely both from Italy and other Nations, who buying of them for ready money, or for exchange and barter of other marchandize, did daily rid and carie them out of the countrie.
            The whole Prouince of Epyre began now to leaue all feare, and to be ſecure from the terrour of the Turkiſh armie, and the Ottoman grew to be little redoubted, but rather contemned by all in generall, now that they ſaw his forces ſo beaten, broken and diſcomfited: and euen Scanderbeg alſo was of the opinion, that Amurath would of himſelfe raiſe his ſiege from before Sfetygrade, and truſſing vp his baggage, after ſo many calamities ſuffered and endured, would depart and not make any longer ſtay in the countrie. Neuertheleſſe, he daily ſent out ſpies and others to ſound the counſels & ſecret deliberations of the Sultan: but yet for all that he could heare no newes from the campe of the enemie. Wherefore as one that mortally hated idleneſſe, he madeScanderbeg goeth to diſcouer vpon the enemy. choiſe of 2000. horſe, & taking the way of the mountaines, he went abroad to ſearch and enquire in what eſtate all things ſtoode, and he was in great perplexitie, becauſe he could not any way learne nor coniecture, what were the counſels & intent of the Ottoman, nor what courſe he was determined to take. If he could intercept any of the foragers or vaſſals of the Turke ſo it was, otherwiſe he was like to remaine doubtfull

and in ſuſpence as before: for either to inuade his trenches, or to come openly to fight with him was but meere folly: neither was there any ſurety to be hoped for by any ſuch courſe; becauſe he feared the number of the Turkiſh forces whole and vnited, and the engines which lay couertly prouided for the fortification of their campe: of the which he had had aduertiſement by thoſe that were come vnto him from the enemie. All this notwithſtanding he courſed ſtill vp and downe, ſometimes heere, ſometimes there to ſhew himſelfe to his enemies, and vpon the appearance and ſhew of his ſmall numbers, to draw him foorth to fight, in hope of ſome good and happy exploit. But all theſe deuiſes did litle or nothing auaile him; for that the Infidels (as if themſelues had bene beſieged) did not ſtirre a foote out of their trenches and rampiers: by reaſon that the Sultan had pronounced the rigorous and terrible ſentence of death, to be executed vpon all thoſe who ſhould dare to aduenture without licence, either to iſſue forth to fight, or to make any mention of fighting with him. The Albanois ſeeing that matters did not fall out to his deſire and expectation, returned to his campe full of care and diſcontentment, there to take further aduiſe what courſeScanderbeg holdeth councell for his proceedings againſt the enemie. was moſt conuenient, both to deliuer the towne that was ſo ſtraightly beſieged, and to expell the enemie out of the countrey: conſidering he was not able to vſe open force againſt him, neither would he be brought to enterprize or aduenture any thing raſhly and vnaduiſedly. To ſolicite the potentates and townes of Epire his confedederates to take armes, and with them to aduenture the fortune of the whole eſtate to the doubtfull chance of battell, ſeemed a courſe of litle or no ſafetie. For, put the caſe he were aſſured of the victorie, yet could not a matter of ſo great conſequence and difficultie be effected but with much bloodſhed of infinite of his people. Amongeſt many opinions propounded in councell, this was laied downe as the moſt ſafe and commendable, to continue the warre according to their accuſtomed manner, and that be ſhould ſuffer the power of the enemie, to vaniſh and waſt away, and to grow into contempt: till being conſumed and ſpent by their owne ſecret diſcommodities and inconueniences, and his forces growing from day to day, to waxe more faint and to decay, he ſhould voluntarily deſiſt from his attempt, and by his owne loſſes and dammages, might be driuen to leaue the prouince which he had ſo vnfortunately inuaded: that he had not (God be praiſed) any occaſion to find himſelfe aggrieued neither with the faith and loyaltie of any perſon, nor yet with his owne good fortune: and that touching thoſe of Sfetigrade, there did appeare ſo many & ſo notable ſignes and euidences of their good perſeuerance, that euerie man might hold himſelfe contented, and his mind well ſatiſfied. Beſides that, the towne was ſo well fortified and defended of all things needefull for the beſieged, that they had not onely good ſtore of neceſſaries for their ordinarie vſage, but more then enough though they ſhould miſpend and abuſe them: and therefore, what courſe ſoeuer the Turke ſhould take, either by abſtaining along time from aſſaulting of their walles, or by giuing the ſame new and often aſſaults, it ſhould be to the ruine and confuſion of his owne people: or that whileſt they ſhould be moſt buſily employed and troubled about the aſſault, they might eaſily approach with an armie from the field, and ſo annoy or endaunger them within their campe, that both on the one ſide and the other, they ſhould reape nothing but ſhame and infamy euen in the face and view of Amurath.
            
            Theſe things did Scanderbeg alleadge openly and in publique, making a ſhewe in outward appearance, and carying a countenance of great cheerfulnes and aſſurance: but inwardly and in his hart, his mind was violently troubled and perplexed with diuerſe cares and penſiue thoughts and imaginations: and he did diuine of the counſels and practiſes of Amurath no otherwiſe then the iſſue and euent of matters did afterwards

make manifeſt. He was no leſſe in doubt and feare of the ſad and ſilent behauior, and of the ſlothfull and idle quietnes of Amurath, then of his armes and all his forces: and he had reaſon: for he knew by long experience his naturall diſpoſition, and his ſubtile cariage and demeanour. He daily conſidered with himſelfe alſo, that giftsScanderbeg in great perplexitie for doubt of treaſon in Sfetigrade. and large rewards, were able both to aſſaile and to peruaile againſt any towne or fortreſſe. He knew that couetouſnes and the hunger of gold, hauing taken hold in mens hartes, did make them ſacrilegious and irreligious, and worſe then brute beaſtes and monſters. The conceit here of did eaſily perſwade him to doubt and feare euery thing, whoſe mind was full of ielouſie and ſuſpition: for he was not ignorant, that the wals of many townes, and the bodies of many men who had contemned all daunger of ſword and armor, who were vnconquerable by force, and againſt whom iron could not preuaile, yet had bene tempted and ouercome by gold and ſiluer. This was it that brought him into an exceeding feare, and an incredible miſtruſt: for his mind running and diſcourſing of diuerſe matters, he imagined it a matter verie eaſie and likely, that in ſo great a multitude there might be found ſome one wretch or other of a wicked and miſchieuous diſpoſition, who being blinded and inueigled with the inordinate deſire of gaine, might open his eare and be ſeduced to condeſcend to ſome infamous and vile conditions of trecherie and infidelitie. And this care did not torment him for Sfetigrade only, but for all the other townes likewiſe within his dominions: but principally for Croie: fearing leaſt ſome one of his ſubiects traiterouſly diſpoſed, ſhould haue ſecret and priuate intelligence with the Ottoman, and ſhould worke him ſome miſchiefe and miſfortune. For this cauſe taking with him in companie no more then Tanuſee and Muſache, and about thirty other beſide them, and being diſguiſed in the habit of a ſimple ſouldier, he emploied all his poſſible diligence and induſtrie to ſearch out and enquire if he could heare of any thing attempted or managed to that effect.
            Thus you may ſee how the Prince of Albanie on the one ſide, and the Soueraigne of the Turkes on the other ſide, ech ſuſpecting and redoubting other, and being tormented in their mindes, had both of them their imaginations occupied with diuerſe thoughtes and cogitations about the vncertaine iſſue of their affaires. The Ottoman
               Amurath conſulteth vpon his proceedings againſt Sferygrade. keeping himſelfe cloſe within his trenches (as we haue ſaide) did ſpend all his time in diſcourſing and conſulting vpon diuerſe ſubtle plots and deuiſes: for knowing that neither violence, nor menaces, nor a long and tedious ſiege, nor the often and continuall aſſaults of his ſouldiers were ſufficient to carrie the towne, but that the defendants did perſeuer in their former conſtancie: he determined therefore to trie his fortune another way, albeit there were ſome who counſelled him to continue ſtill inCounſellers of Amurath are in diuerſe opinions for his proceedings againſt Sfetygrade. preſſing them with his forces, and to holde on his attempts againſt the towne. Many alſo did aduiſe him not to proceede any further againſt ſo manie difficulties, but to bend all his forces to the deſtruction & ſpoile of the countrie, and to make the whole Prouince of Albanie to feele the extremitie of ſworde and fire, the two ſcourges of warre: and to purſue the enemie, who being growen inſolent and arrogant with ſo many victories, did ſeeme to contemne all dangers, and did courſe here & there walking vp and downe the countrie at his pleaſure, with a handfull (as it were) of raſcals and beggers: or elſe that leauing Sfetigrade, he ſhould leade his armie before Croit, where peraduenture they might encounter ſome better fortune: and (it might be) that Scanderbeg would ſhut vp himſelfe within that citie, by meanes whereof they ſhould haue but one enemie onely to make head againſt them. For they were eaſily perſwaded, that he would not commit the guard and care of this place, being of ſuch importance, to the faith and induſtrie of any perſon but himſelfe onely. None of theſe conſiderations

could ſinke into the minde of the Sultan to reſolue vpon: but contrariwiſe he reiected and contemned them, replying (and that with good reaſon) that theſe faſhionsAnſwer of Amurath to the reaſons and aduiſe of his Councellors. of pilling and robbing the countrey, were but mockeries and childiſh toyes: for that the fields did ſcarce aford wherewithall to ſatiſfie the appetite of one onelie ſouldier, ſo carefully had Scanderbeg prouided againſt all inconueniences before their comming into that prouince. No leſſe did he deride the fooliſh diſcourſe of thoſe, who counſelled him to purſue the Epirot: telling them, that there was nothing more pernicious and daungerous, then of a fooliſh and vaine curioſitie to entangle themſelues in thoſe large forreſts and thicke woods of Epyre, being a fit couert for wilde and ſauage beaſtes, where no man could come neare them: but not for men endued with reaſon and diſcretion: and that the enemie himſelfe would deſire no better aduantage againſt them. In like caſe, to remoue his campe before Croy; he ſaid, that were to runne into new doubts and ambiguities, and to hazard themſelues to freſh ſubtilties and alterations of fortune: and that it was certaine they ſhould there find the Croians farre more ſtout & obſtinate in their defence: that Croy had their peculiar and particular Gods aſ well as Sfetigrade: and do you thinke (ſaid he) that there is any appearance or likelihood of reaſon, for vs of a vaine deſire and meere fancie onely, to proceede any further in making tryall of their vertue and fortune, in a matter of ſo great weight and importance, which we (full litle to our profit) haue found to be ſo fauorable vnto them in matters of leſſe conſequence? and in the verie beginning and (as it were) in the prime of their good fortune? ſhall we leaue Sfetigrade vnconquered at our backes being but in their borders? and ſhall we plunge at the firſt daſh into the verie hart and bottome of Albanie, and into the bowels of their realme, and beſiege Croy their capitall and ſtrongeſt citie?
            
            In this manner did Amurath diſcourſe with his councellours, neglecting and reiecting thoſe counſelles which they propounded, yet not finding any other courſe which could ſeeme more plauſible & expedient: ſo that all things remained ſtill vncertaine and vnreſolued. But this was it that moſt vexed him, on the one ſide feare of ſhame and reproch, and the vehement indignation of his mind diſdaining beyond all meaſure to be repulſed, would not permit him to diſlodge and breake vp his ſiege. On the other ſide his miſfortune and extreame loſſes did diſſwade him from making any farther attempt againſt the towne. Thus did Amurath hang in ſuſpenſe, ſtill doubtfull and vnreſolute, concealing his diſcontentmentes, and diſſembling his extreameAmurath ſeeketh to corrupt thoſe of Sfetigrade with giftes. dolour. Yet becauſe he would not lye idle and doe nothing at all, by litle and litle he made way to finde ſome oportunitie, and he ſought a farer off, to eſpie the meanes how to haue ſome parley and conference with the Sfetigradians: which in the end hauing compaſſed, he endeuored to allure and entiſe them with ſmooth and gratious ſpeeches, which are fit enticements for variable and vnconſtant Epirotes: and (thatAnſwer of the Citizens of Sfetigrade to the enticements of Amurath. which doth moſt ſolicite the curious and vnſatiable minds of men) he aſſaied by force of rich offers, great rewards, and large promiſes, to perſwade them to open their gates vnto him, and to receiue in a garriſon into the towne. The Citizens gaue him diuerſe anſwers, which came all to one iſſue and concluſion: that they ſawe no cauſe why they ſhould conſent to exchange their faith and fidelitie, & to become corrupt and diſloiall: nor to leaue the loue and fauor of the Prince of Epire for the yoke and ſeruitude of a ſtranger: that there was none of them all yet that could be content to make marchandize of that faith: that they were all of them bound vnto their Prince with a moſt ſtrict bond, and in a fraternitie together, which they would continue whileſt they had breath. All this notwithſtanding the Sultan perſiſted ſtill in hope: becauſe hauing propounded ſuch large offers, he had valued their diſſoialtie at ſo high a price

and ſo exceſſiue a rate, that it was able to haue corrupted the faith, and to haue peruerted the alleageance euen of the moſt conſtant and beſt minded. Neither was he atAmurath corrupteth one of the garriſon of Sfetigrade to betray the towne. the laſt deceiued of his opinion, for the filthy and foule deſire of gaine preuailed with one of the garriſon, a moſt wretched and deſperate villaine of all men liuing to be abhorred: who being corrupted by the large and perilous offers of Ottoman, did not care a button for the ſafetie of his citizens, of his countrey, nor of his frendes or kinſfolkes, in reſpect of his owne particular profit and commoditie. This wretch becauſe he would not be perceiued by the watch and Sentinels of the towne, ſought a fit and conuenient time to deceiue them, and to conferre ſecretly with certaine ſpies of the grand Seignior, with whom he bargained and concluded vpon the price and reward that ſhould be giuen him for betraying the towne into their hands. But fortune did not immediately preſent him the meanes to compaſſe his deteſtable and wicked enterprize: but (the guilt of his crime, and his owne conſcience making him timerous) he was doubtfull to attempt any thing: leaſt his treaſon happening to be diſcouered, himſelfe might be the firſt that by his owne ruine and deſtruction ſhould incurre the danger of ſo execrable a conſpiracie. To breake downe the barriers or portcallys, to force or breake open the ports, and ſo receiue in the enemie was a matter of great difficultie, and litle certentie, becauſe the place was ſo carefully garded by the citizens. To practiſe with others, and to procure vnto himſelfe conſorts and companions, by whoſe helpe he might in the nighttime raiſe an allarme in the towne, cut the throats of the principall perſons, and oppreſſe the citizens being in feare and aſtoniſhment, & ſo to let in the Barbarians into the towne, & to poſſeſſe them of the place, was a matter of as great impoſſibilitie: becauſe he knew that there was not any creature within the towne, but had the verie conceipt of any ſuch fact in horror and deteſtation: and he ſaw euen by the countenance of ech of them, that they were reſolutely determined, either by a glorious victorie to ſee their countrey preſerued, or if it ſhould be loſt and vanquiſhed, to end their liues honorably.
            The citie by reaſon it was placed vpon the mountaines, and ſeated vpon the toppeThe cauſe and ground of the treaſon, bringing the loſſe of Sfetygrade. of an exceeding high rocke, was vnprouided of the commoditie both of freſh ſprings and of the riuer that ranne neere it. They had within but one onely pit or well in the middle of the towne, which long before that time had beene digged and built by the diligence of their aunceſtors for the common vſe of the inhabitants, but principally for their neceſſitie in time of warres that might afterwards befall them. The whole garriſon (as we haue before touched) conſiſted of ſouldiers that were Dibrians, who though they were a people subiect to Scanderbeg; yet were they not naturall Albanians,Deſcription of the Prouince of Dybria in Epyre. neither in name nor in language. For this countrie of Dybria is deuided into two partes, ſeparated and ſeuered by diſtinction of names as well as by their nature, for the inhabitants call the one of them High Dybria, and the other Baſe Dybria. This latter is all plaine champion, and the whole leuell thereof is a rich and fertill ground, and yeelding plentie of all things: this Dybria is inhabited by the Albanois or EpyrotsBaſe Dybria inhabited by Epyrots. a hardie and warre-like Nation, by whoſe armes and valure Scanderbeg did both augment and maintaine his Empire, and atchieued all his enterpriſes of greateſt difficultie: in ſo much as he reputed and retained them as his laſt and chiefeſt ſuccours and refuge in all perilous aduentures of the warres againſt the puiſſance and power of Ottoman. During his whole life time he had from thence moſt valiant and excellent men as often as he thought good, who proued no leſſe ſeruiceable and profitable to the eſtate of Albanie in all charges and honourable degrees of ſufficient Captaines and commaunders, then of braue and valiant ſouldiers. The higher Dybria is mountanous, hilly, and full of woodes, yet verie fertill and commeth neere

to Macedonie both in neighbourhood and reſemblance of manners. The BulgariansTribullians of Bulgarians, inhabitants of the vpper Dibria, bordering vpon Macedonie. Tribullians or vpper Dibrians hold of the Greeke church. or Tribullians do inhabit it, a nation fierce and addicted to the warres, and as deare were they vnto Scanderbeg as the other, both for the merites of their proweſſe, and of their ſingular faith and deuotion. Notwithſtanding, they do vſe the faſhions and conditions rather of ſtrangers, then of the Epirots: and in many of their cuſtomes they do in a manner abhor the vſage and manner of the Albanois, by reaſon that they doe retaine the ceremonies of the Greeks, and do imitat them in many of their ſuperſtitions.
            Hence did this abhominable traitor take the occaſion of his damnable and wicked purpoſe, for he knew and was perſwaded, that if the Dibrians ſhould once ſee the carkaſſeThe manner of the treaſon cauſing the loſſe of Sfetigrade. of any beaſt, drowned in the bottome of the well within the towne, they would ſubmit them ſelues to the extreameſt ruine and deſolation, and admit any conditions of peace were they neuer ſo vniuſt and diſhoneſt, rather then they would drink of that water. And accordingly as he imagined ſo it came to paſſe: for the ſame night, this wretch hauing polluted the water with the carrion of a dog which he threw into the well: the next morning the thing being perceiued, the rumour thereof was in a moment diſperſed abroad from one to another ouer all the towne: whereuppon there began a ſtrange murmuring throughout all the ſtreets of the city, to enquire who ſhould be the author of ſo deteſtable an act: but being not to be found, the matter grew well neare to a ſedition. The Dibrians being diſcomforted as much as was poſsible, did extreamely grieue to ſee themſelues brought to that eſtate, exclayming that they wereThe notable ſuperſtition of the Dibrians. betrayed, and that they ſhould ſhortly die as bruite beaſtes for pure thirſt and want of drinke. See the ſtrangenes of the caſe, there was not ſo much as any one of them who had not rather make choiſe to be made ſlaue to the Infidels, then to drinke of this water. Some of them cried out a loft, that they ought to ſet fire on the towne and to burne it to aſhes, and ſo by a furious ſally through the enemy to prouide for their ſafety, or elſe to die valiantly. Neuertheleſſe of all other miſchieues, they held it to be the leaſt to fall to compoſition with the enemy. By litle and litle therefore their griefe began to vaniſh, and the noiſe grew to be appeaſed on all parts. Thus for a matter of ſmall moment and a very trifle, was the fierceneſſe and couragious ſtomackes of the Dibrians abated, and their faith being now quite exiled, had left & forſaken their ſuperſtitious conſciences. Now had the Infidels more eaſy acceſſe and liberty to repaire vnto them, and their eares began more graciouſly to encline to conference with the enemy, and now the ſouldiours in a generall commotion, without all care and regard of their dutyThe Dibrians are determined to ſurrender the towne to Amurath, becauſe their water was polluted. and deuoire, did prepare them ſelues of their owne accord to goe vnto Amurath, and to demand thoſe ſhamefull and ignominious conditions, which of late ſo gloriouſly they had refuſed and reiected. The number of the citizens was much leſſer then the Dibrians, and therefore were farre inferiour vnto them in force and puiſſance: by meanes whereof they were not of ability either to put them to the ſword, or to expell the garriſon out of the towne. Beſides, if they had bene able to haue cleared the town of them, yet were their owne numbers ſo fewe and ſmall, that they did not ſuffice to keepe watch and ward vpon the walles: notwithſtanding (poore men) they murmured on all ſides, ſometimes exclayming againſt their infidelity, ſometimes accuſing them of fooliſh and blinde ſuperſtition, and charging euen Scanderbeg in his abſence with their complaints, for that he had committed the care and ſafety of their liues, and of their city, into the hands of ſuch vnfaithfull perſons. Perlat being aſtoniſhed at their ſcandall, and ſuſpecting that this corruption of the water pretended, was but a meere fiction, and onely inuented by ſome whoſe mindes were inclined to diſloyalty, he did firmely beleeue, that there were ſome who had intelligence with the enemy. For this cauſe firſt he prohibited them to haue any treaty or parley with the Turkes without

his priuity and preſence: and immediately repairing to the market place, and aſſembling the multitude together, in a generall conuocation thus he ſpake vnto them.
            
               What a Gods name! was your faith and fidelity (ô you Dibrians) ſo lightly grounded,Oration of Perlat gouernor of Sfetigrade to the Dibrians, diſſwading thē from yeelding them ſelues to Ottoman. that he (whatſoeuer he be that was guilty of this wicked act) a vile wretch hatefull both to God and man, ſhould haue the power to corrupt your courages and your conſtancy, which haue bin knowen and tried in ſo many places and conflicts, as well as he hath polluted the water in your wel? Out alas! it maketh me euen beſide my ſelfe, and I know not what to thinke, when I conſider your pernicious conſultations, and this ſodaine change of all things, that ſo ſlight and ridiculous a matter ſhould be the occaſion of ſo great an indignity and diſcontentment. Doe you thinke it more honeſt to betray the countrey of your friendes and confederates, and to deliuer their wiues, their children, their dwellings, their temples with all holy and ſacred myſteries, into the hands of the Infidels, and to yeeld your ſelues to ſo great trechery and infidelity, rather then to preſerue the excellency of your courages, the purity of your hearts, and the glory of your faith, which hath bene euer admired? and rather then you will defile your mouthes with drinking of this water, be it (as your ſelues terme it) filthy and polluted? I ſee no cauſe (my good friends) why that ſhould make you to thinke your ſelues vndone, vnleſſe ſome deuill or fiend haue bewitched and peruerted your vnderſtanding. We are now come to this paſſe, that being more ſuperſtitious then is conuenient, we care not to reiect all regard of honeſty, faith and piety: and doe hold it better that the world ſhould accompt and call vs traitours, then men voide of ſcruple and not ſuperſtitious. All men will laugh at vs, the poſterity will wonder at vs, our enemies themſelues will deteſt vs, when they ſhall vnderſtand that ſo ſottiſh and fooliſh a cauſe ſhould make vs change our faith and loialty: that our minds ſhould be ſo eaſily withdrawen to reuolt and decline vppon ſo vaine and abſurd an occaſion to ſuch notable diſloyalty and treaſon. Nay there is no man but will thinke (I my ſelfe ſhall be of that minde alſo vnleſſe you draw me from that errour) that it is the giftes and promiſes of the Barbarians which haue gained and corrupted you, for the deſire whereof you are now willing to pretend this excuſe, and to forge this for a colour of your rebellion: by the very obiect whereof (whileſt you endeuor to purge your ſelues to the world from the guilt of that crime) you ſhal confirme and make manifeſt, euen by your own confeſsion in the iudgement of each man, that you are faulty, and to be condemned for this hatefull and vnhappy fact. For what good reaſon can you yeelde, or what argument can you make of ſufficient efficacy to perſwade them, why you ſhould ſo ſodainely forget all remembraunce of your honeſt deuoire and duety, and all the benefits which Scanderbeg hath beſtowed vppon you? Are theſe the preſentes which you giue him (ô you Dibrians?) Are theſe the teſtimonies of your conſtancy? Is this all that you owe to the Sfetigradians your allies, who haue vſed you ſo kindly? I am aſhamed thus to ſpeake to men that are reputed valiant. From henceforth let vs looke for no ſecurity and ſurety in mens affections, no integrity, no vpright and ſound dealing. If mankind be growen ſo careleſſe of loialty: if they be ſo delicate and curious: if the faith of men doe depend vppon ſo friuolous and vaine occaſions: what enemy is there ſo vile and contemptible, or of ſo ſmall prudence or wiſedome, but he may daily finde out ſome inuention to endammage his aduerſary, or that will leaue any ſecret traines, deuiſes or meanes vnſought and vntried, when he ſhall ſee that his fraude hath ſuch likelyhood of good ſucceſſe, and may ſo eaſily be compaſſed? In vaine did our aunceſters incloſe their townes with walles: in vaine did they build towres and caſtels vpon the tops of high rockes and mountaines: and in vaine were garriſons inuented for ſouldiers, if men be mutable and changeable with the times, if the faith of men be chaungeable according

to the inconſtancy of their occaſions, if (as trees doe with their leaues in winter and ſummer,) ſo men doe ſtill put off and put on new thoughtes and affections. What would you haue done (I pray) if the immoderate heate and diſtemperature of the ſeaſon had altered or corrupted this water? Is it not ſtil the ſame water that it was? O daungerous kinde of faith! O the deteſtable inconſtancy of mens mindes! we deuiſe and diſcourſe concerning the ſafety and liberty of this towne, as if the leaſt and haſeſt thing of the world were now in queſtion. Your duety were (ô you Dibrians) after the laſt droppe of your bloud had bene ſhed, to haue left your bodies to be trailed by the feere halfe dead, out of the poſſeſsion of this place: and not voluntarily, whole and ſound to reſigne and giue ouer the command of your glorious and good fortune. We our ſelues (if I may ſpeake it) doe inuite the enemy, we offer them our neckes, wee abrogate our owne liberty: and becauſe wee will not defile our ſcrupulous mouthes with a ſuperſtitious kinde of drinke, we will not ſticke to pollute all lawes, and all rights both diuine and humaine. Haue you not heard how Darius that proud and delicate king of the Perſians, did not refuſe to take a draught of muddy water at the handes of a ſlaue which had taken it vp (as they fledde) in the high way amongſt the dead carkaſſes, and vnder the horſes feete, at ſuch time as being ouercome by our countey man the great Alexander, he fled before him ſhamefully after that memorable diſcomfiture? As braue and proude a Prince as he was he did not diſdaine it: but after he had taken and taſted it, he ſware, that he neuer drunke more ſauourly: and that before that time, he neuer knew what it was to be thirſty. Thus did a draught of filthy water both keepe him from being made captiue to his enemy, prolonged his fortune, and preſerued the life of a great and mighty King. What will you ſay to Caius Marius that famous Generall of the Romaines? how hath the antiquity recorded his ſufferaunce of hunger, and thirſt, at all times amiddeſt the extreame heate of fight, and amiddeſt his greateſt laboures and trauelles in any ſeruice at the ſiege of townes or otherwiſe? And to let paſſe the conſtancy of the Saguntines; what thinke you of the city of Petilia amongſt the Brutians in the time of Hanniball? did it not by an example of ſingular regard, and almoſt incredible, leaue a rare teſtimony of their conſtancy and fidelity vnto all poſterity? And to the intent they might obſerue their faith inuiolably, which they had giuen to the Romaines, and for the defence of their bare and ſore battered walles, they made no difficulty to liue vpon the fleſh not only of dogges (which you abhorre ſo greatly) but of all kindes of foure footed creatures, and with the skinnes of ſwine, with rootes, and with barkes of trees? The moſt noble and renowmed Athenian Themiſtocles, to the intent his vngratefull countrey might not ſuſtaine the blame of his death, dranke (as it is reported) a cup of deadly poiſon. But perhaps you will ſay that the Sfetigradians are ſtraungers to you, and that their city is none of your countrey: it was deliuered to you to be defended, and therefore it is yours (ô you Dibrians:) Scanderbeg made choiſe of your faith and honeſty before all others, to ſee to the ſafety of this place. The towne which your Prince hath committed to your charge, it behoueth you to ſee it ſafe redeliuered into his hands. Moderate therefore I beſeech you, and lay aſide theſe your deſperate opinions, and doe not you attribute that to force and neceſsity, which is indeede nothing elſe but a damnable and peruerſe counſell and reſolution. For tell me true, (I pray you) what will you doe in caſe the Ottoman will not accept of the compoſition to graunt you your liues? would you then refuſe this drinke that you imagine to be ſo deadly? I am perſwaded that all of you would drink it, ere you would do your ſelues anie outrage. But now becauſe you are aſſured of your own ſafety, & you are not in danger to loſe any thing but your faith, you are all of you touched & infected with one malady, and your thoughts

doe runne a madding as men franticke and out of your wits. So little reckonning doe you make of your faith: & of all other crimes, you hold it the leaſt to be touched with the crime of periury and diſloialty. I cannot (ô you Dibrians) commaund nor moderate my affections, I cannot abſtain from tears when I cal to memory our good prince Scanderbeg. Me thinkes I ſee how graciouſly he ſpake vnto you, with what praiers & intreaties he recommended this towne vnto you at his departure, & how euen in this place he implored with too much credulity, your deuoire and loialty. I do remember thoſe clamors and loud cries, which all of you made with brauadoes and magnificall promiſes both openly and priuatly. Where are thoſe your clamors now (ô you Dibrians?) where is that fierceneſſe of your courages? where are thoſe hearts which you then vowed for your country? where is that audacity & careleſſe contempt of life and death? I ſee here ſtill the ſame men and the ſame armes: but the habit and diſpoſition of their mindes is cleane altered. And this towne being brought to a deſperat point, I ſee all things in a miſerable eſtate and condition. Imagine that your Prince ſtandeth here before you in great anguiſh and griefe for this your notable treaſon: what thoughtes think you, will he, & all others entertaine? what aſtoniſhment will there be throughout all the prouince? what will be the eſtate & condition of all Epire? ſeeing that from you doth proceed the root of all their misfortunes and calamities? ô that you would preſent before your eies, whileſt you are yet able, the indignity of this fact, & that you would preſerue your ſelues for your ſelues. Ceaſe not to keep your allies and confederats in the poſſeſsion of their countrey, do not leaue to defend their liberty, & to maintaine your own honor and reputation, which without any great paine or trouble you may yet eaſily preſerue. Regard the piteous & grieuous lamentations of theſe citizens, regard me, euen my ſelfe, who (if you can abide to ſee it) do lie proſtrat at your feete. Behold how all of them doe offer their throates vnto you, and I mine firſt of all. Behold here my naked breaſt (ô you Dibrians) runne it through, pierce it with your ſwordes, take away my life it ſhall not grieue me: let my bloud ſerue for drinke vnto you (if ſuch drink doe pleaſe you,) and if ſo be you cannot by any other meanes neither maintaine your faith, nor defend this city.
            
            With many ſuch reaſons and perſwaſions did Perlat vrge them, recommending vnto them the life and liberty (if not of others) yet of themſelues, and that they ſhould regard their proper ſafety: and ſtill he was in hope to haue remoued them from their ſtrange and pernitious purpoſe. And in the end becauſe he would know whether his ſpeeches had any efficacy or working in their ſcrupulous thoughts: aſſoone as he had finiſhed his Oration, he went preſently towards the Well, hauing almoſt al the communaltyPerlat and the citizens of Sfetigrade, drunke of the polluted water, to draw the Dibrians to do the like, who refuſe it. at his heeles, and in the preſence of them all he dranke a good draught of that water: the like alſo did the moſt part of the inhabitants. Whereupon it was preſented likewiſe to certen of the captains, & chiefeſt perſons of the garriſons: but neither good words, nor good deeds could preuaile with thoſe ſuperſtitious and curious ſtomacks.
            Scarcely can I without bluſhing, either beleeue it my ſelfe or deliuer it to others for a matter of truth, that ſo light and ridiculous a cauſe ſhould preuaile with thē in a caſe ſo waighty & important: and I make no doubt but that the poſterity will take a greater pleaſure rather to laugh at it, then to admire & wonder at this ſtrange accident: and if they do giue any credit to the ſtrangenes of the caſe, yet will they hardly be perſwaded, that ſo vaine and friuolous a humor could haue moued them thereunto. But they wil iudge rather that it was taken as a fit occaſiō by the ſouldiers, who being enclined to treachery and infidelity, had bene before corrupted by the enemy. For my part hauing ſearched and enquired of all things with all poſsible diligence, I could neuer find any likelihood to verifie this ſuperſtition: and therfore I need not make any difficulty

to thinke them blame worthy, who haue conceiued of them ſo ſmiſterly. My reaſon is, for that (as I ſuppoſe) there is nothing in the actions of mortall men ſo ſecrete and hidde, which could for ſo long a time haue bin vnreuealed. And more then that, of all thoſe who were ſo ſuperſtitiouſly addicted, there was not any one of thē euer known to haue yeelded him ſelfe to Amurath: nor at any time was the eſtate of any one of them ſo enriched, whereby it might be preſumed or coniectured, that they had any fraudulent intelligence or ſecret practiſing with the Infidels. Neither is it any maruell that the Dibrians being once intoxicated with this fooliſh ſcrupuloſity, and being fallen into ſo frantike a humor, did commit ſuch an error: ſeeing that they were not onely giuen to be ſuperſtitious, but were alwaies and yet are reputed for Heretickes. ForHere
                     •
                  ie and ſuperſtition neare of kinne each to other. theſe two contagious maladies of ſuperſtition and hereſie, are very neare of kinne the one to the other. For theſe people of Dibria doe vſe the Sclauonian tong, the which language being very large and ample, (as moſt notable authors do teſtifie) is diſperſed and dilated into many and diuers 
                  •
               ects. And that this is true may be ſeene, in that ſome of the Sclauonians doe acknowledge the vnity of the Church of Rome: as the Dalma
               
                  •
               a
                  •
               s,The Sclauoni
                     •
                   tong very large and ample. the Croatians, the Carnians, and the better part of the Polonians: others doe adhere vnto the errors and fantaſies of the Greeke Church, as the Triballians or Bulgarians, the Ruthenians, and a part of Limania. Others in the malady of their ſpirits, haue forged vnto them ſelues a particular opinion, as the Bohemians, the Morauians, and the Boſnians, who for the moſt part doe follow the hereſie of the Manichees. But wherefore doe I make mention of theſe nations? ſeeing all Europe is at this day ouer whelmed with a multiplicity o
                  •
               f
                  •
               rious and curſed doctrines? For, ou
                  •
                alas! within theſe few yeares, by the contagion and infection of neighbour nations, or rather by the ouermuch negligence and ſlothfulneſſe of the Prelates of the Church, and by the pernicious careleſneſſe of Princes and ſecular magiſtrats (if it be not the enormities of our ſins, that haue ſet heauen againſt vs:) al quarters & kingdoms of Europe haue ſuffred them ſelues to be polluted with a multitude of theſe prodigious opinions of all ſortes, which do now ſwarme and abound throughout al chriſtendome. But I haue wandred too far from my matter, we will now returne to our doating and franticke Dibrians.
            The Gouernour was inſtant vpon them ſometimes with praiers, ſometimes with promiſes of great giftes and rich offers, at the laſt, ſeeing all of them to be obdurat and hardened againſt his fruit loſſe perſwaſions, he framed and conformed his minde alſo to the exigence and neceſſity of the time. And hauing aſſembled together a certaine number, part of them Dibrians, and part of the chiefe and principall of the citizens to deliberat vpon the matter: they made a ſhort concluſion (for the matter would not admit any long delay) and themſelues did ſet downe the conditions & couenants of their ſurrender, ſuch as they thought would neither be iniurious vnto themſelues, nor diſagreeable vnto the enemy. Namely, that the garriſon ſhould depart freely & in ſafety, with bag & baggage, that the citizens ſhould haue free choiſe either to remain in their former eſtate with in the towne, or to depart at their pleaſures. Touching the garriſon nothing was altered by the grand Seigniour, but for the citizens he would not in any caſe condeſcend, that they ſhould remaine within the towne. All the reſt was accorded and a watch appointed in the ſuburbs. Immediatly were the keies brought vnto Amurath,
               Sfetigrade yeelded to Amurath. and the place was rendered vp voide and empty of all the inhabitants. Some of the citizens (who were deeply affectionat to their countrey, and loth to depart from the place of their natiuity) did tary ſtill without the walles. But many of them who could not endure to liue vnder the Infidels, leauing and abandonning all, went to ſeeke out Scanderbeg. The traitor who had corrupted the water ſtaid within the towne, and remained with the enemy, where being knowen by them that practiſed with him to

betray the town vnto the Turke, they conueied him preſently to the tents of the Ottoman, with wonderfull ioy and great gladnes. You need not doubt but he had good entertainment: for the Sultan honored him infinitly, both with good words and notableThe traitour who betraied Sfetigrade, rewarded by the Turks. rich preſents, far exceeding the promiſes that had bin made vnto him, in recompence of his diſloialty and treaſon. For firſt he had 50000. aſpres giuen him, and three roabs or ſutes of apparell of excellent workemanſhippe and very rich. Moreouer hee had ſo much land of inheritance and demeanes aſſigned him, as the yearely reuenues thereof did amount to 2000. crownes. But litle ioy had the traitor of thoſe great benefites: for albeit he were thus magnificently rewarded with all theſe honors and riches in the open ſight and knowledge of a multitude of people, and albeit hee did daily receiue a world of fauors amōgſt the Barbarians: yet within a while after he was ſodainly goneThe end of treaſon. and vaniſhed, and was neuer more ſeene nor heard of▪ The report went, that he was ſecretly made away by Amurath, by ſome priuy and deſerued kinde of puniſhment, becauſe he durſt not repoſe any truſt or aſſurance in the nature and diſpoſition of him, who by a filthy auarice had traiterouſly conſpired againſt his countrey, againſt his confederates, and againſt his owne bloud and kinsfolks. Thus you may behold how this marchaunt was enriched by his marchandize: and a man may ſee by this ſo worthyTreas
                        •
                      loued by Princes yet traitors hated of thē. an example, that Princes and great men haue treaſon in eſtimation, but they abhorre the traitours, and haue them in deteſtation.
            
            The garriſon of Sfetigrade was ſuffred to depart free, and without hurt through the middeſt of the Turkiſhe ſquadrons, which ſtood orderly raunged on each ſide as they paſſed betweene them. How beit that Mahomet the yong Prince of the Turks a fierce and cruell youth, who (as the report goeth) did then follow the army of his father into Epire, vpon a deſire to ſee the warre, and to purchaſe himſelfe reputation, did inſtantly and vehemently vrge and intreate Amurath, not to ſuffer them ſo to depart freely without any puniſhment. And he alleadged, that it was but a vaine curioſity to ſtandSpeechees of Mahomet the yong prince to his father, perſwading him to violate his faith with them of Sfetigrade. vppon the obſeruation of his faith, and that it would be to his eternall reproach and infamy; for that the Turkes haue not any doctrine more expreſly deliuered in their law, nor any precept more auncient in the religion of Mahomet, then to ſhew themſelues by all poſsible meanes mortall enemies to the Chriſtians: and ſpecially to them from whom he had receiued ſo many calamities and outrages by the ſlaughter of their legions, the killing of their Chiefetaines, and the pitifull waſting and deſtroying of their army: that the Sfetigradians ought to be chaſtiſed to terrifie others, & were to be made an example vnto thoſe which ſhould come after, to teach them not to perſeuere in ſuch peruerſneſſe and obſtinacy. For it is not (quoth hee) the office of an excellent Generall, to cary a minde mutable and chaungeable according to the eſtate and fortune of the enemy, and to commiſerat their teares and petitions: that it were wel done to put them all to the ſword, or to keepe them in irons or ſtraight impriſonment, till ſuch time as they had order for their raunſome.
            
            By theſe ſpeeches did this arrogant and proud Prince ſufficiently bewray his nature and diſpoſition, declaring euen in his youth and priuat eſtate, what manner of man he would proue one day when he came to riper yeares, and to the poſſeſsion of the Empire. And the inſolency & fiercenes of his tender yeares, did already diſcouer the filthines of his auarice and cruelty. But the wicked and blouddy counſell of the ſonne could not preuaile nor finde any place in the prudent thoughtes of the aged father: but ſharpely reproouing him, it is ſayed, that he thus replied vnto him; That nothingAnſwer of Amurath to the ſpeeches of his ſonne Mahomet. was more neceſſary and requiſite amongſt men, then the integrity of their faith, the which being once violated, it was not poſsible that either kingdomes, Empires, and eſtates or any ſociety could ſtand or continue. That euery Prince of a generous and

noble minde, and of high renowme (if his hope and courage doe aime at honour and ſuperiority, & to the compaſsing of great matters) this faith ought to be the one or the other, either in truth and effect, firme, ſound, and inuiolate, or at leaſtwiſe in outward appearaunce. For that is the onely way and ready meane to procure and purchaſe the lone and good will of all perſons: whereas periurie and crueltie doe ſubuert both ſcepters and crownes, both Townes and nations: and laſt of all they are not more pernitious to others then to the parties that vſe them: that men are conquered and won by the beneficence and liberalitie of thoſe who deſire to finde them faithfull and loyall, but that crueltie, hatred, and inhumanity do little profit a Prince towardes his ſubiectes. For when they ſee themſelues gouerned and commaunded by a proude and immoderat kind of puiſſance, they will not long endure the yoke of ſuch dominion: that by clemencie the harts & affections of many are ſoone gained, and being once drawen to like, ſeldome or neuer will they abhorre to endure that ſubiection which is ſo gratious gentle & tollerable. And to ſay the truth: wherein haue the Sfetygradians offended? or what fault haue they cōmitted againſt the maieſtie of our Empire? They haue defended their countrey, their wiues, and their children: and if they haue of themſelues both preſcribed ſuch conditions, & haue as faithfully obſerued them as the cōquerour hath reaſon to reſt contented with thē: what can we farther obiect or demād of them?
            
            The Dibrians being remoued out of Sfetygrade withall the other companies of the Chriſtians: and a new garriſon of twelue thouſand Ianiſſaries being there eſtabliſhed:Amurath fortifieth Sfetigrade. 
               Amurath bent all his care and endeuour to the repairing of the walles on that ſide, where the cannon had endammaged them. In the meane time Scanderbeg being lately returned from ſurueying and viſiting of all the countrey, was newly aduertiſed of the misfortune of Sfetygrade, and of the infidelitie of the Dibrians. This cauſed him to keepe cloſe within his tent in great ſilence, and full of deſpight and anger. Within a while came Perlat with that his infamous & diſhonored troupe of ſouldiours.Perlat and the citizens of Sfetygrade their comming to Scanderbeg. Sad and penſiue was their gouernour, but much more ſorowfull were the citizens, & the teares trickled in aboundance downe alongeſt their cheekes, for griefe and ſorow of their country now left deſolat. The Dibrians likewiſe through the remorſe of their fault (which was ſo notably ſhamefull) caſting their eies down to the ground,Dibrians craue pardon of Scā
                  derbeg for yeelding Sfetygrade to the Turke. did imitate the ſadneſſe of their companions. But when they came in preſence of their Prince, and had ſeene by the auſterity and felneſſe of his countenance, the vehemency of the indignation, which he ſeemed to haue conceiued in his heart; euery one of them caſting his armes to the ground, and taking their girdells from their waſtes, and putting them about their neckes, they fell proſtrate at his feete, and with bitter teares beſought him, to pardon their grieuous and ſhamefull act. What ſhoulde this Prince doe that was ſo mercifull and gracious? To puniſhe ſo many men, it was no eaſie matter, he ſaw no other occaſion of their crime, but only the ſuperſtitious credulity of that nation: they did freely confeſſe their fault openly in his preſence with contrition and humility almoſt incredible. This could not but moue and appeaſe Scanderbeg,
               Speech of Scanderbeg to the Dibrians, whō he pardoneth. for his anger being pacified, he turned himſelfe towards them, telling them, that he gaue them their liues in acknowledgement of their good deuoir, and becauſe they had behaued themſelues valiantly in defence only of the wals of Sfetigrade. To the citizens according to the former eſtate of each of them, were landes, and poſſeſsions appointed, and to many of them hee gaue charges and honorable offices in the warres: neither did he deny any requeſt in a maner to the Dibrians. Neuertheleſſe, the ſhame of their late ignominy hauing ſo greatly diſgraced them, did not permit them to abide long at the campe, all of them ſhunning the face of their companions.
            The vertue and conſtancie of Perlat during his gouernement of Sfetygrade, did

deſerue ſufficient praiſe and commendation both by the honorable teſtimony whithPerlat his good deſertes and prayſe for the defence of Sfetygrade. 
               Caſtriot gaue him for his deſerts, as alſo by the confirmation of the ſouldiers who ſerued vnder him, yet it may be, that perhappes he merited more blame then commendation, and I might impute the fault and loſſe of the Towne not to the infidelitie of other, but rather to his ſmall care or ouer licentious indulgence towardes his ſouldiours: becauſe in a ſeaſon ſo daungerous he ought to haue taken great heede, and to haue bene very carefull not to ſuffer his ſouldiours to haue conference and familiaritie, nor to haue permitted thoſe of the Towne ſo ordinarily to frequent the company of the infidelles: by meanes of which their dayly communications (the corruption of man is ſuch and the deſire of gold and ſiluer ſo in ſatiable,) the ſouldiourPerlat cōn enmended and rewarded by Scanderbeg. might eaſely be wrought to practiſe with the enemy. Neuertheleſſe Scanderbeg did publiquely ratifie and allowe both his fidelitie and all his actions, not onely in plentifull ſpeeches and often diſcourſes, by word of mouth, but to his wordes, he added alſo deedes of no leſſe value and eſtimation. For he recompenced him with a great ſumme of money, and certaine ſayre horſes, and with many other ornaments and rewards which he gaue vnto him, albeit Perlat was very loath to accept them. Thus was Perlat ſent home to his owne houſe with great encreaſe of honour & reputation. ThisPerlat made an Abbot. Proto-ſengeli Abbots in Epyre. Perlat his integritie of life, his eloquence and learning. perſonage being borne in Emathia was preferred to a ſpirituall dignitie, (which they call Proto-ſengeli:) & we commonly name them Abbots: he lead a maruellous ſtrict & auſtere life, in ſingular continency and wonderfull integrity: he was alſo very learned and paſsing eloquent: beſides, the grauity of his yeares which accompanied his other vertues, did as much or more adorne and beautifie all the reſt of his perfections.
            Theſe things thus concluded and finiſhed, Scanderbeg perceiuing that the Sultan was buſily employed in fortifying of Sfetygrade, and did wholly apply his minde to that worke: he tooke with him fiue thouſand horſe, and haſted with all poſsible ſpeed towardes thoſe partes with a purpoſe to interrupt and diſturbe him in his endeuours. But hauing ſtayed there, the ſpace of two dayes courſing vp and downe, here and there through the woods, and ouer the high mountaines, without finding any matter worthy the ſpeaking of: he attended there, ſtill watching ſome oportunitie, in hope at the leaſtro ſurpriſe ſome of their forragers, or ſome of the enemies ſcouts, or by ſom other meanes to endammage the enemy: nor did the ſouldiours returne altogether without bootie. For (as it is vſuall in any great army,) there were taken many men and horſes as they raunged careleſly abroad in the countrey.
            Now after that Amurath had ſufficiently repaired the walles of Sfetygrade accordingAmurath determineth to leaue Epyre & to returne to Andrynople. to the ſhortneſſe of the time: and that the place was furniſhed and ſtored with corne and other prouiſions for one whole yeare (as though his minde did foretell him that it was like to be beſieged:) he reſolutely determined and concluded with him ſelfe to retire his forces out of Epire, and to returne into his owne countrey. Touching the cauſe of his ſo ſpeedy departure, many are the fables & lyes which haue bene commonly bruted abroad, yet without any certainctie, whileſt that each one would ſeeme by coniectures to ſearch out and to ſet downe the counſels and determinationsThe cauſe of Amurath his ſuddaine departure out of Epyre. of Ottoman. Some impute his ſudden diſcamping to the tumultes of Hungarie: others to the troubles of Greece, and ſome to thoſe of Perſia. Many doe hold that the loſſes and dammages receaued in Albanie, and the diuers trauels and difficulties of this warre did chaſe him ſo ſoone out of that prouince: with an intent neuertheleſſe to returne thither againe with more puiſſant and freſh forces, & to plant his campe before Croy, becauſe that citie did ſeeme to require greater meanes, and more redoubtable forces to terrifie them. For my part I am content to approue both the one & the other of theſe opinions, as hauing all of them ſome ſhew and apparaunce of truth. Notwithſtanding

the laſt ſeemeth moſt likely and probable being ratified and confirmed by the iſſue and euent, which is a witneſſe infallible and without reproofe: or perhaps it were not amiſſe to ſay, that the houre and time limitted and appointed to this aged Ottoman by the deſtinies was not yet come, and as the Poets fayne lieentiouſly:
            
               The ſiſters had not ſpunne, nor fully ended
               The fatall threed whereon his life depended.
            
            But whatſoeuer was the cauſe of his returne, the laſt of Iuly he commaundedAmurath with his armie departeth out of Epire. to truffe vppe bagge and baggage, and that the carriages and parte of his horſemen ſhould goe on before. The next day at the ſunne riſing (hauing firſt in the night time fired their lodgings, and ſome other furniture of their Campe) him ſelfe marched after the others, with the reſidue of the armie who with exceſsiue ioye did make an exceeding noyſe, both by their loude cryes and clamours, and by the ſounde of their ordinaunce and cannons, which they made to roare with often ſhooting off at their departure. The Turkiſh monarch did euer vſe in times paſt,The manner of march obſerued by Amurath with his campe. and ſo did he then take his place in the middeſt of all his batallions, where being mounted vppon a white horſe, and enuironned rounde about with his armed Ianniſſaries, he needed not to be affrayed of any tumult or perill. For in the vaungarde the Beglerbey of Aſia, and in the rereward the Baſſa of Romania (both being in good order of battell) did aſſure and garde the middle battell in which him ſelfe marched. They that write of this expedition doe in a manner all of them agree, that Amurath returned out of Epire with fewer men then he brought withNumber of Turkes loſt in the iourney of Amurath into Epire. him at his comming by thirtie thouſand, hauing loſt fully ſo many in that action. Beſides that, a great parte of his prouiſions for the aſſault, and alſo many of his enſignes were ſpoyled and taken by the Chriſtians, which he neuer caried away againe with him. But all theſe loſſes and hinderaunces did Scanderbeg enlarge with the ignominie of a new ſlaughter: and he renued the misfortune of their eſtate with a freſh calamity. For vppon this returne of the Sultan, the Albanois hauing intelligence giuen him where he lay encamped, that the enemy did diſlodge, he put him ſelfe onScanderbeg purſueth the armie of the Turkes. the way to purſue them with all his army, which was 8000. horſe, and 3000. foote, and liuely preſsing them in the rereward, without any intermiſsion, he held on ſtill killing and deſtroying them: and he gaue his ſouldiours good occaſion to fleſh themſelues, and to ſhew the fury and eagerneſſe of their ſtomackes vpon all thoſe, who either were found to ſlacke their pace, or by any miſchaunce and inconuenience were left behinde their companies: for there was none of them but were gleaned vp, and they did dearely buy it with the loſſe of their liues. The Barbarians did often make head againſt him with their whole army, to ſuſtaine and repulſe the violence of their purſuite. But the Albanois euer diſſembling as though he fled, did ſtill delude them, when they were ready to receiue him: ſometimes withdrawing him ſelfe into the next vallies and hilles adioyning, and then ſodainely againe appearing in ſight: ſometimes would he charge them in front, ſometimes in ſlanke, and ſometimes in the rereward: and thus ſtill skirmiſhing with them as they went on, he plagued them with a thouſand diſcommodities. In this maner mocking and abuſing Amurath and his army, he continued ſo long in purſuing them, that for ſixe miles together, he neuer left following them cloſe at the heeles, preſsing and annoying them with innumerable iniuries.
            The Emperour of the Turks being extreamly vexed with the ſhame & ignominieAmurath leaueth the Baſſa of Romania to repulſe the inuaſion of Scanderbeg. of this abuſe, and at the ſlaughter of his people, commaunded the Baſſa of Romania to ſtay behinde with 30000. horſe, for the ſurety and free retraite of the reſidue, charging him that if the enemy did continue to importune him, he ſhould either charge

vpon him or conſtrain him to the fight, or elſe enforce him to betake himſelf to fight. Scanderbeg perceiuing the enemy to change his courſe, fayre & eaſily retired his companies, and for feare of being encloſed betweene the two armies, he thought it leſt to leaue them being ſo great a multitude. Wherefore he ſeized vpon certaine valleys and paſſages of the mountaines, where he knew he ſhould be ſafe, and that he could eaſily warrant both himſelfe and his army againſt the puiſſance of ſo many enemies. There for a while did he make a ſtand with his forces ready raunged in order of battell, as if he had bene vpon the point to go to charge vpon the enemy, and to hazard the fortune of the field with the Mahometan: and peraduenture ſo would he haue done (ſuch was the hardineſſe and confidence of this perſonage,) if the wearineſſe of his ſouldiours, who were almoſt tyred with their long and hote purſuite of the enemy, and the inequalitie of their numbers being farre inferiour to the Turkiſh forces, had not conſtrained this braue warriour to lay apart that counſell which was ſo temerous and dangerous. Vpon this occaſion therfore addreſſing himſelfe to his ſouldiours, and ſeeming as if he would excuſe himſelfe, he ſpake vnto them this prouerbe (which he vſed often:) I had rather (quoth he) that this place ſhould be noted to be famous for theA prouerbe vſed by Scā
                     derbeg vpon his retiring frō the enemie. flight of Scanderbeg then for his croſſe. For the cuſtome of that countrey was to raiſe a croſſe in that place, where any Chriſtian, eſpecially any man of marke had bin ſlaine or miſcaried, and he alledged this reaſon to iuſtifie his ſaying: becauſe any man may aboliſh the infamie of his flight, by ſome new act worthy of prayſe and commendation: but the life of a man being once gone and paſt, beſides that it is irreuocable & out of hope, ſo is it ſeldome without ſome infamie, reproch, & obloquie of the vulgare and ignorant multitude, who do meaſure all things not by reaſon and iudgement but onely by the iſſue and the euent.
            When the Baſſa of Romania ſaw that Scanderbeg would not moue, but did abide ſtillThe Baſſa of Romania marcheth away after Amurath. within his campe he likewiſe by little & little begā to remoue with his companies, & to march away, being as willing to let alone the enemy and not to meddle with him, but to go onwardes & to ioyne him ſelfe with the maine army that went before him. The like alſo did Scanderbeg vpon the perſwaſion of his ſouldiours, who humbly beſought him not to be obſtinate in purſuing and following of thoſe miſcreants, nor to detaine or hold backe any longer within the hart and bowels of Epire, that peſtilent plague which was ſo happely rid away, and departing out of the countrey. Thus neare about the ſame time, did Scanderbeg returne to Croy, and Amurath taking his iourney through Macedony, & ouer the mountaines of the Tribullians, came to the citie of Andrinople. Both the one & the other of them departed home ſad & penſiue, and as full of melancholie as was poſſible, becauſe their affaires had ſucceeded with ſuch varietie of fortune. But much more diſcontented & full of deſpight was the Turkiſh Emperour, both becauſe he could not ſubdue his enemy the Albanois, for whoſe deſtruction and confuſion principally he came forth of his owne country: and beſides, becauſe the honour, of ſo ſmall a fortreſſe, and ſo meane a place as he had gotten, did not ſeeme vnto him to be a ſufficient recompence for ſo many misfortunes, miſchieues and calamities. Notwithſtanding the care and griefe of the Chriſtians was wonderfully comforted, in regard they were fully perſwaded, and made no doubt, that the infidels being once gone and departed, Sfetygrade might be ſoone regained, and without any great difficultie recouered out of their hands.
            The end of the fifth booke.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               SCanderbeg is perſwaded by his nobles to marrie. The frontier warre betweene the Turkes of Sfetygrade, and the garriſon of the Albanois. Scanderbeg beſiegeth and aſſaulteth Sfetygrade, but is conſtrained to breake vp his ſiege. He prouideth for the furnishing and defence of Croy and the reſt of his dominions againſt the inuaſion of Amurath, who commeth with a huge armie into Epire. Croy is beſieged, battered and oftentimes aſſaulted. Amurath being not able by aſſaultes, mines, nor otherwiſe to force Croye, practiſeth to winne it by corrupting of Vranocontes the Gouernour, who reiecteth him. Scanderbeg, by ſundry inuaſions, and canuazadoes vppon the Turkishe Campe, and by the great ſlaughters of the infidelles before Croy, ſo vexeth and wearieth Amurath, that he ſendeth Ambaſſadours to Scanderbeg to deſire peace, which is refuſed. Amurath vpon griefe and melancholie of his misfortune ſickneth and dyeth before Croy. Mahomet ſonne of Amurath ſucceeding his father in the Turkishe Empire, raiſeth the ſiege of Croy, and departeth with his army out of Epire.
            
            
               THe publique peace and tranquillity of the whole prouince of Epire being now reeſtabliſhed by the departure of the Ottoman forces, and euery man being freed of their feare and care, the traffique being laied open in all the townes and fortreſſes, the garriſons being diſmiſſed, and each man returned to his wonted trade and vocation, the king of Albany did at length alſo giue liberty vnto his legions to reſt them ſelues for a ſeaſon, from the toiles and trauels of the warres. Nowithſtāding he gaue them in charge, that at the end of two moneths, they ſhould all of them repaire againe vnto him, to march with him towards Sfetigrade, to the intent they might recouer that towne of their confederates, out of the handes and poſſeſsion of their aduerſaries. He retained with him in the meane time but two thouſand horſe, and one thouſand foote, whom he ſent as he was accuſtomed, to keepe vpon the frontiers of Macedon, and to guard the goods and poſſeſsions of the inhabitants in thoſe quarters from the roades and inuaſions of the Turkes.
            Whileſt Scanderbeg did thus refreſh him ſelfe from his late trauels and labors, and did within Croy employ that ſmall time of leiſure which he had gotten, vnto a newe kinde of exerciſe wherewith he was vnacquainted: namely to the adminiſtration of iuſtice, and to matters of ſtate: the nobles of Epire and the Pinces his allies and neare neighbors miſliking, that a perſonage of ſuch rare excellency ſhould paſſe his age (for

he was then about fortie or perhaps more) without leauing any iſſue of his body lawfullyScanderbeg perſwaded to mariage by the nobles and Princes of Epire. begotten to inherite his eſtate and kingdome: all of them with one accord aſſembled them ſelues together, and came to the preſence of Scanderbeg as they had oftentimes before done the like: and they laboured by all meanes poſsible to perſwade him to take a wife and to continue his name and memory by the procreation of happy children which might lawfully ſucceede him in his kingdome: alledging, thatSpeeches of the Princes & nobles of Epire perſwading him to mariage. in vayne had he amplified the boundes of his realme, and in vayne had he encreaſed the eſtate of Epire: if he did not againſt the time to come likewiſe ſee them prouided of a Lord and Prince, to whom he had purchaſed ſo great honour and glory by the immortall memory of ſo many famous & worthy actes: that if he ſhould be careleſſe of this matter, they might well ſay and thinke: that his intent and meaning was to haue the publique weale of Albanie to decay and periſh ioyntly with himſelfe, and that with the body of one alone, he would bury the memory and whole body of ſo floriſhing an eſtate: that he ſhould hearken vnto the ſecret prayers, and regard the carefull complaintes of his ſubiectes. For if the ſucceſsion ſhould deſcend to any other: the prouince of Epire knew not how to ſuffer the dominion of any ſtraunger: but did diſdayne to haue any other for their Lord and maiſter but him onely, which ſhould leaue them ſome iſſue of his owne bloud, as the inheritour and image of his rare vertue; that ſo long, and no longer both their good fortune and the diuine fauour of God would continue and dwell amongeſt them, whileſt the ſcepter and crowne of Albanie did remaine in that race, and did abide in the poſſeſſion of his poſteritie.
            
            
               Scanderbeg was of a humour cleane eſtraunged and alienated from any ſuch thought, and the haughtineſſe of his conceiptes did ayme at greater matters: and as one that was either vnmindfull or careleſſe of all other things, he fixed not his hope nor his thoughts vpon any thing, which did not ſeeme to exceede the common reach of all humane capacitie. Wherefore as the report goeth, at the firſt he did with many reaſons full of grauitie and ſententious, vehemently impugne this aduiſe and counſellAunſwere and ſpeeches of Scā
                  derbeg concerning the maried life. of his friends, exalting and commending with no friuolous proofes the ſimple & vnmaried life eſpecially in Princes and great perſonages. And he told them: that nothing was ſo burthen ſome and inſupportable to a free minde, as the dominion of a wife: that the troubles of mariage hauing once made an entry into a mans houſe, his body & his ſpirite had no longer libertie to vſe thoſe rights which do belong vnto them: that fortuneMariage both troubleſome, and the hinderance of a mās good fortune. Scanderbeg condeſcendeth to take a wife. her ſelf (as though by mariage ſhe were become lame) would diminiſh & abridge the amplification & encreaſe of a mans greatnes, & would depriue him of a good part of the meanes, which ſhould raiſe him to the ſupreme degree of proſperitie. Notwithſtanding at the laſt becauſe he would not ſeeme as one that was giuen to ouer much auſteritie, not to neglect the good zeale and ſincere affection of his friends, he condeſcended and granted, being loath to refuſe their aduiſe in any thing which they ſhould iudge to be for the publique good, & for the aduantage & dignitie of the eſtate of Albanie. And he was content to ſubmit him ſelfe to that yoake, ſince they thought it ſo expedient, & ſeeing it was ſo agreeable vnto their minds. Neuertheleſſe he demanded a time of reſpit for the accompliſhment of the matter, and deſired that the ſame might be deferred till ſuch time as Sfetygrade were recouered, ſaying: that for the preſent it could not but be greatly to his reproch, if he ſhould now bend his minde to the ſolemnities of mariage, to feaſting and ſuch like actions of reuelling and banquetting: and in the meane while to ſuffer his allyes and friends to remaine vnder the tyranny of the enemies of Chriſtianitie. The Princes and nobles of Albanie thought them ſelues ſufficiently ſatisfied in that they had obtained thus much at his hands: and

therefore they would not importune him any further, but yeelding him a thouſande thankes, as if he had done them ſome ſpeciall grace and fauour, or beſtowed ſome ſingular gift vpon them: they quickly publiſhed & made it known through al the country, & the whole Prouince was repleniſhed with exceeding ioy at the report therof.
            Theſe things thus depending, there came meſſengers daily from the frontiers, bringing tidings, ſometimes that the lands and poſſeſſions of the Barbarians were waſted and ſpoiled: and ſometimes that their ſcouts were beaten and put to flight. About theFrontier wars betweene the Turkes in Sfetigrade and the garriſon of the Albanois. ſame time alſo, the garriſon of Turks within Sfetigrade were enforced to keepe cloſe within their fortreſſe, by the daily and continuall skirmiſhes of our horſemen, who vſing to ambuſh thēſelues in the woods neere vnto the towne, did ſuffer none to eſcape whom they found at any time, wandering abroad either careleſly, or as they went on forraging, or vpon any other occaſion. For hauing many times iſſued foorth of the towne, they were enforced ſtill, moſt commonly, to returne againe faſter then with a good pace. True it is, that our Chriſtians doubting the diſaduantage of the place, durſt not go too neere the walles to encounter with them, but by feigned ſhewes of flight, they did ſtill endeuour to draw them out into the open fields. One day amongſt the reſt they grew ſo audatious, that 300 of them came forth and paſſed about a bow ſhotA skirmiſh betwene the Turkes of Sfetigrade and the garriſon of the Albanois. beyond the foot of the mountaine, drawen thereunto with a vehement deſire to be reuenged vpon our men, with whom comming to the encounter with more fury then wiſedome, three and fortie of them there left their liues, and 14. were taken priſoners, the reſidue ſaued themſelues by their timely departure, flying away with a ſpeedy gallop: and there had not any one of them eſcaped to carry the newes into the towne, if their companions, who ſtaied within for the guard of the place, had not made haſt to come & ſuccour them. It was an eaſie matter for the Scanderbegians in this tumult & confuſion of all things to haue ſurpriſed the towne, if they had either chaſed thē with more feruencie, or if they had had a greater company. The Turks being from thenceforth ſhut vp within their ports, were ſeized with ſuch feare and terror, that they durſt not any more ſet foot out of the citie, but held themſelues cloſe as if they had bene beſieged by a handfull of Chriſtians. All this was done onely by a part of that garriſon which (as we haue ſaid) was left vppon the frontiers. Notwithſtanding they did it without the aduiſe or knowledge of Scanderbeg, neither did he giue them any commiſſion ſo to do: but ſent thither thoſe forces only for the ſuertie of his ſubiects, and to repreſſe the courſes and violence of the Painims. Neuertheleſſe being aduertiſed how all things had paſſed, though his ſouldiers in ſo doing might ſeeme in ſome ſort, both to haue contemned his authoritie, & to neglect all order & care of martiall diſcipline: yet was not this ſage & prudent Prince any thing diſcōtented with them, but he ſo liked both their coūſell & their actions, that it both gaue him an occaſion to haſten his buſines, & did incite him the more cheerefully to the aſſayling of the place, in regard that the feare & remēbrance of ſo ſmall a loſſe did make them to mew themſelues vp within their wals, as men quite diſcouraged and out of heart. For this cauſe without making any delay, before that he had proclaimed any generall muſter for the aſſembling of his old bands, or for any leauie of new ſouldiers: he diſpatched away to Sfetigrade 300. horſe, and 500. footmen, which he had then ready at hand to comfort & aide their companions: to whom alſo he ſent many gifts and preſents, to ſhew that he approued thoſe exploits which they had already done, & willing them to go on & to perſeuer in the like, and whatſoeuer they could with ſafety enterpriſe againſt the enemy they ſhould not neglect it, nor ſuffer them to take any reſt, till ſuch time as himſelfe comming with greater troups, & with all other prouiſions fit & neceſſary for a ſiege, might bring the town to be at his diſcretiō. This done he bent all his thoughts to the

gathering of new forces, ſo that within few daies he had aſſembled an armie of 18000 men, of which 8000. were horſemen, and the reſidue did ſerue on foote.
            His preparations being all ready, & his cariages ſent away before, himſelf marchedSfetigrade beſieged by Scanderbeg. after with all his hoaſt: ſo that the xx. day of September, he planted his enſignes before the wals of Sfetigrade. His owne perſon & his horſmen were lodged no farther from the wals, then ſo as an harguebuſſe ſhot could not reach them, (for the garriſon of the Turkes was in a manner all harguebuſſiers the beſt that Amurath could chooſe.) The footmen were quartered ſomewhat neerer: and to the intent the enemy ſhould not be able to offend them with their ſhot, they raiſed vp (in manner of a Palyſſado) a great quantity of rafters & plankes, wherof he had made great prouiſion, behind the which the footmen might ſtand & remaine in ſuertie. The Albanois were almoſt all of them archers: the reſidue being Italians and Almaines did ſerue with harguebuſſes & croſbowes. There were alſo ſome Sclauonians, who being more skilfull in the vſe of theSouldiers of ſeuerall Nations ſerue vnder Scanderbeg. ſword then of the bow: vpon the newes of this leauie of ſouldiers (being allured with the deſire of prey & purchaſe) did come to ſerue with the Albanois voluntarily and without any pay at all. There were in thoſe daies that came daily into Epire out of all Nations to ſerue, & to take pay vnder Scanderbeg: for that of all the Captains of Chriſtendome, he only was ſtill buſied and emploied, and was neuer out of armes: but in continuall ſeruice, as the mortall and deadly enemy of the Turkes and Miſcreants. For this cauſe many of them that were retained, being emiſed both with the ſweetneſſe of daily booties and pillage, and by the pleaſantneſſe of the countrie, did ſet vp their reſt to remaine and dwell there for euer. But the truth is that the moſt part being enriched with the ſpoiles of the Barbarians, & growen wonderfull wealthy, did afterwards returne home to their owne countries. There were alſo ſome Frenchmen to the number of 50. or more, who ſerued in that armie: they were appointed to haue the managing & diſpoſing of certaine ſmall field pieces (for they were entertained ſpecially for Cannoniers) with the which they might annoy the defendants, rather then the rampiers of the towne. For I do not find that there were brought thither any other greater peeces, either for batterie or to make any breach, becauſe it ſeemed, that to force the citie by the ſcalado was moſt to the purpoſe. Theſe things thus ordained, the chiefeſt matter & of moſt importance reſted yet behind: and that was, to prouide for the tranquilitie of the whole campe, & for the more aſſured continuance of the ſiege: namely, to ſhut vp all the paſſages from the enemie: for by this meanes both the beſieged ſhold be out of all hope of comfort, and the Turkes ſhould be debarred from comming to ſuccour or relieue them. In this ſeruice was the old garriſon emploied, and there was ioyned vnto them a ſupply of 800. foot, & 1000. horſe of the new leauied troupes. All which forces being deuided into two parts, the one moity of thē he ſent with Streeſe, the other moitie with Tanuſee into diuerſe quarters, for the better gard of the reſidue of his bands, and to detaine all ſuccors from the beſieged. This was no ſooner concluded on, but it was as ſoone put in execution. And thereupon Scanderbeg thought it high time to ſet his ſouldiers on worke, & by giuing a braue aſſault vnto the towne, to let them know the fierceneſſe of his fury. For you muſt vnderſtand, that the ſeuen firſt dayes after the Chriſtians had preſented thēſelues before Sfetigrade, they were vnceſſantly occupied in encloſing & entrenching of their campe, & in building & ordering of their lodgings (becauſe they thought they ſhould haue wintered before the towne.) And during all that time they had not in any ſort moleſted the beſieged, neither in word nor in deede: which made the ſouldiers now of all hands aſſemble about their Prince, demanding euery houre that they might be ſuffered to aſſaile the enemie. But Caſtriot being vnwilling to attempt any thing by armes, til he had firſt aſſaied al other

meanes, he did for a time reſtraine the forwardneſſe and heat of his men, till ſuch time as he had ſounded the minds of the defendants. He ſent therefore two ſouldiers to carie vnto them the ſame capitulations, which the citizens of Sfetigrade did lately accept of Ottoman. But the Turkes made no more reckoning of his offers, then as of aAnſwere of the Turks within Sfetigrade to the ſummons of Scanderbeg. thing of nought: but with notable reſolution, they ſent him this aunſwere, That the place which coſt them ſo much bloud, was not to be ſold for wordes: that he ſhould offer hardily the bodies of his people, yea his own head, for the price of the redemption of that towne: and that then he ſhould well knowe, whether that their faith were dependant vpon the water of a well, as was that lately of the Dibrians.
            This aunſwere was no newes to Scanderbeg, neither did it come contrarie to his expectation, for he foreſawe and coniectured how the Turkes were affected. Wherfore he thought good to haue recourſe to the ſword, & he determined to ſet the Chriſtians a worke as they had before deſired: and he tooke vnto him courage not as one that would vſe many words, but as an enemy that would make them feele the weight of his blowes. The next morning therefore about breake of day, hauing cauſed hisSuburbes of Sfetigrade aſſaulted and burnt by Scanderbeg. troups to approch cloſe vnder the wals, he firſt gaue the onſet vpon the ſuburbes, lately aſſigned by the Turkes to the poore citizens, which he cauſed to be ouerthrowen & burnt. Many of thoſe, who inhabited in the ſame, at the firſt ſight of the Chriſtians enſignes, had their refuge to their ancient friends and allies: the others diſperſed here and there, and being retyred vnder the walles, did ſafegard themſelues by the fauour of the ſame, & of the ſouldiers which ſtood aboue for their defence. In like maner the buildings next the towne were without hurt, except ſuch as the fire (being caried frō one to the other) did conſume with the like confuſion. The fury of the aſſaylauts did not in this place proceed any further, becauſe there were but few Turks there abiding, but only Sfetigradians & Epirots, who although it might wel be ſuppoſed (as was apparantly to be ſeene) that they were but badly affectioned to our men, yet Chriſtian charitie made them to be more remiſſe and pitifull: and they meaſured the perſons by the habite and affections of their hearts in times paſt, and not by the eſtate preſent.
            
               Moſes was not idle in the meane time, for perceiuing them of the towne to be buſied on that ſide in defence of the ſuburbes, and in quenching of the fire: he lead againſtAſſault by Moſes to the ports of Sfetigrade. the great gate three thouſande ſouldiers all ſtout men and hardie, whom being couered and ſhrowded with pauiſhes againſt the iniurie and force of the aſſaylantes, he did animate on with all his might to force and breake downe the portes. The Turkes (whoſe number was more then ſufficient both to defend ſo ſmall a place, and to yeeld readie ſupplies in all parts) came running thither ſpeedily from all quarters, and ſome of them from aloft with great ſtore of ſhot: others with great ſtones & long peeces of timber, did prop vp & defend the port on the inſide, making them ſtronger then they were before: by meanes whereof they cauſed our men to quit the worke which they had vndertakē. And thus was the iſſue of that attempt without any great loſſe of mē: for the Chriſtians hauing not then (as it chaunced) brought any ſcaling ladders with them, they did not long ſtriue in aſſaulting of the walles, but they diſcharged their choller that day both on the one ſide & the other, with bow ſhot and harguebuſſe ſhot only. Scanderbeg hauing cauſed to ſound a retreat (albeit Moſes being chafed & ſet inScanderbeg cauſeth to ſoūd a retreat, and to giue ouer the aſſault. a heate by litle and litle with the furie of that fight) did call and cry vnto his ſouldiers to bring their ladders and other engines for the aſſault: neuertheleſſe all of them vpon the cōming of their Generall did preſently retire, and in a maner againſt their wils, returned ech man to his quarter. Thus were the courages of either partie at that time the more incenſed and ſharpened by the proofe of that ſmall & light conflict, for that the fight was broken off without any hope or doubt either on the one ſide or the other.

The reſidue of that day did Scanderbeg ſpend in diuerſe conſultations, deuiſing vponConſultation of Scanderbeg for his proceedings againſt Sfetigrade. the ſhort & ſureſt way to force Sfetigrad. For the ſtrong ſituation therof which made it almoſt impregnable, and the great & puiſſant garriſon wherwith it was ſtuffed, did euidently make ſhew, that the perill would not be ſmall, if they ſhould attempt it inconſiderately or vnaduiſedly: and the late example of Amurath by his ouerhardy and too peremptorie experience, did coole the courages of the Chriſtians from being too forward in committing of themſelues to the hazard of the like inconuenience. It was concluded therefore for the more ſuretie, that during the daies following, the enemie ſhould be drawen forth by ſmall & light inuaſions, and with as great ſubtiltie & wylines as might poſſibly be inuented, he ſhould be entiſed to iſſue out, and to make ſome ſallies vpon them: hoping by that meanes in time, either to diminiſh the forces of the garriſon, without any great loſſe of their owne people, or elſe making ſhew by little and little of a diſſembled and fained flight, to toll the Infidels out from the guarde of their portes, and then ſuddenly at the ſame inſtant ſetting vpon them with great furie, they might happen to ſurpriſe the citie, during the tumult of that alarme and aſtoniſhment, if ſo be the Chriſtians did preſſe hard vpon the Turkes in their flight, and did ſtriue to enter with them pell mell, into the towne.
            The execution of this counſell was no longer delaied then till the next night, the darkenes and ſecrecie whereof did giue them the opportunitie to attempt it in ſuch manner as ſhall preſently be deliuered. Moſes was appointed to haue the leading ofMoſes. 300. choſen horſe, to prouoke foorth the enemie. Zacharie Groppe on the one partZacharie Groppe. with 500. horſe, and Scanderbeg himſelfe on the other part, with the like number of horſemen placed themſelues very cloſe and ſecretly in an ambuſcado. For theſe companies, taking the benefit of the darkeneſſe of the night, and creeping with as great ſilenceAn ambuſcado laid for the Turkes of Sfetigrade. and ſecrecie as they might, by the pendant of the mountaine, hid themſelues in a place verie fit and conuenient for an ambuſhment, and where the enemy would not haue any doubt thereof, euen amongſt the hollow & winding turnings of the vallies, and amidſt the woods next adioyning full of buſhes & bryers, where the ſcouts of the enemie could not haue any knowledge of their being. For hauing partly put out, and partly couering and keeping cloſe their fiers, they went forth on the backſide of their campe. The time it ſelfe alſo did in ſome ſort aide them to the concealing of their enterpriſe: for all the long night, the ayre being full of moiſt & foggie vapours, and the earth being couered with darkeneſſe, and with obſcure and thicke cloudes: the continuall thunder and lightning did ſo hinder the ſight and hearing of euery man, that it was an eaſie matter to deceiue the Turkiſh Sentinels. The Dybrian in the meane time without ſtaying till the day breake, watched and pryed round about on euerie ſide with his men, in manner of a freebooter or robber: and approching by degrees neerer and neerer to the walles, he wandered vp and downe here & there in the ſight of the townſemen, and did keepe ſtill within their daunger. They within Sfetygrade were not all of one minde and aduiſe, nor of like courage. Many would not be withSpeeches of the Turkes within Sfetigrade, being deuided in their opinions, concerning a ſally to be made vpon the Albanois. 
               held, but did exclaime and crie out: That it was neceſſarie to iſſue out and to ſet vppon them, and that it was a ſhame for them to endure and ſuffer, that ſo faire an occaſion ſhould be loſt: ſome others helde ſtiffely on the contrarie, That they ought to bouge nor attempt any thing without good aduiſe and deliberation. Whereupon there grew a great alteration and diſſention amongſt them, as it is commonly ſeene in thoſe men, who being naturally of a fierce & haſty diſpoſition are pricked on & caried away by a kind of light incredulitie only regarding the outward ſhew & ſuperficial apparance of things, & neuer looking nor ſearching into the marow, depth, and ſubſtance of matters. To ſuch men al good and wholſome counſels do ſeeme vile

and naught: and they do thinke that all good fortune is then only cleane fled & eſcapedSentence. away out of their hands, if the ordering and diſpoſing of any affaires be neuer ſo litle deferred, or (as it were) ſeaſoned and attempred with a litle moderation of ſome ſhortand ſmall delay. Notwithſtanding in the end the better opinion (as the euent teſtified) did beare it away, euen thoſe whoſe aduiſe was to be ſtill and not to ſtirre at all: for they without could not heare any newes nor perceiue any likelihood of any ſalley; but the gates were kept cloſe ſhut, and none ſuffered to come forth, onely they were ſaluted with harguebuſh ſhot aloofe from the wals. The Albanois ſometimes in troups, and ſometimes ſcattered and diſperſed, with their bowes bent againſt them that ſtood vpon the wall, did courſe and gallop here and there, to the intent that they being prouoked the ſooner by theſe brauadoes, might be entiſed to iſſue foorth vnto them. But when Moſes ſaw that he got nothing but blowes, and that there was more likelihood of further danger, then of hope to doe any good vpon the enemie (for by this time two of his men were ſlaine, & ſixe or ſeuen of them ſore hurt, that he could hardly carrie them away) he beganne to retire faire and eaſily from the wals: and hauing conceiued no leſſe indignation then ſhame, he withdrew himſelfe from the view of the enemie. Scanderbeg likewiſe with his troupe in as pitifull a caſe as the other was not long behind him, but he came forth alſo from his denne extremely grieued and diſcontented: in ſuch ſort, that both he and his company, being thoroughly wet and (as it were) all dropping with the raine which had fallen on them all the night: and the Dibrian on the other ſide, returning with his ſouldiers full of anger & deſpite, they gaue good occaſion to the enemy to laugh, and make themſelues merry at them.
            But the Epirot did not long endure this mockery, for he was minded to requit them with plaine and open force & by a generall aſſault. The next day therefore, hauing ſetSfetygrade aſſaulted by the Albanois. his cōpanies in order of battell, & euery mā appointed to his charge, about two houres before noone, he lead at the very firſt 10000. men againſt the wals. Of the reſidue of his army part was left to keepe the trenches, and part was reſerued in a teadineſſe for a freſh & new ſupply, to the intent the aſſault ſhould not be interrupted. Moſes firſt of allMoſes. with a good ſquadron of ſtout & valiant young men went to the ſcalado, hauing conceiued a good hope to carry the towne. For Scanderbeg frō beneath with a great band of archers & crosbowes Italians made the defendants by force of their ſhot to forſake their ſtandings, & by that meanes the others had the more liberty to mount vp to the wals, in ſo much that many of thē hauing gotten to the tops of their ladders, did now get footing vpon the rampiers, & there with equall courage & fury did maintaine the fight with the Turkes for the poſſeſſion of the wals. The artillery, which as we haue ſaid, was plāted on the farther ſide of the town to beat the rampiers, did not ſuffer the garriſon to reſt on that ſide. For albeit the ſhot of theſe peeces did not make any great breach, yet did the wals daily decreaſe in the ſight of them that fought: & the defendants by litle & litle did diminiſh & waxe leſſe by reaſon that the continuance of the ſhot which raſed the wals, did alſo make away many of their mē that ſtood in defence of that place. If theſe here did performe the part of tall ſouldiers, I can aſſure you that the others did behaue themſelues with much more fury on that ſide, where Zacharie
               Zachary Groppe. 
               Groppe went to the aſſault, with whō were the chiefeſt forces & ſtrength of the armie, and eſpecially the Almaines who were reſolute euen to the death, and knew not what it was to recuile frō the enemy. Theſe with pickaxes & bars of iron did ſeeke to ouerthrow the wals where they had bin newly reedified & repaired. Some couered with the targets of their companions and with baskets cloſe ioyned together, did digge & vndermine the foundations: others voiding and ridding away the ſtones that were digged vp, did make the place like vnto an arch or hollow caue. The Infidels that

were aloft on the wall could not, although they would, hinder them from the purſuit of this worke. For albeit many of our men did droppe downe here and there, & were ſlaine with harguebuſſe ſhot from the towers and flankers of the wall, yet did others continually ſucceede in their places without any reſpect of daunger, or without anie feare of death. And the others in the meane time with their croſſebowes and harguebuſſe ſhot did play vpon the enemie: and they had ſo diligent an eye vnto them wherſoeuer they ſawe them to ſtirre or to preſent themſelues in the defence of the walles, that they kept them in ſuch awe and ſubiection, as without euident perill, they durſt not abide vpon the rampiers: yet the beſieged laughing at the great paines and labour that the Chriſtians tooke, did purpoſely delay and protract the fight. For in very deed the foundation of the wall was laid ſo thicke and ſo large by the Sultan, and beſides, it was rampiered within, with ſuch ſtore of ſtones and bankes of earth, that the place was ſure enough of it ſelfe, without the aide or ſuccours of any armed forces. Neuertheleſſe for a while did Zachary hold on ſtiffely in his enterpriſe, to ſee if he could preuaile or find any entrie for his men. In the ende when he ſawe that he loſt his labour, and that it was almoſt an endleſſe worke, he chaunged his courſe: and to as litle purpoſe he determined to ſcale the walles, crying vnto his ſouldiers, To the ſcalado, to the ſcalado. The Turkes perceiuing from aboue the new attempt of the Chriſtians, did purpoſely ſuffer ſome of them to mount euen to the toppe of their ladders, & then ſaluting them with a great volley of harguebuſſe ſhot, and with great ſtones which they tumbled downe vpon them as thicke as hayle, they did eaſily turne both them and their ladders vpſide downe from the height of the wall to the bottome of the valley. For on that part the ground about the wall for a very litle way only was ſomwhat plaine and euen: but on a ſudden, it was inuironed with a mightie great downfall of a huge depth, exceeding hollow and ſteepe withall. Litle better entertainement had the aſſaylants on the other ſide, where Moſes with his company hauing reared their ladders, had diuerſe times raiſed vp the colours of the Albanois vpon the rampiers of the enemie: but the Pagans waxing raging mad to ſee this their brauerie and valure, cauſed a ſtrong ſupply of their companions to come thither, who held themſelues cō
               tinually in a readineſſe to helpe and relieue their fellowes where moſt neede ſhould be. And then all of them cloſe ioyned together, beſtirring thēſelues without all feare of death or daunger, did ouerthrow both men and ladders topſie turuy to the ground, killing and murthering many of them, ſo that in a ſmall ſpace they got the aduantage of the fight. And wheras they were but euen now as men confounded & vanquiſhed, they wreſted the victorie out of the hands of the Chriſtians, with ſuch furie and violence, that the fortune of the fight being ſuddenly chaunged, and in an inſtant; it ſeemed that God did fauour their part. Caſtriot being wounded with extreame griefe to ſee his men ſo ill handled, and aboue all for the hurt of Moſes, whom with muchMoſes wounded. adoe he had withdrawen from the ſhot of the enemie, and ſent vnto his tent to haue his wounds dreſſed: he was a litle retyred and gotten farther from the wall, where being couered with the targets of two ſouldiers on ech ſide one▪ he inuited ſome to ſtand by him & with their ſhot to play vpon the enemy. Others being freſh & ſound, he commaunded and encouraged to take againe the ladders and fiercely to terrifie the beſieged by renuing of the aſſault. Scanderbeg himſelf ſerued there that day with bow & ſhafts, which many of them within the towne did find to their coſts. For it is reported, that it was a wonderfull thing to ſee how many Turks he alone did kill that day: and that he neuer drew any one ſhaft in vaine. It was no hard matter to bring the ladders, and to raiſe them againſt the walles, but the ſouldiers beganne now to preſent themſelues in ſlender troupes, and they durſt not hazarde themſelues in mounting

vp vpon the walles. One of them ſtood looking vpon another: and albeit the greatThe Albanois repulſed from the aſſault. promiſes of the Prince inuited many of them to be forward: yet did the recompence ſeeme to be deadly and mortall, as it made none of them deſirous to aduenture for it. Thus either partie growing into cold blood by litle and litle, they left fighting at the laſt, and the darkneſſe of the night which was equally deſired both of the beſt and worſt ſouldiers, did end and determine that daies ſeruice. The Albanois held themſelues quiet and verie ſtill within their campe all that night, as thoſe whom both the ignominie of the day before and their preſent miſfortune did ſeeme to inuite to take their reſt with ſilence: for they had loſt two hundreth of their beſt ſouldiers, and of thoſe that were wounded there were aboue ſix hundreth, of whom there died of their wounds ſhortly after more then thirtie. Of the defendants, though there were a greater number ſlaine, and that the cries and plaints of an infinite number, which were wounded were heard on all parts: yet the repulſe of their enemies, and the preſeruation of the place, made them to demeane themſelues in great mirth till the next morning: paſſing away the night with great fiers, and they neuer ceaſed running vp and downe the walles and rampiers, ſinging of ſongs, and making great triumph and exceeding ioy.
            By this time had Ottoman intelligence of the ſiege of Sfetigrade, and it grieued himAmurath proclaimeth a new leauie of forces to returne into Epire. at the hart, often times complaining that when he was ſcarce gotten to one end of his trauels, and had but newly licenſed his armie to depart, he ſhould now againe be conſtrained to a worſe warre then euer, eſpecially in the beginning of winter: a ſeaſon not ſo ſtrange as vnfit and inconuenient to make warres in. Neuertheleſſe ſeing himſelfe vanquiſhed both with ſhame and with a certaine kind of neceſſitie and predeſtinate fortune, which would not permit him without ignominie and diſhonor to leaue his townes to the oppreſſion and furie of his enemie, he concluded againe to reuiue his former preparations, and to proclaime a new muſter: and to this effect he diſpatched on all parts his Saniacks, Baſſaes and Chieftaines, employing all meanes which he could poſſibly deuiſe to haſten his purpoſed iorney. And the firſt thing that he did, was, to publiſh abroad his returne into Epire, perhaps doing it of purpoſe to giue the more countenance and authoritie to the matter: or for that the Chriſtians being aſtoniſhed vpon the report of this newes, might be diſcouraged from proceeding with their ſiege. For to ſpeake the truth what I thinke thereof: hardly can I be perſwaded, that there is any likelihood or probabilitie, that the Sultan in the laſt point and period (as it were) of his age, and the daies being at ſhorteſt, in ſo intemperate a ſeaſon and time of the yeare, would be ſo fooliſh and vnaduiſed as to take the fielde at that time in proper perſon; conſidering eſpecially, that the matter was not of ſuch importance, that (if any accident ſhould haue happened) it could haue bene any great preiudice vnto his crowne or kingdome: but that ſome other rather then himſelfe might haue bene ſent, and employed in that action, and haue diſcharged it well and ſufficiently for his honor and reputation.
            The Prince of Epyre being nothing at all abaſhed for the late ſlaughter of his people, or through the diſfauor of fotrune for that daies ſeruice, did apply all his wittes, and emploied his beſt diligence, from time to time to moleſt and annoy them of the garriſon: ſomtimes in the day, and otherwhiles in the night, he would lead his troups cloſe vnder the walles, and caſting balles and pots of wild fire vp into the aire, which fell downe amongeſt the enemies: he ſought by theſe and all other meanes to aſtoniſh them: and ſometime he would ſend forth ſome ſmall number of ſouldiers, to gather together the dead bodies, and to drag them away, thinking by that policie to haue drawen them foorth to iſſue out vpon them. All theſe attemptes and cunning deuiſes

being practiſed in vaine by the Albanois, he concluded to make an end of this ſiege, after he had once more by one other aſſault tried the laſt and vttermoſt of his fortune, howſoeuer the ſame ſucceeded and fell out: and he was induced to this reſolution, partly by reaſon of the hurt of Moſes, and partly alſo becauſe the ill ſucceſſe of the laſtScanderbeg encourageth his ſouldiers to a new aſſault. aſſault might ſeeme in ſome ſort to be excuſed and imputed to the ſudden comming of the night vpon them, which might alſo promiſe the hope of better fortune to ſuch as had their mindes charged with care, and did interpret things according to their owne particular affections. Wherfore the day following after the ſun riſing, he cauſed it to be proclaimed throughout his campe by ſound of trumpet; that beſides the great rewards promiſed in recompence of their vertue who ſhould enter firſt, he did permit them to haue the pillage of the towne, and he amplified the matter with many good words, making it ſeeme a great thing in ſhew and beyond all credit. Beſides, he ſeemed to deplore and bewaile the ſhame & ignominie of the name of the Albanois: that ſo many excellent Captaines and braue ſouldiers, after innumerable proofes of their ſufficiencie and valure, ſhould to their ſingular reproch be enforced by a handfull of baſe and vile ſlaues to make ſo long abode, and ſo ſhamefully to ſpend their time vnder theſe walles which were ſo ſhamefully loſt vnto the enemie. And he demaunded of them, how long they would ſuffer and endure this infamie: that within their owne prouince, and in the middeſt of ſo many townes and fortreſſes, and nations of their obeiſance, one vile garriſon of the Barbarians who had nothing but bare walles to defend them, and were deſtitute of all other hope and comfort, ſhould keepe and holde out ſo long in this place, euen vnder their noſes, and ſhould in a manner triumph at their puſillanimitie and want of courage? That they ſhould hardly do any exployt of worth in a ſtrange countrie and a farre off in forraigne regions, if they had not the power to diſlodge and driue away theſe robbers who were gotten (as it were) within their doores, and did dwell euen within their very bowels.
            With theſe and ſuch like diſcourſes and examinations hauing ſet a newe edge on the courage of the Albanians, and made them more eger againſt the Infidels, he deuidedSecond aſſault to Sfetigrade. his companies, and hauing left about 600. for the guard & cuſtody of the campe, with the reſt he preſſed the towne on all ſides where it was approchable. At the firſt they began the fight with their ſhot only both on the one ſide and the other, ech man doing his beſt to draw bloud from his enemie. After they had ſufficiently skirmiſhed together in that manner, and that they beganne now to growe in choller: the moſt hardie and ſuch as were well chafed betooke themſelues to their ladders, being minded to talke with the enemy ſomewhat neerer. Once or twice were they couragiouſly repulſed by the defendants, and they gaue them not ſo much leaſure, as to raiſe their ladders to the walles: but at the laſt the Barbarians being ſurmounted by the hardineſſe and obſtinacie of the Chriſtians, who no otherwiſe then as Lions almoſt famiſhed, doe ruſh vpon the flocke without any remembrance either of ſnares or other trappes that men doe vſe to lay for them: ſo they, furiouſly perſiſting in the aſſault without all feare of death or daunger, by little and little, did yeelde and giue place to ſo extreame furie: and wanting both ſtrength and weapons to keepe off the enemie, they retyred themſelues behinde the rampiers in ſuch ſort, that they gaue the ChriſtiansThe Albanoys winning the walles of Sfetigrade vpon a ſurmiſe and feare of ſecret ambuſhments forſake and looſe the towne. good meanes and opportunitie to haue made themſelues maſters of the place. But ſee what feare of Ambuſhments may doe: our men who till then were ſo fierce and couragious, and who in a cruell and bloudie aſſault, ſhewed themſelues ſo prodigall of their liues, and ſo careleſſe of death it ſelfe which they had continually euen before their eyes: aſſoone as they perceiued the enemie to waxe faint, and that one after another did abandon the wall, they beganne preſently to miſtruſt ſome policie, and hauing

a conceipt and imagination, that ſome great troups of the enemie did lye cloſe behind the rampiers in ſome ambuſcado, and did attend there to bid them to ſome ill banquet: they grew more cold and negligent in their actions, and caſting their eyes about them on ech ſide, and carefully regarding all places neare them, they did expect nothing elſe, but euen in a moment to be all of them deſtroied: ſuch was their vaine and fooliſh opinion. Herewithall had the Barbarians good leiſure to bethinke themſelues, and to prouide for that which ſhould be needfull and neceſſary: and their companions flocking thither from diuerſe quarters vpon the rumour of that fraie, and bringing with them great ſtore and quantitie of weapons, did reuiue both their courage, and their good fortune. In this concourſe many a man loſt his life, both on the one ſide and the other: but many more on the part of the aſſailants then of the defendants: and more had bene ſlaine if the readineſſe and good deuoire of Zachary had not hindred them: for he at another part of the wall hauing raiſed vp many ladders, did interrupt this their victorie, diuerting the enemie by a new onſet: ſo that they were conſtrained to ſeparate themſelues, and to ſunder their forces. All this while you might haue ſeene Caſtriot with his ſquadrons, ſometimes approching neare the wall, to terrifie them within: and ſometimes doing the dutie of a ſimple ſouldier, leading them the way againſt their enemies; one while by prayers, another while by reproches he would ſolicite and animate them on. The archers and other ſhotte being placed round about the walles, did keepe their ſtand where they were firſt appointed, and ſtill as the furie of the fight encreaſed and continued, they did neuer ceaſe to play vpon the Infidels as they marched vp and downe vpon the curtins. When the defendants did perceiue that their numbers did decreaſe, and that the Chriſtians did encreaſe in courage and obſtinacie farre beyond humaine reaſon: they doubted what would become of it, and they feared the iſſue of that daies iorney: wherefore to ſtop the courſe of their furie, and to gaine time to themſelues, they deuiſed this policie. They ſnatched vp the Turkiſh enſignes from the rampiers, and calling to the ChriſtiansA policy of the Turkes within Sfetigrade with a loud voice, they deſired a truce and ſuſpenſion of armes for a litle ſpace, and that they might haue libertie to parley with Scanderbeg. This was granted vnto them by the Albanians with the conſent of their Generall: and both parts being commanded to ſurceaſe from hoſtilitie, the Infidels were permitted to ſpeake their minds. Thereupon one of them, an auncient and graue olde man (after he had firſt yeeldedSpeech of a Turk
                     •
                   of Sfetigrade deſiring a parley and truce for a day. thanks to the Generall and his companies, for ſo courteous and liberall a graunt made to their enemie) he told them that his deſire was by the conſent of this companie, that they might haue truce granted them for that day onely, to the intent during this ſmall time of delay, they might conſult amongſt themſelues vpon the forme of their capitulation, whereunto their whole companie was inclined with one mind and general conſent: and that the next day they would ſend certen deputies vnto him with conditions, whereunto they would ſubmit and yeeld themſelues: which if they were agreeable to him and to his liking, they ſhould take it as a ſingular and high fauour: whereof notwithſtanding conſidering his clemencie they neuer made any doubt nor diſtruſt, that if he did miſlike of their offers, and would not allow of them, that they would wholly referre themſelues to his owne diſcretion and ordinance; and that they would not in any ſort refuſe nor depart from his arbiterment, and iudgment: and they were in good hope to conclude all things with him to the good and profit of both parties. At the firſt Scanderbeg ſhewed himſelfe highly diſcontented and nothing tractable to thoſe demaunds of the Mahomatiſtes, iudging verie wiſely, that they ſought for nothing elſe, but fraudulently by theſe ſhifts to deferre the aſſault for that day: and either to depriue him of that aduantage whereat he had them: or elſe in

               hope of ſuccours from their ſoueraigne as the experience did afterwards make it manifeſt.Anſwer of Scanderbeg to the ſpeech of the Turke demaunding truce. And therefore he enioyned them to declare preſently what their intent and meaning was: otherwiſe they ſhould looke for the vttermoſt extreamitie of a freſh aſſault liuely renued and recontinued: that all time of delay was impertinent, conſidering that the eſtate of their affaires was brought to ſuch neceſſitie, and to an extreame exigent. Neuertheleſſe at the length being vanquiſhed with their importunate flatteries,Scanderbeg faultie in ouermuch courteſie and facilitie, retireth frō the aſſault, and accordeth truce to the Turkes. and the entreatie of his owne ſouldiers, he was content to giue ouer the aſſault. True it is that he ſaw, that if there were any good hope to force the place, that this ſmall time of delay could not depriue him of that aduantage: wherefore retyring his enſignes, and engines of aſſault, and his troups being withdrawen into the campe. The reſt of that day, and the night following was ſpent in great reſt and quietnes.
            The next morning, foure Turkes, men notably ſubtile and wily, being deputed to treat vpon this matter, came to ſpeake with the Prince of Albanie; and brought him diuerſe exquiſite gifts and preſents. The conditions whereupon they offered to capitulate were of that nature and ſubſtance, that not onely any victor, but euen men vanquiſhed would haue bene loth to accept of them: and they did it purpoſely to prolong the time, that whileſt theſe ſhould be reiected, in ſtead of them they might preferre others, and after that againe others: by meanes whereof, the treatie might be drawen at length. And this was the ſumme of their demaund, That the ancient citizens beingConditions propounded by the Turkes of Sfetigrade. reſtored within the towne with their old priuiledges and immunities, both the houſes and the fieldes ſhould be equally deuided amongſt them all: and that in this manner they reſigning and yet retaining ſtill the towne, would become his ſubiects, and yeeld vnto him perpetuall fidelitie and obeiſance, vtterly diſclaiming the name and gouernment of Ottoman.
                And they required alſo, tenne thouſand aſpres in readie money to be giuen to their Gouernor. The Chriſtians gaue them no anſwer, but onely laughing at theſe demaunds, through pure deſpite which they conceiued of the ſame, they cryed preſently on all parts, To armes. And thus with iniuries and ſcoffes were theſe deceiptfull meſſengers diſmiſſed together with their guilfull and fallacious preſents. The Paynims left not for all that, but ſuddenly ſent againe the ſame perſons to attend and know the laſt reſolution of the Chriſtian Generall, and in caſe they could not otherwiſe diſpatch, to referre the whole to his diſcretion. This ſtrange alteration in the mindes of the enemie, and their ſuſpected liberalitie, though it did keepe Scanderbeg from beleeuing them ouer raſhly; yet neuertheleſſe he thought it not good to reiect theſe meanes altogether: wherefore he tolde them plainely, that he would notAnſwere of Scanderbeg to the conditions propoū
                     ded by the Turkes of Sfetigrade. change nor alter any things of his firſt offers made vnto them, when he ſummoned them at ſuch time as their eſtate was not empayred, nor his camp then endammaged: that they ought not now to thinke thoſe offers grieuous or iniurious, which themſelues at another time had iudged to be equall and indifferent to the Sfetigradians: that they ſhould not expect any other compoſition at his handes: that if they would accept this, he was content without any further loſſe to take the towne into his hands, but if their drift and purpoſe were, by theſe ſubtilties and diſguiſements of faire and cunning ſpeeches to gaine time and to perſiſt in their obſtinate wilfulnes, that they ſhould not for their parts, euer after looke but for all hoſtilitie and extreame rigour: that they ſhould al of them hold this for certaine and determined, that nothing ſhould end this ſiege without the death and deſtruction of them all.
            
            Whileſt the Barbarians did in this manner come and goe to and fro, and that they did thus faine and diſſemble, three whole daies were ſpent and conſumed in theſe emparlances, and at length the ende made manifeſt, what was their intent and purpoſe. On the one ſide therfore the ſubtiltie and inuention of the defendants was diſcouered:

on the other ſide newes being now come of the ſtirring and ſpeedie comming of the great Turke, it did greatly grieue and perplexe the minde of the Prince of Albanie. To quit the place beſieged, the late iniurie and abuſe proffered by the Turkes would not permit him: and to continue there, he ſawe that both the doubt of the enemie, (who was reported to be neare at hand behind his backe) and the importance of all his affaires, which were of greateſt conſequence did diſſwade him from it: Notwithſtanding he remained there a while longer, till ſuch time as there came more certaine aduertiſements of the preparation made by Amurath. But it ſeemed, the very deſtinies did oppoſe themſelues againſt his deſires. For the heauens powred foorth ſuch maruellous abundance of moiſtures and ſhowers in all that time, that the ſouldiers could not ſet their feete without their trenches, much leſſe could they attempt any thing againſt the walles. The raine being ceaſed, Scanderbeg proclaimed one aſſault more againſt the towne to be giuen the day following: and he gaue good order and direction, that all things requiſite ſhould be made and prouided in a readineſſe. Himſelfe abſtained from ſleepe all the whole night: ſometimes being buſied and emploied in diuerſe matters, which were moſt needfull and materiall: & ſomtimes did he walkScanderbeg encourageth his ſouldiers to a new aſſault. vp and downe his campe here and there, encouraging and exhorting his people: often times telling them, that they muſt either driue the enemie cleane out of Epire, or not returne any more to the campe, till they had made themſelues maiſters of the towne: that the realme of Epire did ſeeme diſguiſed & deformed: that nothing could be ſaid or eſteemed in ſafetie and ſecuritie, if the Pagans ſhould be ſuffered any longer to abide and continue within the countrey. And admit that there were no perill or daunger to be feared, nor any diſhonor did enſue by ſuffering them, yet what reaſon had they to endure thoſe outrages of their enemies? and how long would they ſwallow vp thoſe deriſions, and diſgratious ſcoffes and abuſes which had bene offered them?
            
            Thus the night being quickely ſpent in theſe conſultations and prouiſions for the intended ſeruice, the day began now to approch, before the breake whereof Scanderbeg drawing foorth his troups, did lodge them all againſt the walles: but the ſouldiers found it more painefull to creepe vp againſt the hill, then was ordinarie or accuſtomed:Third aſſaul
                     •
                   to Sfetigrade. and the way was more ſoft and ſlipperie vnder their feete, by reaſon of the great ſtore of water wherewith the earth was waſhed: that it made them to drawe their ladders and other engines with great paine, and (as a man may ſay) to dragge them with their teeth. Neuertheleſſe the Chriſtians, being lately incenſed with choller, and inflamed with anger, did not feele either the difficultie or the painefulneſſe of their attempt. The beſieged who doubted of no ſuch matter, at the firſt did reſort to the defence of the walles in ſmall numbers, and were ſomewhat negligent in their deuoire: but hauing quickely made prouiſion of all things, they haſtened thither with greater forces, and reenforcing their defence, they were of ſufficient power to repulſe the aſſailants. From thenceforth the audacitie and forwardneſſe of the Epirotes was not ſo fierce and violent as before: and the ſwords and countenance of the enemie being now neare them and at hand, did inuite and perſwade them to carie themſelues aduiſedly, and with diſcretion: and not with furie and raſhneſſe, and too much hardineſſe of courage. Wherefore caſting a carefull eye to the blowes of the enemie on the one ſide, which fought with them aloft from the walles, they tooke a conceit immediately, that there was another enemie at their backes: and that the rumor (which had bene reported of the returne of Amuarth) was not in vaine, nor a tale falſely giuen out. The bruite of this concepit did ſo encreaſe from mouth to mouth, and it tooke ſuch force in their credulous hearts, by a certaine apprehenſion of vaine feare that they ſeemed to ſee before their eyes thoſe preparations of the enemie, which were yet

ſcarcely begun: and they imagined the Sultan to be alreadie come into Epire, who was yet quiet and at reſt at home in Andrinople. Scanderbeg though he were of an inuincible courage, yet perceiuing this feare and terror of his ſouldiers, was conſtrained to yeeld to the preſent neceſſity: and by reaſon that all things were in a kind of horror, confuſion and diſorder: he cauſed to ſound a retrait, and to ſurceaſe from the aſſault.
            It was ſcant the ninth houre of the day, but that Scanderbeg (after his men had takenSiege of Sfetigrade ra
                     •
                  ſed by Scanderbeg a repaſt) commaunded them to truſſe vp their baggage: hauing firſt throwen downe their trenches, and ſet fire on the other fortifications of their campe. The trees and other frutes in the country had not bene exempted from the wrath and fury of the common ſouldiour, but they had made ſpoile and hauocke of all, if the Prince of Albanie had not repreſſed their rage: telling them, that it was to be hoped one day when it ſhould pleaſe God to be more fauorable vnto them, to recouer the towne, and to reeſtabliſh the ſame in her former eſtate. And therefore without any ſignes or markes of an enemie left behind him, he diſlodged as ſecretly as he could, and tooke the direct way towards Croie. It is reported that Scanderbeg loſt at this ſiege of Sfetigrade
               Number of Chriſtians ſlaine at the ſiege of Sfetigrade. fiue hundreth men and more: which opinion in my iudgement hath more likelihood of truth, then others who affirme, that at the time when he diſlodged thence with his armie, he had not loſt aboue ſixtie. A thing moſt abſurd and far from all reaſon, conſidering the great number of the Turkes which were ſlaine at the former expedition, when they beſieged the ſame place: as all men do confeſſe iointlie and with one accord: vnleſſe perhappes we will ſeeme to ſay as the fabulous Poets haue imagined of ſome men: that the bodies of the Chriſtians were leſſe penetrable then thoſe of the infidels.
            It was on the three and twentieth day of October that (the ſiege of Sfetigrade beingScanderbeg prouideth for▪ the defence of Croy and other places. raiſed) Scanderbeg with his armie returned to Croie, where he had ſcant a minute of leaſure to recreate and to refreſh himſelfe, but that he gaue preſent and ſpeedie order for the enrolling of men, and made choiſe of Captaines and leaders, to whom he appointed their ſeuerall charges according as the conſequence of his affaires, and the newes lately brought vnto him did require. The towne was voided of all ſortes ofNumber of ſouldiers in garriſon within Croy againſt the ſiege of Amurath. people, who for their age and ſexe were vnfit to beare armes: and it was ſtuffed with a garriſon of 2000. men, of whom ſome were Albanois, ſome Italians, ſome Almains, Scla
                  •
               onians & Frenchmen. All which neuertheleſſe did agree in ſuch vnitie & good accorde, as better could not be imagined: the which was in the ende made manifeſt and apparant by the happy ſucceſſe and honour which they purchaſed by the worthy defence of the towne againſt Amurath▪ Vranocontes as in times paſt, ſo now with theVranocontes the Gouernour of Croy, his commendation generall liking, and with a wonderfull conſent and allowance of all men, had the abſolute, charge, authoritie, and gouernement of the place. Very hardly was there anie other to be found in the whole army more fit and worthy of this degree, or who was more in fauour, or better accepted of the ſouldiers. He was a perſonage of ſingular reſolution and conceipt in the middeſt of all perils and greateſt hazards: he was euer readie in the performance of his charge, were i
                  •
                in commaunding or obeying: he alwaies vſed and that with an excellent good grace, to attribute the praiſe and deſert of any ſeruice well affected, to the ſouldiers in generall, rather then by robbing others of their merits to appropriate it vnto himſelfe. And beſides all this, he had behaued him ſelfe well and valiantly during his whole life. Both the goodly repreſentation of his perſon, and the grauitie of his yeares did make him to be reuerenced of all men: and the auncient Nobilitie of his race, did greatly beautifie and (as it were) ſeaſon all theſe good parts in him. Wherefore to confirme and continue this good opinion conceiued of him by the Albanois with ſo generall a conſent and liking, he promiſed to

make no ſpare of his paines nor vigilancy, though it were with the loſſe of his life in all occaſions where it was needfull to be emploied. To Stelluſa likewiſe and Petralba, and other places of ſtrength, were ſent both gouernors and ſufficient forces to defend thē. Neither was it forgotten to appoint a great multitude of perſons in all the towns, who ſhould make prouiſion of victuals & munitions from all parts. But notwithſtanding all the care, paines, and induſtry taken in that behalfe, yet hardly could they make prouiſion of the ſame for 3. whole moneths, by reaſon both of the continuall ſpoile and waſt made by the wars, and for their daily attendance and emploiment in armes, which had cauſed the Epirots that year before to neglect their husbandry, & not to attend to tillage. Notwithſtanding the report is, that certaine marchaunts of Venice, and others of the inhabitants there in the Venetian territories, did furniſh them of victuals ſecretly and vnder hand: becauſe at that time (ſuch was the ill hap of the Chriſtians) the lords of that Signiory were in league and amity with the Turkiſh Monarke. CertaineScanderbeg aided in all his wars with ſupplies of money by the Venetians. Venetians in peace & amity with the Turk. it is, that Scanderbeg did neuer faile of great ſupplies of money from that eſtate, and during his whole life, whileſt he was in wars, he did atchieue & go through them vnder the ſupport and fauor of the Venetians: referring vnto them the glory of his moſt memorable exploits and triumphs. I doubt not but many wil maruell, no leſſe then I my ſelf, whence it ſhould proceed, that the Venetian ſhould make this peace with the Infidel, not cōpriſing Scanderbeg in the ſame: conſidering that they were before ſo ſtrictly aſſociated together, by ſo many bonds of friendſhip and amity. For my part I will not wrong that Senat, which hath euer bene reputed both ſage & religious, to ſuſpect that they did it in any other reſpect and conſideration, but only for the good and preſeruation of Greece, which ſeemed then to be banded and deuided euen within and againſt it ſelfe. And therefore I leaue this matter for others to giue their iudgements vpon it.
            Prouiſion being made of graine and other victuals within Croy, the common garners and magazins were filled in ſuch rate and proportion, as it was ſufficient to ſuſtaine the ſoldiers for one whole yeare. Then was there preparation alſo made for ſupplies of all kinds of ſhot, both long bows and artillery: the charge & managing whereof was continued to the French-men, & they had allowance at all times both in peace and war, for each mans pay 5. crownes a moneth. And moſt part of the garriſon within Croy were harguebuſsiers & croſſe bowes. The affairs of Croy being well ſetled and aſſured, that which remained of the victuals, did Scanderbeg cauſe to be tranſported and deuided to other townes and places of the Prouince. For his owne part, before he would leauy any new forces to be retained to himſelfe for the moleſting and inuading of the enemy, as he was accuſtomed, he thought it good firſt to go and viſit thoſe troupes▪ which he had lately ordained for the defence and guard of the frontiers. And therefore he called vnto him Moſes and ſome few horſemen beſides, with whom hee went both to take order, and giue directions for all things, and to ſend forth eſpials to ſound out the enterpriſes of Amurath, that he might be fully enformed of all things in particular. There was no occaſion neither of froſtes nor cold, nor the earth all coueredScanderbeg 
                     •••
                   induſtry and great carefulneſſe. with ſnow, that could hinder or ſtay the induſtry and diligence of this laborious and watchfull Chiefetaine: neither the greatneſſe or difficulty of his affairs or determinations, nor the hard trauell of his painfull iourneis could terrifie him, but that euery day more reſolutely then other, he did vndertake all the labors that belonged to his charge, viſiting and reuiſiting ſometimes one place, ſometimes another. And at other times would he diſguiſe himſelfe, and in the habit of a ſheepherd, would go euen vnderScanderbeg diſguiſeth him ſelfe to eſpie aduantages vpon his enemies the walles of Sfetigrade, to eſpy if he could by any policy or ſtratageme (as he had in times paſt) or by force, or by fauor of ſecret trains and ambuſhmens cloſely laied, ſeize vpon that towne, and get it out of the hands of the Ottoman. By meanes whereof, they

within had no liberty to reſt themſelues: but (as if they had bin ſtill beſieged) they ſtirred not from their gates, neither durſt they at any time be negligent in keeping good watch and ward, and in looking to all things, with all care as they were accuſtomed.
            During that time that Scanderbeg was thus carefully buſied about his affairs, the eſpialsAmurath vpon the newes of the ſiege raiſed at Sfetigrade referreth his iourney into Epire. being returned brought him tidings, that there was no more talke of aſſembling any forces by the Sultan, but that the fury of his armes was deferred, and that Amurath had put off the war of Epire til the next ſpring: for he hauing heard of the departure of the chriſtians from the ſiege of Sfetygrade, needed not to be entreated (conſidering the ſeaſon of the yeare) to make ſtay of his preparations, which he had begun with ſo great heate and vehemency, but changing his former order & decree, he had cauſed a new edict to be publiſhed▪ That al his ſoldiers and captains who were appointed & enrolled for that action of Epire, ſhould make their repair and rende vous at Andrinople the 15. day of March following. He had a great deſire to haue that voyage & the ſiege of Croy to be concealed and kept cloſe: but he could not diſguiſe nor conuay his matters ſo cunningly, but that euery man might aſſure himſelfe that Scanderbeg was the enemie againſt whom thoſe forces ſhould be emploied. Vpon this determination of the Turkiſhe Monarch, the Chriſtians likewiſe had leiſure for a while to breath themſelues. Wherefore the garriſon vpon the frontiers being diminiſhed by the one moity, there were not left aboue 2000. at the moſt, who building for thēſelues lodgings & cabins (as the faſhion is of ſouldiers) did prouide againſt the iniury of the weather, & winter ſeaſon, and the reſidue of them were diſmiſſed & had leaue to depart home. The kingCroy repaired and fortified. of Epire with Moſes & the others, being returned to Croy, did for a while cōtinue there, during which time, he cauſed certaine baſtils and platformes to be added to the other fortifications of the towne, and to repaire the wals on that ſide which lay towards Tiranne, where antiquity and continuance of time had made thē weake & ruinous. This done, as he was euer ſtirring & impatient of reſt, ſodainly he ſet foot in ſtirrop, poſting to this and to that place: and being meanly apparelled, and with 10. men only in his cō
               pany, he went to the Potentates his next neighbors and allies, and to the gouernors of the Venetian towns, labouring to embarke them in this war, and to put them in mind of the imminent danger and ruine, that did threaten them euen at hand, and did hang ouer their heades: both admoniſhing and encouraging them to the remembrance of their deuoire and duty. Neuertheles the moſt part of that winter, he paſſed couertly in the confines of Macedony, in company of the garriſon which was there appointed. All which time, a man ſhould ſcarce haue ſeene them of Sfetygrade, to iſſue forth out of their gates, for that the neareneſſe of our campe being but 15. miles off, made them to ſtand carefully vpon their guard, and did keepe them in great feare and awe.
            The cold winter being thus ſpent and paſſed ouer, with the new ſpring came new1450. labours and calamities, and all things grew more troubleſome both in publicke and in particular. There paſſed almoſt no day nor night, without ſome letters or intelligence brought to Scanderbeg. Amongſt the Infidelles, one while came ſome to yeeld themſelues to his ſeruice: at an other time, others remembring their auncient familiarity, would enforme him truly of the deſſeignes and enterpriſes of Amurath: which cauſed many to plucke vp their ſpirites more and more; and to others, it gaue occaſion either of feare or hardines, according to the habite & diſpoſition of ech mans heart & corage. But for that he had of late ſufficiently prouided for all his townes, and nothing had binScanderbeg 
                     ••••
                  ieth an ar
                  
                     〈…〉
                   to make reſ
                     ••
                  ance againſt the 
                     •••
                  aſion 
                     〈…〉
                  tended by 
                     •
                  murath. reuoked nor diminiſhed of thoſe prouiſiōs▪ there was no great matter now remaining to take order for, but only to aſſemble ſome forces in forme of an army, with which he might annoy the enemy ſometimes in the open field, and ſomtimes in the ſtraights of the mountaines according as the oportunity of time and place ſhould giue him leaue.

That ſo when they ſhould afterwardes beleaguer Croy, he might be the better able to weary and annoy them, as he had oftentimes at the ſiege of Sfetigrade, atempted and done the like with happy ſucceſſe and good fortune. Of all his Chiefetains, Scanderbeg had not then the company or aſſiſtance of any, but only of Tanuſe, of Streeſe, and of the Dibrian. For the others hauing bene ſent and emploied in the like occurrences 
                  •
               nd occaſions, were deuided into ſundry townes and ſeuerall fortreſſes. He ſent therefore thoſe three with all ſpeed to leauy men throughout all the Prouince: but by reaſon that it was drawen dry of good and able men (the flower and youth of the realme being diſtributed into diuers places & caſtels) they ſpent many daies in the muſtering and leauying of thoſe forces. And this was the cauſe that Scanderbeg (as the report goeth)Dalmatia or Sclauony vpon the ſea. in this warre, did wage many of the ſubiects of the Venetians, and ſome alſo out of the next Dalmatia, or that part of Sclauony, that confineth vpon the ſea.
            The Prince of the Turkes in this meane while, had at the time prefixed, aſſembled the moſt part of his forces, & yet he wanted many thouſands to furniſh vp ſo huge andAmurath leauieth his army and maketh preparations for his iourney into Epire. maſſy an army as that which he had the yeare laſt paſt. By reaſon, that either the far diſtance of places, or the difficulty of the waies did hinder ſome of them, either more or leſſe. And therfore attending till ſuch time as he ſaw his numbers and preparations in all points performed, becauſe he would looſe no time, he emploied that ſpace in the prouiſion of other things neceſſary for an action of that weight and importance, and eſpecially for the gathering of victuals. Albeit order had bin taken, that euery ſouldier ſhould furniſh him ſelf in particular with victuals for many daies prouiſion: for he was fully reſolued, that the Chriſtians had not left any corn vpon the ground, and that they would waſt and deſtroy all the paſture and herbage vppon the firſt tidings of his approach. It were almoſt a thing impoſsible to number vp all the inſtrumentes and engines of aſſault which were prepared. Amongſt the reſt, there were many tooles and inſtruments of iron vſed by husbandmen, beſides an infinit number of bars and mattocks, & pickaxes made of iron crooked of purpoſe to dig in mines, as was afterwards ſeene by experience: for the Sultan had bin perſwaded to vſe this deuiſe as a moſt commodious and fit meane to carry the city of Croy, which otherwiſe was inexpugnable. In like maner, great prouiſion was made of litle peeces of artillery, ſuch as might conueniently be caried vpon camels, and other beaſtes of cariage. And as for great ordinance to ſerue for battery, he prouided great ſtore of braſſe, and other rude and maſſy mettall, which being caried in groſſe, ſhould afterwardes be founded and▪ caſt for that
                  Number of Turkes in the army of Amurath at the ſiege of Croy 160000. 
                     
                        ••
                     n
                        •
                     
                  
                purpoſe. Theſe things thus prepared, and his troupes being fully furniſhed and complete to their perfect numbers, it is generally agreed by all the Hiſtoriographers, that his army conſiſted of 160000. fighting men: beſides artificers, as carpenters, maſons, and all other ſorts of handy crafts▪men and laborers, which are reported to haue followed this camp, part of thē vpon the purſe and pay of the Ottoman, and part at their owne charges for the hope and deſire of prey and purchaſe. All of them being perſwaded, that the ſiege of Croy and their abode in Epire, would endure a very long time and ſpace, and would proue very tedious: for by reaſon that there went many ſtraunge rumors & reports of the ſtrong ſituation of this city, and of the rare fortifications therof, as of a place impregnable, Amurath was determined not to returne againe to Andrinople, till ſuch time as he had gotten it into his hands and poſſeſsion.
            About the fift of Aprill, aſſoone as all things were in a readineſſe, and that the hoaſtAl
                     •
                  anzes or the Turkiſh van
                     •
                  
                  currours. Sebalias Ze
                     •
                  
                  reneſſe. was ready to march: the vauntcurrours of Alchanzes vnder the leading of Sebalias Ze
                     •
                  reneſſe (a man of great practiſe and iudgement in actions military) were ſent into Macedony, at the ſame inſtant that the king of Epire (hauing all at leiſure raiſed his forces, and diſpoſed good watches, wards, and skouts throughout all the mountains and

woods) did ride vp & down here & there courſing ouerall the Prouince, & taking order for the eſtate of his affairs. By this time he had retired alſo his garriſon frō the frontiers, and had with great diligence gathered all his troups together. All this notwithſtanding I doe not find, that during this ſiege of Croy, he had with him ſelfe and in hisNumber of Scanderbeg his army againſt Amurath at the ſiege of Croy 8000. men only horſe and foote. owne company, more then 8000. fighting men, whereof 2000. were footmen, and the reſidue horſemen: neither do any of thoſe who haue hiſtoriſed his actes affirme any otherwiſe. I do ſuppoſe that the cauſe of this ſmall number proceeded either of the ſcarcity of ſouldiers (as was lately touched) becauſe he was of neceſsity to depart, and to ſeuer them into ſo many places, or it might be, that he thought it more expedient to dally with the enemy, and to trauell him by litle & litle, holding him continually in alarme, & ſo to reſerue the chiefe ſtrength of his forces to other neceſsities & diuers accidents of fortune. Conſidering that the war was to be made in the very center & bowels (as it were) of the Prouince, and that now the conſequence of his whole eſtate and kingdome was in queſtion, and he was to ſet vp his reſt vpon the ſucceſſe of that warre.
            Three daies before the arriuall of the Mahometan troupes into Epire, Scanderbeg
               Scanderbeg ſpoileth his own countrey before the comming of the Turkes army into Epire. with his horſemen beating ouer all the champion countrey, had trampled vnder foot, waſted, and ſpoiled, or by ſword and fire had conſumed and deſtroied all the corne, and whatſoeuer elſe was found fruitfull vpon the ground. And afterwards being aduertiſed by meſſage vppon meſſage of the approach of the enemy, leauing the plaine countrey, he retired himſelfe vppon a mountaine called Tumeniſta, about foure milesTumeniſta a mountaine 4. miles frō Croy. from Croy, there to take further aduiſe and counſell for his proceedings, according as the time, and the courſe of his affaires ſhould perſwade and induce him.
            The Cauallary of the Turke holding on their march towards Epire, encountred not with any in the way that made head againſt them, but paſsing quietly through the Prouince, they did at length make their entry without any impechment into the territorySebalias beginneth the ſiege of Croy. of Croy. And after they had made diligent ſearch round about the city, what places were moſt ſafe and ſecure to encampe in, and in what quarter they might moſt cō
               modiouſly come to aſſault the towne, they tooke their lodging at the laſt in Tiranna,
               Tyranna. The nature of the ſoile & the circuit of the territory of Croy. and there pitched their tents and pauilions. The countrey thereabouts is a faire and goodly plaine of ſufficient ſpace and largeneſſe, pleaſant to the eie, and very fertile and fruitefull: yet is it more apt for tillage and to beare corne, then for any other fruite or commodity. It extendeth it ſelfe from Croy, to the towne of the Parthinois. But before I proceed any further, many reaſons do induce me here briefly to touch the originallParthinia in Epire her originall. of this towne, and of the ancient eſtate thereof: and eſpecially that which the auncients haue celebrated touching the ſame, & which is not vnknowen nor hiddē from the poſterity. It may eaſily be gathered, that this towne was of good reckonning with the reſt of the towns of that Prouince before the ciuill wars of Caeſar and Pompey. The ruines thereof, with many ſhewes and particular markes and monumentes which areParthinia ruinated by Iulius Caeſar. yet left, may yeeld no obſcure repreſentation of the ancient nobility of the place, and of the reputation which it once had. For the report is, that it was ouerthrowen and ruinated by Iulius Caeſar, when he beſieged Pompey and the Romaine Senate within the towne of Duras. After which time it remained ſtill in the ſame caſe & deſolation, andDuraz or Dirachin or Epidamum. there is not yet to this day any tract or appearaunce that it was euer reſtored or repared, ſaue only that the inhabitants haue in ſome ſort endeuored in continuance of time to renue it, ſo far forth as it might ſerue them for their common vſe and neceſsity. As concerning the name thereof, I find not that it had euer any other either at the firſt by impoſition, or ſince by vſurpation, neither do the ancients make mention of any particular man to be the founder thereof. And therefore we may referre the originall and foundation of it, to the firſt inhabitors of it: which the very name alſo doth demonſtrate

and antiquity teſtifieth no leſſe. And we ſee that the nation of the Parthinois, was, & is euer accounted amongſt the moſtrenowmed peoples of Epire. Now at this timeParthinois, or Parthins, or Praeſe. by another word themſelues do call it Praeſe: and they do not onely comprehend all thoſe within the number of her inhabitants, who dwell within the encloſures of her ruinous wals, but euen them alſo who inhabit the ſuburbs, and all other places adioyning with that territory: and the place is in all parts very delectable, & wel ſtored with all kindes of commodities. The people are a very war like kind of nation and they are at this day numbred amongſt the other peoples of Albanie. But at this time the report of the comming of the Barbarians, had made them all to forſake their dwellings, and with their families and houſholdes to ſeeke refuge within the fortreſſes, leauing the land naked and in a manner deſert.
            
               Sebalias hauing encamped his ſouldiers to the moſt aduantage, and hauing fitted allThe manner of Sebalias encā
                  ping before Croy. things ſo conueniently, that he might very well contemne & ſet at naught all the force which the enemy ſhould attempt againſt him: he now tooke not any regard to any, but to them only which were within the towne. He had barred and ſtopped vp all the paſſages and waies leading to the city, to the intent no ſuccours nor victuals ſhould be brought vnto them. The Turkes had not brought with them any other weapons, wherewith to annoy the beſieged, but only their lances & cimitaries. Beſides, Sebalias had no deſire, either to courſe ouer the country, or to pil and ſpoile it, being made wiſe by the old and late misfortune and miſhaps of his companions. And the Sultan alſo at his departure had expreſly commāded him, & ſtraightly forbidden him, except it were vpon an extremity, not to make any attempt vpon the enemy. The ſame conſideration alſo withheld our men from ſeeking to fight with the Infidels, and did vrge them to remit the good ſucceſſe and encounter of this war to the comming of the TurkiſhScanderbeg taeketh a ſuruey of the Turkes campe before Croy. Number of Turkes, vauntcurrours vnder Sebalias at the ſiege of Croy. Emperour. For Scanderbeg being gone with part of his people to take a view of the campe of the Infidels, and hauing learned ſome thing touching his purpoſe and counſels, to the intent he might enterpriſe vpon him as he ſhould ſee cauſe and oportunity; hee found their puiſſance to be ſo great (for they were 40000. men ſtrong, as they were the yeare before) and their Generall did cary himſelfe with ſuch wonderfull prouidence and dexterity both in the ſeating of his campe, and in ordering of all other his affaires, that he retired himſelfe vnto his Fort as ſecredy as he might, without attempting any thing againſt them. Beſides, he doubted leaſt the Sultan ſhould come ſodainly vppon him, and ſhould charge him when he leaſt ſuſpected, and ſo encloſe and ſhut him vp behinde at his backe. He remained therefore quiet within his trenches, watching and attending the comming of Amurath, that when he ſhould once hane diſplaied all his forces, and was planted with his whole campe before the walles, then he might haue the more aduantage and cōmodity to inuado their tents diſperſed here and there, the multitude being in confuſion and diſorder, and then hee might weary them with continuall onſets and inuaſions, eſpecially when they had begun to aſſault the towne, and that the beſt forces of the Ottoman being buſied in diuerſe actions, their trenches might more fitly and conueniently be enda
                  •••
               aged.
            During theſe counſelles and deliberations ſo aduiſedly pl
                  •••
               ed by the Chriſtians, the royall enſignes of the Ottoman did dayly arriue more and more, and the wholeAmurath arriueth in 
                     •
                  pire and encampeth before Croy. countrey was filled with armed ſouldiours. In the end of Aprill, Amurath the great Turke, accompanied with Mahomet his ſonne, with the greateſt of his nobility, and the chiefeſt ſtrength of his whole army, ioyning him ſelfe to thoſe forces which had already encamped before the city, came and pitched his tents alſo before Croy, where his Tombe was prouided and made ready for him. There was litle leſſe then twenty daies betweene the comming of the 
                  〈…〉
                and the arriuall of Amurath, neither

ought it to ſeeme ſtrange vnto any man. For by reaſon of the great burthen of the cariages of the army, and the infinite baggage of the ſouldiers, & partly for the eaſe and pleaſure of their ſoueraigne, being now very aged and deep ſtricken in years, they did not march aboue 5. miles a day. Thus you haue Amurath now before Croy, you may imagine that you ſee his companies lying diſperſed all ouer the fieldes, aud the towne enuironed and girt in on all ſides, ſo that there was no ſpace, no not a foote of ground round about the walles but it was couered with lodgings and pauilions; inſomuchCroyans their notable and aſſured courage and reſolution. that many of them were quartered more then 6. miles off: neither was it poſſible that ſo exceſsiue a multitude ſhould otherwiſe be lodged in any ſort to their caſe and commodity. The wonderfull ſight of this ſpectacle was ſufficient to haue abaſhed the corages of the moſt braue & hardy, not only of the ſouldiers, but euen of the captains and leaders, and to haue abated the ſtomacke of euery man not without ſome reaſon and cauſe of feare and terror, by the contemplation of their owne proper perilles, which might haue made them forgetful & vnreſpectiue of their religion, of their country, of their faith and fidelity, and of all bonds of duty and common honeſty. Neuertheleſſe, ſuch was the corage of the beſieged far aboue the ordinary vſe of men, that they were nothing altered from their firſt purpoſe and reſolution, neither could the obiect of ſo pompous and fearefull a ſhew in any ſort terrrifie them, but rather taking thereby an occaſion of greater hardines and conſtancy, for the maintenaunce of their liberty and reputation, which they had before apprehended in their generous aud noble hearts; they did meaſure the greatnes of their glory, and did imagine that the quality of their future triumph and honor ſhould be recompenced according to the hugenes & extremity of the perill then imminent. Wherfore, you might haue ſeene the ſouldiers ſtanding vpon the wals, as gallant and reſolute as was poſsible, euery man with a certaine kind of iealoſie enquiring & entermedling with the charge and duty of others, to prepare & make all things ready againſt the time that the aſſault ſhould be preſented: and in the night time by their fires which they kindled, by their clamors and ſhouts intermingled with ſongs and ſuch like ſignes of mirth and gladnes: they gaue forth euident notice & teſtimony what litle account and reckoning they made of the enemy. Likewiſe the other townes and 
                  •
               aſtels of Epire, had now forgotten their wonted feare and aſtoniſhment, and they imagined that neither the power nor the name of Ottoman was of ſo great force and puiſſance, nor ſo much to be redoubted as in times paſt when he came againſt them. For they were now ſo hardened and acquainted with the experience of ſo many euils that the continuaunce and cuſtome of perilles, had brought them to contemne and ſet at naught all dangers whatſoeuer.
            The Infidels ſpent 4. whole daies in tranſlating and fitting of their lodgings, which being once ordered according to their liking, they came flocking in great troupes to the tents of their Emperor, demanding & requeſting that they might be emploid. But for that day their deſire was refuſed, & they commanded with a moſt ſeuere charge to keepe themſelues ſtill within their campe: the cauſe hereof was the extraordinary reſt of Scanderbeg, which did beyond all meaſure augment the ſuſpition of the old Sultan,
               Croy ſummoned by Amurath. doubting leaſt he which was a maiſter crafts man in fine polices & ſtratagems, ſhould ſet him on worke with ſome vnhappy taske or other. The next day therfore he ſent 2. heralds to Vranocontes to ſummon him, and to make him theſe offers: that if he would deliuer and yeelde vp the towne into his handes, it ſhould be lawfull both for him andCondition
                     •
                   and offers made by Amurath to Vranocontes. the garriſon to depart ſafe with bag and baggage: and that the Gouernour him ſelfe ſhould haue ouer and aboue, 200000 aſpres, beſides honorable entertainement (if he could like thereof) amongſt his greateſt friends and fauorits. And concerning the citizens of Croy, in caſe his religion did not like them, he was content to graunt them free

liberty of conference, and to enioy all their ancient liberties and franchiſes, & whatſoeuer fauor wherein he could otherwiſe pleaſure them. With theſe conditions the Heralds being arriued neare vnto the Port, (for there was but one only by reaſon that on all the other parts of the city, the mountaine runneth whole continually on without any breach, and is not to be approached) the Gouernor who had word ſent him of their comming by them of the court of guard, came riding thither very well accompanied: of whom the Heraulds requeſted that they might be admitted to ſpeak with him, and to deliuer that which they had in charge, but he wold not permit them to enter within the town, but only to approach ſo neare as their voice might be well & conueniently heard and diſcerned: and therupon made a ſigne vnto them that they ſhould ſpeake their minds. It is a ſtrange thing and very wonderful to ſee the fidelity & reſolution of the Croians. Scarce had the Turks any time or ſpace to make an end of their ſpeach, butMeſſengers of the Turke reiected by the garriſon of Croy. that the ſouldiers interrupting the anſwere of the Gouernour, who was beginning liberally and ſtoutly to ſpeak his mind, did generally exclaime & cry out: that the enemy was to be anſwered with harguebuſſe ſhot and not with words; adding thereunto (as the guiſe of ſouldiers is) many ſcoffes and iniurious tearmes againſt the meſſengers.
            
            This being rehearſed & made knowen to the Sultan, his wrath & indignation wasAmurath prepareth for the aſſaulting of Croy. Ordinance caſt for the batterie of Croy. more & more incenſed: & the venim of his malitious hart increaſed mightely. Wherfore being deſtitute of this hope, he ſet himſelfe to make preparations for the aſſaulting of the towne; and firſt of all cauſing his maſsie heapes of copper, braſſe, & ſuch rude metall to be vnpacked, he cōmanded that artillery ſhould be caſt & founded. This worke was long a doing & endured aboue 15. dayes. Of ten peeces which were made & fully finiſhed, there was ſome difference in their greatneſſe: yet foure of them were of likeThe batterie plāted againſt Croy. equall bigneſſe: & each of them did carry a ſhot of 600. weight, and the other which were leſſer bare a ſhot of 200. weight. Foure of the leſſer peeces, & two of the greateſt were planted againſt the wall on that ſide that lyeth to Tyranna toward the Eaſt: the others were placed right againſt the Port. For on thoſe parts onely had they hope to enter the towne by meanes of ſome breach made in the wals, becauſe the acceſſe was more eaſie in thoſe places, in reſpect that the wals & fortifications there were raiſed & builded by handywork of men. And albeit they ſeemed to be moſt ſtrong & ſubſtantiall, yet did they not doubt but the fury of the canon would at length leuel them with the ground. As for all the other bulwarkes and fortifications, they were euery where aſſured with ſuch excellent ſtrength, & the naturall ſite of the mountain did ſo ſerue in ſtead of a rampier, that there needed not any workmanſhip of man to defend them: for if the moſt hardy and aduenturous men liuing durſt enterpriſe againſt thē, they ſhould but loſe their labor for any hurt they could do vnto them: in ſomuch that it is thought that the wall wherewith the towne is enuironned vpon the top of the mountaine, was raiſed there of old by the founders of the city, not for any defence or ſtrength that it could adde vnto the place, but only to giue a better grace, and to beautifie the towne.
            The ordinance being now mounted vpon the cariage, & ready planted, to the intētCroy battered. they might more eaſily and ſpeedily be remoued as occaſion ſhould require, they ſpent 4. whole daies in battering the wals on thoſe 2. ſides, before that the ſouldiers were led to the aſſault, & to fight with the beſieged. The towne was greatly endammaged both on the one part & the other: the rampiers were beaten down, & almoſt halfe the wall was ouerthrowen & razed, and the reſt ſo ſhaken & torne that it ſeemed ready to fall with the leaſt violence that ſhould be vſed againſt it. The Turks ſeeing ſo faire & wide a breach, were in a ſingular good hope to carry the towne: and therefore they ſhewedTurkes make preparations for the aſſault of Croy. themſelues very forward to prouide ſcaling ladders and other engins ready for the aſſault. It was a wonder to ſee how the ſouldiers beſtirred themſelues, labouring & ſtriuing to get together from all parts great and mighty beames of timber, & running vp

& downe the fields to make prouiſion of all other ſorts of engins and deuiſes. There was not almoſt any tent but with a kind of emulation did bring forth ſome particular ſtuffe or matter to ſet forward the aſſault: and according as euery one of them had a deſire to out go ech other, & to beare away the reward that was propoūded for him, that could firſt free the wall againſt the enemy. The Baſſaes themſelues and other the chiefe officers of the grand Seignior did not make any ſpare of their paines nor did they ſtādMahomet his induſtrie at the ſiege of Croy. idle, ſo deſirous they were to preuent the good grace & fauour of Amurath. Mahomet was noted aboue the reſt to vſe an vnceſſable kind of diligence, and with a ſingular viuacitie of ſpirit, as if he had bene one of the meaneſt ſouldiers, was alwayes about his father, and ſetting aſide all regard of his eſtate & degree, he ſpared no trauell & paines but did buſie & employ him ſelfe in all matters with great readineſſe & reſolution: and running ſometimes here, ſomtimes there, he did enflame and encourage the ſouldiers, as much by the example of his owne doings as by words and chearefull exhortations. And morethen that, it is reported, that beſides the reward publiquely propounded by the Sultan, he promiſed a 100000. aſpres to him that ſhould firſt get within the town, and ſhould faſten the Turkiſh colours vpon the wall.
            Touching the Croyans as their mindes were altogether different & of another diſpoſition,Croyans their reſolution. ſo were there effects alſo diuers. The Paynims were growen to that pride & fierceneſſe of their harts, only of a greedy deſire, & an inordinate appetite of gaine and glory, which cauſed them raſhly to vndertake & hunt after that thing wherof they neuer had any poſſeſsion. Contrariwiſe the Chriſtians had their minds fixed vpon this: that all maner of moſt ample & honorable rewards were aſſuredly to be expected frō 
               Scanderbeg, & they did conſider moreouer that the cōſeruation of the realme, the ſafetie of their countrey, the ſecuritie of their confederats, & in briefe the welfare of all the eſtate of Albany did conſiſt & depend vpon their valour & vertue. For this cauſe they were animated & hartned not onely with a kind of obſtinate & ſettled reſolution and with a purpoſe of incredible perſeuerance: but they were tranſported with ſo violent a paſsion of wrath and furie, that they ſeemed as men almoſt enraged. Whereupon though the wall being throwen downe and ruinated on that ſide, did giue them cauſe both of griefe and terrour by the deformitie of that obiect: yet did the greatneſſe of their coutages neuertheleſſe ſo preuaile in their reſolute and ſtout harts, that it did eaſily put away and expell out of their mindes all conceipt of faintneſſe, feare or ſorow: & they did mutually recomfort & encourage ech other. Aboue all, Vranocontes had a notable good grace in exhorting and animating of the garriſon, for as he went vp and downe amongeſt them: he would oftentimes touch and take them by the handes, he would handle their curats and lay his hands vpon their ſtomackes, ſaying.
            
               Theſe, theſe, are the bulwarkes of cities & townes: theſe are the firme & ſubſtantiallSpeech of Vranocontes, encouraging the Croyans vpō the r
                        •
                     in
                        •
                      of their wals battered by the Turkes. rampiers of wals: theſe be the ſtones that are not batterable: this is the ſtrongeſt & ſureſt kind of lyme & morter. What honour, what prayſe, what triumph can we expect or hope for in this place, if being couered & ſhrowded vnder theſe wals, our ſurety ſhal conſiſt onely in their ſtrength and ſafety? And if they ſhalbe the onely meanes to garde & defend vs, & not rather our perſons to be the defence of them: the very cowards can do ſo much & the fearefull ſheepe will contemne the houling of the rauenous wolfe, if they be ſafely encloſed in a ſure cote▪ Such honour is proper & due to the wals and not to the generous ſouldier. Our Prince hath not commanded ys hither to be protected & defended by this towne, but the towne is commended vnto vs, & committed to our cuſtody, & to be 
                     ••
                  fe
                     •
                  ded by vs▪ True vertue is alwayes exerciſed in the greateſt dangers, & 
                     •
                  he is noutiſhed in things that are high & difficult▪ who is not a good pilot vpō the ſea in time of calme weather? Things that are firme, can continue ſtable of them

ſelues, and need not the ſuccor and aſsiſtance of men: neither do they require the helpe of any humaine audacity. And braue and couragious men do not eſteeme, but rather ſhunne thoſe aduentures, by the defence whereof, they ſhall not purchaſe any more honor, then if they had not defended them at all. When a thing beginneth to decay, and to fall to ruine, that is it which requireth to be ſupported, and in ſuch caſes it is, that vertue ſtriueth to ſhew it ſelfe. I may ſay it againe and againe (my good companions) that there only doth ſhine the brightneſſe of valiant hearts, there do the excellent and couragious ſpirits diſcouer themſelues. Wherefore theſe flankers and this curtin thus laied open by the battery, and this breach made by the cannon of the enemy, let it be filled and defended with your perſons, and with your armes, let your ſtout and valiant bodies as of braue & gallāt ſouldiers be oppoſed againſt the infidels in ſteed of ſtrong walles and fortifications: in ſo doing you ſhall giue me the more certaine and aſſured proofe of your valour and worthy behauiour. Let vs therefore ſo cary our ſelues, let vs ſo labour and endeuor in this our conflict to weaken and diminiſh the forces of the Barbarians, that the tyraunt may be abaſhed at the valour of the Croians, and that his courage may be abated and repreſſed: then will he abandon the towne and raiſe his ſiege, when he ſhall ſee the firſt fruites of this warre intertained with the bloud of ſo many of his ſubiectes.
            
            Theſe and many other ſpeeches to that effect did the gouernour vſe ſometimes in the Albanian language, ſomtimes in Italian, and ſometimes alſo by interpretours: diſpoſing and preparing the mindes of his ſouldiours to the aſſault which they expected the day following, and inuiting euery man both by word and by deede, to do his duty and beſt deuoire. Wherefore whileſt the ſouldiers in their ſeuerall charges here and there did diligently apply them ſelues, and were the more incenſed by his preſence, to labour chearfully in their ſeuerall emploiments: the night at length came vpon them, during the which neuertheleſſe the vigilancy of Vranocontes did not ceaſe in the continuaunce of all neceſſary preparations, till it was two houres within night, and that which remained was ſpent in ſleepe, and in taking of their 
                  •
               eſt.
            The infidels who had in the day time ſet all things in a readineſſe, did paſſe all that night in great quietneſſe till the breake of day, for the euening before, it was concluded, that the town ſhould be aſſaulted, and proclamation was made by ſound of trumper, commanding all men that before ſeuen of the clocke in the morning (certaine captains & companies hauing firſt broken their faſt) they ſhould repaire with their armes to the lodging of the Sultan. For this cauſe the ſouldiours with great promptneſſe and diligence, did not fayle to be there at the time appointed, being well prouided of all things accordingly. Then the moſt worthy and notable perſons of chiefeſt marke & qualitie being called together, the old Prince began to vſe ſome ſpeeches vnto them inEncouragements of Amurath and Mahomet to the Turkes being to aſſa
                     •
                  l
                     •
                   Croy. moſt vehement and ardent manner, more then the vigour and ſtrength of his aged and weakened ſpirite would well permit and conueniently ſuffer. Young Mahomet likewiſe, being very prompt and forward both in action and in ſpeech, did not long keepe ſilence, but the oration of his father being ſcant ended, as one furious and full of venemous rage, he aroſe from his ſeate, and did ſo bitterly inueigh againſt the Chriſtians in generall (beſides the extremitie of his priuate hatred which he bare to the Epirots in particular,) that he there bewrayed him ſelf (as an other Hāniball againſt the Romans)Mahomet his mortall hatred to the Chriſtians. to be their mortall and ſworne enemy, and after him all the other Chieſtaines and leaders did encourage each man his own ſouldiours. By that time that all things were ready and in good order, & that the Turke had dined at his eaſe, it was neare noone, at which time the ſquadrons being drawn forth of the trenches, did diſplay thēſelues vpō the plaine. It might be iudged an vnfit ſeaſon to begin ſuch an aſſault, conſidering the

extreme heat of the ſummer: neuertheleſſe the Ottoman thought it to be the beſt time, becauſe he miſtruſted, that if he ſhould haue drawen them out of the campe either in the night, or late towardes the euening, perhaps it would haue giuen Scanderbeg the more oportunity to ruſh vpon them and to inuade and moleſt his trenches, and yet did not this his ſuſpition gaine him any thing, neither was it altogether in vaine.
            The allarme being giuen, and the troupes (as we haue ſayd) being iſſued forth, andScanderbeg inuadeth the campe of Amurath before Croy. marching on with a wonderfull noiſe and ſound of trumpets drummes, and clamours of the ſouldiers, they were now come to the wals: and the foremoſt of them had ſcant or but newly begun the fight, when the Turkiſh campe was ſodainely in an vproare, and was filled with a great tumult and horrible feare ſprong vp amongeſt them. The cauſe thereof was Scanderbeg, who hauing of a long time watched and layd eſpiall to ſee what the Sultan would determine to doe: now with a ſtrong troupe of horſemen (the moſt able and beſt mounted of all his army) was come to the tents of the enemy, & ruſhed in vpon them where they lay next and nigheſt vnto him. The Turks which were placed there in that quarter, did receiue him at the firſt onſet very reſolutely: but perceiuing by the loſſe & ſlaughter of many of their fellowes, that they could not hold out nor ſtand againſt him: they being ſcattered & diſperſed here & there in that feare, had ſoone forſaken both their court of garde and all things elſe whatſoeuer, if the others who were next them had not made haſt: and running thither from all partes at the noyſe of the allarme, & making head againſt the enemy, had not ſtayed them from flying farther. The Albanians keeping their ranckes cloſe, and taking the aduantage of this good fortune, did charge thoſe that came laſt to encounter them more liuely thenNumber of Turkes ſlaine by Scanderbeg at his firſt inuaſion of their campe before Croy. they had done the former, and hauing layd more then 600 Turkes dead at their feete, and made the Barbarians on that ſide to betake them ſelues to flight, they ſacked two of their tents carrying away diuerſe enſignes, and whatſoeuer elſe was found within the ſame. This rumour being brought from hand to hand (as the maner is) to the eares of Amurath, who was then buſied in ordering his forces to the aſſault, although the old man had made prouiſion before of many things, & did greatly affie himſelfe in the ſufficiency of thoſe whom he had left within the campe: neuertheleſſe dreaming and forethinking himſelf of the worſt that might happen (for he was wont euer to ſay, thatSaying of Amurath touching Scanderbeg. Seremet ſent againſt Scanderbeg. nothing was ſufficient to make reſiſtance againſt the fierceneſſe and fury of this beaſt,) he ſent Seremet one of his captaines with 4000. horſe for the repulſe of the Chriſtiās. 
               Mahomet who did alwayes burne in extreame hatred againſt this Prince (though his father would haue diſwaded him from it) went thither alſo being accompanied with the ordinary garde of his perſon, but before that theſe forces were ready on foot, Scanderbeg perceiuing that he ſhould not be able to make his partie good againſt ſo many (as were comming vppon him) had turned bridle and prouided for the ſuretieScanderbeg in great hazard of his life. of him ſelfe and his people, yet not without the extreame daunger of his life. For (as the report goeth) the heat of fight had made him ſo farre to forget him ſelfe, that he brake in amongeſt his enemies where they were thickeſt, and he engaged him ſelfe ſo farre, that he was almoſt oppreſſed by them, and he was not able (but with extreame payne) to make him ſelfe way through the multitude that preſſed vppon him and ſought to ſtoppe his paſſage, for both his owne ſtrength, and the forces of his horſe began to fayle, in ſomuch that very hardly and difficultlie did he eſcape and free him ſelfe from amongeſt them. And after he was with much a do gotten from them, yet did they not ceaſe on all parts to purſue him as long as they had any hope to ouertake him, or to ſtaye him. In this manner did the Chriſtian troupes on the one ſide, and the Generall on the other ſide by a happie retrait ſhift them ſelues out of the fight of the Mahometiſtes. This tumult being pacified and appeaſed, the Turkes returned

vnto their camp, and the Sultan his ſon repaired to his father, extreamly grieuingMahomet voweth and ſweareth the deſtruction of Scanderbeg. that after ſuch a brauado & the ſlaughter of ſo many of their people, his enemy ſhould be eſcaped from him. And he there tooke a ſolemne oth before them all, that he would neuer leaue watching whole moneths, daies, and nights (if need were) but at one time or other by his ambuſhments and traines, he would get this ſauage and wilde beaſt to fal into his ſnares which he meant to lay for him: that he wanted neither a good mind nor good meanes to effect it: and he did ſo far aſſure himſelfe of a good ſucceſſe, that if the other did hold on ſtil, and continue in this brauery & temerity, thus to aſſaile them and to approach to their trenches, he did not doubt but to make him to repent it.
            The Prince of Epire hauing freed him ſelfe from the purſuite of his enemies, tooke an other way, and went after his owne company: who being in a maruellous care andScanderbeg his abſence cauſe of great perplexitie to his ſouldiours. perplexity for the abſence of their maſter, went here and there wandring vp & down, and ſending forth ſouldiours in queſt on all parts to ſearch if they could diſcouer him, or could heare any newes of him in any place. Many of them alſo could not forbeare teares lamenting and deploring the eſtate of Albany, which ſhould remaine as a tender orphan, and the common weale of Epire which ſhould continue deſolate (as it were) in widowhood by the death of ſo diuine a perſonage ſo barbarouſly murthered by the Circumcized miſcreāts. But his ſafe returne (whereof they deſpaired) did reuiue their harts, & made them ioyfull both in priuate and publike: in ſo much, that beſides diuers ſongs vttered by the common ſort in token of their gladneſſe: many of them with great deuotion performed their vowes which they had made for his ſafety: being in a firme beliefe, that by the ſame they had obtained of God, both his life and the recouery of his cōpany. His ſhield was ſo battered & cut with the ſwords of his enemies, that the ſhape therof was ſcant to be diſcerned: & yet was not his body in any ſort hurt or wounded.
            The rareneſſe of this accident is ſo maruellous, that the truth thereof may ſeeme incredible: notwithſtanding for my part I can eaſily be drawen to beleeue it. For admit that there were not in this Prince any corporall force, or dexterity in armes extraordiry, more then in the common ſort of men: yet without all doubt, fortune (or to ſpeake more properly,) the diuine power and puiſſance can do greater things then this, and farre more ſtraunge without all compariſon. But it may be that an other matter may make this more doubtfull, and that is, that Scanderbeg in all his actes, and exploits atchieued in times paſt, was neuer knowen to haue committed ſuch an ouerſight & incongruity, where he had any time or leiſure to take any counſell or aduiſe vppon his actions. But perhaps it is requiſit, that we ſhould grant and attribute vnto ſome men of a hardy and magnanimious ſpirit, as the Poets do: that ſometimes in the wars they are tranſported, with a certaine fury and martiall impetuoſity, ſo as being once chafed and enflamed, they cannot for a while after, neither moderat nor refraine thēſelues at their owne pleaſure. For before a man draw his ſword and take weapon in hand, he knoweth well what he doth, and he is guided by reaſon which doth direct him. But when theſword is once drawen, then only doth fury and choller guid him, & he doth as the vehemency of his paſsion doth lead him. Such was that notable and renowned hardines of Horatius Cocles amongſt the Romaines, by which he ſuſtained the force of theHoratius Cocles his ſtrange prowes againſt Porſena. Leonidas his valour againſt the armie of Xerxes. whole army of Porſena king of the Thuſcans, whileſt his company in the meane time did cut down the bridge ouer Tiber at his backe. And amongſt the Greeks, that of Leonidas the Lacedemonian, who with 300. men, had the hardines to defend the ſtraights of Thermopilae, and to keepe out the innumerable multitudes of the forces of Xerxes.
            
            But to our purpoſe, the dammage that our men receaued in this conflict was not great: for there were ſlaine not aboue ten, and as many wounded, (for the Prince of Albanie hauing left behinde him all his infantery, and thoſe horſemen who were

worſt mounted) had inuaded the infidels with 5000. horſe, all of them choſen men, ſtout, & valiant: who being prompt & ready either to fly or to fight, might eaſily ſhun the force & violence of the enemy. Wherefore hauing wounded their generall, they proceeded ioyfully on their way and ſo returned to their campe. But neither this fayreScanderbeg penſiue for feare of Croy. victory gotten vpon the enemy, nor any other occaſion whatſoeuer of mirth or gladneſſe could ſuffice to cheare the hart of Scanderbeg or to make him mery: his thoughts were mightely troubled and ſurcharged, with the wonderfull & deep conceipts of infinite miſchiefs, & he could not be quiet till he had ſome newes of the ſucceſſe of Croy. For notwithſtanding that the fidelitie & approued valure both of the gouernour and of the garriſon, and the inexpugnable ſituation, and the good eſtate of the place did much comfort and eaſe his minde of care: yet neuertheleſſe on the one ſide, the conſequence of the perill, and on the other ſide the incomprehenſible loue of his countrey, did enforce him euen in deſpight of his hart, to be affrayed: and a carefull kinde of miſtruſt did preſent vnto his imagination, many idle and vayne diſcourſes.
            Concerning Amurath, albeit the former allarme had not made him altogether to diſcontinue the aſſault: yet the chiefeſt preparations, & the beſt endeuours of the ſouldiour were for a while hindered and reſtrained, till ſuch time as he had perfect notice what was the iſſue & end of that ſeruice, which being made knowen vnto him to that effect as we haue deliuered, he cauſed forth with euen thoſe that were moſt backward and negligent, & all his engins & inſtruments for the aſſault to be bent & employed againſt the beſieged. Firſt of all he cauſed the archers & other ſhot to ſtād round about,Aſſault to Croy. ſo as they might annoy them which came vpon the wals to defend them. The leſſer peeces alſo were planted ſo neare, as they might well play vpon the defendants, whileſt in the meane time the raſcall ſort of the moſt vile & commō ſort of people (who were ordained of purpoſe to ſuſtain & beare out the firſt fury of the enemy) ſhould draw & cary the ladders & other engins cloſe vp to the wals. And after thē were to follow certaine braue and luſty troups of the Ianiſſaries & Aſappes: who vpon the raiſing of theIaniſſaries. Aſappes. ladders were appointed to the ſcalado, and ſo to get to the top of the breach: that comming to fight hand to hand with the defendants, they might the ſooner terrifie them and gayne the towne more eaſily. This was the maner of the aſſault on that part where the wals were weakeſt, & where the canō had made the battery: as for the other parts there was little or no care to be taken of them: for though the whole circuit of the wall had bene ouerthrowen & razed: yet was it almoſt impoſsible, that the ſouldier could attempt any way on that ſide to endammage them by reaſon of the huge height & ragged ſteepneſſe of the mountaine. Yet were there certaine peeces placed there alſo, and they played with great ordinance vpon that part of the towne, both to giue the more terrour to the Croians and to beat downe certaine priuate houſes, which ſeemed to be ſubiect to the force of their ſhot. Whileſt the Turkes were making their approches to the town, the defendants diſcharged certaine volleys of ſhot vpon them, & did ſo trouble their rancks with the ſlaughter of many of their people, that it might haue terrified them from approching any nearer if the leaders of euery ſquadron (following them cloſe at their backes, & ſolliciting them ſometimes with good wordes & perſuaſions, & ſometimes with menaces & threats entermingled with the baſtinado) had not preſſed them to go forward with their violent and rough vſage: and more then that, this their obſtinacie ſeemed to be the greater, becauſe the Mahometans with thoſe peeces which they had placed there of purpoſe, did without intermiſsiō annoy them that appeared vpon the rampiers, & ſought to beat them from their defence: whileſt the Alchanzes (a number of ſlaues charged with ladders & ſuch like preparations) did gayneAlchanzes. the foote of the wall, the which their labour tooke ſuch good ſucceſſe that at length

their ladders were lodged againſt the wall, notwithſtanding all the reſiſtance that the Chriſtians could make againſt them: and yet was it not effected without great ſlaughter and bloudſhed of the Infidels. Then beganne the defendantes euery man in his place and charge, to ſettle themſelues more roundly to their labour and to vrge the enemie more hotely: they made no ſpare of their ſhot both harguebuſſe and other, and now beganne their hatred more apparantly to be diſcouered. The clamours of the ſouldiours, the noyſe and clattering of their armour, did reſound on all ſides, the ſound of the drummes and trumpets continually redoubling in the ayre, and rebounding by the eccho and report of the vallyes neere adioyning, did the more animate and encourage the ſouldiers, taking away all power and poſſibilitie of hearing from them that were in fight. But as the cauſe and occaſion of their armes was different, ſo was there as great difference in the conflict: there was little likelihood for them to carrie the place from the beginning, if ſome other caſualtie or miſchaunce of warre did not befall the aſſaylantes. The ladders were often raiſed againſt the walles, and the place was forced with manhoode ſufficient, but they were aſſoone caſt to the ground, broken and torne in peeces: the men alſo tumbling headlong that were mounted vppon them. The remainders of that huge multitude of the baſer and common ſort, were ſo broken and diſmayed, that they could not be made to continue there anie longer, by reaſon that both their ſpirites were ſurpriſed with an extreame feare, and their limmes (as it were) benummed with a kinde of aſtoniſhment. Scarcely ſhould you haue ſeene any one of them that was forward or willing to haue gone againe to the aſſault, though it did little auaile them to holde backewarde: for Mahomet ſtanding at their backes, both as the ouerſeer of their demeanour, and as a ſeuere encourager (which perhappes was partly a cauſe that got him the name and report to be accounted a moſt cruell Prince by all poſteritie) did entreate them very roughly, and would not ſuffer them neither to recuile backewarde, nor ſo much as once for to breath them ſelues. Thus poore wretches, whileſt they thought to ſhunne and auoide the rage and fury of their aduerſarie, they were more cruelly plagued by the exceſſiue rigour of their owne Commaunders.
            Theſe miſerable and poore people thus handeled by the Infidels, are (for theChriſtians ſubiects of the great Turks their miſerable eſtate and piteous condition moſt part) Chriſtians vnder the ſubiection of the great Turke: of whome it is an ordinarie vſe and cuſtome with him to drawe foorth a wonderfull great trayne and multitude in all his expeditions almoſt wholly naked and diſarmed, becauſe he hath no truſt nor affiance in them. With theſe doth he furniſh and ſupply all the ſeruices of his campe, both for the prouiſion of the water and wood, and for the making and caſting vppe of their trenches, rampiers, and other fortifications: and when they come to fight (if it be in the fielde or in the maine battell, then are theyA ſtratageme vſuall with the Turks to weary and conſume the ſtrength of the Chriſtians in fight. firſt expoſed and ſet out to the butcherie, to beare the force and violence of the enemie, that they may diminiſh and ſpende their ſtrength and forces vpon theſe poore and ſilly wretches. If anie fortreſſe or place of ſtrength be to be aſſaulted, theſe are made as carriage beaſtes to drawe the artillerie, to carrie the engines and other inſtruments to the walles: and their bodies are made to ſerue them but as fitte matter to fill vppe the ditches, and their carkaſſes are vſed but as bridges for others to paſſe and trauell on when they goe to the aſſault. And when ſo euer they doe happen to march on ſlowly or vnwillingly, they doe finde more crueltie and inhumanitie at the handes of the Turkes their Lordes and Maiſters, then they doe of their proper and profeſſed enemies. Certainely it is the deadly hatred and naturall enmitie which they beare againſt the name and profeſſion of Chriſtianitie,

that doth cauſe them to vſe this moſt beaſtly and ſauage crueltie, and not anie wantSiege of Scutarie or Scodra by the Turkes. of other meanes that ſhould conſtraine them thereunto. At the laſt vnfortunate ſiege of Scutarie, many of theſe and ſuch like cruelties were then practiſed by the Turkiſh Infidels. The lamentable plaints and cryes of theſe vnhappie creatures were made and heard to them that ſtoode in defence of the walles: many times wouldSpeeches of the Chriſtians liuing vnder the ſubiection of the Turkes, to the Chriſtians their enemies at the ſiege of Scutarie. they crie vnto the defendants, and vſe humble and pitifull prayers and entreaties that they would deale more gently with them: they excuſed and proteſted, that they ſhewed themſelues to be their enemies not of their owne motions or ill affections, but by conſtraint and force, and by the cruell commaund of the tyrant. That though their bodies were compelled to march and to carrie armes againſt them, yet their hearts and good willes were moſt deuote and affectionate vnto them, as thoſe that did acknowledge one and the ſame God, the ſame faith, the ſame religion: notwithſtanding that they were not vnder the ſame Princes, that this was to be imputed to the publique fault and negligence of the Chriſtians, and to their owne priuate misfortune and vnhappie deſtinie. Vpon theſe their complaintes and petitions, the citizens of Scutarie to the vttermoſt of their power did ſpare and fauour them, though in very truth, their eſtate then ſtanding as it did, they could not verie eaſily take that compaſſion of them which they gladly would haue done. O moſt lamentable and extreame griefe, my heart is ſurcharged with ſorrowe, and my ſoule doth euen faint within me to thinke vpon the miſerable and diſtreſſed eſtate of theſe poore Chriſtians. Giue me leaue a little, I beſeech you, in this place to exclaime againſt the indignitie of their miſeries, and pardon me though I wander a while from my diſcourſe.
            
               Good God, is it poſſible that the great Princes and Monarches of ChriſtendomeAn exclamation of the author vpon the miſerable eſtate of the Chriſtians vnder the Turkes. can ſo long endure both to heare and to ſee this extreame miſerie? And can not this grieuous and intollerable ſeruitude of their Chriſtian brethren, their chaines and bondes ſo hideous and ſhamefull, their complaintes ſo dolorous (wherewith for theſe many ages they haue filled the mountaines, the vallies, and the ſeas of all Chriſtian countries,) can they not (I ſay) moue any one to pittie or compaſſion? And are Chriſtian Princes ſo hard and ſtonie hearted, that none of them will commiſerat thoſe extremities? The bloud of Chriſtians doth nowe flowe (as it were) in ſtreames throughout all partes of the worlde: and our ſtrength fadeth and decayeth by little and little, and no man the whileſt doth or will perceiue it. We are now fallen into thoſe times (ſuch is the diuine pleaſure, or rather, ſuch is our ingratitude and infidelitie) that the bloud ſanctified by Chriſtian baptiſme, is now more vile and baſe then the bloud of brute beaſtes: and it will ere long come to paſſe (if this miſchiefe be ſuffered to encreaſe, and to gather greater ſtrength) that the circumciſed, ſetting vs to ſale, ſhall ſcarce be able to make a pennie of thirtie Chriſtians, but they will be bought and ſolde at a more baſe and vile price, then were the Iewes of olde time, who (as auncient * Hiſtoriographers make mention) at the deſtruction ofIoſephus. Egeſippus. 
                  Ieruſalem, were ſolde at that rate by the Romaines. But alas! what can happen to vs more fearefull, or what greater extremities and calamities can befall vs, then are alreadie inflicted vppon the faithfull liuing vnder the power and tyrannie of the Turkes? Their miſeries are come to the full period of all ſhame and villanie: neither is it poſſible, that either they ſhould be able to endure anie greater calamities, neither can the mortall hatred of the Infidels our enemies imagine or deuiſe anie inuention more horrible and grieuons, then they haue already done, for the plaguing of theſe miſerable and wretched caytifes. But forgetting this matter, let vs remember to proceede with the aſſault of Croy.
               
            
            
               The moſt hardy and audatious of the Mahometiſts being either repulſed or killed,A ſally by the Croyans vpon the Turkes. they of the towne cauſed threeſcore of their garriſon (men of good courage and reſolution) ſuddenly to ſallie foorth by a little poſterne (which was on another ſide of the towne) whoſe vnexpected comming brought ſo wonderfull a feare to the campe of the Infidels, as was beyond all imagination. They were Launceknights and Epyrots mingled together, who ſeruing with the harguebuſſe, had with great difficultie, gotten leaue of the Gouernour to iſſue forth of the towne, but they went not farre from the wall, where hauing made a reaſonable ſlaughter of the enemie according to the proportion of their ſmall number, they retyred themſelues immediatly with a greater deſire to returne againe. But for any entreatie or importunitie they could vſe, Vranocontes would not condiſcende vnto their requeſt: neuertheleſſe he did highly commend them for the hardineſſe of the fact, and did recompence them with large rewardes. At the firſt the Paynims did a litle recuile and giue backe, being abaſhed at their audatious enterpriſe: but anon ſuddenly trouping together, partly of ſhame, and partly of a couragious reſolution, they did attend to ſee, if the enemie purſuing their good fortune, would come againe to viſite them. But farre greater was the ſlaughter on that quarter which was towardes Tyranna, where the breach being more plaine and ſpatious, did giue more free acceſſe to the aſſaylantes. All places there were ſtrawed and filled with dead bodies: and the earth did ſeeme to mourne with the pitifull noyſe of the panting ſighes, gaſpes, and groanes of thoſe, who yeelded vp their wretched ghoaſtes. And notwithſtanding, they neuer wanted encouragementes to enforce them on in their obſtinacie: but the miſerable wretches were preſſed and vrged in a moſt deſperare manner, by the careleſſe contempt of their owne liues, to make a ſhewe vnto the Chriſtians of more courage then indeede was in them. The rampiers and walles of the towne were ſo full ſtrewed both with ſhotte, and alſo with other ſtore of weapons, that it argued they made no ſpare of them: and the arrowes did flie ſo thicke in the ayre, as if it had beene a cloude darkening the brightneſſe and cleareneſſe of the ſunne. Thus you ſee what was the endeuours of thoſe Turkiſh ſquadrons, which went firſt to the aſſault.
            The day was now well ſpent, and it was aboue two houres after noone, at which time the Sultan ſeeing his troupes partly lying dead vppon the ground, and partly wearied with their great and long trauell: and on the contrarie ſide, the Croyans preſenting themſelues more brauely vppon the walles, he was at the firſt in ſome doubt and ſuſpence, whether it were better for him to renew the aſſault with a ſupply of freſh forces, or to intermit and put it ouer to another day, conſidering that both the great labour of his people taken all that day, and the exceſſiue heate, had ſo weakened the bodies of his ſouldiers, that they were ſcant able to endure to ſtande for faintneſſe and wearineſſe. In the ende therefore hee was perſwadedSpeeches of the Counſellors of Amurath perſuading him to recontinue and renue the aſſault of Croy. to continue and goe forwarde with the aſſault by the importunities of his Counſellours and Chiefetaines, who ſhewed him, that if hee ſhould nowe giue ouer the fight, and ſhould ſuffer the Chriſtians with ſo ſmall loſſe and bloudſhed to haue the aduantage of that dayes victorie, it would be an eternall reproach and infamie vnto him. And albeit they ſhould haue little or no hope to carrie the Towne, yet he ought not in reſpect of his owne honour to ſuffer ſo many braue and valiant men their fellowes and companions to die vnreuenged, nor yet to reſtraine the forwardneſſe and willing minds of the others. That all ſecondarie aſſaies were more faint and contemptible, and that they were nowe better acquainted with the enemie, and were more hardened to all kinde of daungers and trauels. B ſides that, if he ſhould

now giue them libertie to take breath, they would haue leaſure alſo to reſolue themſelues with the more confidence, & to fortifie their town with ſtronger defences: that it was much better therefore with freſh and new forces to attempt againſt the place, & to force them to the vttermoſt whileſt they were yet wearied and ſore trauelled with their late labour: that when the defendants ſhould ſee them thus obſtinately bent and couragiouſly reſolued, either they would of themſelues abandon their defences, or they muſt needes faint and periſh vnder the burden of ſo vnſupportable a charge. 
               Amurath vpon theſe perſwaſions followed their aduiſe, and cauſed as great forces as before to be lead and conducted againſt the walles: in ſo much that the tumult began to be renued in a moment, and it might be that fortune her ſelfe forſaking the victours, would haue fauoured the new attempt of the Mahometiſtes, if the defendants had notThe aſſault renued. with as great diligence and foreſight prouided in like caſe to receiue them in as good ſort and readineſſe, which was the occaſion that freſh men being oppoſed againſt freſh men, they did without any great paine hold good both in the poſſeſſion of the place, and in the maintenance of their honour and reputation. The Barbarians went ſtill onwards at brute and ſenſeleſſe beaſts, eſpecially on that ſide that leadeth towards the port, and although the way by which they ſhould paſſe was ſo ſtreight and narrow, that two horſemen could hardly march in front together: yet notwithſtanding they went on all on horſe backe euen cloſe to the walles, and with their launces in the reſt did runne againſt the gate, giuing thereby greater occaſion rather to laugh at their fooliſh and ſottiſh careleſneſſe and contempt of their liues, then to admire or to commend any hardineſſe or courage that appeared in them. Wherefore there lay ſo many of them ſlaine on all parts, & there were ſuch heapes of dead carkaſes, as it might well be ſaid of Vranocontes, that he forepropheſied what would be the end and iſſue of that aſſault. The Turkiſh Monarch being not able to endure this hideous ſpectacle, cauſed to ſound a retreat, which freed both the walles and the defendantes from further trouble of the enemie: and there was not any one but had forgotten the former paſſion of his malice and hatred, and had loſt that feruencie and deſire of fight wherewith he was lately poſſeſſed. So greatly did they of all hands deſire to leaue fighting, & this ſtay of the aſſault was welcome to them all. For their continuall labour and the heat of the day, accompanied with extreame hunger and thirſt, had in a manner wholly ſpent them, by reaſon that the ſuddenneſſe of the aſſault had preuented many from taking any repaſt. The reſidue therefore of the day and the night following, they conſumed in refreſhing themſelues both with ſleepe and victuals.
            The ſame night tidings being brought to Scanderbeg of the victory of the Croians, it gaue him good cauſe of ioy and gladneſſe: and he preſently imparted theſe good newes vnto the Princes and peoples his next neighbours. But on the other ſide, theNumber of Turkes ſlaine at the firſt aſſault of Croy. enemie was in great ſorrow and diſcontentment, and was ſeene for many dayes to be very ſad and penſiue, for the notable loſſe of that daies worke was very hard to be digeſted, hauing loſt in that ſeruice more then 8000. good ſouldiers: but the Croians had verie little loſſe, and without any great ſlaughter to ſpeake of. It is reported, that Amurath kept himſelfe cloſe ſhut vp within his tent for two whole dayes together in debating vpon diuerſe counſels and opinions with his Captaines, and the Viſirs his Counſellers. But aboue all others, young Mahomet ſhewed himſelfe to be notably vexed and diſcontented: his ſpirit boiling with fury and choller, and his youthfull yeares being yet vnacquainted with croſſe fortunes and aduerſities, had turned all his paſſions of griefe and anguiſh into meere rage and madneſſe. From thenceforth he tooke vpon him to deale in all the affaires of the campe, & with a carefull eye viewing and reuiewing all the ſeuerall companies, he ſhewed himſelfe ſo greedie of reuenge,

that he ſpared not to labour himſelfe extreamely both night and day, and was verie watchfull at all times to take the aduantage of any fit occaſion: but principally he had an eie to that ſide where the Albanois had lately endammaged their campe. For there he placed a ſtrong and puiſſant court of garde, and dreſſed many ambuſhments, and oftentimes would he watch there him ſelfe whole nightes in proper perſon, to the intent if fortune did preſent him any good opportunitie to oppreſſe Scanderbeg, he might not eſcape againe out of his handes. But all theſe his deuiſes turned to nothing, and vaniſhed away as the ſmoake by the prouident and circumſpect cariage of that expert Chiefetaine the Prince of Albany, who being from day to day enformed of all thinges, either by ſuch as came to render themſelues vnto him, or by eſpials ſent abroad of purpoſe, he helde himſelfe ſtill and quiet in his campe for a ſeaſon, ordering and prouiding for the ſafetie of his affaires, and drawing on his enemies with delayes.
            Notwithſtanding he could not endure to remaine long idle, but being very deſirous that his enterpriſes ſhold ſurpaſſe all others in glory & reputatiō, he aduiſed him ſelf of a fine ſtratageme, by which he purpoſed to ſurpriſe thē who were too intentiue to intrap him. One night therefore truſſing vp his baggage, very ſecretly, he remouedMonticlea. his army to a place called Monticlea, from whence he might moſt cōmodiouſly trauel & diſturbe the enemy. He left Moſes & Tanuſee at Tume
                     •
                  iſta, accompanied with 500. horſe only: and hauing ſet downe a certaine and prefixed time & courſe, and cōmunicated his enterpriſe with them, he willed them to ſet vppon the trenches of the enemy a litle after midnight, next enſuing on the ſame ſide where he had laſt inuaded thē:A policie of Scanderbeg in giuing a canuazado to the Turkiſh campe and that aſſoone as they had but giuen them a falſe allarme, and made a ſhew of forcing the barriers of their campe, they ſhould ſuddenly and ſpeedily make away without giuing the enemie any meanes to come to handiblowes with them: and that himſelfe in the meane time (hauing ſet all things in good order, and leauing 200. men for the guarde of his campe) would on the other ſide breake in vpon the tentes of the enemie with the reſidue of his armie. According to this concluſion there was little diſtance of time betweene the allarme made by Moſes and the comming of Scanderbeg. For aſſoone as he perceiued the ſudden rumour and terrour of the allarme raiſed by theA canuazado by Scanderbeg to the campe of the Turkes. Dibrian on the other ſide, he bare in with a full and ſtrong carrer, and charged them on that part where they litle doubted or ſuſpected. In this manner was the campe of the Infidels full of doubt, feare, and confuſion: ſome ranne here, ſome there, making great haſte on all ſides, to oppoſe themſelues againſt the violence of the Chriſtians. One of them wakened another, crying that they were enuironned and rounde beſet with the enemie. But as for Moſes he did indeede put them in a feare, and that was all he did, by reaſon that thoſe ſouldiers which had beene lately placed in that quarter by Mahomet, did eaſilie repulſe them, eſpecially ſuch as were moſt forward. But the night hindered them frō purſuing after him, for that they ſuſpected ſome ambuſhment, which they had good cauſe to be in doubt of, and eſpecially at that time. But the dammage that Scanderbeg wrought them cannot be recounted. For their campe was on all parts beaten downe, and foully deformed and diſordered both by ſword & fire, and yet did not this inuaſion continue any long time, by reaſon of the ſudden comming and readie arriuall of the Turkes, whoſe preſence in ſo great multitudes did ſoone determine and ende the conflict. For the Chriſtians making a retreate, durſt not hazarde and oppoſe themſelues againſt ſo huge forces as were there vnited, eſpecially in a place that was ſo plaine and euen: for it was in Tyranna where they gaue this charge vppon the enemie. Neuertheleſſe when the Chriſtians beganne to retire, the Infidels had no great deſire to follow after: and if they had, it might be they ſhould

haue paid well for it: for this warie and circumſpect warrior had placed all his infanterie and 8000. horſe neere at hand, to the intent they ſhould be as a gard vnto him behind at his backe, and ſhould ſerue againſt all ſuch caſualties as might befall him. Of theſe companies was he receiued in his retreate with great ioy and high cries and clamors: and ſo paſſing forward, they ſpent the reſt of the night in trauelling to their campe. It is reported that Scanderbeg did neuer doe anie exploite vppon his enemie with leſſe loſſe and bloudſhed: for he brought backe all his troupes ſafe and ſounde without the loſſe of any one man, not leauing vnto the Barbarians aniething ſaue woundes, teares, and lamentations, as the teſtimonies of his being with them; in ſuch ſort, that this ſlaughter and foule diſcomfiture, did make them in a manner quite to forget the calamitie of their late loſſe which they had had before Croy. No man durſt from thencefoorth open his mouth vnto the Sultan, or to aduiſe him to any enterpriſe: for this accident hauing ſucceeded to their ſo notable infamie, did ſeeme to reproue all their counſels and deliberations both in times paſt, and at that preſent. Wherefore they had recourſe in this their generall aſtoniſhment, to that wonted policie which they had proued to be very profitable the yeare before at the ſiege of Sfetygrade:
               Amurath fortifieth his camp with ordinance againſt the inuaſions of Scanderbeg and that was to fortifie and aſſure their trenches on all ſides with artillerie. They drew downe therefore many ſmall peeces which they had planted againſt the walles, and they beſtowed them in conuenient places round about their campe according as they thought beſt: but the greateſt part they placed in that quarter where they had of late found the greateſt danger. For what for the vehemencie of the heate, and what for the encombrance of their infinite baggage, their lodgings were deuided & diſperſed here and there in ſo great diſtance one from an other, and ſo farre off, that it was not poſſible to furniſh and to fortifie all of them. All theſe their endeuors were not long concealed from the Chriſtians, for they wanted not both fugitiues & good eſpials to giue them aduertiſements, but they were certified continually of the doings of the enemie, and eſpecially of this their preparation, which they beleeued to be likely by the example of the like, which they vſed the yeare laſt paſt. Wherefore Scanderbeg alſo was reſolued to lie ſtill for a time, and to hold himſelfe contented with that aduantage which he had alreadie gained, and to enioy the pleaſure thereof, till ſuch time as he might find ſome new opportunitie for ſome other happie action. Beſides, there was an other matter which withdrew his thoughts, and whereof heScanderbeg remoueth his campe to prouide for victuals. was to haue a care, and that was the ſcarcitie and dearth of victuals, which now beganne to fall very ſhort: becauſe there was not left in the countrey any liuing creature of whom they could looke for any reliefe▪ Wherefore to the intent he would not be in any wants, and for that he would refreſh his armie in the extreame heate of the ſummer: he determined to remoue his campe, and to leade his forces to a certaine place of ſingular recreation vpon a riuer which the inhabitants call Iſme, which lyingRiuer of Iſme. cloſe on the ſea, would furniſh them of all things plentifully and in abundance. And they of Duraz, likewiſe (which towne was not farre off) did friendly accord to ſerueDuraz or Dirrachium. him with as much corne as he would demaund. True it is that the Gouernours and Magiſtrates of the Venetian territories did ſuccour him alſo, but it was ſo couertly and vnder hand, that the Mahometan Prince might not perceiue it for the reaſons formerly alleaged.
            The Infidels in the meane time did nothing for many daies together but batter the towne, and ſeeke to breake downe the walles, in thoſe places eſpecially which theBattery renued againſt Croy. inhabitants had newly repaired, and which reſted yet vnbattered. For as yet had no
                  •
                
               Amurath forgotten all his malice, but he had a deſire once againe to aduenture his ſouldiers to the butchery, and to make a tryall of their laſt fortune. Beſides, to

ſeeke to force the towne by mines vnderground, or by any ſuch deuiſes he helde it a matter of great labour and long delay, by reaſon of the ſteepnes, depth, and roughnes of the place, and the high bearing toppes of the loftie rockes and mountaines. ô howExclamation of the author vpon the wretched eſtate of the ſubiects to the Turke. wretched and miſerable are you which are ſubiected to ayoke ſo cruell and vnmercifull, and whom fortune hath ſubmitted vnder the dominion of ſuch proud and arrogant Princes? when they can finde no other meane to fulfill their inordinate deſires: then are you (poore ſoules) conſtrained to ſatiſfie with your blood, and with the diſmembring of your bodies, the cruell rage, the immoderate and licencious humours of ſuch tirants. Aſſoone as the wall was beaten downe on that part where the cannon could be brought to play or make any batterie, and that the breach was made faire and large; the ſame daye did Ottoman commaund and take order, that euery man ſhould make himſelfe readie to the aſſault againſt the next morning, and to aduenture a new conflict with the enemie: but there was ſcarce any of them, that either openly or priuately did ſhew himſelfe willing thereunto as they had bene in times paſt. All of them did ſet a good face on the matter, but verie ſorily and with an ill grace: for eitherTurkes vnwilling to be drawen to a ſecond aſſault of Croy. to refuſe it, or to draw backwards was not the beſt way or courſe for them. Amurath perceiuing this backewardneſſe in his people, and that they were drawen to this aduenture, as it were maugre their teeth: (as the report goeth) he aſſembled the chiefe and principall perſons of all his troupes, who being come to his preſence, with a long diſcourſe, he did thus reproch and obiect vnto them, their faintnes and cowardice.
            Is it poſſible (quoth he) that ſo ſmall a maner, and the dalliance of fortune but a
                  Oration of Amurath to his Chieftaines and Captaines before Croy reproching them with faintnes and cowardice. litle failing you, can ſo pull downe your mindes and abate your courages, as it ſhould make you for euer to deſpaire and to abandon all hope of victorie? what if your valure and prowes be not able at the firſt aſſault to carrie this place, will you therefore be vtterly diſcouraged? Anſwer me I pray you. Is there any towne ſo weake? is there any fortreſſe ſo ſimple, or ſo baſe, as that one onely blow and the firſt attempt ſhould be able to ſubdue it? He that will diſlodge ſuch fierce beaſts as theſe out of their dens, muſt of neceſſitie vſe perſeuerance, he muſt ſtand firme, he muſt be of an vndaunted heart and a courage vnconquerable. Haue ſo many puiſſant armies? haue ſo many excellent Captaines, euen for ſome friuolous cauſe of offence, and for ſome ſmall priuate quarrell, haue they I ſay ſpent their time, and (as it were) waxed olde in the ſiege of cities and fortreſſes? and you that haue receiued ſo many outrages, ſo many indignities, and ſo many contumelies of diſgrace by the diſloialty of the Albanians, will you now to your notable reproch, leaue them vnpuniſhed, and vnreuenged? Who is he euen to this day, that did euer obtaine a memorable victorie, and not in ſome ſorte blouddie? Remember the battell of Varna, the honor and glorie of which victorie doth ſcarce admit any compariſon. It is vnpoſſible to tame an enemie that is fierce and haughtie without ſome expence and loſſe of blood: and all difficult things doe come to a happie iſſue onely with extreame labours and hard trauell. Vpon Croy onely doth depend the conſequence of this whole warre, which being once at your diſcretion, we ſhalbe for euer freed of our enemie in this countrie. For this place being gained which is the principall fortreſſe of all Epire, Scanderbeg will not aduenture to continue here ſo much as one day: wherfore plucke vp your hearts (my good frends) and away with this feare and faintnes of courage: you muſt make a triall of fortune: and if you will haue her to follow you, it is needful that you do often importune her. There is no onething in the world, wherein is more varietie and vncertaintie, then in wars and deeds of armes. Hold on your courſe then: ceaſe not to preſſe the enemy, and do you euen wearie him with continuall aſſaults. If at ech time you kill but halfe a ſcore of the enemie, it will be ſufficient, and the towne will be ſoone vndefended.
               
And it may be (as it happened of late at Sfetigrade) that if our forces ſhall not auaile, yet our good fortune may ſecond this our enterpriſe, and may lay vs downe ſome inuention and good meane to atchieue it.
            This ſpeech did reuiue their ſpirits and wrought in all of them new ſtomackes and freſh courages: it cauſed them to baniſh and caſt away all feare: it made their former hatred to returne before their eyes, and it ſtirred in them a ſingular deſire to purchaſe glorie, and in all actions to ſhewe themſelues very forwarde. But aboue all, this did greatly abate the doubt which they had before receiued, for that they ſaw their tents exempted, and their backes freed from the ſudden ſurpriſes of Scanderbeg: and by reaſonStratageme of Amurath to diuert Scanderbeg from troubling his army during the aſſault of Croy. they were aſſured, that during the fight the day following, they ſhould not be annoyed with any enemie, but only thoſe before them. For beſides thoſe orders which were alreadie taken for all things, and not yet mentioned: this was one which (as I will ſhew you) was laide downe for the diuerting of Scanderbeg, to the intent hee ſhould not of all that day moleſt nor trouble their trenches nor interrupt them from the aſſaulting of the towne. Sebalias (of whom mention hath bene made before) was ſent towards another part of the Prouince, that vnder colour of waſting and ſpoilingSebalias ſent with an armie to draw Scanderbeg from Croy. the countrie, he might delude the Albanois, hoping by that meanes to draw him away with all his forces. In the euening therefore this Chieftaine Turke being diſlodged with a ſtrong companie of 16000. horſe, and hauing ſtreight inſtructions from Amurath ſo to demeane himſelfe, that the enemy might haue no occaſion nor opportunitie to fight with him: he rode on his way with good aduiſe and deliberation. By that time that he had marched about ſome 20. miles, the newes of his diſlodge came to the eares of the Chriſtians, which raiſed a ſore murmuring amongſt the ſouldiers according to the varietie of their fantaſies which they conceiued and imagined vpon the departure of the Barbarian. Notwithſtanding they were all of this opinion, and one mind, that it was beſt forthwith to mounton horſebacke, and to trauell all the night in great ſilence and ſecrecie, that they might gaine all the paſſages of the mountains and woods where they ſuppoſed he ſhould paſſe. But the ſage prouidence of the Chriſtian Generall, who was an enemie to all prepoſterous temeritie, & durſt not affie himſelfe vpon the doubtfulnes of the dark: did referre the whole to the next morning: and then at the dawning of the day, he departed wich enſignes diſplaied, and held the way of the mountaines, the couerts and ſecret places: alwaies hauing before him his vauntcurrers to diſcouer and to beate the waies and paſſages, that he might not fall into the ambuſhments of the Paynim.
            
            About the ſame houre that Scanderbeg departed, the Sultan beganne the aſſault againſt Croy: for hauing ordained all things (as hath bene ſaid) he thought good toAſſault to Croy the ſecond. beginne it betimes in the morning and before that the day ſhould be any thing ſpent: for feare leaſt the aſſault being deferred any longer, ſhould fall out in the extreamitie and heate of the daye. Now the abſence of Caſtroit being reported throughout the hoaſt, did greatly reuiue the courages of the Infidels: and vpon this occaſion being growen more forward and furious, they did haſten with their ſcaling ladders and other inſtrumentes in great ſtore againſt the walles. In like manner ſome there were who forgetting their late loſſe and ſlaughter, did aduenture to approach euen to the port, ſtriuing to breake it open, or to force it off the hinges, and to make way for them ſelues through the ſame by meanes of their mattocks and barres of iron. Towardes Tyrann
                     •
                  
                they caſt great ſtore of wilde fire into the towne: and the artillerie ceaſed not during all the time of the aſſault, notwithſtanding that it was not able much to endammage the defendants, without the great hurt and loſſe of the aſſailants. Neuertheleſſe, the Sultan without all reſpect, did cauſe it ſtill to ſhoot off amongſt both parties,

and did thereby deſtroy ſome both on the one ſide and on the other: for he did not thinke the head of a Chriſtian dearely bought, which coſt him twentie of his owne company. The defendants though they were not altogether free from dammage, yet were they in good ſuertie, neither was there any hazard of the loſſe of the towne: for (beſides their other helpes) ſuch was the naturall ſtrength and ſituation of the place, that it made all the attemptes of the miſcreantes to be in vaine and to no purpoſe. And yet notwithſtanding, if at any time the defence of the place did depend vpon the valure of the defendants & the deuoire of their good diligence, they did euer ſhew themſelues on al hands to be ſtout and valiant, and they gaue maruellous proofs of their faith and proweſſe: and ſtill did they encreaſe in courage, in ſtrength, and in good ſucceſſe. Of the Turkes that aduentured themſelues to the port, there was ſcarce any one that returned: on the other parts, thoſe that were moſt hardie and aduenturous, did remaine dead vpon the place, and an infinite number were ſore hurt & maimed: and there was not almoſt in any one place but verie few or none of their ladders preſented againſt the walls. Neuertheleſſe Amuarth ſtill preſſed on his people with great furie on all ſides: and with a reſolution of obſtinacie more and more encreaſing, did continually ſend ſupplies of freſh men, ſtill renuing the aſſault without any intermiſſion: inſomuch as this ſight and ſpectacle did at one and the ſelfe time,The Turkes repulſed from the aſſault. both feed his humor, and yet torment him to the hart: till in the end being euen glutted with the pitifull butcherie and murther of his people, he cauſed to ſound a retrait and to ceaſe the aſſault, rather at the prayers and perſwaſions of his Baſſaes, then vpon any other cauſe. For they entreated & humbly beſought him, that he would not ſo willfully and deſperately deſtroy and conſume his armie, conſidering that there was no apparance or probabilitie to get the towne in this faſhion: and that it were better to reſerue his forces to worke by mines into the towne, as the beſt and onely way to bring it into his poſſeſſion. But want of victuals, and the extreame famine which did now ſore pinch the armie of the Barbarians, did cauſe this worke to proceede but ſlowly for a time: wherefore to recouer corne and other prouiſions, there were ſent Commiſſaries with certaine men to Lyſſa and other places of the venetian territories. For by reaſon of the peace ſworne betwene them, the Sultan did perſwade himſelfe that he would denie him nothing.Scanderbeg marcheth after Sebalias.
            
            Whileſt theſe things were a doing, Scanderbeg had intelligence by his skoutes, what courſe Sebalias tooke in his iourney: who hauing diſperſed certaine troupes of horſemen all ouer the fieldes, did deſtroy the vines and other things bearing frute throughout the countrey. He diſmarched therefore with as great ſecrecie as was poſſible: and being arriued within a three myles off the Barbarian: he choſe out foure thouſand good and ſtrong horſe to charge vpon him in the open and plaine fields. All his foote forces, and the reſidue of his horſemen, he left with Moſes, and placed them on a high hill neare to the high waye, where he was in hope that the enemie ſhould paſſe: and he willed him that if he ſaw the Infidels to flie that way our of order & diſperſed, he ſhould ſuddenly fall in vpon them, and charge them moſt fiercely: but if he did perceiue them to hold good and to ſtand firme, maintaining the fight with equall fortune and valure and without mouing: that then he ſhould ſpeedily come forward with his companies, and ioyne himſelfe to his forces: and he doubted not, in caſe the enemie durſt abide him, either to make him pay for it and to buy his reſiſtance verie deare, or elſe to driue him to a moſt ſhamefull & diſhonorable flight. For their flight he was nothing at all deceiued: but for the reſt, it fell out otherwiſe then he expected: for Sebalias being aduertiſed of the comming of the Chriſtians by the ſentinels which he had ſet to watch of purpoſe: vpon a ſigne giuen had made all his forces to gather,

together and to keepe neare vnto him: excepting ſome few ſcattered a farre off, who became an eaſie prey to the Albanois. And before that he had any ſight of the enemie, he poaſted thence by another way, and not by that where he knew Scanderbeg was marching. Thus was there nothing done at that time worthy the ſpeaking: and the rather for that Caſtriot kept his forces from following after them: in regard that his footemen were not able without exceſſiue toyle & trauell, to endure ſo long a iorney in purſuing them. Beſides that, the perpetuall care of Croie did greatly reſtraine his forwardnes and fierecnes: and he held it more wiſedome to reſerue his armie in good plight for the continuall wants and neceſſities of the towne. On the one ſide therfore the Turkiſh Chieftaine returned to Amurath with great ioy and contentment, for that he had ſo abuſed Scanderbeg, and kept him all that day from troubling of their trenches: on the other ſide the Epirot returned his campe extremely grieued, becauſe he had loſt that oportunitie, and through that perplexity of his mind which he tooke for Croy, from whence he was not accuſtomed ſo farre to abſent himſelfe.
            The report goeth, that he met with many vpon the way, who gaue him notice of the Turkiſh Commiſſaries being abroad for victuals: and of the conuoy which they had prouided for the ſafe conduct of the ſame. Whereupon, diſguiſing himſelfe out of hand in ſimple attire (an ordinarie policie which he vſed in the warres) and beingAmbuſcado of Scanderbeg whereby he ſurprizeth the Turke his victuallers. attended with a hundreth ſouldiers in the ſame habit, he followed thoſe victuallers by the tract where they had paſſed: and hauing learned by what way they were to returne, he put himſelfe with his companie in an ambuſcado. Then ſent he two of his ſouldiers, men of good iudgement and experience, to go to Lyſſa: willing them to get notice, and to beare good eſpiall vpon the troupes of the enemie, and carefully to obſerue, whether in their returne they did take any other way, then that by which they had paſſed thitherwards: and if they did, they ſhould poaſt away with all ſpeede to giue him intelligence of it. But theſe victuallers returning the ſame way they went, fell into the hands of Scanderbeg, who hauing ſlaine ſome of them, tooke the others priſoners. The corne, the beaſts and carriage horſes, he conueyed to his campe, where he diſtributed the booty amongſt his ſouldiers. This done Moſes returning backe to the campe beſides Iſme, brought thither thoſe other troupes of foote, of which he had the leading.
            Whileſt Amurath did carefully and with great diligence ſet forwarde his mines againſt Croy, ſo much the more carefull was he, and neuer ceaſed to moleſt the beſiegedTurkiſh campe before Croy victualled out of Macedonie. with often and continuall allarmes and skirmiſhes: to the intent that by keeping them buſied in the defence of their walles, they might be the leſſe able to diſcouer the drift of his new deuiſes and his ſecret practiſes: during the which he receiued diuerſe meſſages, the one acquainted him with the diſcomfiture of his victuallers, the taking of his corne, and how all things elſe had paſſed: the other from Alchia brought him newes of certaine corne which was comming out of Macedon. So that as the latter gaue him cauſe of ioy and contentment, ſo the former did renue his wonted griefe & diſcontentments. But the one being partly a recompence for the other, the Turkes were not much moued at the matter, but laying aſide the care of all other matters for that inſtant, the ſouldiers applyed all their care and ſtudie, that the new ſupply of prouiſions might be brought in ſafetie to their campe. Wherefore with the conſent of their Prince, there were appointed 20000. of the ſtrongeſt and moſt able men of their whole armie for a conuoy of thoſe other victuals, to the intent thoſe alſo ſhould not be made a prey to the Chriſtians, as the other had lately bene for default of a good and ſtrong conuoy to ſafeconduct them. But Scanderbeg was at that time ſufficiently buſied in conueying his bootie towards his owne campe, for that he might the better

auoide the enemie, and not any way encounter with him in his returne: he fetched a long compaſſe about by diuerſe by wayes, and with great diſcommoditie and paines, he draue the beaſts loaden with the prey, through the rougheſt and hardeſt ſtreights that he could chuſe within the mountaines, which was an occaſion of no ſmall wearines and toile vnto him, and made him to ſpend long time in his returne: and yet if he had bene freed from that cariage, and though all his forces had bene preſent with him and in a readines: I do not think that he would for all that haue bene ſo deſirous to purſue and ſet vpon the enemie, as to hazard himſelfe againſt ſo mightie and puiſſant a multitude. All this while was Moſes in great incertaintie and perplexitie for the prince of Epire, by reaſō he was certified by good eſpials of the departure of thoſe troupes out of the campe of the Turkes. And he was in doubt leaſt they were prepared for his confuſion: wherefore he ſent forth ſome light horſemen, who with all diligence and celeritie, and with great iornies ſhould go ſeeke out Scanderbeg, and to aduertiſe him of this particular. But they had no tidings of him till he was returned to his people, charged with the ſpoiles of his ſlaine enemies, and the graine which he had taken from them. Likewiſe the Mahomatiſtes without any lette or diſturbance, made a ſpeedie returne with their corne, victualles, and other prouiſions to their campe By meanes whereof, being thus prouided for the neceſſarie ſuſtenance of their bodies: it made them to take a good heart againe, and to reuiue both in ſtrength and courage.
            All this while did they trauell without ceaſing in vndermining of the wall: howbeitA myne made by the Turkes against Croy. the exceſſiue labor of the work did ſwallow vp many of them within the earth: notwithſtanding the pioners had their ſeuerall times and houres particularly proportioned vnto ech of them: and the like order was alſo obſerued throughout all the ſquadrons, and amongſt the ſouldiers of euerie tent within the campe. The continuall labour, and the obſtinate reſolution of the men did eaſily ſurmount all difficultie, and daylie did they continue their skirmiſhes and looſe fightes before the walles, of purpoſe to abuſe the Citizens. And albeit there was no daie paſſed without the death and ſlaughter of ſome of them: yet did not they account that for any loſſe amongeſt ſo many thouſands of fighting men.
            The Infidels did in ſome ſort ſpend all that time ioyfully and to their contentment,Venetian ſubiectes ſuccour the Turkes campe before Croy with victuals. by reaſon that ouer and aboue their ſtore and abundance of victualles lately arriued from Macedony: there was alſo a great number of marchauntes of the next townes vnder the obeiſance of the Venetians, who ſerued them with plentie of corne, wine, oyle, and all ſortes of victualles day by day into their campe: neither was there any want of Mercerie wares, which diuerſe brought thither of purpoſe to traffique with them: who (as the prouerbe is) like flies drawing after honny, did repaire and flocke thither from all quarters, when they once knew of their eſtate: and that their campe was in great penurie of all prouiſions excepting money onely. All this did Scanderbeg ſee verie well: yet becauſe he would not offend the ſubiectes of his friendes and confederates, nor hinder their prinate gaine in particular: he tooke all with great patience, willing his people alſo to diſſemble it as well as himſelfe, without giuing any offence to any perſon either in word or in deede. For howſoeuer it were, he was not ignorant, that though he had hindered this traffique betweene them, yet the enemie for all that ſhould not haue wanted it from other places, by reaſon of the neareneſſe of Macedonie, Thrace and Seruia. And therfore he buſied his braines with greater matters, and with other affaires of more importance: how he might by force of armes and dint of ſword, and not by famine and want of ſuſtenance, expell this outragious enemie out of Epyre. This made him to haue an eſpeciall care and regard of a

matter which was deeply to be conſidered on: and that was to encreaſe and augmentTanuſee and Moſes ſent by Scanderbeg to leauie a new ſupply of ſouldiers. his forces: for of the eight thouſand men which he had leauied at the beginning of this warre, there was litle leſſe then a thouſand of them diminiſhed and decreaſed: all which were either conſumed in the ſeuerall ſeruices againſt the enemie, or by diuerſe other accidents and diſcommodities: beſides a good number who were licenſed to departe, and were ſent a waye to refreſhe themſelues in their dwellinges: ſuch as he thought had endured ſufficient hardneſſe, and done their good deuoire in the forepaſſed dangers. The charge and commiſſion for this matter was committed to Tanuſee and to Moſes, who trauerſing and compaſſing all the prouince, did ſcarce leauie two thouſand ſouldiers, whereof fiue hundreth were horſemen, and the reſidue footemen. It was no eaſie matter at that time to find any one man in all Epire fit and able to beare armes, but he was alreadie emploied in ſome place either of charge, or elſe appointed to ſome particular ſeruices: ſo well and ſo carefully had Scanderbeg ſtrengthened and aſſured all things, with wonderfull counſell and aduiſe: becauſe he would not willingly leaue any angle or corner of his realme expoſed to the iniurie and violence of his aduerſaries.
            During the ſame time that this leauie was made by Scanderbeg, the Croians being importuned by the daily alarmes of the Infidels could not any longer containe themſeluesCroyans ſallie out vpon the Turkes. within their walles: but often times ſallying out of the towne, they did with great good happe and ſucceſſe encounter with them. One day aboue the reſt, their ſeruice was moſt notable, at which time there iſſued forth about 500 of the garriſon, and hauing well beaten the enemie of whom many were cut in peeces and the reſidue put to flight, they were ſo earneſt and forwarde in the chaſe, that they purſued them euen within their trenches, which made the Mahometiſtes (when they ſawe the Chriſtians to be ſo hardie and couragious, and that their temeritie did drawe them on vppon this their good fortune) not to grieue verie much at their companions which lay ſlaine, becauſe they were in hope ſoone to be reuenged. But this their hope was made vaine by meanes of Vranocontes, who though he ſawe his ſouldiers to returne with little or no dammage, yet neuertheleſſe wiſely weighing the danger and hazard of that dayes ſeruice, with the politique and ſubtill diſpoſition of the enemie, he would not from thence foorth any more permit them to ſet their foote without their portes.
            But greater was the griefe, and more notable was the ſlaughter that Scanderbeg brought vpon Amurath and his forces: for his new bandes being vnited and incorporatedA ſecond canuazado by Scanderbeg to the campe of the Turkes before Croy. to the bodie of his whole armie, and the ſame being deuided into three parts, one to Moſes, an other to Tanuſee, and the third reſerued to himſelfe; about the ſhutting of the euening, he cauſed his Enſignes to march verie ſecretly & directly towards the campe of the enemie. But before he was gotten as farre as Monticlea (which was diſtant about two miles from their trenches) he was diſcouered by the Turkiſh Sentinels. Great and ſuddaine was the tumult when they vnderſtoode of his comming, but moſt of all where the tents lay neereſt to the daunger. Wherefore nothing was omitted by the Barbarians, neither did they leaue anie remedie vnattempted, which the vncertainety and darkeneſſe of the night could aduiſe them vnto either for repelling him backe, or for debarring him from entring vppon them. There were gathered together in great haſte and tumult about ſome eight thouſand men which oppoſed themſelues againſt him: which made him to pauſe a little, and with a ſofter pace and more leaſure to march forwarde againſt them. The Mahometans aduaunced them ſelues to encounter him, and with a huge crie on all handes were the firſt that beganne the fight: but the Chriſtians refuſing to ioyne

with them in fight, by litle and litle recuiled backwardes, to the intent that drawing them farther off from their trenches, their fury might be the more abated and diminiſhed.Moſes and Tanuſe inuade the Turkiſh Campe. Hereupon Moſes and Tanuſe hauing ſodainly entred their rampiers and barriers on that part which was appointed them, had filled al the campe with exceeding feare and confuſion: and being entred within certaine tents, and the watches ſlaine, they deſtroied all with the fury of fire, where force of armes could not any way endammage them. Greater was the loſſe and diſhonor without compariſon receiued by them then by Scanderbeg, for that the Infidels bending all their thoughts and endeuours to that part, Moſes had the more liberty euen from the beginning, freely to do execution vppon the enemy, by burning, ſacking, and killing all at pleaſure, and to bring their Campe into feare and diſorder, as in all ſodaine actions and vnexpected it is commonly vſed. But this victory was of ſmall and ſhort continuance, for within a while after a more ſtrong troupe of the Barbarians haſtening vpon them, the Chriſtians thought it not good to attend their comming. In one thing aboue the reſt did fortune greatly fauor them, in that the artillery whereof they ſtood in ſo great feare, did not at all play vpon them: were it that they could not well tell how to vſe it in the darke, or elſe that for the feare wherwith they were ſurprized (as it is oftentimes ſeene) they had forgotten to aide themſelues with it. The day began now to appeare, when as the Prince of Albany giuing place vnto the enemy, did withdraw himſelfe in the middeſt & chiefeſtScanderbeg retireth from the enemy. heat of the fight, and retired about 2. miles off to a certaine hil where it was eaſie for any to ſee him, and there did he attend Moſes with his ſquadrons: for that was the place which at their going to the charge, was appointed for their rende vous. Aſſoone as the Turkes ſaw him there to make a ſtand, they went in great haſt to the Sultan his pauilion, humbly entreating him to giue them leaue to iſſue forth, & to ſet vpon him, ſhewing him & pointing with their fingers at the ſmall number of the Chriſtians: ſo muchTurkes deſire and obtaine leaue of Amurath to iſſue out and to ſet vpon Scanderbeg. preuailed their praiers & importunacy, that the old man ouercome with their requeſts condiſcended thereunto. Immediatly therefore there made out 12000. men ſtrong & luſty 7000. horſe, and 5000. foot. Vpon the diſcouery of this great and mighty troupe, Scanderbeg at the beginning made ſome doubt, whether he ſhould ſtay and receiue them, conſidering the nearnes of the whole army of the Turkes, or whither he ſhould yeeld and giue place vnto the time: but he held beſt for that time to take and chooſe the mid way and meane between both, neither to flie altogether, nor yet altogether to abide: wherefore retiring faire and eaſily by degrees towards the higheſt and rougheſt parts of the mountains, he did temporize and dally away the time: relying both vpon the ſtrength of the place, and the aid of his other troupes, whom by the duſt ariſing in the air by reaſon of their marching, he did now perceiue not to be far off. The Infidels came on, with great fury euen to thoſe hils, but ſeeing the difficulty of the place, & that it was very dangerous to paſſe further, for that the very waight of their bodies would ſufficiently load & hinder them from getting vp, they began to ſlacke their pace. Scanderbeg would not ſtirre, till he certainly knew that his people did approach, yet could not his policy be conueyed ſo cunningly, but the Barbarians did perceiue it very eaſily. For turning bridle vpon the hearing of the noiſe of our men that were comming on, and ſeeing their vauntcurrours, they were contented not to approach any nearer, but in great haſt and feare caſting many of their enſignes to the ground, they made awaieThe Turks flie. with all ſpeed poſsible. Neuertheleſſe their great baſt did not altogether preſerue them from the ſword of their enemies, becauſe that Scanderbeg his ſouldiers had begun the fight with them, and with their ſhot playing vppon them from aloft, they had layed many of them dead vppon the place. On the other ſide the Dibrian haſting thitherwardes with great diligence, did take many priſoners of thoſe that were not able to

hold way with their fellowes, and the reſidue had free liberty to ſaue them ſelues. The ſucceſſe hereof being heard and ſeene by Amurath, but eſpecially the horrible aſpect of that nightes ſlaughter, and the deformity of his Campe, did cauſe him to conceiue ſuch extreme griefe, that for a time it ſtopped vp his ſpeach, ſo as hee was not able to ſpeake a word, which was the occaſion that nothing was either attempted or determined all that day againſt the Chriſtians. The report is, that the next day, Scanderbeg with a ſmall traine attending him according to his wonted vſe was ſeene by the Barbarians to walke vpon the top of the mountaine which hangeth ouer Croy, and thereSpeach of Amurath touching Scanderbeg ſeeing him vpon a mountaine euer Croy to haue ſome conference with Vranocontes. And that this being reported, and his perſon ſhewed vnto Amurath by ſome of his men that pointed at him, hee blamed the folly and inconſtancy of his people: and with a dogges laughter (as the ſaying is) he told them, that the beſt way was to let alone that furious and vntamed Lion: and not from thenceforth to feede that vnhappy beaſt with the bloud of his men, that ſo peraduenture he might at length be brought to reaſon by his owne rage and proper fury, rather then by any force of armes that ſhould be vſed againſt him. But as it was litle or no diſhonour for Scanderbeg to heare theſe wordes vttered from the mouth of his aduerſary, ſo likewiſe was it to be taken as a marke of ſingular honour, that he had the power to draw from him this teſtimony, and that he had enforced his enemy to harbour ſuch a conceipt of him.
            But to the matter. Now was the whole army of the Barbarians in great ſorrowe and ignominy, and they demeaned them ſelues rather as men beſieged, then as thoſe that beſieged others. Beſides that, to theſe their miſhappes this alſo was added which enſueth, being of no leſſe importaunce, and which alſo did greatly encreaſe their miſfortunes. The ſecret working of the Mine was now come to the knowledge of theThe Mine of the Turkes diſcouered and ouerthrowen by the Croians. inhabitantes: whereupon one night they iſſued forth of the towne to ſee what was done therein, and I know not how they went about it, but it was done with ſuch ſilence and ſecreſie, and ſo ſodainely, that they ouerthrew and ſcattered the moſt part of their worke, and diſcouered all the doings of the enemy without being ſeene or perceyued by their skoutes, till ſuch time as hauing marred all their implements and prouiſions, they were retired to the towne in ſafety. I do beleeue well that they made choiſe of the dead time of the night, when men being in their ſoundeſt ſleepe, do repreſent the very image and ſhape of death. Yet ſome doe deny that they ſallied forth at all at that time, or that they knew by any ſuch meanes the enterpriſe of the enemy: but they ſuppoſe that the Turkes being not well able to conceale their fraudulent inuention and ſecrete workings, the Chriſtians did by their countenaunce and demeanour, coniecture and grow into ſuſpition of ſome ſuch intent. Whereupon as ſoone as they began to grow doubtfull of the matter, they preſently deuiſed how to ſurpriſe and preuent them in their deuiſe. And they ſay that they did place certaine Baſons,A deuiſe for the diſcouery of a Mine. and Pannes of Braſſe and other mettall full of water, in diuerſe places, for that by the beating and ſound of the blowes, as they were working vnder ground, the counterſtroakes and rebounding noiſe made with the force of their ſtroaks, would euidently ſhew in what place they did Mine vnderneath the earth. And although they did ſufficiently diſcerne the entry of the Mine: neuertheleſſe fearing leaſt they ſhould be ſurpriſed by the conueyaunce thereof vnder the earth, becauſe it might be digged turning and winding with great vncertainety, whereby the enemy might be brought into the towne on ſome other ſide▪ where they leaſt ſuſpected: therefore they had deuiſed and inuented this remedy for a miſchiefe that was ſo doubtfull and vncertaine. It may be that both the one and the other of theſe aſſertions are true, and eyther of them hath ſome likelihood and probability; howbeit as the latter is more ingenious

then the former: ſo in my iudgement, the trueth thereof is not ſo likely as the other. But how ſoeuer it be, this is one thing not doubted of nor denied by any: that though the Croians did litle or nothing feare the endeuours of the enemy, yet did they make prouiſion with good aduiſe and exact deliberation for all things within the towne, whereby they might preuent and interrupt all the pretences which the Ottoman might deuiſe againſt them. And therefore as ſoone as Amurath knew that the Mine was diſcouered, and that the townes men did chearefully fortifie themſelues with all kindes of reſiſtaunce: he gaue ouer the conceipt of all theſe fantaſies, and ſurceaſed from proceeding any further in this purpoſe. But had it ſo fallen out that his deceipt had remained ſtill hidden and concealed from the citizens, yet notwithſtanding he would in the end haue diſcontinued that worke of his owne proper motion: becauſe that in vndermining of the ground, there were ſo many rockes, and ſtrong banckes of hard ſtone in euery place, which did euer hinder their worke, by reaſon of the neareneſſe and proximity of the mountaine; In ſo much that to haue cleft and pierced through them, would haue beene an endleſſe labour, and a worke of ineſtimable difficulty. And yet there were ſome who would haue had him obſtinately to perſeuere in the ſame. This care then being remoued, he reſolued to employ his thoughtes, and to proue an other way: the deuiſe whereof was with as litle profite as the other: and that was to ſee if he could by any manner of meanes for money and by corruption, bring the Croians to his deuotion. And he held it not amiſſe to haue recourſe to this policy and inuention, ſeeing neither force nor fraude, nor menaces and threatnings, could preuaile nor profite him any thing at all.
            Hee ſent therefore to Vranocontes one of his Baſſaes, a man of high degree andAn ambaſſage ſent to Vranocontes by Amurath with intent to corrupt him, and to make him betray Croy. great authority about his perſon, and one that was greatly commended for the dexterity of his witte and iudgement. Who (taking with him but two ſeruaunts onely with their handes full of precious giftes, moſt rich preſentes, and ſumptuous ornamentes, after the Turkiſhe faſhion) had inſtructions giuen him, that before he made any mention of the yeelding of the towne; he ſhould offer theſe preſents to Vranocontes in the name of Amurath, the better thereby to prepare his minde and diſpoſition to the intended and decided parley. This done, he willed him ſubtelly to ſound andInſtructions giuen by Amurath to his ambaſſadour. ſearch the depth of his thoughts, and to ſee how he was affected: and ſo with large promiſes of gold and ſiluer, he ſhould practiſe to induce him to deliuer the place into his hands: and to ſhew him how eaſie a thing it was for him, who was the chiefe commaunder and gouernour of the garriſon, ſeeing the number of the citizens was but ſmall and ſlender: and that they might be drawen either by loue or by conſtraint, to allow of that which the ſouldiers ſhould accept and like of: that likewiſe the ſouldiers would not contradict any thing which he ſhould thinke meet. And that he ſhould moreouer aſſure him, beſides the offers and preſentes ſent vnto him, both he and his people ſhould not want any place or degree of honour which they could deſire in all his Court. The Ambaſſadour Turke hauing this charge and theſe inſtructions giuen him, did take his way directly towards the towne, and as he approached neare to the Port, he was ſtayed by the guards, till ſuch time as the Gouernour was aduertiſed of his comming. Vranocontes being ſpeedily ſent for and arriued, the Turke deliuered the ſumme of his commiſsion, and at the firſt as he was preſenting the giftes from Amurath, and did labour with glorious wordes to inſinuate and worke into the fauor and good liking of the Chriſtian, thinking to allure him with his cunning perſwaſions, and to get credence to his meſſage, to the intent he might cutte him off from ſpending further time, and from being more tedious: It is enough (ſayed the Gouernour) and you haue adorned your goodly preſents with as goodly and elegant ſpeaches. Let vs

now heare the reſt of the meſſage which you bring vs from your maiſter, ſo ſhall weSpeach of Vranocontes to the Ambaſſadour of Amurath. be the more ready to receiue your giftes, and to accept of your largeſſe, when I ſhall once know the ſumme of your demand. Otherwiſe you may not thinke that we will any way bind our ſelues, vnto you by your curteſies, nor that we will be in any ſort tied vnto you by this bond of your benefites, tending perhaps to our infamy and reproach, vnleſſe we firſt ſee to what end you vſe this your liberality ſo exceeding & extraordinary: for then may we either accept ſafely, or reiect iuſtly your preſents, when your words ſhall haue made cleare and manifeſt the intent & meaning of your hearts.
            
            The Barbarian being nothing at all abaſhed at the ſpeach of the Gouernor, replied thereunto immediately.
            
               Howſoeuer it be (quoth he) for other matters, we haue not brought you theſe giftsAnſwere of the Turkiſh Ambaſſador to Vranocontes. vnder pretence to deceiue any man, for that were the way to deale with ſlaues and children, and not with free and valiaunt perſons. And although (ô Vranocontes) all things proceeding from an enemy are ſuſpitious (as thou haſt ſayed very well and wiſely) whereof we our ſelues alſo are not ignoraunt, yet durſt we not without bluſhing preſent our ſelues before thee (as the ſaying is) with our handes voide and empty. Neither oughteſt thou to condemne the gratitude of our mindes, if thou be the man that thou ſeemeſt to be, and as thou art reported to be generally. Receiue therefore and take in good part theſe preſentes which ſhall not any way wrong thee, nor be any impediment, but that thou maieſt freely, and with full liberty diſpoſe of thy affaires, and continue thy former rightes to ordaine of them as thou pleaſeſt. For whether thou doeſt refuſe and reproue our requeſts, or other things which we haue to ſay vnto thee: (which perhaps doe as much concerne thy good as ours) or whether thou doe approue and allow of theſe preſents offered thee ſo franckly and ſo freely, we will not in any ſort obiect it as a reproach vnto thee. For nothing is to be held or eſteemed more baſe, vile and ſeruile, then ſo to giue, as to expect a profite and gaine by the gift. We are now come vnto thee (gentle and worthy Captaine) freely and of our owne accord: and (I ſpeake it from the very bottome of my heart) we doe not ſeeke to ſurprize thee, neither by wordes nor by giftes, whom we haue ſo often proued to be inuincible by armes and dint of ſword, and who doeſt repute all things inferiour vnto thee, and to the greatneſſe of thy thoughtes. This is the cauſe that Amurath loueth thee, and doth admire theſe rare vertues in his enemy: this is the cauſe he doth deſire (if by any meanes he may) to haue thee neare vnto him. No doubt that is the place, and to be neare the preſence of ſo great a Monarke, is far more fit and conuenient for thy merites. And there it is that the excellent magnanimity of thy courage, and the dexterity of thy ſpirite, ſhall be able to finde out the way and meanes to mount to the higheſt and ſupreame degree of all glory and good fortune: not that I condemne Scanderbeg, whom euen we our ſelues his enemies doe glorifie for the recouery of his countrey, for the defending of it ſo often and ſo valiantly, yet through thy ſuccours and aſsiſtance principally: but thou art worthy of another maner of Prince, and of a better and higher aduauncement, and not to ſpend thy yeares, and to conſume thy glorious life in this obſcurity, and in this vility and baſeneſſe of eſtate. Moreouer Scanderbeg his good fortune will vaniſh away euen in a moment, the Deſtinies haue oppoſed againſt him an enemy, who is too mighty for him to endure continually: wel may his puniſhment be deferred for a ſeaſon, but it cannot be auoided: ſo extreme and incredible an hatred hath the Ottoman Prince conceiued againſt him. Ouer and aboue the incomparable forces which he hath aſſembled for his deſtruction, he hath ſworne and proteſted not to ſpare any coſtes or expences, nor trauelles, nor daungers, nor to depart out of Epire, till ſuch time as he haue ſubdued him, and impoſed a moſt

deadly and mortall yoke vpon his head. Now ſee how the originall of this miſchiefe doth begin principally with you of Croy: we heare him euery day ſounding into the eares of his counſellours theſe and the like ſpeaches: that he will rather ſhamefully abandon and forſake his Imperiall city of Andrinople, and all the dominions of his eſtate and Empire, before he will quit the poſſeſsion of this place: before he will leaue this city vnconquered, and before his wrath ſhall not be fully ſatisfied with the ſlaughter and butchery of your diſmembred bodies, and there is no doubt but he will doe it, and I doe tremble to foretell it. For though I be one of your enemies (amongſt infinite others,) yet am I a man and haue humaine paſsions: and therefore hardly will my eies be able to endure or ſuffer ſo miſerable a ſight and obiect of your pitifull and lamentable condition. Aſſure your ſelues he will not faile to do it, if you do not chaunge your mindes▪ if now (taking the benefit of his long ſufferance and patience) you do not accept the ſafety, the light, the liberty, & the peace which are ſo freely offered vnto you: but go to, ſay a Gods name, that this fortreſſe ſo vnmatchable, that theſe walles ſo inacceſsible, that your valour (which is more then all the reſt) ſhall preſerue & defend you: but how long I pray you will this be? doe you thinke that the Ottoman will raiſe his ſiege and remoue his Campe in the middeſt and chiefe heate of this war? you ſhall ſee it to your coſt, you ſhall feele it to your griefe and loſſe, that though his forces profite not nor preuaile not, though all his attempts and endeuours doe proue vaine & bootleſſe, yet (I ſay) you ſhall ſee ſtill before your eies, and you ſhall continually behold before your wals theſe ſame enemies, theſe ſame tents, till ſuch time as the extremity and importunity offamine (which maſtereth and ouercommeth all things) doe in the end enforce you to yeeld, and to ſubmit your ſelues. What other hope then haue you left I pray you? whence is it that this greedy deſire of perils and dangers hath ſeized vppon your obſtinat and hardened hearts? Shall Scanderbeg ſupply your wants with victuals being impriſonned within theſe wals? who being conſtrained to keepe cloſe hidden continually in theſe forreſts, or wandring vp and down the tops of the mountains, and being ouerloaden and ouerwhelmed on all ſides with cares and trauels, is ſcarceable to ſuſtaine his miſerable body? Will the Venetians ſend or ſuccour you with prouiſions, who do daily bring and furniſh vs againſt you, with all ſtore of ſuſtenance and neceſſaries for the war, euen in exceſſe and ſuperfluity? Be wiſe therefore, you that are ſo braue and valiant, be you once well aduiſed and take your wits vnto you: behold it is your enemy that warneth you, you haue perſiſted long enough in this obſtinacy: neither your countrey nor your liberty ought to be ſo wilfully defended, that you ſhould oppoſe your ſelues for them againſt the wil & pleaſure of the diuine maieſty. It behoueth you to yeeld & to giue place to Fortune, and to bend your knees to the moſt puiſſant and mighty. But what liberty is this wherof I ſpeake vnto you? the true liberty, the true rewardes, and the perpetuall tranquillity of this life, is in the power of Amurath. Prouide therfore for your ſelues, whileſt your affairs are in ſound & good eſtate, whileſt you haue yet time to determine vpon it: whileſt that we your enemies do exhort you, do entreat you, and do loue to entertain you, rather as our companions and friends, with your good liking, then as our ſlaues & priſoners by force and conſtraint.
            
            In this maner did the Barbarian deliuer his meſſage, framing and conforming with a ſingu
                  •••
                good grace, both his countenance and his voice: and hauing finiſhed, he did attend to obſerue what alteration he could perceiue in the ſpirits and affections of the cōpany, purpoſing thereupon to haue taken an occaſion to treat a part & in ſecret with the Gouernour vpon the reſidue of his ambaſſade. But knowing that the affections of them all were mightely eſtranged, from liking the ſubiect of his diſcourſe, as men that knew how to contemne the ſwords of their enemies, and not their words onely, and

hearing the ſouldiers begin to mutter, and murmure here & there, as if they had ſome wrong offred them, rather then be perſwaded to yeeld themſelues, he praid the gouernour to giue him leaue, to vſe a word or two vnto himſelfe alone and in ſecret, which was likewiſe accorded vnto him, for they did all much rely & truſt vpon the ſage wiſdome & conſtancy of that perſonage: being aſſured, that he would not vndertake any thing, which ſhould not be for the aduantage & maieſty of the Realme of Albany, and for the profit of ech of them particularly. Then began the wily fox to declare the ſecret which was committed vnto him by the Sultan, couering his deteſtable and hatefull meſſage, with the moſt affected and plauſible ſpeeches that was poſſible. Vranocontes
               Vranocontes reiecteth the Turkiſh Ambaſſador and diſmiſſeth him with threats and menaces. foreſeeing the venome of his pernitious practiſes, did cut him off & interrupt him in the middeſt of his talke, enioyning him preſently to get out of his ſight. Thus wholly confounded and aſhamed did the Ambaſſador depart, no man accepting of his bribes by the expreſſe commandement of the Gouernor: otherwiſe, it is not to be doubted, but the licentiouſnes & greedy deſire of the ſouldiers, would not haue needed any intreaty to lighten thoſe varlets of their cariage. At ſuch time as this trim Orator of the Turkiſhe Prince was retiring himſelf and ready to depart, Vranocontes in recompence of his painted and fine language did denounce vnto him this ſentence: ſtraightly charging and commanding him, that neither he, nor any other from thenceforth, ſhould be ſo hardy on the part and behalfe of the Ottoman▪
                   as to repaire againe to the town, or to demaund any parley: proteſting that if they did, they ſhould be aſſured (beſides the loſſe of their handes, their noſes, and their eares, to haue their bodies wholly and hideouſly deformed and tormented.
            
            The Baſſa being returned to the campe, was receiued of the multitude & common ſort in great confuſion, for that they had long expected him with great deuotion, and they were come forth againſt him, being deſirous to vnderſtand the reſolution of the beſieged. This was in a maner the only hope wherupon they did build for the getting of Croy, and for the finiſhing of their labors: but when they perceiued that the preſents were not receiued, which they ſaw in the hands of the Baſſa his ſeruants, they knew well that there was nothing done nor concluded. Moreouer after they heard it reported, with what obſtinacy the Croians had made anſwer, in ſuch ſort as is already declared, there was not any one of them which conceiued not in his heart, either ſorrow or feare, or fury, acording to the naturall inclination of euery one in particular. The agedAmurath and the Turkes agreeued at the repulſe of their Ambaſſador, prouide to aſſault Croy. 
               Sultan aboue al the reſt, being ouercome with impatiency, had recourſe again to arms, purpoſing once more to force the towne by an aſlault, which he had earſt giuen ouer & ſurceaſed: wherin he did rather content his wrath & choller, then any way reuenge his diſgrace & diſhonor. He commanded therfore to make ready the ladders, & other engins of aſſault againſt the next morning, ſpending almoſt al the whole night in this idle and vaine labor, and in placing the artillery, not forgetting alſo to prouide for the ſecurity & ſurety of his campe, knowing how Caſtriot had his eie alwaies open to deuiſe ſome means how to annoy him. For this cauſe he left 30000. men wel appointed, who held their horſes alwaies in a readines and ſtill bridled. The next morning aboutCroy aſſaulted the th
                     •
                  rd time. the day break, was the ſouldiers conueied & placed neare the wals, and at the very firſt beginning, the roaring cannon went off both on the one ſide & the other, & did ſeeme to contend which ſhould deuoure moſt bloud, & cauſe greateſt mortality. But the ſhot of the Chriſtians fell more fortunatly then thoſe of the Infidels, who were as litle reſpectiue of their own people as of their enemies. And whileſt they aſſaied to driue our men from the defence of their wals, they made many of their owne cōpany to forſake the fight, both by reaſon of their deadly wounds, and in regard of the euident danger which they feared. When the ordinance had done thundering, they came to the Scalado,

wherein by how much the more there did appeare perfect valour, and true courage, ſo much the more matter did they ſtill find to aduenture the loſſe of their liues; ſo that in a moment, the bloud was ſeene on all ſides to runne downe as it were in ſtreames, and the earth was euery where couered with ſenſleſſe & breathleſſe bodies.
            
               Amurath could not anie longer endure to be cruell againſt him ſelfe, notwithſtandingTurkes repulſed, from the aſſalt. that he had enterprized this laſt attempt of a meere wilfulneſſe and obſtinacie. Wherfore cauſing the fight to ceaſe, he retired into his pauillion, as one enraged and mad for griefe and anger: where he paſſed the reſidue of that day, his owne hands doing violence and outrage to his aged and white haires▪ & pulling himſelfe by the chin, with his eyes lifted vp to the heauens, he powred forth many iniurious and blaſphemous ſpeeches, reproching euen God him ſelfe with his complaints & exclamations. And he did ſeeme to queſtion with him, why he had reſerued his hoarie haires, andAmurath his 
                     •
                   impatiēcie, who enraged at his ill ſucceſſe exclaimeth againſt God. aged yeares to ſo many misfortunes and ignominies: that both the whole race of his forepaſſed life, and the name of the Ottomans ſhould be altogether ſo diſgraced and diſhonored: and the glorie of his mightie conqueſts atchieued for many yeares, ſhould now at the laſt be obſcured and darkened, by meanes of one poore and baſe Caſtell in Epire, being in a maner but a vile and paultry village? The Baſſaes & other his familiars did labour to comfort him with diuerſe diſcourſes, recounting vnto him a world of examples, both ancient and moderne, of the ſudden fall and misfortune of other great and mightie Princes, and of manie ſtraunge and foraine kings and Emperours: but all was in vaine, and his craſed mind would admit no comfort. Notwithſtanding the day following, the old man, albeit he were verie weake and ill diſpoſed in his bodie, the vehemencie of his griefe hauing euen almoſt ſpent and waſted him to nothing, yet did he fall to counſell with certaine of his Chieftaines & greateſt Peeres, who as the report goeth, were foure in number: two Baſſaes, the one of Romania, the other of Aſia, andAmurath conſulteth vpon his proceeding in the ſiege of Croy. two of thoſe whom they call Vizirs or Counſellers. Long time were they in deliberating vpon the ſumme and conſequence of this war, & they were deuided into three diuers opinions. One was to continue the ſiege ſo long, till that the extremity of famine had worn out the beſieged. The ſecōd did aduiſe him to leaue Croy, & to purſue Scanderbeg with all his forces: and by that means, though he ſhould not haue his wil of him by force of armes, yet he might peraduenture encloſe and ſhutte him vp in ſome place where by famine he ſhould bemaſter him. The laſt opinion was: that ſeeing they had ſufficiently tried al means, & had aduentured the fortune of al hazards, it was but meer folly to continue there any longer with ſhame and infamy, or vpon deſpite and indignation onely to conſume and deſtroy his owne army: but that it were good rather to ſend ſome Ambaſſador to the Albanois, which ſhould deale and perſwade with him vpon any tearmes to become tributary to the Ottoman. And in caſe he did giue eare vnto it, he ſhould demand 10000. crownes for a yearely tribute. This opinion was allowed as the moſt ſafe: and Amurath did conſider with him ſelfe, that this would be a good and honorable colour and ſhew of victory; if before his departure out of Epire, he might preſcribe ſuch conditions to his enemy, and impoſe a yoke of ſuch ſubiection vpon the Prouince of Albanie. For to continue the ſiege, they found it very inconuenient for many reaſons, and they did foreſee a thouſand diſcommodities, which the winter would bring vpon them, and that the beſiegers would be ſooner wearied then the beſieged Moreouer the default and want of victuals, for the maintenance of ſo many thouſands of men for ſo long a times and (which was a thing of more importance) the daily courſes and inuaſions, which the enemy was like to make vppon their Campe, were not a litle to be feared. Neither did Amurath like, or take any pleaſure to loſe any more time in running and wandering vp & downe the mountains of Albany
               
after Scanderbeg: ſeeing it was a thing alſo which could not be effected, without ſingular daunger, and a wonderfull hazard both of himſelfe and all his armie.
            The matter therefore being thus▪ reſolued on▪ this Ambaſſade was committed toIſup ſent Ambaſſadour from Amurath to Scanderbeg to cōclude a peace with him. the care and wiſedome of a Turke, whoſe name was Iſup, a perſonage of great credite and authoritie with Amurath, who hauing bethought himſelfe that it might be, the ſumme would ſeeme too great vnto the Epyrote, he warned his Ambaſſadour, that if he did refuſe to condiſcend and to ſubmit him ſelfe to ſo great a tribute, he ſhould abate the one halfe of it. One thing yet remained which ſeemed ſomwhat difficult: and that was the meanes how to meet with Scanderbeg, for to go wandring vp and down the prouince, and to ſeeke him without knowing in what place certaine, (all the countrey being in armes) ſeemed a matter very daungerous and of little ſafetie: notwithſtanding that the name of an Ambaſſadour was euery where ſacred and inuiolate: ButSentence. they were eaſed of this care by meanes of certaine Dibrians who were then priſoners in the Turkiſh Campe. For they did couenaunt and vndertake, if they might haue their libertie, to conduct the Barbarian ſafe and ſounde to the preſence of Caſtriot, which being graunted them and they deliuered, they lead him the way taking their courſe to the Campe of the Chriſtians. The firſt place they came to was the mountaine Tumeniſta, where finding the Prince of Epire, they went on right towards the riuer of Iſme vpon the Sea ſide: but there they miſſed him alſo: for the ſame night hauing remoued with all his carriage, he was retired into an open countrey, which the inhabitants call the Red plaine: whereof the Dibrians hauing notice by certaine thatThe Red plaine dwelled thereabouts, they departed from thence, and within leſſe then an houre they came to the ſame place (for it was not farre from the riuer Iſme.) And before they entred all of them into the campe, one of the guides (leauing the Mahometan with the others) went on before to do his duty to Scanderbeg, & to know his pleaſure concerning the Ambaſſador. The Dibrian being knowne by thoſe of his owne ſquadron, & being entertained and welcomed with many ſalutations and embracements, entermingled with ſome teares▪ by reaſon of the longing deſire which they had to ſee him, was ſpeedily conducted to their Soueraigne: who hauing ſeene and welcomed the ſouldier, & hauing heard his meſſage, without any delay he ſent Tanuſee well accompanied with a good traine both of horſemen and footmen, to go and conduct the Ambaſſador vnto him: who being conueyed to the preſence of the Prince, did not for that day deliuer any thing touching the meſſage which he had in charge from his Maiſter, becauſe the night began to approch: but being entertained with great curteſie, & feaſted moſt ſumptuouſly, he paſſed that night within the tents of the Chriſtians. In the meane while Moſes with a good number of horſemen being mounted on horſebacke, by the commandemētScanderbeg his great care and prouidence to preuent the ſodaine ſurpriſes of his enemies. of Scanderbeg, was ridden forth to courſe vp & down round about, & to diſcouer on all ſides far & neare, both in the vallies and woody places: & the watches alſo were doubled in all the quarters of the campe, for feare leſt vnder this faint ſhew & colour, the Ottoman ſhould attempt ſome exploit againſt them: ſo that there was nothing elſe done almoſt all that night in the campe of the Chriſtians. Aſſoone as it was day, & that the chiefe and principall of the Armie were called & aſſembled together, Scanderbeg gaue audience to the Turkiſh Ambaſſador: who being formerly prepared of his oratiō artificially framed & deuiſed, thought to haue perſwaded thoſe ingenious & free ſpirits in ſome ſort to condeſcend vnto his purpoſe. He began therefore in this maner.
            
               I could wiſhe, ô Scanderbeg, that God would haue giuen vs the minde and affectionOration of Iſup to Scā
                     
                     
                        •
                     erbeg. long agoe wherewith we now come vnto thee: though perhappes more late then we ought, being now made wiſe by our owne harmes. For then neither had we for our partes ſeene ſo many goodly armies conſumed and deſtroyed with one

and the ſame deſtinie, neither ſhouldeſt thou dayly behold before thy eyes, thy realme ſo pitifully diſmembred, nor ſhouldeſt thou haue heard ſo many complaints & lamentations on all ſides amongeſt thy ſubiects. But ſo hath nature ordained & appointed it, that it is impoſſible to attaine to a perfect peace, or rightfull equitie, without bloud and the violence of armes. Let vs therefore hold our ſelues contented, and take in good part that which reſteth: let vs preſerue theſe ſmall reliques and remainders to ſome better fortune. Sufficiently hath the land of Albany bene ouerflowen with the bloud of mankind for theſe many yeares: ſufficient is the deformitie and deſolation of this prouince which was ſometimes moſt pleaſant and beautifull, and the moſt flouriſhing ſeate of great and famous kings. God hath giuen vnto Amurath mighty forces, and his puiſſance doth in a maner exceede beyond all humane deſire: whereas thy dominions (ô Scanderbeg,) if thou compare them with his, and (if I may ſpeake it freely,) are very ſmall and as nothing. Neuertheleſſe the valour of thy people, thy vertue, and (that which exceedeth all) thy great and admirable fortune, haue made them that they are not to be deſpiſed: whereof thou haſt made a moſt glorious triall in the whole courſe of thy warres. And we our ſelues (though thou be our enemy) haue & do oftentimes both in publique and in priuate greatly wonder and admire it. We doe well remember the proude peoples of Hungary & Greece, that abounded ſo infinitly in goods and wealth, how eaſily they were tamed and ſubdued by our weapons: but this nation of yours only continueth inuincible, & is vtterly impatient of our dominion. I do not flatter thee, for I am thy enemy, & I would to God that the things which I ſpeake were not true. Onely againſt you and your countrey (for any thing I ſee) we haue not made any ſhew, that we are either valiant or fortunat: but reaſon would that your proſperitie (ô you Albanians) ought to be held ſomuch the more ſuſpitious: the end wherof (though it may happen to fall out miſerable) hath ſo puffed vp your ſpirits through ouermuch credulity, as if you had already embraced the perpetuall poſſeſsion thereof, that in the end it will be your ruine and confuſion. And yet if you ſet before your eies all the particularities of your good fortune, this lingring war hath bereaued you likewiſe in ſome ſort of your ſtrength & of your reputation. For albeit hitherto you haue held wars with vs without any great loſſe or diminution of your forces: yet where is Sfetigrade? where is that ample and large territory? what is become of the multitude of mannors, buildings, and rich farmes, ſo well planted and husbanded? where is the wonted beautifull ſhew and aſpect of all theſe things? wherefore is this goodly region waſted and ſpoiled? where are all thoſe large garners and ſtore▪houſes of your corne, wherewith both the towns next adioyning, & Italy it ſelfe was wont to be ſtored and relieued? and to conclude without touching any other matters, where are the noble and goodly wals of Croy which are now ſo battered & deformed, that it ſeemeth, there is ſcarce left any ſhew or token of them? and the countenances of the defendants euen breathing for life, do retaine no part of their former eſtate or of their wonted condition. What is it (ô Scanderbeg) that thou doeſt expect further? thou ſeeſt how all things do haſten to bring vpon thee a million of miſchiefs and vexations: of thy towns, ſome are taken & loſt, ſome are preſſed with a ſtrong and mighty ſiege. Croy the capitall city of thy countrey, is in a maner brought to nothing, and there remaineth nothing but only the obſtinacy of the people: who though they hold out for a ſeaſon, yet in the end will ſoone be ouercome through pure want. For Amurath hath reſolued to augment his forces, and to continue the ſiege al the winter, yea another ſummer: and (if need be) many yeares, till ſuch time, as if the ſworde cannot maiſter them, yet famine ſhall make them to ſtoope vnder his ſubiection. But this is no otherwiſe, then in caſe thou bee deſirous of thy owne misfortune, and doeſt ſhewe thy ſelfe ſo vnwiſe as to

refuſe theſe conditions of peace with the which I am come vnto thee. Behold how the Ottoman in ſtead of being thy mortall enemy is content now to accept thee as his friend and for his tributarie. He will raiſe his campe from before Croy, he will lead away his enſignes out of Epyre, which he brought hither as an enemy, neuer more to returne againe: and he holdeth it more pretious without bloudſhed to binde this prouince by being ſtipendary vnto him, to acknowledge the greatneſſe of the benefit, then to ſeeke to impoſe vpon you an endleſſe and moſt cruell ſeruitude. Now for the greatneſſe of ſuch a benefite he demaundeth of you but a ſmall charge and an eaſie burthen: he is content to take but ten thouſand crownes for a yearely tribute: as for any other thing which appertaineth either to you as your owne, or to him as his due, he demaundeth none at all. Well may you (ô you Albanois, and thou alſo ô Scanderbeg,) without any diſhonour, without any dammage, conſent and accorde in this one point onely, to the iuſt demaunde of Amurath, in regarde of ſo many of his Townes in Epyre, and ſo many of his poſſeſsions, and ſo many goodly things, which thou doeſt enioy & hold from him, not by any right of inheritance, but onely by vſurpation and meere violence. IsMorea once named Peloponneſus in Greece. 
                  Morea any thing leſſe noble then Epire? Is theCaramania or Cilicia. 
                  Caramanian Prince any way inferiour vnto thee in nobilitie, in puiſſance, or in richeſſe? let me ſpeake it vnto thee without reproofe. Beſides many other peoples and nations of excellent renowne and antiquitie, all which do willingly & without conſtraint cauſe their tributs to be brought dayly euen to Andrynople: much more reaſon haſt thou to yeeld vnto the like, ſeeing it is not impoſed vppon thee by way of bondage and ſeruitude: but rather as a more certaine bonde, and a more ſtrict obligation of thy fidelitie. Examine well thy owne forces (moſt prudent and politique Prince,) conſider all good and happie fortune, and let not ſo excellent an occaſion ſlippe away at this time out of thy handes. If thou ſhouldeſt now reiect theſe conditions of alliance which are offered thee, it may be that hereafter thou wilt be deſirous to haue them graunted, when it wilbe all too late, at ſuch time as the eſtate of thy affaires being chaunged, thou ſhalt finde the countenaunce of the victour more auſtere, and much more loftie and Imperious, but in labouring thus earneſtly and carefully to perſwade thee in this matter: I doe more then ſtandeth either with the maieſtie of Ottoman, or the grauitie of my Ambaſſade. Neuertheleſſe I will not reuoke any thing which I haue ſpoken: but rather more then that (if an enemy may any thing preuaile with you) I pray and entreat you, I require and beſeech you: that whileſt it is yet time, and whileſt the old man is in ſo good a minde, you would haue a regarde and conſideration both of ours and of your owne eſtate ioyntly both in one. For doe not you thinke (if it fall out ſo vnhappily that this peace be not obtained) that Amurath wilbe more diſcontented at it, then we ſhall haue cauſe to be wearied and greeued with it. For certainly therein are we all in particular intereſted, we onely are the men that ſhall ſmart for it, and vppon whoſe heades the whole miſchiefe is like to fall: becauſe for the fulfilling of his will and pleaſure, and to ſatisfie the furious appetite of his paſſions, we muſt vowe our ſlauiſh bodies, and prodigally expoſe and aduenture our liues to all hazardes and accidents, and with our owne bloud, if we can not with yours, we muſt ſatiate his wrath and malicious minde. Euery day muſt we be (as it were) in your bowelles: and we muſt continue in ſhedding each of others bloud: till ſuch time as either one of the two be glutted with doing of miſchiefe: or that our long perſeueraunce, and a certaine kinde of vnhappie fate and deſtinie doth altogether deuoure and conſume both parties.
            
            The Ambaſſadour would haue proceeded on forward with his ſpeech, but that the aſſemblie grewe into a ſodaine tumult and commotion: ſome murmured, others

reioyced and triumphed to ſee, that Amurath their enemy and perſecutour, was not now able to do them any more harme, that he was wearied, & euen worne out with the toyles and trauels of theſe ſo long continued warres: and that he was as one already vanquiſhed and ouercome by their valour, and they could not forbeare from laughing to heare the conditions which his Ambaſſadour did ſeeme to offer, and to propound vnto them with ſo glorious a ſhew & oſtentation of good words. Some of them frowned and muttered, for that Amurath vnder a ſhadow and colour of peace and amitie ſhould intend cunningly to worke them to ſubmit themſelues to the yoke, in yeelding their perſons to be tributaries, whom being his enemies, he was not able to ſubdue and conquer. And this I dare ſay, that there was not any one of them, which did like better of this reconciliation that was offered, then that the war ſhould be ſtill continued: nay they did not ſo much as eſtimate it meete, that the matter ſhould be debated by moſt voyces in a full and common councell: ſo mightely are the mindsSentence. of mortall men puffed vp by the proſperous and happy ſucceſſe of their affaires. Alas what is become now of the brightneſſe and glorious renowme of that nation, of thoſe noble and generous ſpirites, and of the ſeede of that inuincible vertue? The Epirots
               Magnanimity of the Epirots in the dayes of Scanderbeg. did ſee their eſtate and Empire moſt miſerably rent and torne. Of their townes, ſome were taken, others ſtraightly beſieged, the landes and patrimony of their aunceſtours all couered ouer with men at armes, their wiues and their children remoued and exiled (as it were) farre from their ſight, and euen languiſhing and pining away for very griefe, and with continuall feare and lamentation: the bodies of their friends and fellowes dayly ſlaine and diſmembred before their eies, and all things flowing and drowned in bloud and cruelty: and yet did euery one of them take more delight and pleaſure to remaine and continue in that meane and low fortune, and to ſtand vppon the guard and maintenaunce of their liberty, with the great expence and loſſe of their bloud, though not without hope of good ſucceſſe, rather then they would in any ſort yeeld vnto the Infidell, or to giue vnto their enemies the leaſt ſhew or confeſsion of faintneſſe or cowardize. Wherefore Scanderbeg, (whoſe minde alſo was euer vndaunted and vtterly vnacquainted with any paſsion of feare or timerouſneſſe, after he had appeaſed their murmuring and the noiſe raiſed amongſt them, he turned himſelfe to Iſup, and becauſe he would not ſeeme to returne him to his maiſter the Ottoman (as it were) with diſdaine or in ſuſpence, or without any certaine reſolution, he made him aunſwere in this manner.
            That which thou haſt propounded vnto vs (Iſup) at this time, is no other thingAnſwere of Scanderbeg to Iſup his Ambaſſade. 
               (as I now remember,) then was heretofore offered vs by Ayradin: who at our firſt comming to this Crowne, did by letters, brought vnto vs in the name of the Sultan, demaunde of vs certaine places of Epyre and all Macedonie, touching which point the full anſwere giuen you at that time was ſufficient to haue ſatisfied you. And I doe not thinke my eſtate ſo much empayred nor yours in that manner augmented, that you ſhould with any face or ſhewe of honeſtie ſeeme at this time to offer me theſe conditions. As for that long diſcourſe recounting the loſſe of Sfetygrade, the battery and ruine of the walles of Croy, the ſpoyling and waſting of our fieldes and territories, we doe ſcarce account that any loſſe at all, as long as theſe heades are in ſafetie, as long as theſe ſouldiours are in health and well diſpoſed, and as long as our people is in ſecuritie, it wilbe an eaſie matter (beleeue me) to recouer whatſoeuer is loſt, and to repayre that which is deſtroyed, God aiding and aſsiſting vs, it is nothing to deſtroy or to reedifie ſuch things as thoſe, all the while we want not quicke handes and good workemen (ſuch as we haue here) to vndertake them. But aunſwere me (I pray thee) ſeeing thou haſt a delight to reckon vppe our misfortunes, how dearely haue you

bought and payed for them continually, with what loſſe and ſtore of bloudſhed haue you bought Sfetygrade (albeit it was not your proweſſe that carried it, but the ſuperſtition of the beſieged?) And the ſiege of Croy, how many of your beſt ſouldiours hath it coſt you? Goe to then, hold on ſtill a Gods name to be braue in this manner, ſo might you alwayes proceede and continue in happyneſſe. For my part I doe not, nor will not enuie it, I can be well content to ſee your enſignes alwayes to continue within Epire, to ſuffer my townes to be beſieged and aſſaulted, my fieldes to be pilled and waſted: and whatſoeuer is good in Macedonie to be ſpoyled and deſtroyed, ſo long as you beare ſuch like markes and tokens of your good fortune, and ſuch teſtimonies as theſe be of your valure. I proteſt vnto you, I hold it better and more expedient for vs to entreat you not to depart at all out of Epire, then to buy your departure at ſo high a price as you ſet vs. God forbid that any age or time ſhould ſee, or that any man liuing ſhould euer heare, that this prouince was become tributarie, as long as Scanderbeg is aliue. Aſſure your ſelues if Ottoman would reſtore vnto me the whole & entire poſſeſsion of Macedonie, and all the patrimonie of my anceſtours, nay if Amurath would deuide with me, and make me copartner with him of all his Empire: I would neuer ſuffer the name of Albanie to be ſtained and blemiſhed with this blot of diſgrace and infamie. In vayne therefore doeſt thou heape vp theſe examples of ſtrangers & forreine ſtates: in vayne doeſt thou repreſent before our eyes, the ſubiection of the Peloponneſians, and ſeruitude of them of Aſia: for there is no example nor Preſident whatſoeuer of ſo great weight and efficacie, which may moue a free and liberall hart to ſubiect and ſubmit it ſelfe to ſo baſe, villanous andSentence. fowle an indignitie.
            
            The Turke made no further reply being vnwilling to ſtand any longer vpon thisAmurath ſickneth vppon griefe and melancholy. matter: and therefore held it needeleſſe alſo to make any offer of a leſſer tribute, or to follow any further the inſtructions giuen him by the Sultan: for he ſawe that the mindes of them all in generall did abhorre to heare of any ſuch ſubmiſsion. The counſell therefore being riſen, he was conducted with his trayne to dine with Scanderbeg in his owne lodging: and after great cheare, & honorable entertaynement giuen him: Tanuſee and certaine horſemen did conuey him about a myle from the Campe, for feare leaſt vpon this fauour ſhewed him, the licentiouſneſſe of the ſouldiours might in ſome ſortworke ſome iniurie or outrage vnto him. Scarce was he gotten out of the ſight of the Albanois, but Scanderbeg with all his armie, doubting ſome ambuſhments of the enemy, if he ſhould not ſpeedely remoue from thence, did march away preſently to Tumeniſta: where he placed gardes and ſcouts on all ſides, with a far greater care then he had vſed at any time before.
            The returne of Iſup to Amurath, who then lay at Tyranna the leſſer: as it did greatly augment his former griefe: ſo did the conceipt thereof redouble the violence of his diſeaſe and ſickeneſſe. The daunger whereof being from day to day aggrauated, and growing more and more ſuſpitious, it made the Baſſaes to quit almoſt all care of armes, & to deuiſe vpon nothing elſe then how to cure & ſuccour the old Sultan. But the maladie being vncertaine, and his diſeaſe vnknowen vnto them, they ſaw no better receipt nor remedy to miniſter vnto him, then to entertaine him with ſtore of good wordes, and pleaſant talke and deuiſes. For his ſickeneſſe being engendred through the impatiency of griefe and diſcontentment, did require to be lenified and mitigated with things confortatiue, purpoſely applied to put away melancholy: and the cure was to be wrought with ſome new and pleaſant delights which might cheare vp his drooping thoughts, and reuiue his ſpirites which were ſo greeuouſly perplexed. This was the eſtate of their affaires for a time, during the which the Turke founde him

ſelfe thus ſicke and out of quiet: notwithſtanding he could yet for all that in ſome ſort giue audience and ſpeake vnto his people, without much payning of himſelfe: and he was able to giue them directions, and to prouide for manie accidents which ſeemed then requiſite and neceſſarie: till ſuch time as Scanderbeg being aduertiſed of this indiſpoſition and crazineſſe of his perſon, did altogether draw out of his bodie that litle ſtrength and vigour which remained, and was yet left either in his members, or in his courage, by meanes of two or three inuaſions which he made vpon his campe. At the firſt and ſecond time there was not much harme done, nor ſcarce any thing executed worth the remembring: for that the promptneſſe and vigilancie of the Turkes in defending of their trenches, did hinder and diſappoint the purpoſe of the Epirot: beſides that, their mindes were more attentiuely buſied rather to the defence of thēſelues then to the offending of the enemy. But this did more & more chafe and incenſe the hardy courage of Scanderbeg, who taking the benefit of the night, as the time moſt proper & naturall to procure tumult, feare & confuſion, marched with all his horſmen towards Tyranna: becauſe the place being more plaine and eaſie for horſe to ſerue in, by means therof the tents of the Turks wold be the more ſubiect to the inuaſiō of their enemies.
            It was now paſt midnight when the Chriſtians being on foote, their cōming wasA third canuazado by Scanderbeg to the campe of the Turkes before Croy. diſcouered by the noyſe and neighing of their horſes. The darkneſſe was greater then was vſuall or accuſtomed, and the heauens being couered and obſcured with thicke and groſſe cloudes, did yeeld forth no light nor clearenes at all, and therefore hardly could any thing be done or ordained againſt the violence and furie of the Albanois. Neuertheleſſe according to the opportunity of the time did they prouide a remedy: & the ſouldiers were diſpoſed in order according as they could beſt imagine by the hearing, & not hauing the ſight of the enemy. Neither was the quality of that ſeaſon leſſe cōtrary & ſuſpitious to the Chriſtians alſo. And howbeit that ordinarily, the aſſailant hath more reſolution & aſſurance, then the party that is ſurpriſed, yet did a certen horror ſeize vpon them, & ſeemed ſomewhat to daunt their courages, & not any of them durſt ſet forward or march one before another. In the midſt of this doubtfulneſſe and ſtaggaring (as it were) both on the one part & the other: Scanderbeg taking to himſelf about a hundred horſe of his vauntcurrors, & ſeuering himſelfe from the bodie of his troups, aduanced forward with great furie euen to the enemies trenches, to prouoke them to iſſue out: and hauing incenſed them with high cries & clamors, and caſting of darts in amongſt them, he drew forth ſome of them from their appointed ſtations: who ſeparated themſelues from their companie with purpoſe to ſet vpon him, and in hope to haue defeated him: but the greateſt miſchiefe lighted vpon themſelues, part of them being ouerthrowen, & the reſidue were glad quickly to returne frō whence they came. Scanderbeg continued for a time courſing vp and downe here and there, and as one that deluded & dalyed with them, he ſought meanes to haue drawen forth ſome greater troupe to charge him: but ſeing the time to paſſe away in this vaine and friuolous expectation, and that the darkneſſe of the night by little and little bganne to weare away by the drawing on and approch of the day: he returned to his companie, & without any further fayning or diſſembling, he ordered his troupes with very excellent good skill, and deuided them betwene Streeze & Tanuſee (for Moſes was left with the infanterie at Tumeniſta) & hauing readily inſtructed them what they ſhould do, he lead them on againſt the enemie. The firſt onſet was with ſhot, wherwith they plaied one vpon another, and the moſt of the fight was in that order: for the Albanois was in doubt, leaſt if the rankes ſhould ioyne, and be mingled together in the darke of the night, his ſouldiers ſhould be ſcarce able to know their felowes frō the Infidels, for which cauſe he would not ſuffer them to preſſe in vpon the enemy: neither had they

come at all to handyſtroakes, if it had not beene long of the Turkes them ſelues, who preſuming vpon their huge multitude, did cauſe a ſtrong battallion of horſe, to make out towardes the left ſide, and ſo purpoſed to haue encloſed the Chriſtians betweene them. But Scanderbeg ſeeing them a little ſeparated from the reſt of their mayne armie, did preſently withdrawe him ſelfe from their trenches into the open fielde, and deuiding his troupes alſo a ſunder, to the intent the fight ſhould be maintayned on both pattes, he made againſt them ſpeedily, and charged them with great furie both before and behinde. At the firſt onſet the Barbarians receiued him with a braue and hardie reſolution, expecting that freſh ſuccours ſhould haue ſeconded them from their campe: but the long tariance and ſlackeneſſe of their ſupplies, and the decreaſe of their owne ſtrength, which by litle and litle fayled them, and the furie of the Chriſtians encreaſing together with the aduantage they had gotten againſt them, made them at length to ſet ſpurres to their horſes, and they neuer thought them to runne faſt enough, till they had gotten within their campe. A great number of Turkes and ſome Chriſtians alſo left their liues in that conflict before that the Infidels betooke themſelues to flight. By this time the day beganne to breake, and the multitude of the Infidels beganne to growe ſo great and encreaſe ſo mightily, that they conſtrayned Streeze and Tanuſee to retyre. The Turkiſh troupes would gladly haue purſued them in their retreate: but for feare to diſpleaſe the Sultan, they layde aſide all deſire of reuenge, and buſied themſelues in recounting their owne loſſes and misfortunes. Beſides that ſlaughter onely which was made in the fight, there happened not any diſorder within their campe, neither was there aine bootie or pillage gouen, but onely ſome ſmall ſpoyles which were founde vppon the dead bodies: for you muſt note, that the fight was both begunne and ended without and not within the trenches of their campe. The great men and Chiefetaines of the armie, did very aduiſedly ſeeke to conceale this diſcomfiture from the Sultan, to the intent his melancholique humour might not haue any further matter for to worke vpon. Neuertheleſſe they could not by anie meanes keepe it from the knowledge of the olde man, who was verie iealous and full of care, by meanes of the generall and publique murmurings and whiſperings, and the priuate plaintes of the common ſort, which did eaſily diſcouer that which was happened, vnto his mind already enclyning and addicted to ſuſpect the worſt. For, as it is commonly ſeene, that none are either more couragious or greater cowards then the popular ſort, in the good or bad ſucceſſe of their fortune: ſo did the Turkes goe vp and downe their campe, deuiſing and debating one with another, and ſaying: That the enemy would at ſome one time or other, finde out ſome good opportunitie to ſet vpon the very tents and pauilions euen of the Sultan their Lord and Soueraigne.
            Now was the Ottoman greatly perplexed vppon the courſe of his proceedinges,Turks in great perplexitie vpon the ſickneſſe of Amurath. to breake vppe his campe, to raiſe his ſiege, and to leaue the warre which he had vndertaken with ſo great courage and ſhewe of magnanimitie: verie ſhame would not ſuffer 
                  •
               im. Some counſelled him notwithſtanding to leaue the greateſt part of his forces before Croy, and with them to continue the ſiege: and that himſelfe ſhould retire and take his iourney to Andrinople, and ſo by that meanes prouide for his owne health and ſafetie: for that if he did abſent himſelfe for a while from the bloudie ſight of his enemies, and from the viewe of thoſe tragicall ſpectacles and calamities: the force of his deſeaſe would by little and little vaniſh away and be aboliſhed. But his health euerie day empayring and waxing worſe and worſe, and his breath by little and little beginning to faile him, they then knew that the immutable decree of the heauens was not to be reuoked, neither by chaunge of place, nor by

any ſuccours, or humaine counſell or aduiſe. Wherefore although they neuer ceaſed by ſoueraigne medicamentes and other remedies to ſeeke the recouerie of his health, and to reuiue his decayed bodie (as the mindes of mortall men are neuer deſtitute of ſome hope,) yet had they a ſpeciall regard (as a ſort of marriners or ſaylers who haue loſt their pylots) euerie man to his power and abilitie, to prouide and procure all thinges requiſite, by which their armie might be ſecured and preſerued. Wherefore cauſing their tents to be drawen cloſer and neerer together, which before lay diſperſed here and there, and were more ſubiect to the violence of the enemie, they did entrench their campe in a more ſtreight circuit, and within a leſſer compaſſe, garding and defending their rampiers with good and ſtrong forces of armed ſouldiers. And hauing thus ordered the eſtate of their affaires, they did attend either the death of the Sultan, and therewithall an end of this warre: or elſe peraduenture, his health and recouerie which ſhould miniſter vnto them ſome new and freſh plots for the ſtrengthening and reenforcing of the ſiege. Scanderbeg had notice of all theſe matters, and wanted not daily aduertiſementes to bring this newes vnto him. And many there were alſo amongſt the Infidels, who came and rendered themſelues vnto him, by whom he learned the counſels and moſt ſecret deuiſes of the enemy. For there was not almoſt any one day, but there repayred vnto him a great number ſeeking refuge in his campe or in his townes, eſpecially after that it was once publikely ſuppoſed and commonly beleeued, that the Sultan was drawing neere his end. For it is vſually ſeene, that the vulgar ſort doe willingly followe the fortune of thatSentence. partie which is ſuppoſed to be moſt ſecure and of greateſt ſuertie. Now Scanderbeg thought it not beſt to continue his ordinarie allarmes and inuaſions, but rather to referre them ouer, and reſerue his chiefeſt violence till ſuch time as Amurath were deceaſed. Neuertheleſſe he would oftentimes walke abroade both by day and byCrayna a mountaine ouer Croy. night, vpon the toppe of the mountaine named Crayna: and there he would deuiſe vppon matters with Vranocontes, or elſe he would be courſing vppe and downe the next hilles and mountaines diuerſe times with ſundry troups of ſouldiers, thinking eyther to ſurprize ſome of the Turkes, as they ſhould be employed in the ſeruices of their campe, or elſe to keepe them by all meanes poſſible in continuall terror and ſubiection.
            But this intermiſſion of armes, and the ſorrowfull expectation of the Turkes didAmurath his laſt end a mirrour for great perſons. not long continue: for within three dayes Amurath departed out of this life, and left behinde him all worldly fortune both good and bad. A moſt notable and worthie mirrour for the great men of the earth, who in this worlde beeing the mynions of fortune, are too too much puffed vppe with the happie gale of her continuall fauours: and can not abide to ſtrike their ſayles, or to vayle the bonnet to one onely ſtorme of ſiniſter and vnhappie fortune. Howe can it be but thoſe men muſt needes ſuffer ſhippewracke in the ſea of their delitious pleaſures, and in the gulfe of their owne greatneſſe? I holde it not impertinent, if I recount vnto you in this diſcourſe the laſt Acte of his ende and tragedie. The report goeth, that when he perceiued his limitted houre and appointed time to approach, as he lay vppon a little lowe bed or pallet, he cauſed himſelfe ſomewhat to be rayſed vppe, and then framing his ſpeech to his Baſſaes and chiefe Princes of his Court, he madeComplaints & lamentations made by Amurath at his death. long and lamentable complaintes, and powred foorth his grieuances exclaiming vpon the Deſtinies which had ſo deceiued him, that nowe the end and iſſue of his laſt actions ſhould be diſhonourable and infamous, whereas the forepaſſed courſe of his yeares had beene moſt glorious: that the heauens ſhould ſo ordaine it, that he, who had ſo often repreſſed the proude and haughtie Hungarians, who had

tamed the inſolencie of the ſtately Grecians, and brought their name in a manner to nothing: ſhould be nowe conſtrayned to yeeld vppe his ſoule in diſhonour and reproch vnder the poore walles of a little Caſtle, and in the viewe of ſo contemptible an enemie. Then turning himſelfe to his ſonne, he recommended him verie earneſtly to the faith and fidelitie of his ſeruantes: and he inſtructed and admoniſhed him touching manie particularities, ſometimes a part, and ſometimes in the hearing of all the companie. And albeit his bodie euen deſtitute of all force and ſtrength, and the teares in abundance trickling downe his cheekes to ſee his childe then ſtanding before him, did euen ſtoppe vppe and hinder the courſe of his ſpeech, yet did he often reiterate and repeate theſe and the like wordes vnto him. LetSpeech and admonitious of Amurath to his ſonne Mahomet vpon his death bed. 
               my example (quoth hee) be a warning vnto thee my ſonne, neuer to contemne and deſpiſe anie enemie be he neuer ſo weake and feeble. There hath not beene (that I knowe of) any one thing, whereof I haue ſo much repented me in all my life time: yea euen in the other worlde (if there be at leaſtwiſe anie part of vs remayning which hath vnderſtanding after the bodie is extinguiſhed) I ſhall ſtill and euerlaſtingly repent it, that I was ſo negligent and inconſiderate, as to be the father and the nouriſher of a domeſticall enemie: whereby I haue both purchaſed this calamitie to my ſelfe, and this perpetuall blot vnto the name and Empire of the Ottomans: giuing vnto the whole worlde, and to all ages in time to come, fit matter to talke and to make a ieſting ſtocke of this my ignominious death, and ſhamefull ende before the walles of Croie. Euen then ſhoulde this fugitiue haue beene ſuppreſſed, when by that trayterous part which he plaied in Hungarie, he intruded him ſelfe into the crowne and realme of Epyre. In the firſt beginning, when hee was but yet newly eſtabliſhed, and that the heartes of his people were not yet affected vnto him, the wretch him ſelfe, and the memorie of his name might haue beene for euer extinguiſhed without the loſſe in a manner, of anie of our men. Fondly and fooliſhly was it done to ſende againſt him eyther Haly Baſſa, who gaue the firſt matter and encreaſe to his audacious fierceneſſe and to the beginnings of his good fortune: or anie other of our Chiefetaines, by whoſe deſtruction or impriſonment, he hath nowe both grounded and ſupported his forces, and hath aſſured him ſelfe of the faith and fidelitie of his ſubiectes: and wrought him ſelfe into the credite and good opinion of thoſe peoples, who were his vaſſalles. A thing which I (hauing oftentimes thought vppon) could hardly haue beleeued, that I ſhould euer haue ſeene ſo great ſhame and ignominie to haue befallen me, or that my Empyre could haue beene ſo torne and diſmembred by this warre of Epyre, were it not that experience (as a ſchoolemiſtreſſe) hath nowe taught it me, and made me to feele it to my wonderfull great loſſe and diſaduantage. Of eight ſcore thouſande fighting men which followed me into Epyre, and did accompanie vs to this place, if you doe nowe conferre vppon the remainders of our armie, and doe take a diligent viewe and muſter of thoſe which are left, you ſhall finde how greatly they are abated and diminiſhed of their firſt numbers. Theſe fieldes were not ſufficient to entertaine all our regiments, and nowe howe manie tentes are voide and emptie? howe manie horſes doe wander vppe and downe without their olde maiſters? and howe much empayred and leſſened in your forces ſhall you returne home to Andrinople? As for this bodie of mine, I ſee the Deſtinies haue vowed it to the territorie of Epyre. But wherefore doe I impute the trauerſes and croſſe accidentes of fortune to my owne ouerſight and follie? Seeing the firſt ſeedes and originall of all our miſfortunes hath beene deriued from this ſoyle, and that this countrie of Epyre did euen watch of ſet purpoſe

to worke vs this miſchiefe? For they ſeeing Hungarie in ſuch confuſion of tumultes and rebellions, did incite and ſtirre vp againſt vs the armes of Eugenius and other Chriſtians, whereby not onely the ſoueraigntie and royaltie of the kingdome of Epyre, but euen the entire poſſeſſion of our Empire, and the crowne of the Ottomans was brought in queſtion, and came to be tryed by battell, as the whole worlde may euidently ſee by our trauels and labours ſuſtained in thoſe famous iournyes of Varna and Baſilia. By meanes of which our troubles, and whileſt we had neither time, nor forces ſufficient to wade through at once with ſo many and weightie affaires, the power of this our enemie (as you ſee) grew to be encreaſed and enlarged. But nowe from henceforth, how or with what ſtratagemes you are to mainetaine the warres, you are not to expect any counſell or aduiſe from me, who haue beene ſo greatly miſtaken, and haue made a wrong account of all things which concerned my owne good, and the eſtate of my owne affayres. Neuer was fortune ſo deceiptfull or falſe vnto me in anie of my counſels or attemptes as in this warre: and it may be that thou Mahomet my ſonne, ſhalt finde more fauour at her handes againſt this enemie: and for ſo manie honours and dignities which God hath giuen mee, peraduenture he hath reſerued the tryumphe of Epyre for thee. Thou therefore (my ſonne) ſhalt receiue both the Scepter, and the other markes of our Empire: but principally and aboue all, I leaue vnto thee this enemie, charging thee that thou doe not leaue our death vnreuenged: but that thou haue this thing onely and continually before thy eyes, and in thy minde, in acknowledgement of ſo large and honourable a patrimonie as thou art to receiue and enioy by me. Other ſacrifice then this neither my aged trembling handes, nor my grieued departing ſoule doe not require nor demaund of thee.
            
            This diſcourſe ended, his ſpeech beganne to faile him, and drawing on neereAmurath his death. towardes his ende, he lay about halfe a day as it were in an agonie or extaſie. And then his eyes being couered with endleſſe and eternall darkeneſſe, hee yeelded vppe his ſoule to the wonderfull ioy and contentment of manie millions of the Chriſtians.
            The hearing of theſe things is a matter of no ſmall import, and it is a worlde to ſee the great men of the earth, howe they doe holde the eſtates and kingdomes of this worlde in ſo high an eſtimation: and doe prize humaine and momentarie things at ſo great a rare. And they doe perſwade themſelues, that it is poſſible to get ſuch a perpetuitie in the poſſeſſion of fortune, that it ſhould at no time be contrarieAmurath his manifold exploites and famous actes. or croſſing vnto them. What did that age yeelde more great then Amurath? who of all men then lying vpon the face of the earth, (be it ſpoken without offence) was of more glorious and high renowme then he? who had euer more notable teſtimonies and tokens of worldly felicitie? who did in his time attaine to more famous tryumphes then Amurath? who by the ſpoyles of ſo manie mightie Kinges and Princes, and by the ruine and conqueſt of ſo manie proude and loftie Nations, did reſtore the name of the Ottomans being in a manner cleane defaced, and did enrich the houſes of the barbarous Infidels? This Prince was he that hauing ſuppreſſed the furie of all domeſticall and ciuill warres, did giue the beginning and commencement vnto the greatneſſe of his fortune by the bloude and ſlaughter of his owne naturall brother. He was the firſt of the Turkiſh Princes, that did ſuppreſſe and diminiſh the libertie of the madding and franticke Greekes, and eſtabliſhing his Empire euen in the center of their bowels, did from thence enlarge and augment his forces: wherewith afterwardes he afflicted and tormented the other Nations of Chriſtendome with ſo many miſeries and calamities, that it is almoſt

impoſſible for the tongue of man to number them. This was he that firſt brake downe & ouerthrew that wall of the Greekes at the entry of Morea adioyning to the Iſthme or Snake of Corinth cōmonly called Hexamile, by meanes wherof he made all
                  Hexamile, a wall ſo called by the Greekes, which did run ſixe miles in length encloſing the countrie of Peloponneſus or Morea from the ſea of AEgeuum, lying betweene Greece and Aſia, euen to the ſea of Ionia, or part of the Mediterran ſea, lying betweene that and Italy now called the gulf of Venice.
                
               Europe ſubiect to his inuaſions. This was he that without any lawfull or iuſt title, but onely by his valour and by the ſword, did get the poſſeſſion of ſo many realmes and cities in Aſia, that ouerthrew and diſcomfited many great and mightie armies, that ouercame many puiſſant Kings and Princes in pitched and ſet battels, and brought them vnder ſubiection: who hauing ſlainc the King of Hungarie, did more then once with his great good hap, giue the chaſe vnto Hunyades that famous & redoubted warriour: through the conceipt and remembrance of which his glorious and haughtie exploites, and by the ſucceſſe of all which fauours beſtowed vppon him by fortune: his ambitious and proud heart did promiſe vnto it ſelfe the ſuperioritie and conqueſt of all Empires and eſtates Chriſtian, and the entire dominion of the whole earth. But ô how are his thoughts now changed! ô how farre doe thoſe his laſt ſpeeches differ from the courſe of his forepaſſed life! being now heard to powre forth ſuch vile and baſe complaints, & to lament ſo ſhamefully, euen in the view of an enemie, of whom in time paſt he made ſo ſmall reckoning and ſo little eſtimate? where were then become the haughtie thoughts of his vndaunted ſpirit? his arrogant and imperiousAmurath an example of the vanitie and inconſtancie of worldly bliſſe and fortune. voice? which ſo many braue Chieftaines and Leaders, ſo many troupes and legions, ſo many thouſands of armed ſouldiers were wont to heare with feare and trembling? Oh how the caſe is now altered, the man is now of another manner of viſage, of another kind of countenance, of another aſpect. Where is that head adorned with ſo many trophees and goodly tryumphes? where is that royall and princely hande that ſwayed ſo many Scepters? where is the puiſſance, the power, the ſtrength of his maieſtie that commaunded ouer ſo many kingdomes, nations, and peoples? Beholde he now lyeth full low vppon the ground, a deformed, a filthy, and ſtincking carkaſſe: with his hands cloſed, his eyes ſhut, and his feete ſtretched out, which earſt ſo gloriouſly did trample and tread vppon the earth, and did triumph vppon the landes which he had vanquiſhed and ſubdued. And now of ſo many, and ſo infinite riches, of ſo vnmeaſurable wealth, and ſo huge treaſures, of ſo many honours and vaine glorious praiſes, which he enioyed in his life time, his fraile bodie retaineth nothing, but hath left all behind him. O the imbecilitie and weake condition of mans nature! ô the vaine glorie of mortall creatures! ô the blinded and peruerted thoughtes of fooliſh men, why doe we ſo glorifie our ſelues? why are wee ſo puffed vppe and exalted? why doe wee ſo ſet our affections on the riches, the authoritie, and the pompous vanities of this life? ô howe admirable is the chaunge of all humaine things? howe fleeting is the glorie and oſtentation of mortall Empires? and howe great is the daliance of fortune, deluding and deceiuing fooliſhe men with ſuch vanities.
            His bodie being embalmed with pretious oyntmentes and ſweete odours wasPruſa or Burſa, the place of Amurath his ſepulcher. Siege of Croy raiſed. pompouſly and honourably kept and preſerued, to be afterwardes interred at Burſa aunciently named Pruſa, in Bithinia in the ſepulcher of his aunceſtors. Mahomet being immediatly ſaluted as their Lord and Soueraigne, was aduiſed by the greateſt and chiefeſt perſons, that the death of his father ſhould carefully be concealed, to the intent the report thereof might not come to the hearing of the enemie, Afterwards when it was farre in the night, truſſing vp their baggage, and all things prouided in arcadines for their diſcamping, they departed before the dawning of the day. The report is, thatAmurath his age at his death 85. yeares. 
               Amurath deceaſed about the middeſt of Autumne fiue monethes after the ſiege laide before Croy. As touching his age, there is ſome diuerſitie of opinions, yet it is generally

agreed, and gaineſaied by none: that he had fully attained to foureſcore and fiue yeares. Nothing is more certaine then that Mahomet was highly aggrieued and diſpleaſed to leaue the ſiege, and to abandon the warre which had brought them ſo great diſhonor: but neceſſitie enforced him thereunto, and made him haſten his returne to Andrinople, there to take the inueſtiture of his crowne and Empire, according to the ancient cuſtome of their kings, as alſo to repreſſe and extinguiſh the tumults which might happen, and are vſuall to be raiſed vpon the change and alteration of eſtates. Scanderbeg at his departure did not ceaſe to follow him, ſometimes preſſing vpon his maine forces, and ſometimes gleaning vp thoſe that were hindmoſt: and ſo ſtill continued he troubling their armie, till he ſaw them cleane gone out of the boundes and limits of his countrey: and then triumphing with a double occaſion of ioy and gladneſſe, both becauſe Amurath was departed this life with ſhame and infamie, and for that, the reliques of the enemies forces were cleane ridde out of Epire: he returned to his companies, and ſo tooke his way directly towardes Croie.
            
            By this time was Vranocontes & the Croians iſſued out of the town in great troups,Scanderbeg returneth to Croy where he is receiued with exceeding ioy. and they went wandering vp and downe the fieldes which were yet moiſt with the blood of the Turkes. In all places they made ſome ſtay, and ouerſeeing and viſiting all things with an incredible pleaſure and delight. Scarcely could they beleeue themſelues in that which they had ſeene and ſearched with their eies, in ſuch ſort were the hearts of this people lately poſſeſſed and ſeized with feare and horror: that their perplexed and doubtfull ſpirits, could not yet forget their former terror. The king of Albanie was receiued with a maruellous concourſe of people: and Vranocontes was the firſt that entertained him with infinite embracements: who after he had kiſſed him (as the faſhion is) the others according to their degrees and callings, did likewiſe welcome him. There was not any of the common people, but did teſtifie their ioy and gladnes of his comming: ſometimes proſtrating themſelues (according to their maner) at the feete of their Prince, and ſometimes handling the skirtes of his robes and veſtiments, they would embrace and kiſſe them with great deſire & affection. Then began they to expreſſe and make ſhew of their exceeding ioy, with all kinds of acclamations, melodies, and inſtruments of muſicke, with ringing of belles, with bonfiers, with feaſting and banqueting, and whatſoeuer elſe which in the comentment of their hearts they could any wayes imagine or bethinke themſelues. The Croians were highly commended and extolled with many praiſes and good commendations bothRewards giuē to the citizens, ſouldiers and Gouernor of Croy by Scanderbeg. in publique and in priuate, for their deuoire and dutie ſo faithfully and valiantly performed. The garriſon likewiſe beſides their appointed pay, had great and large ſums of money giuen them for a recompence with many good and rich garmentes. Touching the gouernour, beſides great ſtore of gold and ſiluer: Scanderbeg gaue him two coate armours of purple, and one other richly wrought in gold, and foure goodly manours for the reward and recompence of his vertue and good ſeruice: and laſt of all beyond his expectation, though not vndeſeruedly, he honored him with a higher title, and created him Duke of Emathia: giuing him the preſent inueſtiture and poſſeſſion of that dignitie.
            Theſe things thus accompliſhed, Scanderbeg tooke eſpeciall care to diſpatch awayVranocontes created Duke, of Emathia. Chriſtiā, their ioy and triumph vniuerſally vpon the death of Amurath. meſſengers of this victorie on all ſides to the Princes and peoples his neighbours and confederates, the rumor and report whereof being diſperſed abroad, was the occaſion, that infinite numbers of people daily reſorted to Croie and many being allured thither onely vpon the report of theſe newes, of the death of the Turkiſh Monarch, came thither (as it were) triumphing for ſome ſtrange victorie, and to ſee ſome ſight and ſpectacle not vſuall, nor accuſtomed. The tidings hereof did ſoone ſpread itſelfe

in a manner ouer the whole world: and there could nothing haue happened more wiſhed and deſired, nor more wellcome to all the eſtates of Chriſtendome. Hungarie began to take breath: Greece came againe to take heart and courage to it ſelfe, and ſhe ſeemed to be deliuered (as it were) out of bondage, and her bonds to be broken, and rent aſſunder. All men had their mindes and ſpirites lightned and erected with hope vpon the report of this good accident: and they did attend ſuch a chaunge and alteration of the fortune of moſt kings and Princes, that they did expect the renuing and repairing of their former eſtate and condition. But out alas: how fallacious and deceitfullChristians had litle or no benefit by the death of Amurath. are the thoughts and cogitations of mortall wightes? yea more miſerable are the hopes and refuges of miſerable vnhappie men. It pleaſed God to take away Amurath out of this life, but did he want for all that an Heire to ſucceed him of leſſe crueltie? True it is, that the bounty and diuine clemencie (after long and innumerable miſchieues) did harken vnto the complaintes and lamentations of the Chriſtians, and granted them to ſee the death and end of this tirant. But what? did the comming of Mahomet his ſonne vnto the crowne, any thing ſhorten or diminiſh the thraldome, bondage, or ſeruitude of the Chriſtians? or were the miſeries of the Orientall nations any thing leſſened by that accident? Oh no: behold that great and imperiall city ſo famous by the name and ſeate of the great Conſtantine: (for I will not ſpeake ofConqueſts atchieued by the Turkes of late ages vpon Chriſtendome. Euboea. Or Lesbos. the bounds of the Ottoman Empire, dilated & enlarged euen to the farthermoſt parts of Aſia and Africke:) ſee the noble ile of Rhodes: which was of late the neſt and harbour of thoſe worthy Knights of the croſſe, and the ancient bulwarke of the Chriſtians: behold how * Nigropont,* Mitelene, Cipres, all the Greeke ſea, with Hungarie, Croatia, Tranſiluania, Seruia and Bulgaria: and (to be breife) in a manner the moytie and halfe of all Europe is become Turkiſh, by the victorious armes and conqueſtes of this Mahomet or his ſucceſſours, and poſteritie: all which to the great reproach of Chriſtian Kings and Princes, doe teſtifie, that the fortune of ſo fearefull and terrible an enemie, is not mortall not permutable, with the head and life of one fraile and mortall man: ſo mightily ha
                  •
               h he incroched and intruded vpon our libertie, by our owne faintneſſe, ſloth, and cowardice, which hath enabled them againſt vs, whileſtCauſes of the conqueſts of the Turkes vpon the Chriſtians. that we ſit ſtill with our handes (as it were) folded vp in our boſomes, and as the beholders and lookers on of their tragicall ſports, which are preſented vnto our eyes, vpon this Theater of worldly miſeries: and whileſt our ambition, our hatreds, our partialities doe ſet vs together by the eares amongſt our ſelues, how do they giue occaſion and opportunity to the Infidels, to aduance the greatneſſe, the prerogatiue, and the maieſty of that Empire, and to increaſe it dayly more and more? Aſſuredly, if our ſinnes do holde on, and continue as they haue begun, I am greatly in doubt that they will ſwallow vp all of vs one by one: and ſo, it may be, we ſhall make an end of our plaints and bitter griefes, when thoſe ſmall reliques and remainders yet left vnto the Chriſtians ſhall haue an end likewiſe, and be brought to their finall and laſt confuſion.
            But we will leaue, for this time, our complaints and exclamations, and will beare a part with others in this ſhort ioy which God hath giuen them: for now, as it were, by emulation, there came, thicke and three folde, gratulations from all partes vntoLiberalitie of Chriſtian kings & pr
                     〈…〉
                  s ſending preſents to Scanderbeg to congratulate his good fortune vpon the death of Amurath. 
               Scanderbeg, euen from nations and kingdomes farre remoued: and the renow me of this Prince was then growen famous aboue all others, in the mouthes of all men. The city of Croy was more notorious by the death of Amurath, then once was Argos through the death of Pirrhus. To theſe mutuall reioycings, the Princes of Chriſtendome did adde many marks and tokens of their gratitude and liberalitie: for Nicholas then Biſhop of Rome, Ladiſlaus King of Hungarie, and Philip Duke of Burgundie, ech

ſeeming (as it were) ielous, and commendably contending who ſhould exceed other in bountie, did ſend their Ambaſſadours into Epyre, with timely and neceſſarie ſuccours of great ſummes of money: knowing well that he was exhauſted and drawen drie of ſuch like meanes and ſupplies, by reaſon of the long expences and diſcommodities of the warres. Alphonſus king of Arragon was not behind any of them in contributing towards his wants: but (as one that exceeded all others in loue and good will towards Scanderbeg) being not ſatiſfied to ſhew his largeſſe and bountie, by the teſtimonie of thoſe ample treaſures which he ſent him: he ſuccoured him alſo with 300000. meaſures of wheate, and 100000. meaſures of barley, after he was enformed of the neceſſitie of the countrey, both by reaſon of the tillage hindered by the Turkes: and how that litle ſtore of corne which had bene ſowed, was waſted and ſpoiled by the infidels. He aided him alſo with great ſtore of workemen, whom he paied out of his owne coffers, for the repairing of the walles of Croy, which he knew had bene battered and beaten downe by the enemie.
            
               
                  •
                
               Scanderbeg hauing proclaimed a ſolemne triumph of Tilt, Turney and other martiall ſports of all ſortes: by the beauty of that ſpectacle he did greatly grace his victoryTriumphes in Epire for the diſcomfiture and death of Amurath. obtained againſt the Infidels. The number and the goodly ſhew of ſo great an aſſembly, not onely of them which came to ſee the triumphs, but of the braue and gallant youthes that came thither, vpon a deſire and hope to gaine the prize propounded: did make a ſhew and reſemblance of another faire and goodly armie vnder the walles of Croy. And it ſeemed no great maruell that Amurath had bene vanquiſhed, and diſcomfited by the Albanois, to them who ſawe ſo many warlike youthes, and the ſtrength of thoſe forces that were then with Scanderbeg. Then did it appeare that the ancient nobleneſſe and valour of that nation was returned into Macedonie: and thoſe olde times long ſince paſt and gone, of Alexander and Pyrrhus, did ſeeme to be renued and reſtored againe.
            
               TO THE READER.
               I See now that this volume hath exceeded his iust proportion: and in continuing of it longer, it might be as tedious vnto you as it hath bene weariſome vnto mee. VVe will heere therefore ſound a retrait in the middeſt of our cariere: that breathing our ſelues a litle, we may be the better diſpoſed to proceede with the other following.
            
            The end of the ſixth booke.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               MAhomet is crowned Emperour of the Turkes. His gouernment, manners, and perſon are deſcribed. Scanderbeg at the entreatie of his ſubiectes is maried. He fortifieth his dominions, and prepareth for the warres. Mahomet entangled with the warres of Perſia ſeeketh to haue peace with Scanderbeg but is reiected. Scanderbeg inuadeth the Turkiſh territories. Ameſe one of Mahomet his Chieftaines is ſent with an armie against Scanderbeg: by whome being ſuddenly ſurprized, in the battell of Modriſſa, his armie is diſcomfited, and the Turkiſh Generall himſelfe is taken priſoner. Mahomet ſendeth another armie into Epire vnder the conduct of Debreas one of his Saniackes: who in the battell of Pologue is ſlaine by Scanderbeg, and his armie likewiſe defeated. Mahomet practiſeth ſecretly and by rewards to corrupt Moſes. Scanderbeg purpoſing an expedition againſt the Turkes, requireth and obtaineth ſuccours of Alphonſus king of Naples. Belgrade in Macedonie is beſieged by the Albanois. The Belgradians deſire truce of Scanderbeg, which is accorded them vpon certaine conditions.
            
            
               IN the former ſixe bookes we haue repreſented vnto you as vpon a Theater, thoſe two excellent and incomparable warriours Amurath and Scanderbeg, by the ſucceſſe of whoſe armes being ſo variable and diuerſe, you may eaſily contemplate how the courſe of fortune hath a kind of declining and decaying age, which in proceſſe of time maketh her (as it were) to waxe colde, and to diſcontinue the largeſſe and bountie of her wonted fauours. And how ſoeuer ſhe doth frankely and voluntarily accompanie great minds and high aſpiring natures, whileſt the heate of youth doth ſtirre vp their bloud, and enflame their haughtie courages: yet when gray haires doe by little and little approach and bring on colde and vnweldie old age, then doth fortune alſo ſeeme to grow olde and waxe faint and heauy, by meanes whereof that goodly luſtre and bright beautie of their former glorie doth ſeeme to be eclipſed and to vaniſh quite away. Examples thereof are the ruines of thoſe famous Monarchies of Ninus, Cyrus, Alexander and that great Romaine Emperour Auguſtus: beſides many other excellent Princes and Captaines which euen in this our owne age, haue beene made liuely markes of fortunes inconſtancie, who in their young yeares, hauing had the ſunne beames of proſperitie

gloriouſly ſhining vpon them, and fortune hauing alwaies followed them in their warres, that they ſeemed to haue her at commaund: yet in their elder yeares they haue bene forced to proue the inconſtancie of her frownes and diſſauorable aſpect. And truly my opinion is, that God euen of his diuine prouidence, doth vſe & enure men to theſe caſualties and accidents, becauſe he would haue the great men of this world to know and acknowledge, that it is he onely and no other, that diſpenſeth and diſpoſeth of proſperitie and aduerſitie: to the intent alſo that humaine and earthly things ſhould not ſeeme vnto fooliſh mortall men to haue any durable continuance or eternitie: conſidering that there is nothing ſolide, ſtable, or permanent here below, nor any thing vnder the ſunne, wherein may be found perfect happines. And if any one thing haue any ſhew and appearance of felicitie, it is ſo brittle, fraile and vnconſtant, that euen then when men thinke to haue moſt ioy of it, and to enioy the pleaſures and profits of the ſame, ſuddenly and immediately they ſee it gone and decaied: ſuddenly and immediately they perceiue it waſted and conſumed.
            Such was the ende and death of Amurath, which being heard and beleeued at Andrinople, did ſtirre vp diuerſe motions both in the affaires and mindes of men. The great men and Nobles of the citie (as thoſe which had neuer miſliked neither of the felicity nor gouernment of this Prince) were very ſorrowfull, and did for a long timeAmurath best beloued by his ſubiects and moſt vpright to his enemies of all the Ottoman Princes. bewaile and lament the olde man, partly for the common loſſe (for the report is, that of all the Ottoman race, there was neuer any one of them better beloued of his people, nor more iuſt & vpright to his enemies) partly alſo for that they were not ignorant, that the chaunge of the crowne and dignitie roiall, could not happen without infinite dammages, and the ruine of many in particular. But the ſtirring heades and ſuch as were deſirous of a chaunge and new alterations, did litle grieue at this chance: but rather on the contrarie were the more in heart, and did conceiue great hopes in their imaginations: becauſe they had of a long time wiſhed, that Mahomet whom they knew to be a young Prince fierce and ambitious, might come to the crowne, and get the poſſeſſion of the imperiall ſcepter. The popular and common ſort (who of themſelues are naturally deſirous of nouelties and alterations) did entertaine theſe tidings 
                  Sentence. with great ioy and contentment. But aboue all, the Ianiſſaries (which are called, the Prince his Enfants, reioyced exceedingly: and running vp and downe the ſtreetes armed, did fall to ſacking and ſpoiling freely and without controlment, of the goodsCuſtome of the Ianiſſaries to ſacke the houſes of the Iewes and Chriſtians at the death of their Prince, and houſes of many perſons, eſpecially the Chriſtians and the Iewes: who are naturally abhorred and hated of the Turkes. For ſuch is the licenſe and libertie, or rather the damnable cuſtome of that people, that at the deceaſe & death of their ſoueraigne, this is vſually and ordinarily permitted and granted vnto them.
            It was a wonderfull thing to ſee the concourſe and great reſort of people of all ſorts and degrees, that flocked daily to the imperiall citie of Andrinople to ſee the new king, and the triumphes of his coronation, which was the cauſe that an incredible multitude went to meete Mahomet as he returned with his armie. The IaniſſariesMahomet crowned Emperour of the Tur
                     ••
                  s. were the firſt that went to ſalute him: who hauing no ſooner demaunded then obtained pardon for the rapine and ſpoile committed within the citie, did receiue and conuey him to the pallace roiall with infinite ioy and gladneſſe, and with the publike applauſe of all the communaltie: who with a generall voice and common conſent, hauing declared and proclaimed him Emperour, he was afterwardes crowned with great ſolemnitie: and being furniſhed with the diademe, ſcepter and other habits and imperiall ornaments, he was placed in his fathers throne, with many prayers and ſolemne vowes of euerie man. And at the ſame time were the publique treaſures deliuered vnto him: and the Baſſaes and other officers of the crowne did ſweare vnto

him fealtie and obedience. Theſe things thus accompliſhed, the people had a great largeſſe both of golde and ſiluer in all the ſtreetes of the citie: beſides the liberall rewardes giuen to the ſouldiers. Thus was the auncient faſhion and ceremonie of this Nation in the creating of their kings partly obſerued, and partly not, in this comming of Mahomet to the crowne. For the firſt thing that the Turkiſh kings do vſe and accuſtom is, to abſent their children: and to keepe them out of Europe in thoſeEmperours of the Turkes the maner of their ſucceeding to the crowne. Prouinces of Aſia which are moſt remote and fartheſt off: euen aſſoone as they are gotten out of their infancie. And the cauſe thereof as I take it is this, for that they ſhall not practiſe and conſpire againſt their fathers through a curſed humour of ambition, and deſire of raigne and Empyre, from the which, there is ſcarce any age or perſon exempted, but hath ſome inſtinct and naturall motion thereunto. Afterwards when it happeneth that the Emperour is deceaſed, or that it is thought that his deathSentence. is not farre off: the Baſſaes and others, (who are of greateſt power and authoritie both with the people, and in the gouernment of the eſtate) doe ſend away ſpeedie poaſtes and letters to the one and other of the ſonnes of the Prince laſt deceaſed, according as eche man is particularlie affected: and they doe from point to point aduertiſe him of all things: willing him to haſten his comming, that he may get the poſſeſſion of the crowne, and ſeate himſelfe in the ſucceſſion of the Empyre, then readie to fall voide and emptie. It is a ſport to ſee with what contention theſe great men doe ſtudie to ſurprize the packettes and curriers of each other: whileſt that euerie one of them laboureth to get the ſcepter to that partie, to whom he is moſt affected and euerie one doth his beſt and worſt to beguile his companion. Nowe when theſe young Princes are thus ſollicited: with what vehemencie, with what fancies and affection▪ they do come poaſting from all partes to beare away the prize thus in queſtion; I leaue it to your imagination. Certaine it is; that he amongſt them all that can firſt get to the ſtreights of Gallipolie or Helleſpont: he commonly is the man that obtaineth the ſoueraignitie of the Empire, for that the Ianiſſaries comming to meete and to ſalute him, doe afterwardes all at leaſure, eaſily and quietly put him in poſſeſſion of the kingdome. The other brethren are forthwith eyther baniſhed or exiled out of all the territories and limits of their dominions: or elſe are cruelly and vnnaturally ſlaine and murthered, for feare leaſt there ſhould remaine ſo me cauſe of ciuill tumults and ſedition. Hence is deriued that prouerbe vſed byProuerbe of Princes children. the auncients, That more fortunately are children borne to priuate perſons, then to Princes. But now of all this, nothing could happen in this manner vnto Mahomet, for neither had he any brethren of ſufficient age, eyther fit to gouerne the Realme, or able to attempt or to obtaine the kingdome: neither did he returne as a priuate perſon out of Aſia, but with a moſt ſtrong and mightie armie which he brought backe out of the enemies countrie, where he had bene before ſaluted and proclaymed King and Emperor by the vniuerſall conſent of all the ſouldiers in generall. For this cauſe he came peaceably and quietly to the Empire, without any commotion, without any danger or difficultie, and with the exceeding ioy and incomparable gladneſſe of the whole Communaltie. Now had they forgotten the loſſe of their late deceaſed Prince, and all griefe and ſorrowe for his death was vaniſhed together with his memorie. The calamities and ſlaughters lately receiued in Epyre, and the obſequies and funeralles of their companions, were nowe cleane worne out of minde, and there was ſcarce any one by reaſon of this newe pompe and tryumphe which did apperceiue or obſerue the poore reliques of their miſerable defourmed armie, or that did remember (by reaſon they were ſo drowned in ioy) what goodly forces, and what ſtrong ſquadrons they had ſent into Epyre, in reſpect of thoſe which were

thence returned, and were brought home againe.
            The new Monarke, whoſe delight was in bloudſhed and cruelty, as much as anyMahomet his cruelty & impiety. that euer raigned, thought it good to looke to his affaires, and to prouide for the ſecurity of his eſtate, and he had an intention to ſettle ſome of them in good aſſurance, and of others to make a change and innouation. The firſt deede that he did was to make diligent inquiſition, if he could finde any other aliue beſides himſelfe, that was deſcended from the loines of Amurath, vpon whom after the maner of his predeceſſors he might poure out the venome of his hatefull ambition. There were found two infants, the one called Turſines of the age of eighteene moneths, the other was calledTurſines, brother to Mahomet drowned. 
               Calepin. The former was caſt into the water and drowned by the expreſſe commaundement of Mahomet, who gaue it in charge to Moſes one of his Baſſaes to ſee it executed, and he without any difficulty or relenting, did eaſily yeeld to aſsiſt ſo execrable a ſpectacle. The mother of the infant deteſting the deede, and exclaiming vppon the brutiſhnes of the fact, with howlings and horrible cries intermingled with continuall tears and lamentations, did poure out a thouſand curſes againſt the author of the murther being there in preſence. The tyrant to appeaſe his mother in law, did deliuer into her hands in expiation of his Parricide, him that was the executioner: and ſhee full ofMoſes Baſſa, the murderer of Turſines, murdered by the mother of the infant. rage and extreame fury, with a knife ſtabbed him to the heart euen in the preſence of Mahomet, and then ripping vp his body, ſhee diued & ſearched into his bowels for his heart, which hauing found, ſhee pulled it forth & caſt it the dogs. A moſt worthy and notable leſſon for men of a corrupt mind, who can be content to ſtaine their conſciences, and to proſtitute them ſelues and their affections, to ſerue the furious paſsions of great men and princes. As concerning the other child named Calepin, the common reportCalepin brother to Mahomet. Caly Baſſa. is, that Caly Baſſa to get the good wil of Mahomet (ſuch is the inconſtancy of mortall men who do gladly follow the fortune of the moſt puiſſant) did preſent the infant vnto him being then but of the age of ſix moneths: and the only ioy and delight of his mother the widow of Amurath, who in his ſecond mariage with this woman theSponderbeg Prince of Penderacia. daughter of one Sponderbeg, the noble Prince of Penderacia, had begottē this yong infant, & had committed him to the cuſtody of this Baſſa, and recōmended him to his eſpecial care, at ſuch time as he drew neare his end. Mahomet being enformed by womē of good knowledge, that he was of the linage of his father, cauſed him ſpeedily to be ſtrangled, and then with great magnificence celebrated his obſequies at Burſa, by thisCalepin or one in his ſtead ſtrangled by Mahomet. means conſecrating the firſt fruits and beginnings of his cruel Empire with the bloud of his owne brethren. How beit others write, that Caly Baſſa did prefer another childe in ſtead of Calepin, who was ſtill nouriſhed and brought vp in Conſtantinople, amongſt the Greekes, and that afterwards in the ſhipwracke and ruines of that noble city, he with ſome others being left aliue was conueied thence, and that in the end, during the Papacy of Calixtus the third, he was entertained at Rome in the Vatican, where being inſtructed in the true religiō, & regenerat in holy baptiſme, he wēt after that to the court of the Emperour Fredericke in Almaine: of whom being receiued according to the honor due vnto ſo great a Prince, he ſpent the reſt of his daies in Auſtriche. You ſee what diuerſity there is between writers in this behalfe: notwithſtanding in my iudgement it hath no great likelihood or probability, that Amurath ſhould be able to beget children, when he was paſt foure ſcore yeare of age, vnleſſe perhaps this age of ours alſo haue receiued that rare gift and bounty of nature, which the auncients haue obſerued in Maſiniſſa and Cato the eldeſt. Howſoeuer it be, it is not much materiall, onely I could wiſhe that trueth might haue place: for in writing of an Hiſtory, I would not willingly ſet downe any vntrueth, nor yet reprehend others ouer raſhly. For ſuch is the law and rule of Hiſtories, that many fables doe fall out oftentimes to be entermingled

with true reports, which muſt ſtraightly be ſifted and examined, that in proceedingHiſtories how to be written. with the matter, truth and vntruth may be diſcerned, no otherwiſe then as they which are to drinke of a brooke, will purge and clarifie the water from all mud and filthineſſe. But to the purpoſe.
            
               Mahomet purſuing his blouddy beginnings, as one that would not omit any thing of his former furious proceedings, did daily deuiſe & ſuborne new ſlanders and accuſationsMahomet his tyranny and miſchieuous manners. againſt the greateſt perſons of his Court, and his fathers ſeruants: and vnder colour of calling them to an account, ſome of them he cauſed to be put to death, and of others he would procure the goods & offices to be confiſcated, in ſuch ſort, that within a very ſmall time (according as before his comming to the Crowne he had ſecretly plotted and purpoſed in his conceipts) he became terrible and more to be redoubted, then is fitting for a king, and he grew odious and hatefull almoſt to all his ſubiects. He altered and changed in a manner all the ſtatutes and ordinances of his aunceſters, and all the lawes and conſtitutions both ciuill and military: ſometimes reforming and correcting them, ſometimes adding of new vnto them, he ſurcharged and burthened his people with new impoſts and ſubſidies: and he bental his endeuours more then any other of his predeceſſors to amplify and augment the numbers of the Ianiſſaries, and of his men at armes, and to enrich and encreaſe his treaſures. For amongſt many of his other wicked conditions, the humor of auarice and couetouſnes had that command ouer him, that the meane and ſimple order both of his diet and apparell, was reproachfullyMahomet his notable vices and vertues. obiected vnto him as a vice: and it was ſuppoſed that his exceſsiue ſparineſſe and abſtinency, proceeded only of a miſerable and couetous humor. All men doe attribute vnto him a certaine liuelineſſe and viuacity of ſpirit, euen more then humaine, a heart couetous and greedily thirſting after glory, and not vnlike to that of the great Alexander. And it is moſt certaine, (as we haue partly before touched) he did excell all men liuing in cruelty, vſing (as the ſaying is) a rod of iron, both againſt his ſubiectes, and againſt ſtrangers, and he ſhewed himſelfe to haue as litle care of the bloud and life of his owne people, as of his foes and moſt mortall enemies: in ſuch ſort, that vppon euery ſleight and trifling occaſion, he would put to death euen thoſe litle boies and laddes,Seraill, a place where the Turk vſeth to keepe his concubines. whom he loued voluptuouſly, and which he kept within his * Serayl for the fulfilling of his beaſtly pleaſure. On the contrary, he was a moſt francke and liberall rewarder of thoſe men, who were of a quicke and ready ſpirite, and ſuch as were of valour and great courage, and of them which did ſerue him faithfully and loyally. For periury there was neuer any man more notorious, for he neuer kept faith nor promiſe with any perſons whatſoeuer. Moreouer many haue bene of the opinion, that he did not beleeue in the law of Mahomet their owne Prophet, no more then in the Goſpell of Chriſt. For albeit he was born, bred, & inſtructed by his mother, who was the daughter of George Deſpot of Seruia, and profeſſed the Chriſtian religion, and taught him the Pater noſter, Creede, and Aue Maria, yet when he came to ripe yeares, and that he betookeMahomet a notable Atheiſt worſhippeth good Fortune only as God. himſelfe to the embracing of the Mahometan profeſsion, he did ſo litle cleaue either to the one or to the other, that he liued a meere Atheiſt, and acknowledged, ſerued, nor adored any other Deity, but that alone which he called good Fortune. Hee did maruellouſly honor and eſteeme thoſe, which were skilfull in any Art or myſtery whatſoeuer, and he tooke great care that his victories and conqueſtes might be written by learned men, and thoſe that were of iudgement: he delighted infinitely in readingIohn Maria of Vicentia ſlaue to Muſtapha eldeſt ſonne of Mahomet. of the Hiſtories of the auncients, he was very skilfull and learned in the Greeke, Perſian, and Arabian tongues, he made great ſhewes of loue and kindneſſe vnto Iohn Maria of Vicentia, the ſlaue of his eldeſt ſonne Muſtapha, becauſe hee would haue had him to write in the Turkey and Itatian tongs, the famous victory which he obtained

againſt Vſuntaſſan king of the Perſians. He gaue great rewardes vnto Gentill
               Gentill Belin a Painter of Venice. 
               Belin a Painter of Venice, whom he cauſed purpoſely to come from thence to Conſtantinople, becauſe he would haue his picture drawen as liuely and naturally as hee could by his art poſsibly: and becauſe he ſhould paint out the habites and faſhions of the Occidentall nations. Moreouer he was a curious obſeruer of the Starres and Planets, according to the courſe and motion of the which, he ruled and directed all his actions. Beſides, he had in his mind euen with his cruelty, ſome impreſsion and ſhew of iuſtice and ſeuerity, in ſo much that during his raigne, all the paſſages and high waies were free, open, and ſafe for trauellers, and the name of theeues and robbers was wholly extinguiſhed and aboliſhed. A great warriour he was, ſtrong and valiaunt of his perſon, hardened and enured to endure watchings and trauels with notable patience: happy and fortunate in moſt of his actions: and (to ſpeake in a word) he was euen a king of Fortune, which made him worthy of the Empire of Conſtantinople. As touching the forme and feature of his viſage, and the making of his body, he was of aDeſcription of Mahomet. meane, or rather of a ſhort ſtature, which notwithſtanding did containe within a great heart, and full of magnanimity. He was pale of face and of a ſallow complexion correſpondent vnto his courage: his looke and aſpect was frowning, fierce, and terrible, his eye browes hollow, and his noſe ſo high and crooked, that the point thereof ſeemed to touch his lippes. His ſhoulders were large and ſquare, and all the members and lineamentes of his body, were ſtrong ſet and very well made, and with ſuch ſtrength, and vigour in his armes, that (at ſuch time as Scanderbeg liued with Amurath his father, amongſt all the youths of the Court, he would yeeld and giue place to none but to him only in drawing the bow or in wraſtling.
            It may be that I haue buſied my ſelfe about Mahomet more then needed, conſidering that my purpoſe was not to deſcribe his life nor his maners, but the life of Scanderbeg onely. Neuertheleſſe I thought it not amiſſe herein to ſeeke the pleaſing and contentment of all men. For as my deſire is that theſe memorialles ſuch as they are, ſhould not be vnpleaſing to the poſterity: ſo doe I ſuppoſe alſo, that the readers of the ſame at this preſent will not be wearied, by ſeeing (as it were) in a table the outward and inward habite of ſo accompliſhed and perfect a warriour▪ who (though he were an enemy) yet was a moſt puiſſaunt, a moſt fortunate, and a moſt renowmed Prince. Beſides alſo that a good part of the praiſe and commendation of our Epirot, doth conſiſt in the comparing and reſembling of theſe two together. For by how much more we doe ſometimes iuſtly condemne, and ſometimes iuſtly extoll the former, by ſo much doth the valour and felicity of the other ſhine forth and appeare more glorious.
            Whileſt the ſpirites of the Turkes were attentiuely contemplating vpon their newCroy repaired & n
                     •
                  w fortified by Scanderbeg. Monarch, and that hee was buſily occupied in the care of his priuate and domeſticall affaires, the King of Epire the meane while did employ both his time and diligence in repairing the ruines of Croy. He did altogether renue the old fortifications which were partly ruinous with antiquity and length of time, and partly razed and beaten downe by force of the Cannon: and he added others vnto them of a better forme and proportion, and of more ſurety and ſecurity, then thoſe which were vſed by the ancient ſimplicity when this thundering of Ordinaunce was not in vſe, and this diueliſhe inuention of the Cannon did not yet amaze and terrifie ſtrong and defencedA digreſſion and exclamation of the author againſt the inuentio
                     •
                   of Ordinance. townes: but that all exploites and deedes of armes did onely and ordinarily conſiſt in the ſtout ſtomackes and ſtrength of hardy ſouldiours, and in the armes, valour, and proweſſe of valiaunt men. O that it had pleaſed God, that the inuentor and firſt author of this Art ſo famous and notorious had neuer beene knowen, and that our age

had neuer brought forth ſuch an inuention. It may be we ſhould haue ſeene many more Hectors, more Epaminondaes, more Scipioes, more Rolandes. The yeelding of townes and holdes would not haue bene ſo ready, and the courages of people would not ſo ſoone haue bene forced or withdrawen from fidelity and loyalty, to the breach of their faith, and to periury. If the auncient ages and forepaſſed times had beene acquainted with ſuch artificiall ſleightes and inuentions, we ſhould not at this day haue had the name nor memoriall continued, either of their Captaines ſo highly renowmed, or of their ſouldiers ſo greatly commended. Achilles had not borne away the honour of the death of Hector, nor AEneas of Turnus, nor Coſſus of Volumnius, but ſome baſe Groome, and ſome abiect and vile companion. The tenne yeares ſiege of Troy would neither haue drawen againſt that city the armes and the eies of the whole world: neither would it haue miniſtred fit and worthy matter for ſo many excellent wits from age to age, to hiſtorize vpon the actes & accidents of that war. We ſhould not haue admired that lōg obſtinacy of the Tarentines. We ſhold haue madeleſſe reckoning of the conſtancy both of the Saguntines, & the Numantines. Antiquity would not haue talked of Petilia in Calabria: and the obſcure towne of Caſsilin, would not ſo often haue ſcorned and contemned the fury of Hanniball, that braue Chiefetaine of the Carthaginians. Wherefore, as the noble wittes and quicke conceipted ſpirites of our time, haue on the one ſide giuen vs good matter to write of, by reaſon of this and ſuch like rare and ingenious inuentions: ſo on the other ſide by meanes of this inuention, much more beyond all compariſon haue they depriued the Hiſtoriographer of all good occaſion, to employ his penne any more in writing. For now from henceforth will not true valour be able to ſhew it ſelfe: to no purpoſe is it for ſouldiours to vſe the Art of fighting, and to practiſe the skill of weapons: and in vaine is it to learne to handle the ſword, the buckler, and ſuch like, or to practiſe any other kind of fight hand to hand. And what then? forſooth they vſe now to fight aloofe, and to make warres a farre off, and field ſeruices conſiſt moſt in looſe and light skirmiſhes. But returne we from whence we haue digreſſed. Amongeſt other fortifications newly made in the towne of Croy, at the gate of the towne Scanderbeg cauſed a great and ſtrong towre to be builded: the walles whereof, from the bottome vpward, went not ſtraight and euen vpright, but were raiſed a ſlope and bending in manner of a counterſcarfe, to the intent the Cannon ſhould be the leſſe able to play vppon it. The other partes and quarters alſo of the towne, both within and without were repaired and fortified without any intermiſſion, by the aduiſement and directions of good and skillfull Enginers.
            In the meane time, whileſt theſe were in doing: the Princes and nobles his neareſt1451. Perſwaſions vſed by the nobles of Epire to draw Scanderbeg to mariage.
                kinſmen, did importune Scanderbeg without ceaſing, and did ſhew the vehement deſire which each man had to ſee him maried, and to haue children deſcended of him. Eſpecially now at this time, when all things (as they ſayed) were exempted from feare and miſtruſt: and now that all daungers were ouer gone and paſt, and that the enemies were withdrawen from all care of Armes, both by reaſon of their late miſfortune, and by the motions and tumults which doe vſually accompany the change of a new King at his firſt comming to the Crowne: that he ought not to fruſtrate the hearty wiſhes and deſires of ſo many peoples his ſubiects and confederates of this ioy and comfort, eſpecially in ſuch a ſeaſon (for it was in the moneth of May, when all things did ſeeme to reioyce and flouriſh) and which did inuite him thereunto, with promiſe of nothing but ioy, mirth, and gladneſſe. That therefore he ſhould ſuffer him ſelfe once to be entreated and perſwaded by his people, who would take more pleaſure and contentment in this onely, then in all his victories obtayned againſt Amurath.
               
Albeit the Prince of Albany were vnwilling to enter into this band, yet weighing all matters and circumſtances with iudgement and ſound aduiſe, it ſeemed vnto him more expedient and for his honour to conſent thereunto, then to hold off and to vary from his former promiſe which he had made vnto them the yeare laſt paſt, at the inſtant and earneſt requeſt of all his ſubiectes. For this cauſe he condeſcended vnto their deſire, and committed the care of the whole matter to the iudgement and wiſedome of Muſache Thopie, his ſiſters ſonne, and ſome two or three others, to whom he imparted his minde in that behalfe. At that time Ariamnites
               Ariamnites Comminat. 
               Comminat (of whom hath beene before ſpoken) did excell all the Princes and Lords of Epire, both in puiſſaunce and largeneſſe of dominions, as alſo in nobleſſe and antiquity of bloud, he had one daughter named Doniqua, worthy (no doubt of ſuchDoniqua the wife of Scanderbeg. afather,) and the true Idea and Image of all perfection of beauty, (which is one not of the leaſt excellenceſſe, and a thing not meanely reſpected in women.) Wherefore Scanderbeg tooke no care for any other match, nor Ariamnit for any other huſband for his daughter. The conditions and couenaunts of the mariage were as ſoone and eaſily agreed on and diſpatched, as they were thought vppon and deuiſed: Scanderbeg referring it to the diſcretion of the father, to determine of his daughters dowry, and as it liked him to ordaine and nominate it, ſo was it freely and voluntarily accepted. Neuertheleſſe it was correſpondent and aunſwerable to dignity, both of him which gaue it, and of the perſon alſo which receiued it. The eſpouſals were preſently celebrated and ſolemnized, and without any delay at all. Great were the triumphes and publique reioycings of all the Prouince at this mariage, and theMariage of Scanderbeg. Bride was as ſpeedily brought home with a Princely traine, and moſt royally accompanied, by all the neighbour Princes, and almoſt all the nobility of the countrey, who did honour the feaſt with great pompe and incomparable magnificence. Such as could not be preſent did honour them with their Ambaſſadours, and moſt ſumptuous preſents. All in generall did reioyce at this ſtraight knot of affinity, betweene theſe two the moſt puiſſaunt Princes of Albany, which gaue them ſome appearance and probability of hope, that in time to come their forces being vnited would preſerue and defend the prouince againſt all inuaſions and perils of the warre whatſoeuer. The Seigniours of the eſtate of Venice did teſtifie both by an ambaſſade, as alſo by rich preſents ſent him out of their common treaſure, the great good liking and contentment, which that Senate receiued by this mariage. And in like manner, all other Princes and Potentates, did largely expreſſe the like affection, and the ſingular good will which they bare him in this publique cauſe of ioy and gladneſſe, as they had done before in the times of his greateſt troubles and daungers: for (as the common ſaying is) thoſe are the two ſeaſons wherein true amity and friendſhippe doth make ſhew and triall of itſelfe. That which was ſent from the king of Arragon wasSentence. in all and euery part ſo ſingular and magnificall, that Scanderbeg (as the report goeth) would not haue accepted it, if his neareſt and moſt familiar friends, and the inſtant prayers and intreaties of the Spaniſh Ambaſſadours, had not vehemently importuned him thereunto. In lieu and recompence whereof, after hee had accepted them, he ſent backe vnto the King other preſentes of no leſſe value and eſtimation, as horſes, ſlaues, and other riches and treaſures which he had taken as the ſpoiles of his enemies the Barbarians. In this manner was this great feaſt ſolemnized with no leſſe pompe and magnificence then reputation and renowme. For beſides that already ſpoken of, the tourneys, iuſtes, triumphes, and other ſpectacles of diuerſe ſorts hauing prizes and rewards of excellent value appointed for thoſe that ſhould beſt deſerue them, did ſtir vp the courages of the young gallants on all parts, who ſhewing themselues

couetous of glory, and flocking thither to thoſe triumphs, did by their preſence greatly augment the beauty of that aſſembly.
            
               Mahomet was not ignoraunt of any of theſe things, nor of the fortifications of Croy, and it is thought, that he would willingly haue troubled the ioy of our Albanois, but being partly retayned with his domeſticall occaſions (as newe kingdomes commonly doe engender new infirmities and new diſorders) and partly alſo being intentiue to the heaping of great ſummes of money, and to the enriching of his treaſures, he was conſtrained for a ſeaſon to forbeare from any ſuch enterpriſe. Notwithſtanding in the middeſt of his threats and menaces (as he was very talkatiue and free of his ſpeeches) he called his mariage the vnhappy and ſhort ioy of that vnfortunatSaying of Mahomet touching the mariage of Scanderbeg. couple, ſaying: that it ſhould not be long ere he would ſauce their new contentments with deadly teares and lamentations.
            One thing there was which Scanderbeg had not yet done, and which of a longThe progreſſe of Scanderbeg with his Queen to viſite all his kingdome. time he had no leyſure to put in execution, by reaſon of his continuall lets and hinderaunces of the warres: and that was to viſite all the frontiers, townes, and paſſages of his Realme, which at this time he accompliſhed: hauing with him in company his new ſpouſe and a good troupe of horſemen: and he ſpent many daies in that recreation. In all places where he paſſed, the people by great flockes in a certaine kinde of emulation, did enforce them ſelues euery man according to his degree, to receiue him into their townes with magnificall and royall entertainment: and with a thouſand ſortes of goodly ſhewes and ſpectacles, and or rich preſentes, according to the vttermoſt of their power and abilities, they did gratifie both him and his princeſſe. There was not any one, but was moſt gratiouſly accepted, without any ſhew of diſlike, or any token of diſdaine: all of them were receiued with a chearfull countenaunce and like courteſie, not onely thoſe which came full handed, but euen they alſo, who wanting meanes to ſhew and teſtifie their good willes, did preſent him with their good heartes, and the prodigall bounty of their affections. The King holding on his courſe in this progreſſe, did viſite euery particular place, euen to the entry of Macedony, and to the very fartheſt limits and borders of his countrey. When he came into the lower Dibria, he obſerued one place aboue the reſt, by which the Barbarians had euer vſed and accuſtomed to make their inuaſions vppon Albanie, and by ſodaine roades and foragings to waſt and deſtroy at their pleaſures, the goods of the inhabitaunts, and to ſurprize and oppreſſe them at vnawares. For albeit there were many other waies and paſſages into the Prouince, yet this ſame onely was (as it were) the moſt commodious, and on that ſide more then any other, did the Chriſtians alſo vſe to inuade and harrie the fieldes and territories of the enemies. In this place therefore he determined (during that litle time of reſt which he enioyed, and whileſt the troubles of armes ceaſed) to depriue the Turkes of this opportunity of annoying of his people, and to prouide for the preſeruation and ſafetie of his ſubiectes.
            This was a mountaine which they of the countrey call Modriſſa, very ragged,Mountaine of Modriſſa. and of a great height: from the which the frontiers of the Infidels may be very well diſcouered a great waie off. On the toppe of this mountaine, he reſolued to build a fortreſſe, and to fortifie it with good ſtore of ſouldiours, ſuch as being prompt and vigilant, ſhould (by ſhooting off their artillery) aduertiſe the inhabitants at all times of the comming and arriuall of the Turkes: and to the intent alſo that the neare neighbourhood of that Fort ſhould ſerue for a place of refuge vnto his people, whenſoeuer they ſhould be driuen vppon any neceſſity to flie from the enemy: a thing which he had long before conceiued in his thoughts, and many times aſſayed to put

in execution, but was alwaies compelled to leaue vndone, by reaſon of the daily and continuall troubles of the warres. For this cauſe without making any long delay,Fortreſſe at Modriſſabuilded by Scanderbeg. and for that him ſelfe would not long dwell in delightes, nor would not haue the harts of his ſoldiers to be corrupted & effeminated, neither to continue drowned in idleneſſe, eaſe, and diſſolution, he returned ſpeedily towards Croy, the reparations whereof were by this time brought to good perfection. There did he take vp a good number of Maſons, Carpenters, and moſt part of the workemen and labourers of the city, and about a foure thouſand ſouldiers, to the intent, that if the enemy ſhould go about to diſturbe them, they ſhould finde ſufficient forces to repulſe them▪ and ſhould not be able to annoy or hinder them in their worke. With that company he went to Modriſſa, where ſetting them in hand with this fort, he followed it ſo diligently, that it was begun and ended without any let or diſturbaunce of the Mahometans. For albeit the Turkiſh Monarch were impatient of reuenge, and did at that time labour very diligently to leauy a great and puiſſant army againſt Scanderbeg, yet being mindful of the foule diſcomfitures and ouerthrowes formerly receiued by the Albanois, and being partly terrified with the rumour of a moſt daungerous warre, intended againſt him by the Perſians, ſetting aſide all other matters, and neglecting (as it were) all other occaſion, he bent his whole thoughtes on that ſide to ſee, what would be the end and iſſue of thoſe tumults. For this time therefore did theſe troubles and diſturbances diuert the Turkiſh armes from the Epirots, and they enioyed yet a while longer the benefite of the death of Amurath.
            
            Notwithſtanding the happie ſucceſſe and good fortune of Scanderbeg, and the dayly grieuances of the ſubiectes of Mahomet, who complained vnto him that they were continually ouer-runne, harried and pilled by the ordinarie roades and incurſions of the Epirotes, did not a little trouble and perplexe the Sultan: yet at the firſt he did but ſomewhat eaſe his ſtomacke (though in vaine) with many menaces and outragious ſpeeches againſt Scanderbeg being abſent: afterwardes hauing recourſe to flatteries and faire ſpeeches, he aſſayed to treate with him for ſome accord to be had of pacification and peace betweene them. To this ende he ſent ouer an Ambaſſade vntoAmbaſſadours ſent with conditions of peace by Mahomet to Scanderbeg. 
               Croy, offering him to make peace with him, ſo that he would yeeld him ſelfe tributarie, according to the conditions which Amurath had before propounded vnto him. Of all this matter, and of the cunning diſſimulation of the Ottoman, and of the warre rayſed by the Perſians, the Prince of Albanie was duely enformed, by the ſecrete intelligence of certaine great and noble men his friendes about Mahomet. By meanes whereof, the Ambaſſours being arriued, they were ſoone refuſed, and their demaundes vtterly reiected, returning with this aunſwer for a full reſolution. That hardly could hee be content to accept anie conditions of peace of the tyraunt,Anſwer of Scanderbeg to the Ambaſſadors of Mahomet. were they neuer ſo honeſt and tollerable: much leſſe theſe, which were ſo intollerable and iniurious. That he was entred into Epire onely to this ende, to ſhake off his yoake from that Prouince, and to aboliſh, as much as in him lay, the hatefull name of bondage and ſeruitude: and not to impoſe newe griefes vppon them. That this was the onely fruite and benefite which he did reape of his trauelles and hazards ſuſtayned, to ſee his countrey one day freed and deliuered from Turkiſh tyrannie and ſubiection. That if hee had had anie deſire or deuotion to haue amitie and friendſhippe with him, hee would then haue yeelded to ſubmit him ſelfe to thoſe termes of ſlauerie and thraldome, when the power and puiſſaunce in a manner of all Europe and of Aſia, was euen in the verie heart and bowelles of his kingdome: when the bloudie Amurath did beard him to his face, and was in armes againſt

him; and was deſirous to haue had him yeeld to theſe conditions. That it ſhould ſuffiſe them to thinke what they had ſuffered in times paſt, euen to that daye: the remembraunce whereof ſhould giue him iuſt cauſe of griefe and ſorrow at all times. That it was not nowe with the Epirotes as in times paſt, but that matters were quite chaunged, and the men cleane altered from that they were wont to be: and they had little reaſon to hope to bring them to this point. Well they might do it by conſtraint offorce and open violence: but to thinke by good wordes and entiſing ſpeeches to perſwade and inuite them to ſo infamous and baſe an act, they were fouly miſtaken and deceiued.
            
            This Ambaſſadour being diſmiſſed with this aunſwer, and his offers being vtterlyThe fortreſſe of Modriſſa finiſhed and furniſhed. reiected: Caſtriot did altogether apply him ſelfe to his worke lately begunne, leauing his enemies for a while to take their reſt. By this time was the fortreſſe of Modriſſa in a good forwardneſſe, by reaſon that the lyme, ſtones and other ſtuffe was prepared and made readie for the building long before hand. In leſſe then ſixe moneths was it encloſed and compaſſed with walles, and fitted with other edifices and particular houſes and lodgings for the ſouldiers: the ouerplus that remained was followed and enlarged afterwardes from time to time. The place being ſure and ſtrong by nature, needed not anie ditches or rampiers to ſtrengthen it: and therefore prouiſion was made onely of men, armes, munition, and other prouiſions. There were brought thither alſo from Croy, certaine peeces of great ordinance: which being deliuered to them of the Fort, they were admoniſhed how to vſe them, and to what end: as hath bene before declared.
            Theſe thinges thus done: Scanderbeg led the Albanians into the enemies countrey,Territories and Dominions of the Turkes inuaded & ſpoiled by Scanderbeg. where finding the places voyde of defence, they made a hand of all that they found, harrying and ſpoyling all things, and not ſparing to afflict the Turkiſh dominions with what ſoeuer miſchiefes and diſcommodities the furie and rage of the warres could poſſibly imagine. From thence ſome of them retired with their Chiefetaine towardes Croy loden with prey and bootie: but the better parte was left vppon the frontiers (as had bene euer vſed) in garriſon. For, albeit the raiſing of the fortreſſe of Modriſſa did greatly aſſure and ſafegard the plaine countrey: yet were not the ordinarie forces retired from the frontiers, becauſe the place where they were appointed was diſtant about foureteene miles or more from Modriſſa. Beſides that the ſouldiers of the garriſon were not left for that ende, and to the ſame effect as thoſe of the newe Fortreſſe: but principally for the repulſe of the violence of the Turkes, and to gard the Prouince againſt the incurſions and pillages of the Painims. And if it did happen that the Turkes did come vpon them with ſuch force and puiſſance, as they were not able to make head againſt them, then were they to retire and ſaue them ſelues, either in the toppes and ſafe paſſages of the mountaines, or elſe in the inner partes of the countrey. Scanderbeg after he was arriued at Croy, being deſirous to take the benefite of the time, whileſt the Sultan was buſied in other affaires, and by ſome notable act to amplifie the boundes of his Realme, he called together his Nobles, and the principall perſons of the citie of Croy, with the moſt part of his troupes and companies: and hauing a long time deuiſed with them vpon the proceedings of the warres, and what courſe was beſt to be taken: at the laſt, becauſe he would ſoundOratiō of Scanderbeg to his ſubiects, perſwading thē to proceed with their conqueſts vpon the Turkes. the intents and meaning of their thoughts, and proue how they were affected, he began thus to ſpeake vnto them.
            Worthie Peeres and braue Epirotes, now that we haue ſufficiently filled and gorged our ſelues with feaſting and banquetting, and with all kinde of licentious eaſe

and libertie: we haue no reaſon anie longer to leaue our armes, and to let our wonted vertue lye (as it were) a ſleepe and forgotten: we haue kept holy day long enough: we haue feaſted and triumphed ſufficiently for the victorie had againſt Amurath: we haue ſpent a whole yeare, partly in recreation, partly in repairing of our townes, or building of newe places, and we haue not ſo much as once viſited the enemie. It is nowe high time to awake, and to giue ſome newe proofe of your wonted valour, euen now whileſt Mahomet hath his hands full with the Perſians, and that God hath giuen you the meanes and oportunitie, without anie effuſion of bloud to reeſtabliſh the auncient honour and reputation of Albanie, and to reuiue thoſe ancient times ſo greatly deſired: whileſt that the enemie his power is nowe ſomewhat weakened and repreſſed, and whileſt he is otherwiſe occupied and entangled in diuerſe weariſome and tedious troubles, not knowing what to doe, nor what courſe to take: for theſe two, are the onely and principall ſeaſons for the good and happie diſpatch of
                  Two onely times to diſpatch great exploites againſt an enemy: when he is weakened, or other where employed and occupied. great exploites. This therefore is the time, this is the houre, that inuiteth you to ſeeke out the enemie, and not alwayes to lye ſtill and idle, and to expect when he will come to aſſaile you. Behold howe Sfetigrade looketh after you, and calleth for your ayde. Doth the ill ſucceſſe of the laſt yeares ſiege terrifie you? I aſſure you I would be loth to leade you, where I ſhould thinke the miſchiefe to be ſo great, or the perill ſo euident: but no we the great number of your victories, the death of Amurath, the preſent occupation of our aduerſarie, hath greatly diminiſhed theſe difficulties: beſides that you ſhall not want ſtore of artillerie, and ſuch like engines and inſtruments of aſſault. The opportunitie of the time, and the countenaunce of the enemie, ſhall inſtruct vs what is further to be done. For my part, I can promiſe you nothing without expence and loſſe of bloud: without vehement and earneſt labour: of which notwithſtanding, the valiant man, the couragious ſouldier hath ſcarce anie feeling or perſeueraunce: euen then when he is moſt painefully occupied, and in the action: much leſſe will he be afrayed or in doubt of it, before he commeth to proue the difficulty of it. Yet if Sfetigrade be ſo odious and diſpleaſing vnto you, there are other places and fortreſſes of the enemy not farre off, which may recompence your loſſes ſuſtained at Sfetigrade, and may content and ſatisfie your deſires. There is Belgrade as neare or nearer then Sfetigrade, and not vnworthy neither of our trauelles, nor of our bloud, if we haue any deſire either of honour, or of recompence. I haue reaſon (my good companions) to be aſhamed more then any, that I ſhould ſpend one yeare during my raigne amongeſt you idlely and doing nothing, and yet to ſee and ſuffer the houſes of our aunceſters, the townes of our confederates, the noble markes of the eſtate and Empire of the Albanians, ſo ſhamefully to be ſubiected and enthralled vnder the Infidelles. Wherefore that this time of ley ſure and opportunity which is left vs, doe not ſlippe out of our handes, let vs follow and imitate the Perſians: let vs embrace the good fortune which God ſeemeth to haue offered vs. In ſo doing, we ſhall enlarge our dominions: we ſhall augment our franchiſes and liberties: We ſhall reuenge our loſſes, our grieues, and iniuries: and (which aboue all is to be preferred) we ſhall keepe the youth of our Realme from ſloath and idleneſſe. Neither hath the Biſhop of Rome, nor our good friend the king Alphonſus, nor ſo many deuout and Catholique Princes, aided and ſuccoured vs with their treaſures and other ſupplies, to the intent we ſhould keepe vs ſtil idle within dores: that we ſhould dwel in pleaſures and delights, & grow corrupted and effeminate: but rather that we ſhould betake our ſelues to armes, and make proofe and triall of our valour in the middeſt of all perils and daungers, and that euen in deſpite of death it ſelfe wee ſhould performe the duety and deuoyre

of men valiant and couragious, and of moſt braue and reſolute ſouldiers.
            
            This encouragement of the king of Epire ſeemed not greatly to like the auditors: for they did not applaude it with a ſudden and vniuerſall crie and conſent (as they were wont:) but with a kinde of muttering noiſe, interrupted (as it were) by times, and by ſtoppes, they did ſignifie ſufficiently, that the mindes of the ſouldiers were not conformable, but rather different from his deſire. Notwithſtanding though there were fewe or none which did commend or allowe of his aduiſe: yet being aſhamed openly to contradict it, they ſtood ſtill one looking vpon another: and none of them durſt open his mouth to reply vnto him, for feare of being noted for a greater coward or more daſtardly minded then the reſt of his cōpanions. Then Vranocontes ſeeing all of them ſo ſtil and ſilent, ariſing out of his ſeate, & addreſſing his ſpeech to Scanderbeg: 
               It is not (quoth he) moſt prouident and prudent Prince, either timerouſneſſe or wantAnſwer of Vranocontes to the oratiō of Scāderbeg: in the name of all the Epirots. of courage, or the experience of our late ſucceſſe at Sfetigrade which cauſeth vs at this time with bluſhing cheekes to diſallow and diſlikethy counſell: but (giue me leaue to be the firſt who may freely confeſſe vnto thee the cauſe of this our backwardneſſe): it is the time and ſeaſon of the yeare, wherein ordinarily conſiſteth the beſt part of militarie ſeruices: it is I ſay, the time onely which doth aduiſe & admoniſh vs not to hearken vnto thee. Thou ſeeſt that the Autumne is now well neare ſpent, ſcarcely ſhall we be able to leuie any forces, ſcarcely ſhall we put in order other things requiſite for the ſiege, and we ſhall hardly make our approches to the walles, but that the vnſeaſonableneſſeWinter wars moſt diſcommodious and hurtfull. of the winter will aſſault vs with infinit inconueniences & diſcommodities, both the heauens and the earth wil make warre againſt vs, the ſhowers & raine continually falling, the froſts, Ice and ſnow, will both hinder, offend, and encomber our ſouldiers, and will defend and protect the enemie. For as this ſeaſon is of it ſelfe vnfit & diſcommodious for all occaſions: ſo is it moſt contrary, and to the ſingular diſaduantage of thoſe that come to be encamped, and lye at the ſiege of townes. And there is great ods and inequalitie betweene the dammages and inconueniences which it bringeth to the beſiegers, in regard of thoſe annoyances which it layeth vpon the beſieged. For theſe being retired within their walles, and vnder the ſuccour and couert of their baſtils and defences, will be able with pleaſure to affront vs, and hauing abundance of all neceſſaries, they may (as it were) with the one hand hold their weapons and armes readie to defend them ſclues, whileſt with the other they do repaire and renue their forces & their rampiets. And what ſhall we do the whileſt? Onely we haue the aduantage of our corages prodigall & careleſſe of our owne ſafeties, and obſtinately addicted to aſſaile & force the enemy. For to ſpeake of any artillery, it is not vnknown vnto vs, both at the ſiege of Sfetigrade, and at other places, how litle good it doth and will do, eſpecially in this vnſeaſonable time of winter, and againſt places ſo defencible & ſtrong by nature, ſeated vpon rocks & mountaines which are vnbatterable & impregnable. I cō
                  clude therfore, that it behoueth vs with all our power and endeuors to ſhun & auoyd theſe vaine attempts, and this wilful loſſe and deſtruction of our ſouldiers: and it behouethSentence. Time and ſeaſen to be attended by men of valor & wiſdome. men of valor and wiſedome to attend a conuenient time and ſeaſon, as good and skilful ſailers vſe to do, when they are to make their voyage. Neither will this delay any thing diminiſh or abate our courages, nor will it adde any ſtomach to our enemies. Touching the warre of the Perſians (if I may ſpeake what I thinke of it) for my part I do repoſe little or no truſt therein at this time: for either wil the report of all thoſe skirmiſhes and commotions vaniſh away to ſmoke and come to nothing: or elſe it is like that the Perſians will deferre and put off their armes till ſome other time of better oportunitie. All this notwithſtanding (moſt valiaunt Prince the mirrour of magnanimitie) we will not hinder thy determinations; but if thou doeſt thinke,

that thine owne opinion and conceipt in this point, be more for the benefite and aduantage of the Eſtate, and for the publike and common reputation, we will march on with a good will, and will cheerefully follow thy enſignes, whereſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thee to leade vs: we will frame and fit our tongues and our ſpeeches, our handes and our actions, yea the very times and ſeaſons to ſerue onely at thy good will and pleaſure, and as it ſhall ſeeme good vnto thee. In thy company the ſnow ſhall be pleaſant, the ſhowers ſhall ſeeme ſweete, the winter ſhall be thought milde, and all things ſhall be gracious, acceptable and pleaſing vnto vs: no trauels, no difficulties, no hazardes, nor any kinde of dangers ſhall grieue or diſcontent vs, ſo long as thou art our leader and commaunder: ſo long as we may enioy the happie preſence of thy vertues, and may follow the greatneſſe of thy fortunes.
            
            
               Scanderbeg perceiuing how his ſubiects were affected, and the rather for that they ſpake nothing but what was true and certaine, he ſuffered himſelfe ſoone and eaſily to be perſwaded by them, according to that curteſie & bountie of his good nature, wherewith he did euer draw the affections of the cōmunalty to loue & honor him. Wherefore the Counſell being broken vp, the aſſembly diſmiſſed, & the ſouldiers licenſed toDonique the wife of Scanderbeg paſſeth the Sommer at Petralba. depart, he permitted euery man to retire to his owne home. At the beginning of the ſommer he had left the Queene at Petralba, as afterwards alſo in the ſame ſeaſon of the yere he vſed alwayes during his life to do the like: to thintent that during the extreme heate of ſommer, & till the end of Autumne, ſhe might remaine there for her more ſolace and recreation: & the reſt of the yere ſhe vſually ſpent at Croy, except it were at ſuch times as the Turks came into Epire, or that the country was troubled with any immoderate forces, & extraordinary puiſſance of the enemy. For then when it ſtood vpō theColchina a citie of the Venetiās vpon the ſea or gulfe of Venice in Dalmatia. hazard of his whole eſtate, he tranſported her with all her houſhold, & the moſt precious things of all her furniture and moueables vnto Colchina a ſea towne of the Venetians, or to ſome other ſuch like place farre remoued and out of the way. Now that he hadde diſmiſſed his army, he him ſelfe with Ameſe, and very ſmall traine, went to the Queene to Petralba. Vnder this caſtell was a plaine of ſinguler beauty and veryDeſcription of the conntrey about Petralba. pleaſaunt, both for the admirable recreation which the very nature of the place did affoorde, as alſo by reaſon of the notable diligence of the inhabitants, who had bene very curious and induſtrious in trimming and husbanding of the ſoile. For it wanted not any fruites, vines, plants, or trees, nor any thing in the world which might ſeeme either to adorne and beautifie the countrey, or to make it bleſſed and happy. In this place during that quarter of the yeare did the Queene make her abode, accompanied with her Ladies, maides, and officers. On all ſides was the plaine enuironned with wood and thickets, and with many narrow ſtraights and vallies in a manner vnacceſſible: amongſt the which Scanderbeg held continuall watch and ward, keeping a great number of ſouldiers to guard and defend the place: which was alſo ſingularly well prouided and furniſhed, with armes, men, victuals, & other munitions for all occurrences and accidents of Fortune whatſoeuer Hauing made but ſmall ſtay at Petralba, he remoued with his Queene backe againe to Croy, where alſo he had no long reſt. For (as Vranocontes moſt ſagely and wiſely had prognoſticated) newes came within a while, and the report encreaſed daily: that the Perſian was retired, the tumults of that war appeaſed, and all ſturs and commotions pacified: and that the Turkiſh Monarch being freed from this feare, did minde to bend his forces againſt the Albanians.
            
            
               Scanderbeg was greatly troubled with theſe tidings, neuertheleſſe he told his ſubiectesMahomet prepareth an army againſt Scanderbeg. Sentence. openly, that in this caſe it was requiſite to vſe armes and good counſell, and not choller and indignation. Howbeit he was in good hope, that the enemy would not march in a ſeaſon ſo contrary & diſcommodious. Yet did he preſently moūt on horſe

backe, and taking with him not aboue fiftie horſe, he left Croy his chiefe citie, and drewe towardes the frontiers where Moſes lay in garriſon: there to take ſome more certaine counſell and aduiſe for the maner of his proceedings. When he came thither, he found that to be true in effect which had bene reported vnto him at Croy. For thisScanderbeg leuieth an armie to withſtand the Turkes. cauſe hauing leuied and muſtered in great haſt about 5000. men, he retired with them into the lower Dibria, where he was wont to encampe and to winter his armie, aduertiſing Moſes and others not to ſtirre nor attempt any thing, till they ſaw him approch with his troups. Scarce did there paſſe ten dayes betweene theſe preparations and the comming of the Turkes: the which being diſcouered by them of the garriſon in the newe fortreſſe at Modriſſa, and being mindfull of the inſtructions giuen them by their Soueraigne, they ſignified the ſame accordingly by the ſhot of the Canon. This ſignall was receiued firſt by the paizants and inhabitants of the countrey, and afterwardes by Scanderbeg, in ſo good time, that truſſing vp baggage in the night, with as much ſilence as was poſſible, he made towardes the enemie. Moſes was not then preſent at that ſeruice: for by reaſon that the infidels did take their way farre off from the place where he lay, he would not leaue thoſe paſſages vngarded which were committed to his charge, for feare leſt the Painim, being either victorious or vanquiſhed, ſhould finde that paſſage vnfurniſhed and without reſiſtance. The ſelfe ſame night did the Barbarian vſe incredible celeritie & diligence in his iourney: they were about twelueAn armie of twelue thouſand Turkes inuadeth Epire thouſand fighting men and no more, all on horſebacke, choſen and well appointed, both to giue a charge brauely, and to beare a ſhocke as reſolutely: and Mahomet thought it not good to vſe anie greater troupes in this expedition. Our Chriſtian forces were in a maner equally parted, their numbers both of horſemen and footemen being neere alike. The night was now almoſt ſpent, and the day readie to breake, whenAm
                     •
                  ſa generall of the Turkiſh armie againſt Scanderbeg. as Scanderbeg being enformed by his diſcouerers of the way that Ameſa tooke (for ſo was the Generall Turke named) and being fauoured by the ſilence of the night, he ſeized vpon a part of the mountaine of Modriſſa, hauing a purpoſe to ſurpriſe the enemie: who being ignorant of this ſtratageme, had nowe paſſed the mountaine of Mocrea, and being entred the valley that lay betweene that and the mount Modriſſa,
               Mount Mocrea. were euen readie to get vp the hill, to the intent that (paſſing from thence farther into the heart of the Prouince, he might the better ouer-reach Scanderbeg, and deſtroy the plaine countrey. Part of his people were nowe gotten to the place, and being entangled amongeſt the craggie rockes, and the ſteepe deſcents of the mountaine, their horſes were euen out of breath with mounting to the toppe. Others likewiſe followed cloſe after them: and many of them were as yet ſcarce paſſed the valley, whenAmeſa & the Turkes armie ſurprized at Modriſſa, by Scanderbeg. as the Generall of the Chriſtians (giuing the ſignall of the fight) with a great crie and a terrible noyſe, no otherwiſe then as a mightie ſtreame, did fall ſuddenly vpon them from aboue, ouerthrowing and beating them downe, being alreadie wearied and well neare tyred, both them and their horſes. The firſt that made head againſt them were the footemen, whom Scanderbeg employed in the beginning of the ſeruice, by reaſon of the ſituation and qualitie of the place: doubting leſt if his horſemen ſhould haue charged, the fall of the hill, with the force of their owne violence, might haue borne them on with more extremitie then he was willing, and ſo being caried headlong downe the mountaine, they might haue wrought their owne ruine and deſtruction. The principall praiſe therefore, and the chiefe commendation of this victorie appertained to the footemen. The Turkes which were gotten vp to the top, caſting away their launces, defended them ſelues with their cimitaries; but by reaſon that their horſes could not get anie good and ſure footing, their blowes were vncertaine, and their force was to little purpoſe. The Chriſtians couering themſelues

with their Targets, did firſt kill and ouerthrow their horſes, and then all at pleaſure had their willes of the riders: manie of whom perceiuing this ſtrange and vnaccuſtomed kinde of daunger, diſmounted from their horſes, and eyther fought on foote, or ſought to ſaue themſelues by retyring into the valley towardes their companions, and to reſerue themſelues to a more ſure exploit, and to a ſafer kinde of ſeruice. Ameſe the Chriſtian, being accompanied with a ſtrong and mightie troupe of horſe was ſent by his Vncle to the other ſide of the mountaine, where the deſcent was more facile and eaſie: and there beganne an other fight in the ſtreightes and moſt narrowe paſſages of the valley. In this meane while was it faire day light, by which time the ſurplus and reſt of the horſemen (who were of Scanderbeg his battallion) hauing firſt repulſed the enemie, beganne to make into the plaine. Of the footemen ſome purſued the enemie, others kept at the foote of the mountaine, from whence with their bowes and arrowes, they ſpent good ſtore of ſhot vppon them whom they ſawe broken and out of order. On the one ſide where the way ſeemed more free and open for the enemie, Caſtroit did fiercely preſſe vppon them cloſe at their backes: on the other ſide Ameſe the Chriſtian had ſhut in, and (as it were) beſieged Ameſe the Turkiſh Generall, who (ſeeing not anie likelihoodeAmeſe Generall of the Turkes, taken priſoner by Ameſe the Nephew of Scanderbeg. nor apparance either of victorie or of ſafetie) was oftentimes importuned and vrged by the Albanois to render himſelfe: which at length to his great griefe, he was contented to yeeld vnto: and laying aſide his armes, he gaue him his faith to be true priſoner. In like manner, infinite others yeelding to their ill fortune, did by their captiuitie, giue an ende to their woundes, and determined the conflict. The victorieVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Ameſe at Modriſſa. being aſſured, the ſouldiers fell to make bootie of their baggage. All their Enſignes and Standards were gayned, and ſeuen thouſand men were counted dead vpon the place. The moſt part of their horſes were either ſlaine or maymed: and yet did this victorie coſt the Chriſtians litle bloud or none at all: for they loſt not in the fightNumber both of Turkes and Chriſtians ſlaine in the fight at Modriſſa. aboue 30▪ perſons at the moſt. Ameſe the Turkiſh Generall (according to the right of the law of armes) was graunted to Ameſe the Chriſtian by his Vncle, who willed him to leade him amongſt other priſoners to Croy, with ſome part of the ſpoiles gotten vpon the enemy, eſpecially the ſtandards: the reſidue were liberally graunted and deuided amongſt the ſouldiers.
            The King of Epyre hauing continued certaine daies in that place, to ouerrunne the frontiers of the Infidels, to diſmiſſe his ſouldiers, to viſit, order & diſpoſe of all things, returned to Croy againſt the feaſt of Chriſtmas. At his arriuall, all the multitude both old and young pell mell, in great and huge troupes flocked together to receiue him, and they met him without the gate with many acclamations and popular applauſes, much more great, and farre exceeding beyond all compariſon, all that had beene vſed and accuſtomed. For it was a common ſpeech and talke amongſt them, that God had now giuen them a manifeſt ſigne & pledge of their good fortune, and that they ſhold preuaile as well againſt the new Monarch, as againſt his predeceſſour: alſo that they were aſſured vnder the conduct of their Prince, to haue like fortune & good happe againſt the ſonne, as they had of late againſt the father. So fond and vaine are the imaginationsSentence. and iudgements of the ignorant & rude communaltie, that by one only accident (be it neuer ſo meane) and according as the ſucceſſe of the firſt beginnings doth more or leſſe pleaſe them, ſo do they meaſure & interpret the ſecond, the middle, & the laſt euents of worldly actions: eſpecially if their owne deſires and affections, and the promiſes of fortune doe concurre, and do ſeeme to ioyne and agree in one.
               The Turkes priſoners feaſted by Scanderbeg.
            
            During the ſolemnitie of this publique triumph and feaſting, both in reſpect of the time which was feſtiuall, and of their affaires, which had ſucceeded ſo fortunate, Scanderbeg
               
commaunded the priſoners to be enlarged, and that Ameſe ſhould be brought vnto him: whom after he had welcommed and receiued with great humanitie, he honored & feaſted moſt magnificently, to the intent he ſhould be pertaker of their ioy and triumph for that victorie, whereof himſelfe had partly bene the giuer and the occaſion. But firſt of all, the Mahometan did requeſt him, that he would vouchſafe to licenſe ſome one of the captiues to go to Andrinople, and to aduertiſe his friends of his eſtate and condition, and to bring his ranſome. For it may be (ſaid he) that they which are eſcaped from the ſlaughter, doe know nothing of my misfortune and aduenture: but may thinke me to be ſlaine amongſt the reſt. This being accorded as he demanded, and the price of all their ranſomes being concluded and agreed vpon at 13000. crownes: two of them were preſently diſpatched and ſent away to deale for the deliuerie of their companions, and they were accompanied with one of the Chriſtians, till ſuch time as he had conducted them ſafe out of the countrie. Thus you ſee what paſſed this yeare in Epyre, and what were the chiefeſt tumults of that time.
            Whileſt that matters ſtood vppon theſe tearmes, the newes of this diſcomfiture1452. was come to the eares of Mahomet, who ſeeing the reliques of his army without a Generall, without enſignes, & without armes, I leaue it to you to be imagined, whether the ſight therof did not procure griefe and ſorrow both in publique & in priuate. The Sultan did enquire particularly of the encounter, & he was deſirous to heare the diſcourſe of the whole manner and order of the fight: which being told him, though he were euen enraged for pure deſpite and anger, yet he fell from the conceipt and remembrance of that misfortune, to feaſting, reuelling and banquetting, ſtriuing & enforcing himſelfe to the vttermoſt of his power, to obſcure the praiſe and deſerts of the Albanois, and to colour, excuſe, & hide his own misfortune. But if the calamity of hisMahomet insenſed against Ameſe, in vnwilling to pay his ranſome. army vpon the view & hearing of their miſchance, did in any ſort trouble this couetous & miſerable minded Prince, you may be ſure that the meſſage ſent by Ameſe did much more moue him & eagerly incenſe him. By meanes whereof, ſometimes imputing vnto him the diſgrace of that ouerthrow, in that he had ſo fooliſhly loſt his people, by trayning them in the night time raſhly and inconſideratly into thoſe ſtreights & ſteepe mountaines: and ſomtimes accuſing him of cowardice, treaſon & diſloialty, he wold willingly haue refuſed to disburſe any thing towards their ranſome, (ſo ſubtill & ingenious is the humor of auarice, to keepe together the riches which it hathSentence. gathered:) if that the principall perſons of the court, and the kinſmen and friends of the priſoners had not perſwaded him to the contrarie. For what with their goodPerſwaſions vſed by Ameſe his friend
                     •
                   and the Turkes cour
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  rs, to Mahomet in his behalfe. and ſufficient reaſons, and what with their humble prayers and entreaties, they appeaſed the Sultan, ſhewing him, that Ameſe in the whole courſe of his life before paſt, could not iuſtly be blamed nor ſuſpected of the like error or default. Moreouer that he alone was not fallen into this misfortune, but many braue and valiant ſouldiers beſides him: and that therefore the caſe of their companions ought not to be neglected and vnregarded. Many other reaſons did they alleage, in ſo much, that the money being ſoone procured and deliuered vnto the meſſengers, together with manie pretious gifts and preſents, which they ſent priuately to Scanderbeg: it was quickely brought and paied in Epyre. The moſt part of that ſumme Scanderbeg willed to be deliuered to his Nephew, the reſidue was partly deuided and ſhared amongeſt the ſouldiers, and partly ſent vnto Moſes to be diſtributed amongſt them of his garriſon.Liberalitie of Amuſe the Nephew of Scanderbeg. The Nephew of Scanderbeg ſhewed himſelfe no leſſe liberall then his Vncle. For reſeruing to himſelfe very little or nothing of that which was giuen him, he gaue it in common, and parted it both amongeſt friendes and welwillers, and to thoſe that were partners with him in his perils. Their ranſomes being thus paied, the Turkes

were licenſed to depart at their pleaſures. Ameſe was very ſorie to leaue the King of Albanie, and (the ſaying is) that before his departure, he did a long while, in ſecretAmeſe and the other Turkes priſoners ranſommed. deuiſe with Scanderbeg vpon the nature and diſpoſition of Mahomet, and of the manner of maintayning the warre againſt him. At their going thence there were manie preſents beſtowed vpon them, and victuals prouided to ſerue them for manie dayes, beſides a good conuoy, which did bring them ſafe and ſound into their owne limits and confines.
            Before ſuch time as Ameſe arriued at Andrinople, there was begunne to be madeDebreas appointed with a new armie againſt Scanderbeg. a newe leauie of other forces, and the old companies were ſupplyed with freſh men in the place of thoſe which were loſt. He that had the leading of them was named Debreas, a man of notable courage, and one that by his experience and long practiſe in armes, had attained to the degree & dignitie of a Saniacke. But he had laboured too ambitiouſly with the Ottoman to grant him this commiſſion, enforcing himſelf withDebreas his ambition and glorious oſtentation. manie glorious promiſes to animate the Sultan more & more, and to put him in a full hope and perſwaſion of an aſſured victorie. For he referred all things to the conceipt of his owne wit, and to the ſufficiencie of his owne wiſedome, attributing little or nothing vnto fortune, notwithſtanding that ſhe doth beare a great ſtroke in all humaine actions, and eſpecially in deedes of armes. Neuertheleſſe he promiſed the Sultan not to hazard all his forces at one blow, nor to commit them to the aduenture of one entire battell, but that he would by ſome good entry and beginning make himſelfe way to an aſſured victorie. Beſides, he tooke no great care nor was deſirous of any greater forces, then ſuch as Ameſe his predeceſſor had lately had before him: induced thereunto through a kind of emulation & deſire of glory: to the intent it might be ſaid, that he had reeſtabliſhed the good fortune of the Turkiſh Empire with the like numbers, & (as it were) with the ſame ſouldiers. As it is cōmonly ſeene, that the man which is
                  Sentence. hardie and reſolute thinketh nothing impoſſible whereunto his mind is affectioned.
            
            Now was not Debreas the onely man that had thus deſired to be employed by the Sultan, but there were many others, who of themſelues and their owne motion, did ſue to haue the honour of that difficult and hard ſeruice: for by how much the moreAmbition and enuie of the Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. the name of Scanderbeg did growe glorious amongſt the Barbarians, and the greater report and renowme that ranne of his inuincible fortune: ſo much the greater was the reſort and concourſe of all ſuch as thought any thing well of their owne valure and worthineſſe: eche of them greedily deſiring to haue the credite of that iourney, as men that did affect and aſpire to the greateſt offices and higheſt dignities. Beſides, the ambition of theſe men was much augmented and pricked forward by the liberalitie of the Turkiſh Monarche publiſhed and ſpread abroad, who had lately proclaymed and decreed a wonderfull great rewarde and recompence to him that could vanquiſh the Albanois. But after that Ameſe vppon his returne was ſeene and heard toAmeſe cōmending the vertue of Scanderbeg diſcourageth the Turkes. vtter his opinion and conceit of Scanderbeg and his fortune, thoſe their haughtie deſires were much chaunged and abated. For by a continuall, yet true commendation, he did ſo extoll the vertue of the Chriſtian Prince and his companies, as it little wanted, but that Debreas had chaunged his opinion, and that the Sultan had not broken the voyage. Neuertheleſſe becauſe he would not derogate from the maieſtie of his Empire, he thought it better to encreaſe and ſtrenthen his armie, then either to miſtruſt the diligence and deuoire of his Saniacke, before he had made proofe and tryall of him: or to leaue the diſcomfiture of Ameſe, and the late iniuries of his people vnreuenged. Wherefore there was added to the troupes before leauied a new ſupply of 3000. horſe. Thus whileſt that Ameſe diſcharging the dutie of a friend, and gratifying his late hoaſt, did exalt the honour of Scanderbeg, and did publiſh his rare vertues,

he was in a manner iniurious vnto him, or rather he was the author and occaſioner of his greater praiſe and of his more honorable victorie.
            All things being in a readineſſe, and the companies readie to march, there fell ſuch great ſtore of raine, continuing for many dayes together, that it did for a while hinderDebreas marcheth into Epyre with an armie of 15000. men. the forwardneſſe of the ſouldiers. Put the foule weather being ceaſed, and the ſeaſon of the yeare being likewiſe growen more milde and pleaſant, by the comming on of the ſpring, they tooke their iourney with all ſpeede and celeritie: the ſame reaſon and conſideration drew Scanderbeg likewiſe into his campe, there to deliberate with his Chieftaines, and to prouide for the ordering of his affaires, which the roughneſſe of the winter had cauſed him to deferre and put off, till the time fell out more fit and gratious to his purpoſe. This was the occaſion, that at the ſame time when both the preparations, and the comming of the enemy were noyſed in the countrie, he wasScanderbeg leauteth an armie of 7000. men againſt Debreas. with Moſes amongſt the Dibrians, wherefore he aſſembled ſpeedily, and in a ſmall time to the number of 7000. men or ſomewhat more.
            It ought not to ſeeme ſtrange, neither ſhould any man maruell, that the Chriſtians were ſo ſuddenly and readily armed and prouided, nor that they gathered an armieThe order taken by Scanderbeg for the ſudden arming of his ſubiects and ſpeedie raiſing of an armie. with ſuch incredible ſpeede and celeritie. For the King of Epyre of his owne meere and proper motion, without the deſert or merit of any mans ſeruice, had giuen the better part of his ordinarie reuenues, eſpecially of his demaines, to certaine of the greateſt and chiefeſt men of the countrie, vppon condition, that whenſoeuer there happened any neceſſitie of warre, they ſhould preſently find him a certaine number of men at their coſtes and charges, according to ech mans ſtate and qualitie: with whom, themſelues alſo in perſon ſhould make their ſpeedie repayre vnto him, and ſo to receiue ſuch directions, and to be employed in ſuch ſeruices, as it ſhould pleaſe him to commaund and appoint. Theſe men therefore were alwaies readie in armes, and well appointed, expecting nothing but the will and pleaſure of their Chiefetaine. Beſides there was a certaine number of the inhabitants, and eſpecially of the husbandmen, who by a certaine vſage and cuſtome of the countrie, were bound to accompanie them whereſoeuer they marched without anie conſideration of pay or wages: and commonly, the onely deſire of prey and pillage did furniſh him with more men then he him ſelfe would haue demaunded. Hereof it appeareth, howe Scanderbeg could continually repayre ſo manie and ſo often armies, conſidering that his rents and cuſtomes were not ſo great, nor were not ſufficient for anie long time to entertaine his ſouldiers. Adde herewithall, that if neither the cuſtome of the countrie, nor their greedie deſire of prey, had not been ſuch as it was, yet the regarde of the common perill, the conſideration of their Prince his dexteritie and good fortune, might eaſily haue allured and perſwaded them, and was ſufficient to haue drawen them into armes. As for the ſtipendarie ſuccours and mercenarie ſouldiers which he hyred for his money, the chiefe burthen and importance of that charge, was borne for the moſt part by the Biſhoppes of Rome, the King of Naples, and other Catholique Chriſtian Princes, who fayled not from time to time to furniſh him with money and treaſure, which (as the ſaying is) are the ſynewes of the warres.
            
               Debreas hauing paſſed ouer the greateſt part of Bulgarie, or the countrie of the Tryballians, was gotten as farre as Pologue, which is a place and part of Bulgarie,
               Pologue. vnder the obeyſance of the great Turke, and not farre from the confines of Epyre. Hereof Caſtriot being certainely informed at full, commaunded ſpeedily to mount onScanderbeg marcheth with 6000. men againſt Debreas horſe backe, chooſing out of all the companie ſixe thouſand horſe: for the matter requiring ſo great haſte, he could not conueniently vſe the ayde of his footemen.

The reſidue he ſent away with the olde garriſon of Moſes, hauing firſt taken order for ſuch thinges as ſeemed neceſſarie: but before hee beganne to march with his troupes he had ſent the Dybrian with tenne horſemen to take notice, and to diſcouer the comming and purpoſe of the enemie. The reſt of the ſquadrons followed after fayre and eaſily. The Generall of the Turkes was encamped in theThe deſcription of the countrie about Pologue. Scopia a chiefe towne in Macedonie. fieldes of Pologue, tarrying for the breaking of the day. The plaine was bounded on the one ſide with the mountaine of Mocrea, on the other ſide with the towne of Scopia (which was belonging to the Turkes) and it was encloſed likewiſe with two other mountaines of a notable height called by a generall name, the mountaines of Pologue. Moſes had good leaſure to ſuruey all things (for the Moone being at full, did ſhine verie bright) and he brought backe certaine and perfect notice of euerie thing to the generall of the Chriſtians, who taking the aduantage of this ſingular benefite of the night, commaunded his companies to haſten their pace. They were no ſooner departed from Mocrea, and ſcarce entred within the plaine, but the heauens were ſuddenly chaunged euen in an inſtant: and at the firſt there fell a ſweete ſhower, which did but gently wet the battallions, but theArmy of Scanderbeg ſtriken with feare by the terror of a ſudden tempeſt raine encreaſing by litle and litle, there followed a great tempeſt of thunder and lightning with a mightie ſtorme and violent windes. Hereupon did the Enſignes make a ſtande, and a certaine horror and feare beganne to poſſeſſe the companies: in ſuch ſort, that they ſtoode gazing one vppon another verie ſad and penſiue, as if ſome ſiniſter token and preſage of ill fortune had befallen them. Scanderbeg making but a ieſt of this their timerouſneſſe and vaine feare, went to the head of the battell and puſhed forward the Standard-bearer with his hand, telling him, that he was but an ill prognoſticator vnto himſelfe: and he ſaide with a loud voice: that it behoued them vponSpeech of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers encouraging them not to be amazed at the tempeſt. ſuch an opportunitie to take the aduantage of the time, and to charge the enemie: that this was no other but the caſualtie and inconſtancie of the ſpring time, and new ſeaſon of the yeare, namely of the moneth of March: and that before they ſhould be able to come to handie-ſtroakes with the enemie, they ſhould ſee the ayre would waxe cleare, and as calme and pleaſant as before. Whereupon the ſouldiers being recomforted, and interpreting it to be a ſigne of their owne good fortune, they did both mutually encourage one another, and they put their leaders likewiſe in a better hope and comfort. By this time the weather being cleared (as Scanderbeg had foretolde) the brightneſſe of the moone-light encreaſing with her courſe, and the neereneſſe of their troupes did now diſcouer the approach of the Albanois, which haſtened on eche mans fortune eyther good or bad. The enemie at the firſt being aſtoniſhed and vnreſolued, ſtoode a while in ſuſpence, whether they ſhould fight, or flie: or whether it were beſt to temporize. The darkeneſſe of the night did much augment their terrour, and the audacitie of the Chriſtians whom they ſawe to be aduaunced ſo farre without their confines and from their owne dwellings. On the contrarie, this ſeemed to encourage them, and to encreaſe their hardineſſe, in that they knewe they were to fight not in the enemies countrie where they might be in feare of ambuſhments and ſurpriſes. But the principall point that made them to caſt awaie all feare, was the multitude and valure of their troupes, which was enough euen to make the verieſt cowards to be aſhamed to thinke of flight. Wherefore in the ende Debreas giuing a ſigne to beginne the fight, willed them to goe to the charge, and calling to minde his owne great and large promiſes made to the Ottoman, and the inſtructions giuen him, he animated his ſouldiers, and courſing vppe and downe nowe here now there, thus did he incenſe and egge them on more fiercely againſt the enemie.
            
               
               On, on, braue ſouldiers (quoth he) now is the time come that you ſhall be fullyOration of Debreas encouraging his ſouldiers to the battell. reuenged of your wrongs, and repaire the honour which heretofore we haue loſt: now may you auenge you of your impriſonment, of the loſſe of your fellowes, and your owne bloud. See how theſe Champions of the night doe haſten againſt you: ſee how they come bringing (as it were) bondes and fetters to manacle your handes. They thinke they ſhall encounter here with their courteous hoaſt Ameſe: they are perſwaded that they ſhall be fauoured by the vallies of Mocrea, and the thickets of Modriſſa, and theſe dens & ſtarting holes which are the ordinary refuges of theeues and robbers. Behold with what ſecuritie and ſuertie the battell is offered vnto you, euen in a manner at home, and at your owne doores. If your ſelues will, they cannot ſtand againſt you, neither for valure nor for number: and you can not deſire a place more fit and conuenient to fight on horſebacke. For my part either will I looſe my life together with you, and here will I reſt, if not fortunate, yet free amongſt the dead bodies of my deereſt companions, or elſe by your prowes and vertue I will ſo carrie and demeane my ſelfe, as the ſeuere iudgement of our Prince ſhall haue no cauſe to reproue vs. Goe to then my good friends, let euery man be of good courage, none did deſire this voyage ſo earneſtly as we, none did accept the iourney with more ioy and gladneſſe. If we be conquerors, none can expect greater glorie nor greater rewardes then are prepared for vs: if we be vanquiſhed, as great will be the frownes, the ſcornes and the reproofe which will be laid vpon vs.
            
            Thus ſaying he ſent forth a certaine number of ſouldiers in manner of forlorne hope, to skirmiſh with the Chriſtians, and to keepe them play, that whileſt they did ſtoppe and hinder their furie and violence, himſelfe in the meane time might take ſome ſure courſe vpon the hazard of his whole forces in the maine fight: and then afterwards by little and little he came to trie the fortune of the field. Scanderbeg on the other ſide thus ſpake vnto his men.
            
               How now my ſouldiers? what a ſhame is this? Haue they that were of late yourOration of Scanderbeg encouraging his ſouldiers to the battell againſt Debreas. priſoners taken armes now againe? Haue they the courage to oppoſe themſelues againſt you that were their maiſters? See theſe infamous reliques of the campe of Ameſe, they complaine and they cry out againſt you, that you were but bad banquetters. For it is the faſhion at great banquets, and it is the dutie of right banquetters to leaue nothing behind them: behold here I ſee other ſtore alſo of freſh and new forces with their new Generall: what other thing is it, then a newe matter and obiect of greater glorie? downe with them, ouerthrowe them as you were wont, you braue Albanois. Let not our faintneſſe and ſlothfulneſſe caſt vs out of the poſſeſſion of ou
                     •
                   wonted good fortune: let not our aduerſaries haue any occaſion to ſay by our preſent misfortune, that it was Modriſſa, and the vallies of Mocrea, and not we that did of late vanquiſh them: let the plaine and open fieldes, giue plaine and apparant proofe of your valiant hearts and vndaunted valure.
            
            In this manner admoniſhing and encouraging his companies, he tooke eſpeciall care that his ſouldiers ſhould keepe themſelues firme in good 
                  •
               rray and order of battell, to the intent the ranckes might not be confounded and intermingled, but mightThe battell of Pologue. be diſcerned and diſtinguiſhed from the enemie. And he had this reaſon eſpecially, for that the ſmaller number being once diſordered, might eaſily be forced and ouerthrowen by the greater. And becauſe he durſt not relie too much vpon the ſtrength of thoſe looſe troupes which he had made out to encounter and to beginne the fight with the Barbarians: he cauſed Moſes and Ameſe with a ſtrong ſquadron of choſen men, to make head againſt the enemie which was comming to giue the onſet vpon him: doubting leaſt if at the beginning of the battell they in the forefront ſhould happen

to be repulſed, both his owne people might be the more troubled and terrified, and the enemie the better hartened and encouraged. As for the reſt of his ſquadrons, he kept them cloſe and excellently well ordered in great ſilence. In like caſe, the Infidell either doubting the obscuritie of the night, or conforming his counſels to the renour and demeanour of the Chriſtians, ſtirred not at all: but with his battell cloſe arraunged and in good array, he held himſelfe quiet as a beholder of the fight. Thus the conflict betweene the vauntcurrours on the one ſide and the other did ſeeme to repreſent (as it were) a pleaſant combat: and the two armies on both partes did carefully attend in great doubt the euent and hazard of the battell, which it behoued them ſhortly to vndertake. But the Dibrian did ſoone cut off this ſpectacle and their expectation: for like a violent ſtorme ruſhing in vpon the middeſt of them that fought, withMoſes putteth to flight the Turkes that began the flight. the deſtruction and ſlaughter of a great many, he did eaſily put the reſt to flight, and with the exceeding vehemencie of his furie, hauing forgotten himſelfe, he had without all doubt purſued them euen into the middeſt of their maine battallion, if that Ameſe calling backe his ſouldiers had not refrayned his furie, and with good words as well as deedes had not cauſed him to retire their enſignes.
            Certaine it is and not to be denied: that Moſes was a braue man, hardie and valiantMoſes his immoderate fury in the heat of fight. of his perſon, and a moſt excellent Captaine fit to haue the commaund of any forces: yet when he was once embrued with the blood of his enemies, and that (as the ſaying is) his blood was once hot: his impatiencie did ſo maſter him, that he was not able
                  Speech of Scanderbeg to Moſes reprehending his ouermuch hardines. any longer to rule and moderate himſelfe. Wherefore it is reported that Scanderbeg did ſharply reprehend him: admoniſhing him to temper his hardineſſe and audacitie with more moderation and modeſtie, and to vſe his victorie more aduiſedly: that well it might be tolerable in a priuate ſouldier to be ſo audacious and hardie: but in a leader which hath the charge and commaund of men, it is a fault no leſſe pernitious then reproueable, and a very bad preſident and ill enſample.
            
            But the rare qualities and excellent deſerts of this worthie perſonage do inuite me, by the way to touch a word or two concerning his originall. This Moſes (who wasMoſes his originall & deſcent or pedegree. called the Dibrian) by reaſon that he dwelt, and did poſſeſſe a goodly and large territorie and inheritance amongeſt the Dibrians, by another ſurname was called Goleme Ariamnites by nation an Epirot: deſcended and borne in the citie of Valmes in Epire:
               Valmes a citie in Epire. 
               Muſache being his father and Roiſlaua his mother. This Muſache had two bretheren to wit Ariamnites Goleme or Comniat father in lawe to Scanderbeg (of whom hath bene before entreated.) And Vladienne Goleme de Ariamnites, who begot Muſache, ſurnamed Goleme de Ariamnit: otherwiſe Muſache de Angeline, ſo called by reaſon of his mother the ſiſter of Scanderbeg: and thus much brieflie for the diſcent of Moſes. But to our purpoſe.
            The reſt of the troupes Albanois ſtood a while at a ſtay, and without mouing eitheir forward or backward, admiring the extreme hardines of the Chieftaine. But on the contrary, the enemies were ſtriken with an exceeding feare, and began thereupon to conceiue a certaine and generall reſolution to fly away, and to leaue fighting: notwithſtanding thinking that the Chriſtians by reaſon of the darkneſſe of the night would not ſtirre any farther, nor enterprize any thing, but deferre the maine fight till the break of the day, they ſtirred not at all, but held good & ſtood firme for a while, & the rather for that beſides the ſhame and ignominie, they iudged that their flight in the vncertaintie of the darke would be farre more perilous and full of hazard. Likewiſe the Albanois was not a little perplexed in his thoughts, but had diuerſe imaginations in his minde: being in doubt whether he ſhould attend the day-light or elſe ſhould preſſe forward this his good fortune, which to men of warre, is very light and

inconſtant. For herein he found him ſelfe deceiued of his hope, in that he thought to haue ſurprized them at vnwares, and found them out of order, as he had of late ouertaken the Amezans: & yet for all that, ſeeing he had ouerthrown and beaten backe their firſt troupes, he was in hope that they would not abide him but be gone, and ſo purſuing them at their backes, he might obtaine the victorie without any loſſe or bloodſhed of his owne men. Now therefore when he perceiued them to ſet a good countenance on the matter, and yet neuertheleſſe to be (as it were) in a mammering, and readie to turne their backs: without any more delay, he ſounded a charge & gaue the onſet vpon them moſt furiouſly both before and behind: ſaying vnto his ſouldiers.Speech of Scanderbeg encouraging his ſouldiers to giue the charge vpon Debreas.
            
            
               Come on (my friends) let vs vſe the victorie whileſt theſe fellowes are thus amazed, and whileſt their wounds are yet freſh and bleeding: let vs preuent the enemie of their flight, which they are now deuiſing and debating, how to take their moſt aduantage, and how to get away free and ſafe out of our ſight.
            
            
               Debreas his troups endured the ſhocke at the firſt verie coldly: which made him to repaire to their fore ranckes, where he animated & exhorted them to behaue them ſelues manfully and to ſtand firme both with good words, and by the example of his owne vertue and valour: inſomuch that now they began to receiue the Chriſtians to the encounter with a good reſolution, & made them to hold bridle, & ſtopped them in their pace. But whileſt they were thus combatting together, and that ech of the armies were in doubt to be confounded and entangled one within another, the fight as yet was not verie mortall, till ſuch time as one of the Muſaches was ſent with part of the horſemen from the left wing to charge the enemie vpon that ſide, where firſt of all their rankes beganne to breake and be diſordered. Scanderbeg preſſing continually vpon them in the forefront, did beate vp and downe the preſſe hauing a vehement deſire to encounter with the Generall of the Turkes, and he had enioyned ſome ofPolicie of Scanderbeg in battell to ayme at the deſtruction of the Generall of his enemies. Saying of Scanderbeg touching the cutting off of the Generall of the enemies. his people with promiſes of good rewardes to carie a good eye vpon Debreas. The report is, that it was a propertie peculiar and vſuall with him in all battels & encounters, to lay the firſt and principall plot of his victory againſt his enemies by giuing the onſet vpon their Generall, and by his death and deſtruction: for he was wont commonly to ſay, That the head was firſt to be cut off, and then that the reſt of the bodie would tumble after it all alone: that he knew not any kind of creature in the whole world, which could ſuruiue after the head thereof was once taken away.
            
            But the braue and ſudden charge giuen by Muſache, did ſomewhat hinder the purpoſe of Scanderbeg, for that Debreas leauing the head of the battell where he as then kept, did ſuddenly make towardes that ſide: that repulſing the enemie and redreſſing the rankes againe in good order which Muſache had diſordered, he might cauſe them to temporize yet a while, and to beare off the violence of their enemies, till ſuch time as it grew to be day. The ſouldiers in the vauntgard no ſooner perceiued their Generall to be abſent, but they beganne preſently to waxe more faint and flacke in fighting, ſuffering themſelues with little violence to be beaten backe euen into the middeſt of their other battallions. Moſes, to the intent he might winne honour by ſo glorious an action, brake in verie furiouſly amongſt the thickeſt of them,A hardie act of Moſes. and ſnatching an Enſigne out of the handes of one of the Barbarians, he throwe it to his cōpanions that followed him. This accident made them to redouble their fierceneſſe againſt the enemie, and did with a kinde of iealouzie ſo incenſe and ſet ſpurres to their courages, that they came trouping thither on all ſides as men that brauely deſpiſed all daunger, and feare of death. Then beganne the ſlaughter and chiefeſt feare amongſt the Infidels: then might you haue ſeene many a Moſes: then might you haue ſeene how the Turkes by heapes and companies forſooke and loſt their Standardes:

There was no more queſtion or contention who ſhould keepe the fielde: but euerie man thought it beſt to ſhift for himſelfe by running away. The miſfortune that followed Debreas made him forgetfull of all good diſcipline and martiall order, and depriued him of all good counſell. For without all delay (as a man diſtracted with furie and feare) he came poaſting thitherwards: where, as he was carefully buſied in rallying of his ſquadrons, and ſeeking to renue the battell: Scanderbeg who had euer caried an eye towardes him, came vpon him, and with his launce in the reſt charged him, and with the point thereof ran him cleane through a litle aboue the breſt euenDebreas ſlaine by Scanderbeg. vnder the chinne: and he endeuoring to auoide the blowe by bending aſide his head, receiued the ſtaffe wholly into his bodie: and he made an end both of his life and of this battell. Being fallen from his horſe his people couered him with their bodies, as long as they thought him to be liuing, ſtill looking that he ſhould remount againe to horſebacke: but perceiuing his bodie lie dead without a ſoule, and that there was not now any man left which could vpbraid them for flying away: they turned bridle immediately, and abandoned ſpeedily both their ſtandardes, their cariages, theirVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt the armie of Debreas. companions and their enemies: and they held him to be moſt accurſed, that in flying was the hindermoſt. Thoſe ſouldiours that ſerued vnder Ameſe in the laſt iorney at Modriſſa, hauing ſtill in mind that aduenture, as they fought verie warily and carefull of their liues: ſo were they the foremoſt and moſt fortunate in their flight: the which being made more certaine by reaſon of the day-light, ſo was it the more cruell and cauſed the greater bloodſhed and ſlaughter. For Muſache on the one ſide, and Moſes on the other purſuing and preſſing cloſe vpon them at their heeles, did kill and cut off more of them in the chaſe, then were ſlaine in the field during the fight: and ſome of them alſo were taken aliue. Much more large and ample no doubt had this victorie bene, at leaſt in reſpect of them which were wounded, if the Chriſtians had bene ſeconded with any Archers or Harguebuzziers: but more then their launces, targets, and courtlaxes they had no other weapons to vſe vpon the enemie. At the length when they were gotten a good way within the Turkiſh confines, and that the chaſe now ſeemed to be more dangerous to them that followed, then to thoſe whichSentence. fled, Scanderbeg left purſuing of them, and gathered together his troupes, who were maruellouſly glad and ioyfull: and ſo he retired with his priſoners without any loſſeNumber of Turkes ſtaine in the battell of Pologue Victory not bought but giuen to the Chriſtians. or dammage, hauing not any one of his men either ſlaine or wounded. Thus you ſee by the ſtrange ſucceſſe of this battell, how fortune diſpoſeth of the purpoſes of men, and doth ſometimes fauour them beyond all reaſon and conſideration. The Turkes loſt 4120 men: and therefore the Chriſtians might well ſay (as they might vſually) that this victorie was not bought but giuen.
            The bootie by order of the Prince, being brought forth in the common and open ſight of them all was equally deuided amongeſt the ſouldiers: to the intent that they which had continued the furie of the fight, by following the chaſe vpon the enemie,Debreas his horſe and armour giuen to Moſes by Scanderbeg in honour of his valure & vertue. without any care of ſacking their campe, or ſpoiling of the dead, might not ſuſtaine any loſſe or diſaduantage. To Moſes he gaue with his owne hand the horſe and armour of Debreas, with an honourable teſtimonie likewiſe of his great deſertes and commendations. As for the reſt, euerie one had a ſhare, and fared the better for this iorney, and ſome of them had priſoners giuen vnto them. Amongſt others, Muſache his fortune was, to haue a yong Turke to his priſoner, whoſe phyſiognomy and good countenance ſhewed him to be both of nobilitie and of courage. But betweene the maſter and the priſoner, there aroſe forthwith a pleaſant controuerſie, which gaue occaſion of laughter to all the ſtanders by, and I will impart the ſame vnto you. The young man hauing ſome ſpeech with Muſache concerning his ranſome, demaunded

of him, what ſumme would content him: in the end they agreed vpon 200. crownes,A pleaſaunt queſtion betweene Muſache and a Turke his priſoner. which the Turke preſently taking out of a litle bagge payed, and told out vnto him: and afterwardes deſiring leaue to depart, the Epirot began to ſmile: telling him, that he muſt ſeeke elſewhere for ſome other money to make vp his ranſome: that it was no reaſon he ſhould thinke to pay him with his owne money: that all that coine, and what elſe ſoeuer was taken with him, did of right belong vnto him, and was in one and the ſame caſe and condition with his bodie, and that a priſoner taken in the war, could not reſerue nor chalenge any thing as his owne. The Turke ſometimes with reaſons, and ſometimes with entreatie deſired him to let him goe. But (to make ſhort) the matter was brought before Scanderbeg, who purpoſely commanded both the one and the other of them to alledge what they could in defence of their right: and afterwards turning him to his people, he vſed theſe wordes.
            Truely (ſaid he) here is a pretie controuerſie, both of theſe plead for that whichSpeech of Scanderbeg deciding a controuerſie betweene Muſache & the Turke his priſoner 
               is mine: the money Muſache which we knew not of, we did not beſtow vpon thee: nor you (ſir youth) ought not to abuſe vs with this wile, who doe well know, that euen the life wherewith thou breatheſt, is but borrowed, and dependeth on our mercie: ſo farre is it that thou canſt pretend any right to be reſerued to thy ſelfe in anie thing. Notwithſtanding there is no reaſon that I ſhould be iudge in mine owne cauſe: but who will not iudge rightly in a matter of libertie? and who will not ſet aſide all rigour and rightes of warre in fauor of a priſoner? To thee therefore Muſache, we giue of our owne free motion all that this priſoner hath about him: and do thou as franckly and freely giue him his libertie: or rather, the dutie of nature, on this condition, that if euer hereafter he fall againe into thy hand, thou ſhalt diſpoſe of him fully and freely at thine owne pleaſure and diſcretion.
            Thus this young Turke being verie glad and exceeding ioyfull, that he had gotten his libertie: and hauing alſo both his horſe and his armes franckly giuen him by Scanderbeg, departed, highly commending without ceaſing, this his bountie and liberalitie, praying vnto God hartily to proſper both the King and the eſtate of Albanie. The Chriſtians truſſing vp their baggage, towardes the euening did retire thence into Dibria, where during the time of their aboad, (as it is commonly ſeene that when any enterpriſe ſucceedeth happily vnto men, it lifteth vp their minds to affectSentence. greater matters,) the Albanois beganne to make a motion in a generall councell touching their proceeding in the warres, and for the aſſaulting and winning of ſome townes from the enemie. But in the end it was concluded for the beſt and moſt expedient, that they ſhould ſtay a while to ſee what the Turkiſh Monarch would do after this diſcomfiture of his forces, leaſt they ſhould happen incontinently to vndertake an action, either with too much haſtineſſe & temeritie, or more dangerous then would eaſily be effected. Two monethes therefore were limitted for the diſcouering of that matter, and there were eſpials diſperſed throughout all partes: notwithſtanding that there was no want of fugitiues both from Andrinople and other places, which came daily to yeelde themſelues to the Albanois. Theſe things thus paſſed, Moſes retyred himſelfe to his garriſon vpon the frontiers: and Scanderbeg with Ameſe and the reſt of his Princes and Nobles, tooke his iourney towards Croy.
            
            In this meane time, the army of the Barbarians which had bene broken and ouerthrowen,Mahomet and his Nobles greatly troubled and vexed at the diſcomfiture of Debreas. was returned and come to the preſence of Mahomet, who though he ſaw them in a moſt miſerable plight, and diſtreſſed in all reſpects, yet tooke no pittie nor compaſſion of their eſtate. For firſt of all, both the Sultan and all the great perſons of his Court, were greatly troubled and agreeued at the flight of ſo many ſufficient and able men, ſaying openly and aloud, that they were people enough to haue reſtored

the fortune of any battell, had it bene neuer ſo deſperate and out of hope. Afterwards, when as the great Turke came to enquire of the particulars, where and in what place the battell had bene fought, and againſt what troupes and numbers of the enemie: then was he much more enflamed with rage and choller then before, commaunding them out of his ſight, reproaching and blaming them vnceſſantly, and exclaming againſt and deteſting their faintneſſe, ſloth, and cowardice. Moreouer, the miſfortune and miſhappe of Debreas cauſed thoſe of his condition and calling, rather to be glad then to grieue thereat: were it either becauſe they did enuie the reputation of his valour and vertue: or that they did hate his audacious preſumption. Mahomet himſelfe was exceedingly abaſhed at the ſucceſſe of this miracle, and was not altogether free and exempted from feare. He could not be perſwaded that Scanderbeg with ſo ſmall a companie, durſt enterprize to enter ſo farre vpon his frontiers, and euen in the open plaines of Pologue to encounter with Debreas. Notwithſtanding finding that their teſtimonies did agree in all parts, and that there was no difference nor diſagreement in their tales; he durſt not call in queſtion the truth of their reportes. Touching the principall point, which was, how to be reuenged: he wanted not flatterers of all ſorts,Sentence. 
               (an ordinarie plague attending great Princes, and which doeth puffe them vp with vanitie) who by a certaine reprochfull and artificiall interpretation, did obſcure andSpetches and perſwaſions of Mahomet his flatterers animating▪ him againſt Scanderbeg 
               detract from the honor and deſerts of the Chriſtians, offering both their perſons and their liues to ſerue againſt them, and vndertaking and promiſing, that they would ouerreach and goe beyond the Epirot, were he neuer ſo cunning and well practiſed in ſleights & policies: that euerie place was not as Modriſſa: that the ſtarres would not fauour him in all places: that he ſhould not find euerie one to be an Ameſe, nor a Debreas, eſpecially when that Scanderbeg ſhould ſee himſelfe beſet and aſſailed with ſuch a troubleſome Hydra hauing ſo many heades: and that of eche one which was cut off and ouercome, there ſhould ſtill ariſe another monſter who would neuer ceaſe to ſeeke to deuoure him. And were it that he were (as a man may ſay) euen in the armes of his Ieſus: yet ſhould he not be alwaies in ſafetie and ſecuritie.
            
            
               Mahomet did gladly giue care to the good affection of his people, and he wouldMahomet deuiſeth to corrupt ſome of Scanderbeg his ſubiects. not openly gaineſay nor contradict any one of them, that offered themſelues ſo willingly to theſe daungers: but the craftie Foxe had another matter hammering in his head: his braines were beating and deuiſing vpon another kinde of reuenge, which might be wrought with leſſe bloodſhed & loſſe of his people: namely, how he might oppreſſe and confound this his aduerſarie by ſome ciuill and domeſticall warre, and by ſtirring vp againſt him the armes and ambuſhments of ſome of his owne ſubiects. For he knew, that where force of armes would not preuaile, there policie and otherSentence. 
               ſleights of warre ought to ſupply their defects. A courſe which he himſelfe had oftentimes put in practiſe with happie and good ſucceſſe againſt many others, by following the tract which his father Amurath had troden before him, at ſuch time as he impatronized himſelfe vpon the empire of Greece. And (ſuch are the ticklings and enticementes of mens deſires, eſpecially when they ſeeke for Empires and dominions) he eaſily promiſed vnto himſelfe and was perſwaded, that he ſhould find ſome of the moſt inward and familiar friends of Scanderbeg, who would be wrought and allured to be the authors and executioners of his wicked practiſe: wherein he was not altogether deceiued.
            At that time there were many about Scanderbeg who were of great account and authority with him, both in the adminiſtration of the eſtate, as alſo in the warres. But as Moſes did excell them all in the practiſe and experience of armes, ſo was he in the higheſt degree of fauour and reputation with his Prince: and Scanderbeg loued

and eſteemed him aboue all the reſt. This made the Ottoman to haue a deſire to practiſeMahomet ſeeketh to vndermine the faith of Moſes. and worke with this perſonage, and by the greatneſſe of his faire and large promiſes, to make a conqueſt of the fortreſſe of his conſtancie, faith and loialtie. One thing there was which he did hope would greatly further the conuciance of this matter: and that was, becauſe it was told him, that the lands and poſſeſſions of Moſes did bound and butte vpon his confines, eſpecially towards Sfetigrade: ſuppoſing that this neare neighbourhood would giue him the more eaſie and readie acceſſe to haue ſome ſpeech and conference with him: and that the whole matter might be handled the more conueniently and the more ſecretly. Wherefore touching any further prouiſions to be made for the wars, and to thoſe vaine offers & vaunts made by his Courtiers: he faigned that vpon ſome good conſiderations he would deferre the reuenge of his wrongs and outrages in Epire, till another time and ſeaſon, and then hauing communicated this ſecret with one or two of his moſt priuate and faithfull Councellours, he wrote vnto the Gouernour of Sfetigrade in a moſt cunning and ſubtile manner, and the ſaying is, that he did the like to the Gouernour of Alchria. But it is not much materiall whether he writ to them both or not: yet I beleeue, that this web was weaued and this practiſe was begunne, continued and ended in one of thoſe places onely: neither was it wrought for all that without great daunger and difficultie: and the reaſon which maketh me to thinke ſo, is the qualitie of the caſe, and alſo for that the letters ſent to Alchria (if there were any) did neuer ſort to any purpoſe and effect.
            The Gouernour of Sfetigrade hauing receiued the letters which were ſent vnto him, did peruſe them verie ſecretly, and he had a great deſire to execute the commandement of his ſoueraigne as effectually as he might: for that by the accompliſhing of his will and pleaſure, he was ſure to become great, and to be highly rewarded. The ſubſtance of the letters in regard of Moſes was to this effect: That he ſhould dealeLetters of Mahomet to the gouernor of Sfetigrade willing him to practiſe with Moſes to reuolt from Scanderbeg. with him in the name of Mahomet, and to put it to his choiſe, whether he would accept of money, or elſe haue preferment and aduancement of eſtate and liuings, eyther with the Turkes in the court of the Emperour, or (if he had rather) in the realme of Albanie, vpon this condition: That he ſhould make away Scanderbeg, or by ſome meanes cauſe him to be made away: or at the leaſt by leauing of his ſeruice to follow the armes and partie of Ottoman. Many other good ſpeeches were added in the letters fit to perſwade and induce him thereunto, by which it was eaſie to be diſcerned what was further to be done in the matter: albeit there was not any mention at all made of Moſes. And it was referred to the power and diſcretion of the gouernour to deale as the time and the place ſhould giue him opportunitie, and as he ſhould iudge to be moſt for the profit and dignitie of his maieſtie. The Barbarian forgot nothing of that was enioyned him, but vſed ſingular dexteritie, diligence, and diſcretion in inuiting Moſes to conferre with him. And the better to attaine thereunto, he imparted this matter to a Chriſtian one of his owne houſhold ſeruants, and by Nation an Albanois: putting him in hope, that it ſhould be the meane to enrich both him and his houſe for euer, if he could bring the Dibrian to this point to haue ſome ſpeech and conference with him. This fellow therefore did the gouernour ſend towards Moſes. The night ſeemed to be the fitteſt time for the effecting of this matter, during theA meſſenger ſent to Moſes from the Gouernour of Sfetigrade to practiſe with him for his reuolt. which, this Epyrot taking his iorney, and being skilfull of all the places and paſſages of the countrie, he neuer loſt his way, but came directly to the place where he found Moſes with his garriſon in the frontiers of the Prouince. The Dibrian preſently vpon the comming of this meſſenger from the enemie, gaue him conuenient opportunitie to ſpeake vnto him, and withdrew him apart from all other companie; who

before that he came to breake with him any thing touching his meſſage or the cauſe of his comming, at the very firſt entreated him to take the paines to come to Sfetygrade. Whereupon ſeeing him to refuſe ſo to doe, and that he did in a manner laugh at the impudency of the Infidels, he changed his courſe, and falling to flattering, and faire ſpeeches, he made him attentiue to his talke: then entring into the matter, he diſcouered to him in ſome ſort the intention and minde of the Sultan. Moſes gladly gaue eare vnto him, and with a wonderfull liking (ſuch is the variety of men eſpecially of them that follow armes) he ſwallowed vp the cunning the cloſe bait of his own praiſes: namely, when the meſſenger told him, that the great Turke did ſo highly honor and eſteeme of him, that he thought him only of all the flower of Epire, worthy to be ſollicited both by letters and by ſpeeches. Reaſon would he ſhould rather haue bluſhed for ſhame, to ſee him ſelfe only amongſt ſo many others (as a man forlorne & of a deſperate hope) to be choſen and ſelected as a fit inſtrument and occaſion of ſo deteſtable and felonious an act, and of a crime ſo hatefull, vile & trecherous. But ſuch is our corrupt deſire of earthly honors, and ſo ambitious are our thoughts, aſpiring to glory andSentence. Empire, that it maketh vs altogether to forget our ſelues and our dueties. Neuertheleſſe for that time did Moſes ſhew him ſelfe both by his ſpeaches, and by his countenance to be ſuch a one, that the ſubtill meſſenger could not tell what to make of him, or whether he did approue or reproue that which had beene propounded vnto him. Yet did this miniſter of Sathan ſufficiently coniecture of the meaning and thoughtes of the man, and therefore not detayning him with any further diſcourſe, but promiſing to returne vnto him againe ſhortly, he tooke his leaue and returned to the Gouernour. It is commonly reported, that when Moſes was demanded by ſome of his ſouldiers, what communication had paſſed betweene them, he anſwered, that it was a ſpy of the partes neare about Sfetigrade, which came to giue him certain aduertiſements, and that he was in good hope by his aide and aſſiſtance to doe the king good ſeruice and greatly to further his attempts & purpoſes. The ſouldiers did eaſily beleeue what he ſaied, as not miſtruſting any thing. Beſides that, the habit and attire, and the ſpeach of the meſſenger being a Chriſtian did ſeeme to perſwade and import no leſſe. And what reaſon had they but to credit Moſes, whoſe faith and fidelity had bene ſo notably knowen and teſtified, and into whoſe handes the whole eſtate of his Prince had bene ſo often put and committed? eſpecially in the warre of Dayna, when that Muſtapha on the one ſide, and the Venetians on the other ſide, did ſeeke to haue gotten the eſtate of Epire from him? Notwithſtanding the Dibrian was noted euer afterwardes to be very ſad and penſiue, more then he was wont or vſually accuſtomed: which proceeded (as I ſuppoſe) of the remorſe of conſcience that ſeemed to touch him with a deepe conſideration of the fact, being ſo weighty, difficult, and important. He was mightely diſtracted and perplexed in his mind, ſomtimes his heart was touched with the thoughts and remembrance of the curteſie and humanity of his prince, who deſerued no ſuch vnkinde and wicked part, and with the greatneſſe of the authority & preheminence which he had about Scanderbeg, wherwith any other beſides him would haue held him ſelfe highly contented, ſometimes againe he conſidered the exceſsiue greatneſſe and rewardes offered him by Mahomet, eſpecially the crowne and ſcepter preſented vnto him, a thing ſo much deſired and affected of miſerable mortal men, and ſo ſweete a thing doethe thinke it to ſit aloft, and to be preferred aboue other men. ButSentence. in the middeſt of theſe 
                     ••••
                   meditations, and in this variety of his thoughtes and cogitations, he did with great deuotion attend the returne of his eſpiall: a manifeſt argument that his heart was corrupted. O moſt impious and wicked ears, that could ſo eaſily be drawen and allured to hearken ſo long vnto ſo miſchieuous a meſſage! O moſt

ingrate and vnthankfull Moſes, whoſe inconſtancy could cauſe thee to violat thy faith and loyalty, and to conſpire againſt thy country, againſt thy Prince, againſt thy frends and companions, againſt thy religion, againſt thy owne dignity and honor, & againſt the ſecurity of thy own eſtate, vpon a vaine hope of ſome idle conceited good hap, and of a thing meerely doubtfull and vncertaine?
            Whileſt the Dibrian did remaine thus perplexed & turmoiled with the vncertainty of his owne thoughts, behold our gentle meſſenger is againe returned, plentifully furniſhed and prouided, not onely with words farre more ſweete and plauſible, but withMoſes peruerted and corrupted to become a traitour to Scanderbeg. rich giftes and ſumptuous preſents: yet I doe not finde that Moſes did accept of any of them, but that onely his mind was now throughly poſſeſſed with a diſpoſition enclining to infidelity and treaſon. Notwithſtanding the aunſwere which he made to the meſſenger, did ſufficiently diſcouer the malady of his minde: for he willed him toSpeeche of Moſes to the Turkiſh meſſenger. come no more into his preſence, that he did moſt humbly thanke the Sultan for his great fauour, and good will, and promiſed him ſo to cary and demeane himſelfe, that from thenceforward he ſhould not find him to be his enemy. Thus whileſt that Scanderbeg being ignoraunt of the counſels of Mahomet, doth ſend abroad eſpials on all ſides, to ſound and ſearch out his determinations, the Infidelles are plotting and deuiſing how to worke him a greater miſchiefe, and to ouerwhelme him with a daunger farre more pernicious.
            It hath bene before touched, how that both Scanderbeg and his ſubiects, did delayScanderbeg determineth to haue the aide of Italians in the warres. and put off the warre, and the beſieging of townes for a ſeaſon, to a time then prefixed and appointed: which being now expired, and no newes of any motions or tumults heard of from Andrinople, but that all things were in good reſt and quietneſſe; the king of Albany bethought and deuiſed with him ſelfe what expedition were beſt to be vndertaken, and what things were requiſite to haue it well and orderly executed. To this end he was reſolued (if he might) to aide him ſelfe with the ſuccours of the Italians, conſidering, that though his ſubiects were excellent in fighting of maine battels, and in combatting hand to hand in the plaine field: yet did he not thinke them to be fitte or ſufficient for the aſſaulting of holdes, and the forcing of townes, and ſuch like ſeruices. Alphonſus King of Sicily and Naples (of whom mention hath beene often made) did keepe his Court continually at Naples, which was not farre diſtant from thence. And for as much as not onely Scanderbeg, but in a manner all Chriſtendome, did vſe this Prince with a kind of familiarity, he tooke care to vſe the helpe of no other, but of him onely; aſſuring him ſelfe, that of all the Princes and Potentates Chriſtian, he ſhould not finde any more willing nor more ready to aide and aſsiſt him. For this cauſe before hee would proclaime any leauy or muſter of men within his Prouince, he cauſed two good and ſtrong ſhippes to be rigged, trimmed, and made ready: which being richly furniſhed and fraughted with many excellent and ſumptuous preſentes, he ſent with two of the greateſt and nobleſt perſons of his kingdome vnto Alphonſus with letters written in moſt familiar and pleaſaunt manner. Some afffrme, that becauſe hee would finde him the more ready to ſend him ſuccours, he did require Alphonſus by this Ambaſſade, to receiue him into his ſafegard and protection: but the Epiſtle enſuing ſpeaketh not a word of any ſuch matter, neither doe I dare to auerre it for trueth. The tenour of thoſe letters were as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     To the moſt noble and victorious Prince Alphonſus king of Arragon, Naples, and Sicilie: Scanderbeg king of the Epirots ſendeth health and proſperity.
                  
                  Our ſouldiours (moſt Catholique King) know how to fight with men onely in

the field: but for the aſſaulting of walles and holdes, they are vtterly ignorant. YouLetters of Scanderbeg to Alphonſus king of Naples &c. 
                     Italians (as I heare) are very skillfull in that kinde of ſeruice, and you loue it well: this is the cauſe that wee at this time haue neede of your good aide, which we deſire you to impart vnto vs. The Infidelles are poſſeſſed of certaine of our townes in Epire: and I haue for a long time had a ſingular deſire to plucke this thorne (if God be ſo pleaſed) out of my foote, but the continuall impedimentes and hinderaunces of the warres, hauing euer withheld me, I haue not bene able to this day to bring it to any good paſſe. Wherefore to the intent I might accompliſh my deſire, I haue made choiſe of this oportunity: being moſt fit both in regard of the ſeaſon now preſent, as alſo of the ley ſure and reſt which Mahomet hath permitted vs, whoſe fury we haue now repreſſed in two ſeuerall combattes and battelles. You may geſſe by few wordes what it is that we haue neede of, all other things are in a readineſſe, onely we ſtay for ſuccours and aide from you, which (if it ſhall pleaſe your Maieſty) you may ſend vnto vs: namely Harguebuſhiers and Croſſebowes, ſuch as are skilfull to fight aloofe, and to trouble the enemy a farre off: for of other ſouldiours, our dominions are ſufficiently well furniſhed. But ô how happy may I account Naples and Sicily which are gouerned by ſuch a king as my Alphonſus, from whence as out of a treaſury, a man may haue choiſe of all preſidentes and examples of vertue. If we haue neede of your people either in peace or in war: both our eſtate hath bene furthered by your lawes, and our warres haue bene maintained by your armes. For my part, I doe ſo highly eſteeme of your loue and good will, and the memory of your exceeding great benefits doth remaine ſo ſacred & inuiolable in my mind, that many times I wiſh (though perhaps therein I ouerſhoot my ſelfe) that your fortune and eſtate were ſuch, as you might haue occaſion to try and proue, rather then to purchaſe and tie your friends vnto you. For ſo ſhould I be able by ſome certaine and euident proofe to teſtifie my deuotion and ready ſeruice, and the entire affections of my vnfained loue towards you.
               
            
            The Ambaſſadors hauing had their diſpatch with theſe letters, Scanderbeg made aScanderbeg viſiteth his garriſon with Moſes iourney into Dibria, where the garriſon then lay, and had in his company Ameſe his nephew, Muſache his brother in law, and ſome other of his Lordes and nobles, with whom he purpoſed there to conſult vpon the eſtate of his affaires, and to take ſome order for the leauying of an army. Being arriued there, he demanded of Moſes, whether he had learned any newes that concerned the eſtate, being ſo neare and continuall a neighbour to the enemy? His aunſwer was: That he heard of none, but (quoth he) ISpeeches and diſſimulation of Moſes to Scanderbeg. haue had conference of late with a man of Sfetigrade, to ſee if there could be found any way or meane to get that place from the enemy, but he hath proteſted and ſworne vnto me with great oaths, that it is ſo carefully guarded, and ſo circumſpectly gouerned with watch and ward day and night, and it is ſo aboundantly furniſhed and prouided of al neceſſaries, that it is not poſsible by any means to obtaine it. For the Dibrian was in great feare and doubt, leaſt that Scanderbeg ſhould enterpriſe the recouery of Sfetigrade, and by that meanes he ſhould not be able to keepe his promiſe made to the Sultan, wherefore his chiefeſt care was ſo to perſwade with Scanderbeg, that he might turne his minde wholly to the ſiege of Belgrade.
            
            
               Mahomet hauing heard what had paſſed betweene Moſes & the man of Sfetigrade, was much troubled in his minde, conſidering he had no aſſuraunce by any pledge or gage of the faith of Moſes. Notwithſtāding being then preſſed with other cares more vrgent concerning Greece, which at that time called him to armes, he ſurceaſed for a time the expedition of Epire, becauſe he could not conueniently goe thither him ſelfe in perſon, nor yet ſend any great forces ſufficient to atchieue and compaſſe a matter of that importance. On the other ſide to prouoke the enemy or rather to feede him ſtill

with light inuaſions and running Camps, he held it to be a courſe neither correſpondentMahomet wileth the gouernour of Sfetigrade to hold on his practiſe with Moſes. to his greatneſſe, nor yet for his aduantage or profite. Wherefore without any more adoe ſending other letters vnto the Gouernour, he willed him to haue in mind what he had giuen him in charge, and both commending his diligence, and ſpurring him on in his good deuoire, he encouraged him to perſeuere as he had begun, and to entertaine the Chriſtian with his wonted perſwaſions, not troubling him ſelfe with any thing elſe for that time touching the warre of Albany.
            
            Whileſt matters ſtood thus in reſt and quietneſſe, Alphonſus receiued both the AmbaſſadeSuccours ſent by Alphonſus king of Naples to Scanderbeg. and the letters of Scanderbeg very honourably, and with all ſpeed cauſed men to be leauied according as the haſt of the time would permit. There were muſtered to the number of 1000. footmen, 500. harguebuſsiers, & the reſt croſſebowes. The king would willingly haue encreaſed the number, but that the Ambaſſadours ſhewed him that thoſe would ſuffice, becauſe the places which were to be beſieged were but of a ſmal circuit and cōpaſſe: beſides that the Prouince of Epire was well ſtored with good and expert archers. Neuertheleſſe in ſtead of greater forces, they deſired him to furniſh them with certaine engines of aſſault, as artillery and barres of iron, all which were granted vnto them, and he appointed them alſo certaine Cannoniers for the ſeruice of the ordinance. The king Alphonſus alſo not contented with theſe offices of amity, did adde thereunto a great quantity of corne, and a huge ſumme of money, to defray the charge of the war, prouiding alſo two other veſſels richly furniſhed and appointed: In the which the ſouldiers being embarked vpon the Adriaticke ſea, or the gulf of Venice,
               Gilbert Ortafan a knight of Naples, ſent by Alphonſus to the aide of Scanderbeg. (where the paſſage was not aboue 60. miles ouer) he recommended them to God and to the windes. Within a while after, he ſent a new ſupply by Gilbert Ortafan a knight of great valour and experience, by whom alſo he ſent letters vnto Scanderbeg: wherein firſt he rendred him thanks for the excellent gifts and preſents which had bene ſent him. Then highly praiſing and commending him for the confidence & good opinionAnſwer of Alphonſus king of Naples to the leeters of Scanderbeg. which he had of his affaires, hee exhorted him to vſe him as his owne, and with officious tearmes of great amity, he endeuored to encreaſe that opinion in him. And withall moſt bountifully and liberally did he proffer & promiſe him, that all his beſt means ſhould be euer ready to do him pleaſure. As for the ſouldiers ſent vnto him, merely he made him this aunſwere: That the Italians were expert and very skilfull not onely in combatting with men vpon the wals of ſtrong holdes and defenced townes, but with Ladies and Gentlewomen in their priuat chambers: That the Albanois ought therefore to be carefull and to looke well vnto it, leaſt that they whom they had inuited to fight with their enemies a farre off, ſhould be found to enter combat neare home, and at hand within their owne houſes.
            
            Our Italians being caried with a good and proſperous gale of wind which blew at South, had a pleaſaunt paſſage, and in few daies arriued in Epire. The ſouldiers being ſet on ſhoare with their baggage, armes, and furniture, went preſently to Croy, whileſt the Prince of Albany was yet in Dibria about the muſtering of his ſouldiers, (which was well neare finiſhed) and watching carefully to heare, if there were newes of any new motions or ſtirrings from the partes of Turkie. All things being ready prouided and nothing left vndone that was neceſſary, he returned with his army towards Croy, there to ioyne with the Italian forces, of whoſe comming he was well aſſured, and to make prouiſion of ſome other neceſſaries requiſite for the ſeruice that was intended. Moſes was left at Dibria with the garriſon which conſiſted of 1000. horſe, and as many footemen, though Scanderbeg were very vnwilling thereunto, and would gladly haue had his company in that voiage, hauing many times inuited him to go with him to that ſeruice, and offering to appoint ſome other in his place for the keeping of the

borders: were i
                  •
                that he doubted of ſome future miſchiefe, as oftentimes the dexterityMoſes ſeeketh by excuſes to exempt himſelf from going to the ſiege of Belgrade. of our ſpirites doth cauſe vs (though we know not why nor wherefore) to foreſee things to come. Many others alſo entreated and perſwaded with him, to go with them to the ſiege of Belgrade, but he being too preciſe and ſcrupulous in his faith and promiſe vnlawfully giuen to an Infidell, did by ſhiftes and excuſes cunningly exempt himſelfe from that ſeruice, telling them that it was not conuenient, that that quarter of the countrey ſhould be left to the mercy of the Barbarian: for Belgrade being ſituated on the other ſide of the countrey, was diſtant from Dibria more then one hundred and forty miles,) and that no man could more faithfully and carefully guard his lands and poſſeſsions then him ſelfe. That if they had gone to beſiege Sfetigrade which was neare hand, he would haue borne them company: that it was not more diſcontenting to any then to him ſelfe, that he could not be at the ſiege, where he knew both himſelfe might purchaſe honour, and his ſouldiers might finde great profite and benefit: that he was of the opinion, that he ſhould haue enough to doe, and that Mahomet would not lie idle, but as ſoone as he ſhould heare that Belgrade were beſieged, he would perhaps inuade that part of the countrey, and renue the warre vpon the Albanois, purpoſely to withdraw and diuert their campe from before Belgrade. There was none but did allow of theſe his reaſons: and his trecherous counſell was generally approued of thoſe who were ignorant of the ſecret thoughtes of his heart. In ſo much as he had authority giuen him to encreaſe the garriſon, according to the exigence of the affaires and the neceſsity of the time.
            The king of Epire returning towards Croy, the Italian bands ſent vnto him by Alphonſus
               Neapolitan Ambaſſade & ſuccours entertained and feaſted at Croy by Scanderbeg. went to meet him on the way, and receiuing him with great ioy & triumph, they conueyd him into the city, the reſidue of the army being willed to encamp without the walles. The Ambaſſadours hauing deliuered the effect of their charge, did conſigne the money which they had brought into his hands, together with the kings letters: which being openly read in the publique aſſembly, gaue occaſion of laughter vnto all the audience. Caſtriot with a long Oration magnified the liberality of the King of Naples, and his ſingular amity and friendſhippe towardes the people of Albanie: and afterwardes gaue order that the ſtraunge companies ſhould be entertained each according to the eſtate of his degree and calling, and that they ſhould be welcommed and feaſted with publique banquets and triumphs, whileſt that the commanders and chiefe officers of the army did take order for the mounting of the artillery and for the prouiding of cariages and other neceſſary inſtruments. All things being in a readineſſe, Scanderbeg iſſued forth into the fielde, the whole multitude conueying him to his Campe, where firſt of all hauing taken a generall view and muſter of his army, and publique prayers and proceſsions being ſolemnly perfourmed before their departure, for a proſperous and happy returne, and for the victory: ſo as the ſouldiers being now ready to march, onely attending the ſtroake of the drumme and the ſound of the trumpet, Scanderbeg ſpake vnto them in this manner.
            This is now the eleuenth yeare of our continuall trauelles (my good ſouldiours)
                  Oration of Scanderbeg to his army being to march to the ſiege of Belgrade. which we haue ſuſtayned for the recouery and poſſeſsion of our countrey of Epire, and for the feare and dwellings of our aunceſters which were loſt vnto the Barbarians, rather by a certaine kinde of fatall neceſsity, then by any default or want of courage either in them or vs. The time is now come that we muſt employ our whole power and endeuours to di
                     •
                  neſt theſe Infidels, and to expell them wholly out of our countrey, and with no leſſe glory to impoſe the yoke vpon the necks of our enemies, then we haue already by the diuine clemency and your vnſpeakable proweſſe, ſhaken it off from our owne ſhoulders. If the life and the death of Amurath haue heretofore

giuen you a large and ample ſubiect of glory: you haue now a fitter occaſion & a more noble matter to purchaſe honour. And it may be that his ſonne is reſerued for your greater glory. You haue had euen of late ſome pledge & experience of your good fortune, and the tyrant gaue you ſome proofe and triall thereof, whileſt that with the one hand (as it were) holding the funerals of his father, with the other he demanded peace of you, yet vnder a certaine colour and honeſt ſhew of tribute. The which we hauing denied him, he would with a ſtrong hand haue enforced and exacted of vs, ſending hither certaine of his captaines and ſouldiers as Collectors of that his tribute, throughout all this Prouince. But the vallies of Mocrea, and the fields of Pologue, can teſtifie that they had but ill paiment, and that they made but a bad audit. The conſideration hereof ought to ſpur vs on to follow and purſue that which remaineth yet vndone. Amongſt the reſt the town of Belgrade doth ſeeme to promiſe vs no leſſe good ſucceſſe: in the ſiege whereof, we will continue as long as your ſelues ſhall thinke conuenient: in ſuch ſort that if either the fortune of the warre, or the obſtinacy of the defendants, doe protract & draw it out at length, we are not determined to continue there longer then till the end of Autumne. Howbeit I am in good hope, that we ſhall not be enforced to ſtay there to the end of that ſeaſon, conſidering both your accuſtomed valour, the flower of ſo many goodly troupes, ſuch great ſtore of engines, and peeces for battery, wherewith the King of Sicily hath moſt bountifully furniſhed vs. Beſides you know that Belgrade is a towne of Chriſtians, peopled with our owne kinſmen and friends, and that Amurath after the death of Theodore Corona the laſt Lord of thatTheodore Corona, Lord of Belgrade in Bulgary. city, did traiterouſly ſeize and poſſeſſe him ſelfe of the ſame. This place is yet full of her ancient citizens, who do onely attend to be freed and deliuered out of the ſeruitude of thoſe Infidels. I am much deceiued if they do not greatly further and fauor our attēpts, whereby the enemy ſhall be aſſailed both within & without. Go to therfore (my good friends and companions in armes) march on a Gods name reſolutely and couragiouſly, ſuccour them that attend in expectation of your vertue: at leaſtwiſe ſpare not to enforce both them and the reſidue, if you find them peruerſe and obſtinate.
            
            With the end of this Oration, there began a great cry and clamor of all the army with exceeding ioy and gladneſſe: then began the companies to ſet forward, but Scanderbeg
               Tanuſee ſent to begin the ſiege of Belgrade. commanded them to ſtand, and that euery man ſhould keepe him ſelfe ſtill in his quarter: for neither had he as yet ſent forth any vauntcurrours (as he was accuſtomed) to diſcouer the countrey: nor the Marſhalles were not yet departed to chooſe a place for their campe to lodge in. Tanuſee had commiſſion to this effect, who being accompanied with three thouſand good horſe departed immediatly without any further delay, endeuoring by his diligence to preuent the enemy. Then Scanderbeg ſending his baggage and cariages before, did follow after with his maine army. The fame and report of this enterpriſe was already gotten to Belgrade, and the citizens were throughly enformed of euery thing in particular, which was the cauſe that the Chriſtians, were depriued of all meanes to do them any dammage, either by ſecret ambuſhmēts, or by open force & violence: for the peiſants were retired into the ſtrong holds with the chiefeſt of their corne and other prouiſions, and hauing left nothing in the fields (for it was in the hart of ſommer) they had layd vp all in garners within the wals, inſomuch that the ſouldiers (naturally addicted to couetouſnes & deſire of pillage, and not finding any matter fit to prey vpon, or to make boot of) would not haue abſtained from ouerrunning all the country, and from deſtroying & burning al with ſword and fire, if Tanuſee had not hindered and withheld them: telling them, that he had no ſuch charge nor commiſſion giuen him by the general. Wherfore keeping good watch & ward on all ſides, he lodged his troupes quietly and without any diſturbance vnder the wals, without doing any outrage or iniury to the inhabitants, either in word or deed.

Neither did they in like manner in any ſort hinder or contradict their approach, butBelgrade beſieged. held themſelues ſtill and quiet within the towne, without any ſtur or motion made againſt them: yet did they in the meane time carefully prouide for all things within the city, diſpoſing their courts of gard and ſentinels, and appointing ech man to his place.
            The garriſon of Turkes within Belgrade was very ſtrong, conſiſting of a thouſandNumber of Turkes in the garriſon of Belgrade. men at the leaſt: the common people being Chriſtians were more in number by a third part, yet altogether vnfit and vnapt to beare armes. For as touching the weaker ſexe of women and children, they tooke no great care to ſuffer them to remaine and abide within the towne: but concerning the citizens, there was great difference and diſagreement of opinions amongſt the ſouldiers, whether they ſhould permit them to continue there ſtill, or to put them foorth. Some ſuſpition they had of their faith and fidelitie, by reaſon that their ceremonies and religion was different from the TurkiſhTurkes within Belgrade are doubtfull of the faith of the Citizens. profeſſion. Notwithſtanding this greatly diminiſhed that ſuſpition, in that they had bene ſuffered ſo long within the citie, and had bene friendly and courteouſly vſed by the Ottoman, and none of them had bene euer touched or ſuſpected with any ſhewe or token of treaſon. Beſides that, they ſawe in their owne handes (as it were) certaine and aſſured pledges of their faith: euen their wiues, their children, their parents, and all their fortunes and poſſeſſions. The conſideration of theſe contrarie reſpectes, did make them in a doubt what to doe and to determine of them. The Gouernour being willing to retaine them within the towne, & yet to haue ſome more aſſured gage of their faith, who were but as ſtraungers vnto them: that he might make all ſure: and that fighting with the enemie, he neede not to doubt any ciuill or domeſticall rebellion,Con
                     •
                  etence betweene the Gouernor and Citizens of Belgrade vpon the ſuſpition cōceiued of their 
                     ••
                   faith by thē of the garriſon. cauſed certaine of the chiefeſt and moſt auncient of the Chriſtians to come vnto him, with whom, after he had taken them aſide, he reaſoned and diſcourſed a long time in cloſe and couert termes, touching this warre and ſiege begun by the Albanois: and in the end diſcouering vnto them the deliberation of the ſouldiers, he aduertized them, that the matter could not be paſſed ouer without ſome ſedition, if the minds of the garriſon were not ſatisfied with ſome ſure bond of their faith and fidelitie. That he for his part did neuer make any doubt of their truth and good deuoire, nor at that preſent had any miſtruſt therof, nor had leſſe hope in their armes, then in himſelf & thoſe of the garriſon. That neuertheleſſe it was his duty to admit and hearken to the plaints of the others, and to do them reaſon in their demands, whom it eſpecially concerned, and to whom it principally appertained to bethinke them ſelues how they might be aſſured to haue but one only enemy. The Belgradians began to complaine and to find themſelues agreeued, that this wrong ſhould be done them, who had neuer committedAnſwer of the citizens of Belgrade to the ſpeeches of the Gouernour. any act, whereby the Turkes ſhould either ſeeke to bring them into further ſeruitude, or ſhould take occaſion to conceiue that euill opinion of them: that they knew no reaſon whence this their miſtruſt ſhould proceede, but onely becauſe they were Chriſtians, and of the race of the Albanois: But therein they did them apparaunt and great wrong, to thinke that they did eſteeme of their ſafety more vnder others: conſidering that they could not poſsibly hope f
                     ••
                   more liberty, nor a more franke and free permiſsion of their ceremonies and religion, then Mahomet euen to that day had graciouſly graunted vnto them. That all other pretences were but vaine and friuolous, by which they were charged to loue and to eſteeme better of Scanderbeg, for that the towne of Belgrade was neuer any part of his dominion nor vnder his ſubiection. And that the Belgradians did diſdaine the rule and gouernment of the Caſtriots: inſomuch that they would endure any other indignity, rather then to be brought vnder his command and authority: that they had then had ſome appearance & likelihood of truth to be afraid of their faith, if there had bene left aliue any of the iſſue of Theodore,
                  
who might haue preſented himſelf to the communalty, which commonly is deſirous of their auncient eſtate and condition: but nowe that he was dead and gone, all the alliance and ſocietie of the Albanois was together with him dead and extinguiſhed: and that euer ſince his death they had conſtantly and with ſingular good affection, accepted and endured the Empire of the Ottomans: to whom they had vowed and conſecrated their countrey, their libertie, their wiues and children, with their bodies, goods, and liuings. Other gages or better aſſurances they had not to giue them, or to bind their faith more ſtrictly and aſſuredly to them of the garriſon, then that which they had already giuen vnto Amurath.
               Citizens of Belgrade giue hoſtages to the Turkes for aſſurance of their faith.
            
            The Barbarian being more intentiue to obſerue their countenances, then the outward ſhewe of their wordes, did receiue their proteſtation with great ioy and contentment. Neuertheleſſe he caried him ſelfe, and framed his ſpeeches with ſuch cunning and dexteritie, that before they departed from his companie, they promiſed him a good number of hoſtages: which being deliuered, were put in ſure and ſafe keeping, within the caſtell or fortreſſe where the Turks only commanded. Willingly he wold haue tranſported them to Andrinople, the better to be aſſured of them, but he was not able ſo to do, by reaſon that the ſiege layd about the towne, did hinder him from the ſame. Matters being thus ſettled and pacified within Belgrade, and all ſuſpition being now extinguiſhed, the companies, the watches, the portes being reuiſited, and euerie part and place of the towne being ſurueyed, and a ſtrong Court of gard being appointed vppon the market place to ſerue againſt all neceſſities and ſudden occurrences whatſoeuer, the Gouernour was deſirous to encourage and hearten both the citizens and the ſouldiers: and to the intent hee might quicken, and ſtirre vp their minds to behaue themelſues faithfully and valiantly, he vſed theſe or the like ſpeeches.
            
               If there be anie thing at this preſent, which a Captaine ought to ſpeake vnto hisOration of the Gouernor of Belgrade to his people being beſieged. ſouldiers: or if by my ſpeeches (ô Belgradians) you were to haue your courages confirmed and ſtregthened: the enemie nowe planted before your eyes, hath preuented me of all ſuch ſpeeches and perſwaſions. For there is no exhortation more effectuall, no ſpurres are more ſharpe, euen to the greateſt cowardes, then the daunger it ſelfe which is threatened by the enemie: neither is it their guiſe to inuite or allure, to perſwade and exhort, to encourage and confirme the mindes of men, as Captaines vſe to doe vnto their ſouldiers, and as I doe vnto you. But they doe preſſe and conſtraine you to armes, they holde their naked ſwordes to your throates, they bring cordes and irons to binde and mannacle you, if you ſhewe your ſelues faynt hearted and negligent. Me thinkes I ſee nowe inſolent and proude Scanderbeg, cruell and bloudie Scanderbeg: me thinkes I heare him ſummoning you to bondage and thraldome. Stop your eares, I coniure you in the name of God, ſtop your eares: hearken not vnto his ſpeeches, which tende to nothing but your ſhame and infamie. Valiant men vſe not to aunſwer with their mouthes and with their lippes, but with their weapons, and with their handes readie armed. We haue not put on armes to be forced with wordes, we haue not ſhu
                     ••
                  nd rammed vp our gates, to open them againe as men amazed or aſtoniſhed. Let our enemies then make way for themſelues, if their fortune ſo ſerue them. For our partes, wee are not to feare it, no more then that the heauens are like preſently to fall vppon vs. Was it poſſible, that Sfetigrade (being ſeated euen in the verie middeſt of our enemies, and being furniſhed with leſſer numbers) was able to deride the Brauadoes of the Albanois, and to maintaine the immortall name of the Ottomans in Epire? Nay (let the vertue euen of our enemies, ſerue you for an example) was it poſsible that Croy ſhould bee able ſo cheerefullie, and ſo audaciouſly, to hold out and make reſiſtance againſt

the puiſſance of all Aſia and Europe? Could ſhee (her walles being ouerthrowen, her fortifications being raiſed) onely by her notable perſeueraunce and conſtancy merite the perpetuall and euerlaſting title of glory? and ſhall we in the aboundance of all things, and hauing ſo neare an hope of aide and ſuccours from Andrinople: ſhall wee (I ſay) be afraied at the ſight of a handfull of baſe companions? Shall not we dare to looke vppon them without terrour of aſtoniſhment, who are no other then an infamous troupe of theeues and freebooters?
            
            This ſhort Oration did ſo chafe the harts of the ſouldiers, that beſides infinit vaunts and brauadoes (as is vſuall in ſuch caſes) ſome of them flocked together about the Gouernour, and with great inſtance beſought him to grant them leaue to ſally forth, & to ſet vpon the enemy: but he refuſed to yeeld vnto their demaund, by reaſon hee was aduertiſed that Scanderbeg did approach, betweene whoſe arriuall and theſe accidentes,Scanderbeg before Belgrade. there was litle or no great ſpace. It was about the tenth houre, that the troupes of the Albanois did appeare before the towne, and did encampe them ſelues cloſe together in a large plaine vnd
                  •
               r the walles. Firſt they tooke their repaſt all at their eaſe, and then afterwardes they parted their companies, each hauing their ſeuerall quarter appointedNumber of Scanderbeg his armie before Belgrade. them. The numbers of Scanderbeg his army, was 15000. men, 8000. horſe, 7000. foote. They were placed round about ouer the plaine, and vpon the mountaine, the which being not very high nor ſteepe, did ſerue as well for the horſemen to encampe in, as the footmen. And for this cauſe was the artillery planted there alſo in diuers places fit and conuenient, to make a battery againſt the wals. By that time that all things were ordained in a readineſſe, the night ouertooke them, the audacity and fierceneſſe of the beſieged was much abated, by the terrible ſhewe and aſpect of our people, and eſpecially by the view of thoſe peeces and engines prepared for the battering and aſſaulting of the towne.
            Immediatly vpon the breake of day, the ordinaunce began to thunder moſt furiouſly, and the Curtin in ſome places began to be diſmanteled, and the Flankers toBelgrade battered. be razed: whereupon the defendants both falling to conſultation, and yet labouring the whileſt to repaire the breaches, were for a time deuided into contrary opinions, being in doubt whether it were beſt to demaund a Parley or not, before that the enemie ſhould come to the ſcaling of the walles, and that the furie of the aſſault ſhould bebegunne. For they were ſore affrayed, leſt they ſhould not be able to maintaine the place: and if in the middle and heate of the fight they ſhould intend it, that then the ſouldiours being caried away with the hope of victorie, would not be perſwaded to yeeld vnto it. But the Gouernour would not in any caſe conſent thereunto: telling them, That the perill as yet was not ſo great, and that they ſhould at all times finde oportunitie enough to take that courſe ſo vile and ignominious: whereupon they were ſatisfied, and ſurceaſed that motion. The next day likewiſe paſſed in the ſame manner, for that the breache was not yet aſſaultable, nor ſufficient to receiue the ſouldiours, and Scanderbeg cauſed the batterie to continue ſtill with great furie. And after two dayes were ſpent in that ſort, and that the ditches were nowe filled vp with the ruines of the wall: he withdrewe his ordinaunce from that ſide where the towne was made leaſt defenſible, and for that it was nowe time to vſe the furie of his ſouldiours, he appointed the next day to giue an aſſault, and to make a triall of their valour, commaunding them to be ready by the breake of the next morning: which was done accordingly. As the enſignes were readie diſplayed, and that the ſouldiours with great cries and clamours began to march in good order and reſolution, certaineBelgradians demand a truce of the towne came foorth ſuddenly and met them: who being conducted to the preſence of the Prince, required to haue truce; which was ſoone and eaſily graunted

them. Afterwardes demaunding what their compoſition ſhould be, if they did yeeld them ſelues: Such (quoth Scanderbeg) as is due to men that doe yeeld: to wit, their liues ſaued, and free libertie to depart with their armour, bagge and baggage: as for the reſt, it did belong to the victours. The two meſſengers being returned, and their aunſwer openly reported, the defendants were generally ſadde and ſorrowfull, that ſo hard conditions ſhould be impoſed vpon them, all things being as yet ſound and in good eſtate: whereas if their caſe had bene deſperate, and the towne forced to the vttermoſt, euen they that were in a manner vanquiſhed, might eaſily obtaine ſuch an agreement. The garriſon were penſiue and ſore grieued: feare and deſpite made them to haue manie motions and conceipts in their minds. The Chriſtians ſayd neuer a word, notwithſtanding that by the articles propounded for their compoſition, they ſawe they ſhould be depriued both of their goods and their houſes. True it is, that they were in a good hope, that if the place came into the handes of the Chriſtians, they ſhould obtaine of the King of Albanie what ſoeuer they would demaund. And therefore they made no ſhewe howe they were affected, either on the one ſide or the other, nor what they thought of the conditions, for feare leſt they ſhould renewe and reuiue the ſuſpition that had bene before conceiued of them. Being demaunded of the Gouernour what their opinion was, they refuſed to ſhew their mindes, giuing himGouernour of Belgrade conſulteth with the citizens vpō the conditions offred by Scanderbeg. Anſwer of the citizens of Belgrade to the Gouernour. onely this anſwer: That they did expect from him not interrogatories, but commaundements: that whatſoeuer he ſhould iudge to be for the honour and profit of all in generall, that would they maintaine and ratifie, both armed and diſarmed. A great part of that day was ſpent in conſultations: at laſt it was concluded, that they ſhould demaund a truce and abſtinence from armes for one whole moneth, during which time if there came no ſuccours, that then they would ſubmit them ſelues to the conditions and offers which were propounded. They were in hope that Mahomet would not endure this ſhame and infamie, but would either be there himſelf in perſon, or elſe would ſend ſome ſuccours with all ſpeed. For before the comming of Tanuſee, they had aduertized him of the preparations made againſt them. Thus by this pollicie and deuice they did hope to preſerue their libertie & their towne without any bloudſhed or loſſe at all. And if the Chriſtian did deny to condeſcend to this agreement, that then each man ſhould be reſolute, and prepare him ſelfe with a good courage to the defence of their walles, and to vſe their vttermoſt obſtinacie againſt ſo obſtinate an enemy. The meſſengers being ſent backe with theſe capitulations to the campe of the Chriſtians, Scanderbeg made no other accompt of theſe demaundes, but reputed them worthie to be laughed at, willing them either to be better aduiſed, and that with ſpeede, or elſe to prepare them ſelues to the extremitie of a generall aſſault. In the end when he ſawe that they were ſo fully and firmely determined, as they would not abate ſo much as fiue dayes of the delaye and reſpite which they demaunded, he grewe into greater choller: but the night comming vppon them, did put off the concluſion thereof for that inſtant. Scanderbeg calling a Counſell to conſult and deliberate vpon the matter, ſome of his chiefe Lordes and eldeſt Captaines were of opinion: ThatSpeeches of ſome of the Nobles and Captaines of Scanderbeg: perſwading him to accept the offers of the Belgradians. he ſhould not altogether reiect theſe demaundes, but that he ſhould ſound the beſieged euen to the laſt point, whether they would abridge anie part of that time. They alledged the difficulties that would impeach them from carrying of the place: for that the toppe of the mountaine (whereon the citie was ſeated) did not for the moſt part admit and giue anie eaſie acceſſe vnto thoſe that ſhould labour to clime the ſame: and that the great ſtonie rocks naturally ariſing in many places round about the town, and being wrought by arte into the circuite of the walles, and ſo ſeruing for a fortification to the towne in many places, would eaſily ſcorne all the force and violence

of their ordinaunce, and make them of no power nor vertue: in regard whereof it might be an occaſion that the ſiege might be of long continuaunce. They alleaged moreouer, that how ſoeuer it fell out, and whether the truce were either graunted or denied to the defendaunts, yet they beleeued that the Sultan would not faile, to ayde and to ſend them ſuccours: that the daunger would be much greater and more to be feared, if hee ſhould come and finde them wearied and ſore laboured, whereas if he came not at all, or that he did foreſlow his comming, they might then obtaine the towne without any bloudſhed, and without any loſſe or hazard of their people: or in caſe he did come in good time to their reſcue, yet they might then take their choiſe both of the time and the occaſion, according as it ſhould offer it ſelfe: that all things would fall out conueniently and to his aduauntage in the fight, and would be to the furtherance of his victory, and to the greatneſſe of his glorie. That he had with as ſmall forces as thoſe then preſent, giuen a memorable ouerthrow to Haly Baſſa. Moreouer, that Mahomet in regard of his couetous deſire and vnſatiable ambition to the Empire of Conſtantinople, had cleane forgotten the warre of Epire. And they ſuppoſed that the Belgradians did demand this time of truce, for the deliuery of their towne, to no other end and purpoſe, but onely becauſe the king of Turkes ſhould not blame them for yeelding it vp ſo haſtily and ſhamefully, and to the intent, when they ſhould be caſt out of their dwellings, and ſpoyled of all their ſubſtaunce, they might be thought worthy both of pardon and compaſsion. Scanderbeg ſmiling at theſe their allegations, replied vnto them in this manner.
            
            I ſee (quoth he) that the Albanians are glutted with ſo many victories, that they are Anſwer of Scanderbeg to the perſwaſiōs of his Chiefetaines, touching the graunting of truce to the Belgradians 
               nowe become delicate and effeminate: and that as the froſts and cold of the laſt winter were vnpleaſing vnto them, ſo the heate of the Sommer doth nowe annoy them. They haue neede to be viſited with ſome miſaduenture (God graunt that it happen not vnto them) to chaſtiſe them for their ſloth and negligence. Beſides, who will not condemne vs of ouer much credulitie? If we remember, the like fraude was practiſed againſt vs heretofore by them of Sfetigrade, and they deluded vs in the ſame maner. What thinke you is then to be done, when the prefixed time of the truce being expired, you ſhall finde either their deceipt ſecretly hidden to be diſcouered: or that their minds ſhall be altered and chaunged? We ſhall then abide hard penance for our light credulitie, and in vaine ſhall we repent the loſſe of the time paſt: and we ſhall be conſtrained in the meane time to depend wholy vpon the pleaſure and faith of our enemies. And how ſoeuer there be many things alledged touching the difficulty of the ſiege, and the occupations of the Sultan, yet ought not wee for all that to deferre that which the vrgency of our affaires doeth require to be done. And if it happen that whileſt we are buſied in forcing of the towne, there do appeare any likelihood ofſtirs from Andrinople, we haue forces ſufficient both to defend our ſelues, and to ſecure vs from their attempts. Beſides that, Dibria alſo is ſufficiently aſſured with the garriſon which Moſes hath in a readineſſe vpon thoſe frontiers.
            
            After the matter had bene long debated and diſcuſſed to and fro, notwithſtandingTruce for ſixteene dayes granted to thē of Belgrade. anie thing that had bene ſayd to the contrarie, Scanderbeg was content in the ende to ſubſcribe to the opinion of the greateſt number. As touching the time, there was ſome difference betweene them and the infidels, many matters being argued and diſputed on both partes: but in the ende they agreed vpon a truce for ſixteene dayes. The capitulation being thus accorded and concluded, Scanderbeg tooke not more care of anie thing, then to ſet good watch and ward on all ſides. And therefore ouer and aboue the ordinary ſcoutes diſpoſed and ordained by Tanuſee, he choſe out fiue and twentie watchfull and diligent ſouldiers, whom he appointed to keepe vpon the top of a certaine

mountaine not farre from the campe, for the more ſuretie of his troupes▪ to the intent, that the enemie being diſcouered by them a farre off, and notice thereof giuen to the campe, by fires and lights held vp aloft in the aire, themſelues alſo ſhould immediatly giue the allarme, retiring ſpeedily into the campe. By meanes whereof the ſouldier being certified, and hauing warning of the comming of the enemie, ſhould haue ſome time to arme them ſelues, and to put them ſelues in a readineſſe to fight. Furthermore, becauſe his companies ſhould encampe more at their eaſe, and by lying at large might recreat them ſelues from the parching and vehement heate of the ſunne: he him ſelfe with Ameſe and certaine of his Nobles, lodged vpon the mountaine next the towne, retaining for his regiment three thouſand horſe and a thouſand foote: and he diſpoſed all things with ſingular prouidence and diſcretion, planting certaine peeces of ordinance right oppoſite ouer againſt Belgrade, which were alwayes kept in a readineſſe, for feare leſt they of the towne ſhould make any ſallie and inuade him on a ſodaine. Muſache and Tanuſee with the reſt of the armie were commanded to encampe in the plaine vnderneath him, for their greater 
                  •
               aſe and commoditie. The ſouldiers alſo were willed to abſtaine from armes, and to reſt them ſelues from all actions of hoſtilitie, till ſuch time as the daies of truce limited to the inhabitants, were fully ended and expired.
            The ende of the ſeuenth booke.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               Mahomet hauing vndertaken the conqueſt of Conſtantinople, and marching againſt it with a mightie armie, vpon the newes of the ſiege of Belgrade ſtayeth his iourney, and ſendeth Sebalias to relieue Belgrade: who ſurprizeth the armie of the Chriſtians, and raiſeth the ſiege. Scanderbeg maketh head againſt him. The battell of Belgrade betweene Scanderbeg and Sebalias. The particular combat of Scanderbeg with Acmath and Barach two Turkes, who hauing vowed his deſtruction to Mahomet, are both ſlaine by Scanderbeg. Sebalias and the Turkes are put to the retyre. Scanderbeg withdraweth his army into the confines of Epyre. Moſes reuolteth from Scanderbeg to Mahomet. Sebalias returneth to Andrinople. Tanuſee ſent by Scanderbeg to bury the Chriſtians ſlaine at Belgrade, ſpoileth and deſtroieth all the countrey. Scanderbeg is viſited with Ambaſſadors from diuers Princes to comfort him vpon his misfortunes. Moſes is ſent by Mahomet with an army againſt Scanderbeg. Conſtantinople is beſieged by Mahomet. The deſcription of the city and maner of the ſiege. The negligence and couetouſneſſe of the Greekes and the ſimplicitie of Conſtantine the Emperour, cauſeth their owne ruine and deſtruction. Mahomet hauing diuerſely forced the citie all in vaine, at length by the ſtrange cowardize of Iohn Iuſtinian Lieutenant Generall to the Emperour, and the faintneſſe of the Greekes winneth it by an aſſault. The Emperour is ſmothered and troden to death. The horrible exceſſe and crueltie of the Turkes in the ſacke of Conſtantinople, and the barbarous crueltie of Mahomet againſt the Chriſtian priſoners. The towne of Pera neere Constantinople yeeldeth voluntarilie to Mahomet, who with ſingular periurie, vſeth them with all kindes of crueltie.
            
            
               IT is vſually ſeene, that when there happeneth any newes of great importance, the fame thereof, like a running, Poaſt flieth all about more ſwift then the winde: ſo was the ſiege of Belgrade euery where noyſed and blowen abroad, and the tydings thereof came to the eares of Mahomet, at ſuch time as he was not farre from Romania, marching with enſignes diſplayed to the conqueſt of the Grecian Empire, andMahomet going to the conqueſt of Conſtantinople is ſtaied vpon the nowes of Belgrade. to ſeeke the ruine of the Emperour of Greece, and the deſtruction and deſolation of the people of God. The haughtie and generous courage of this young Prince, did aſpire to the dominion of the whole worlde: the boundes of his ambition did exceede farre beyonde the ſucceſſion of his fathers Empire, and he ſought to ſurmount the glorie of all his aunceſtors. For

caſting his thoughts to higher enterpriſes, he was reſolued to reduce within the number of his conqueſts, the proude and triumphant citie of Conſtantinople: and he helde it to be a great blot and ſtaine to his honour to entitle himſelfe Emperour of Greece, and not to haue the poſſeſſion of the Imperiall ſeate and capitall city of that Empire. Beſides, he conſidered this with himſelfe, that by enterpriſing an exploite of ſo high regard, he ſhould make his memorie immortall ouer the whole earth, and that all the Nations and peoples of the world, would be ſtriken with the terror of his wonderfull actes, in that he being but in the prime and entrance of his youth, ſhould be able to make a conqueſt of a towne ſo puiſſant, and to purchaſe to himſelfe a name ſo glorious and renowned. And he was the more enflamed in this his deſire and affection, becauſe his predeceſſors hauing oftentimes attempted the winning of that towne, had alwayes bene repulſed with ſome diſgrace and loſſe of honor and reputation.
            Aſſoone therefore as the newes of Belgrade was come vnto his eares, he was extreamely grieued and perplexed, and he complained with infinite plaints and lamentations, that fortune ſhould ſo croſſe and diſturbe his attempts, as to take out of his hands the ioy, benefit, and aduantage of a glorie ſo excellent and incomparable. The very conceipt and griefe wherof dryuing him into rage and choller, made him to exclaimeSpeech and exclamation of Mahomet vpō the news of the ſiege of Belgrade. 
               and to burſt out into theſe ſpeeches. Vnhappie and vnfortunate Epyre, which doeſt alwaies bring ſome ſiniſter and vnluckie misfortune to the hinderance of our affaires and proceedings. Whereupon ſurceaſing for that time to proceede any further againſt the Greekes, he bent all his care and imagination only to the reliefe of Belgrade. Howbeit that ſome of his Baſſaes perſwaded him in any caſe not to interrupt or break off ſo goodly and honorable a iourney, nor to leaue off all thoſe royall & princely preparations for the hazard and danger of one only baggage and paultry towne of Epire. 
               But Mahomet replyed and told them, ſaying: That his aunceſtors neuer taught himSpeech of Mahomet to his Baſſaes perſwading him not to leaue his voyage of Conſtantinople for Belgrade. that leſſon, to abandon and forſake the defence of his owne againſt the iniuries of his enemies, whileſt of an ambitious mind he ſought that which belonged to other men. That for his part he reputed all conqueſts and ech victorie vile and diſhonorable, and that glory to be baſe, & of no moment nor eſtimat, which ſhould be defiled or ſtained with the leaſt touch of ignominie. Can it be good or commendable (quoth he) for a Prince to amplifie & enlarge his Empire with the one hand, and to diminiſh & leſſen it with the other? how ſhall I beleeue, that any of my people can fight with quiet and ſetled mindes in Romania, as long as their fancies and imaginations are caried away with thinking, that a vile & lewd fugitiue is triumphing the whileſt ouer Macedony, and is tearing, rending, and ſpoiling the bodies of their fellows & companions? True it may be, that vpon the Greekes we may purchaſe vs great honor, and greater ſpoiles and bootie: but the loſſe of Belgrade will be more to our detriment and diſaduantage then we can reap profit by the conqueſt of the whole Leuant. It behoueth Monarches & great conquerors to be carefull of their fame and reputation, and (as good & excellent tutors & protectors) to preſerue it vnſpotted & vnblameable, both towards them which are aliue preſent, and to the poſteritie that are to ſucceede hereafter. Moreouer Conſtantinople cannot fly from vs, but Belgrade being once gotten out of the power & alleagance of the Ottomans, will not without great difficulty be recouered. It ſtandeth vs vpon firſt to quench this fire within our own dores, for feare leaſt being neglected, it grow more ſtrong & violent, and ſpread farther abroad: and the fury of a people ſo proud & inſolent, is not to be left vnpuniſhed and vnſubdued. The citie of Croie may ſerue for a ſufficient teſtimonie to teach vs, the which continueth and remaineth as yet in good eſtate and condition, lifting vp her head aboue all the cities of Epyre: and gloriouſly vaunting and boaſting of the woundes and calamities which ſhe gaue vs,
               
and which we haue ſuffered to reſt vnreuenged, to the great reproch of the name of the Ottomans.
            
            But his Baſſaes ſhewing him that Belgrade was ſtrongly and excellently well fortified, that it was abundantly prouided of all neceſſaries for defence: and that for the more ſecuritie, he might ſende thither ſuch freſh ſuccours, as it ſhould be impoſſible for the enemie to winne it, and that the voyage of Romania needed not in the meane while to be interrupted: All this would not anie whit perſwade him, nor turne his obſtinate minde from the warre of Epyre. For the ſiege of Belgrade and the onely ſhame thereof had ſwallowed vppe all his thoughtes and imaginations,Turkes their wonderfull care to preſerue their conqueſts and his head was alwayes deuiſing vppon the ſame. And to ſpeake the trueth, I dare aſſure you, that there is not anie Nation nor kinde of men vnder the heauens more diligent and carefull in preſeruing of their conqueſtes, and in keeping the countries which they haue gotten from their enemies, then are the Turkes. For they holde it a moſt notable iniurie, and eternall ſhame and infamie, that their enemies ſhould take from them one foote of ground, whereof they are the owners: or ſhould innouate, alter, or chaunge any thing vppon their poſſeſſions. It ſhall not be impertinent in this place to recount an accident which is as yet freſh in memorie, during the raigne of the laſt Baiazeth. The Hungarians had erected neere to the riuerAn act of Baiazeth the ſecond vpon the riuer of Danowe or Danubius in Hungarie. of Danowe a tower of wood ſeruing to diuerſe vſes and priuate commodities, rather then to any purpoſe of ſeruice for the warres: a worke in trueth that was not worth the ſpeaking of. Baiazeth being aduertiſed thereof, could not moderate his paſſions, but to his extreame charges and expences, he aſſembled forthwith a mighty armie, onely and of purpoſe to ouerthrow and beate downe this edifice. And he held it not ſufficient to commit the execution thereof to his Lieutenants, but he would needes be there in proper perſon, waſting and deſtroying the whole countrie adioyning. The Hungarians thought it not beſt to oppoſe themſelues againſt his furie, but gaue place vnto him, and made a mocke of ſo fooliſh and outragious a part: and ſo litle did they grieue at the dammage offered them, that they wiſhed him many ſuch victories. Now whether this diligence in the Turkes be either to be commended or diſcommended, this is moſt certaine, that the euent of things doth apparantly make ſhew of it. But we for our partes doe imagine that there is no cauſe of feare vntill ſuch 
                  Note. The delaies and ſecuritie of Chriſtians time as the fire be gotten into our owne houſes, and that the flame haue embraced euen our bed-chambers. Hence it proceedeth, that whileſt we prepare water againſt tomorrow for the quenching of the fire, we are preuented in the inſtant: being burnt vp preſently and conſumed out of hand.
            
            The great Turke taking that courſe which the importance of thoſe affayres didSebalias ſent againſt Scanderbeg with an army of 40000 horſe. require, amongeſt all his ſeruants made choiſe of Sebalias, a Captaine more politique and ſubtill, then aduenturous and hardie: and who more then once had tryed himſelfe againſt Scanderbeg. In regard whereof he made him Generall of this iourney into Epyre, and gaue him the commaund of 40000. horſe, all choſen men and well appointed: ſo that they made a goodly armie, very ſtrong both for their number and for their valure. Mahomet calling Sebalias vnto him before his departure, helde him with a long diſcourſe, vſing not onely exhortations and perſwaſions, but with many praiers expreſſed in moſt vrgent and earneſt tearmes, he entreated him, that he would employ all his diligence, induſtrie, courage, & vigilancie, & the beſt & moſt ſufficient meanes he was poſſibly able in that ſeruice, to bring that warre to a good end, and to reſcue his ſubiects, promiſing him great riches, honors, and aduancement euen in theMahomet conſpireth the death of Scanderbeg. higheſt degree that he could beſtow vpon him, and as farre as himſelfe would wiſh and deſire: eſpecially if he could bring him either the head of Scanderbeg cut from his

ſhoulders, or his perſon aliue into his preſence. I doe finde alſo that this matter ſhould be plotted in another faſhion, and that two ſouldiers, the ſtrongeſt and moſt aduenturous of the whole armie, named Acmath and Barach, ſhould of their owne properAcmath and Barach promiſe Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg. motion preſent themſelues to Mahomet, and ſhould bargaine with him for a huge ſumme of money: and that he did condeſcend to giue them a farre greater reward then they demaunded, ſo that they would (accordingly as they offered) contriue the death and deſtruction of Scanderbeg. Behold how pretious and excellent was his life and perſon to be eſteemed, which was ſo highly priſed and valued euen by one ſo miſerably and couetouſly addicted.
            
            
               Sebalias being readie furniſhed and prouided, as one that was more forwarde withSebalias mercheth towards Epyre. his hand then with his tongue, to put in execution the commaundement and charge giuen him by his soueraigne: and ſuppoſing it needefull to make haſte, if he would bring his matters to any good paſſe: he cauſed his ſouldiers with all ſpeede poſſible to mount on horſe backe, and when they demaunded whither he would leade them, he tolde them into Epyre. For the Sultan himſelfe was not more tormented in his mind, then Sebalias was perplexed and troubled with thinking vpon Belgrade: day & night, ſleeping and waking, vnceſſantly and in all places, was that towne before his eies. And becauſe he was in great feare and doubt, leaſt they within the towne ſhould not hold out till his comming: hauing a deſire to put them in good courage & hope, by the expectation of ſpeedie ayde and ſuccours: he had no ſooner gotten his diſpatch from the Sultan, but he determined to ſende away ſpeedily a Poaſt with letters to them that were beſieged. But the chiefeſt care and difficultie was howe to get a man fit and able to vndertake the enterpriſe, and that durſt expoſe himſelfe to the hazardA Poaſt ſent by Sebalias to carrie newes of ſuccours to the Belgradians. of ſo great and manifeſt a perill. And yet the large promiſes which he made were ſufficient not onely to haue inuited and allured, but in a manner to haue enforced the heart of any man to aduenture it. In the ende, they found one a very quicke and light fellow, who being preſently mounted vpon the ſwifteſt horſe in all the armie, ſpurred away with all ſpeede, ſparing neither by day nor by night, no trauaile nor paynes, nor for anie extreamitie of the heate, ſo as in three dayes or little more he came to a towne vnder the obeiſance of the Turkes, named Gyrocaſtra, being aboutGyrocaſtra. ſome ſixe ſcore and fiue miles from Belgrade. The Turkes haue no ordinarie and ſet Poaſtes in Turkie, but in ſtead of them, and becauſe vppon ſuch occurrences, their Curriers (whom they call Vlach) ſhall not be vnprouided of horſes, the Sultans
               Vlach Poaſts of Turkie. haue eſtabliſhed and laide downe this order: that in running on their iourney, they may diſmount as manie men as they meete with on the way without anie exception: and ſo by often chaunging of their horſe, they make way with incredible ſpeede and diligence. This meſſenger being arriued at Gyrocaſtra, and hauing communicated his buſineſſe to the Magiſtrates of that place, by their counſell and aduiſe ſtaied there that day till it grew to night: then leauing there his horſe, and chaunging his attire (the better to deceiue the ſcoutes of the Chriſtians) in the darke of the night, he tooke his iourney on foote, and at the length, he got neere the towne on that ſide where Scanderbeg himſelfe lay encamped. For the tentes of the two Thopies, and the reſt which lay in the open plaine, ſtoode farther off, ſo as they could not perceiue him. Both the one and the other of them were eaſily deceiued, for that the meſſenger (hauing verie aduiſedly ſhunned the tentes of the Chriſtians, and taken the other ſide of the mountaine, where the way was more couert, and the paſſage more harde and difficult, had ſo ſecretly and cloſely conueyed himſelfe euen to the foote of the towne wall, that he was ſcarcely diſcerned by the Sentinelles of the towne. Vnto whom, after that he had by whiſteling and calling

vnto them, made himſelfe knowen by his ſpeech, he was ſuddenly drawen vp with a corde let downe from the wall, and ſo conueyed into the towne. As he went on toBelgradians aduertiſed of ſuccours comming to relieue them. ſeeke out the Gouernor, the common people in a great confuſion came running about him on all ſides, and in great doubt and ſuſpence began to enquire of him, & to learne what good newes he had brought: for the end of the truce was now neere at hand, and the time approched wherein they were to auoide the towne. The Gouernor hauing cauſed the common people to depart, and calling the meſſenger vnto him, he queſtioned with him in ſecret, very few being preſent: after he had receiued and peruſed the letter, he gaue credit to that which the meſſenger reported: by meanes wherof the Captaines of the garriſon conſulting together, did conclude and determine if neede were, to ſtand reſolutely in defence of the place, till the comming of Sebalias to relieue them: and when the day-light ſhould appeare, they appointed that theſe tydings ſhould be publiſhed and made knowen to them of the town, and it was accordingly imparted vnto all of them, not with a loude voice or open proclamation, but by the mouth of the Gouernor himſelfe, firſt in the market place, and after from one to another, with an expreſſe charge and commaundement to keepe it ſecret, that they without might not be aduertiſed of it. For they had a great deſire both to deceiue and delude them by the meanes of this truce taken for the rendring of the towne, as alſo to ſee them ſuddenly ſurpriſed and oppreſſed 
                  •
               re they were aware: and yet whileſt they ſtudied by their cloſe and cunning ſilence to deceiue the Chriſtians, they bewrayed the matter by another occaſion.
            The inhabitantes and garriſon of Belgrade were in ſome doubt, leaſt that theirBelgradians repaire their breach contrarie to their agreement. ſuccours would not come timely enough and before the truce were expyred: by meanes whereof eyther they ſhould be driuen to defende them ſelues, or elſe to forgoe and forſake the towne. For this cauſe they beganne to repaire their walles and baſtilles, where they had beene battered and beaten with the artillerie. The Generall of the Chriſtians perceiuing this, and miſdoubting ſome fraude, entred into great choller, and was in a minde to haue aſſaulted them: neuertheleſſe for that the time of the truce was to expire within a three dayes, he pacified himſelfe, and was contentMeſſage of Scanderbeg to the Belgradians willing thē to deſiſt from repairing of their town
                     •
                  . to ſend one vnto them to reproue them, and to let them knowe, that they did violate and infringe the agreement and couenants paſſed betweene them, by innouating and altering thinges from their former eſtate: an euident ſigne of ſome treaſon ſecretly intended and imagined. That they ſhould ſurceaſe therefore from their worke, or otherwiſe if they came afterwardes to endure the rigour and extreamitie of their enemies, they ſhoulde impute it, not to anie breach of faith in them, but to their owne default and deſerts. The inhabitants in outwarde ſhewe and appearance ſeemed to obey it, and did forbeare from doing any thing, that their enemies could either ſee or perceiue: notwithſtanding they continued night and day by all other meanes, as to carrie earth, to ſtrengthen the walles, to lay together great heapes of ſtones, and other prouiſions fit to throwe vppon their enemies: all which they did cloſe behinde their rampiers. O of what power, force, and efficacie is hope, ſo toSentence. alter and chaunge the mindes of mortall men, and to make them ſo variable and inconſtant? O howe little and ſmall a thing can make them chaunge their thoughts and cogitations? Of late this people when their eſtate was whole and ſound, were moſt cowardly diſcouraged and amazed, being ſtriken with feare and terror at the onely viewe of the enemie: and now their walles being battered, razed, and beaten downe, their bulwarkes being ouerthrowen, and their defences laid open and diſcouered, they doe prepare to make reſiſtance againſt an enemie, whom they are like to find more fiercely & cruelly incenſed, and readie by the ſword moſt iuſtly to reuenge

and to demaund reaſon for their faith and promiſe violated. Neuertheleſſe ſtill did they continue running vp and downe the walles, getting to the toppes of their houſes and into all the towers and higheſt places of the towne to ſee, if they could diſcouer the aide and ſuccours which they expected and deſired ſo earneſtly: or if they could perceiue any duſt of their horſes, or heare any noiſe of their comming by the people of the countrie. Their eyes were clearer ſighted then ordinarie, whatſoeuer ſound they heard, whatſoeuer obiect preſented it ſelfe to their ſenſes, they thought it to be 
                  Sebalias, and that it had beene their gods comming to their ſuccours: ſo eaſie a matterSentence. is it for a man to perſwade himſelfe of that, whereof he hath any hope that it is like to come to paſſe.
            
            That which gaue cauſe of hope to them of Belgrade, was an occaſion of feare and ſuſpition to the Chriſtians: they regarded no leſſe carefully then the others, the toppes and higheſt places of the mountaines where their ſcoutes were placed, to ſee if they could diſcerne any aduertiſement by boughes and branches of trees, or by fires or any other ſigne giuen them to arme themſelues, and to prepare to horſebacke, it being a thing not poſſible to keepe them continually ſadled, nor themſelues alwaies in armes, by reaſon of the violent and extreame heate, which did make their bodies very faintChriſtians before Belgrade ſurpriſed by the Turkes. and feeble. But the Enſignes of the enemie were in ſight, and their cries and clamors were heard amongeſt them before that they had any notice or warning giuen them by ther ſcoutes of their approch and comming. Not much vnlike vnto a companie of ſeafaring men and ſaylers, who being embarked & becalmed vpon the maine ſeas, whileſt the Maſter and Pilots do looke vp to the flagge or ſtreames to ſee what windAn excellent compariſon. doth blow, to the intent they may fit their tackling, and make readie their ſayles: ſuddenly in the meane time being ouertaken with an outragious and horrible tempeſt, (whereof there appeareth not any precedent ſignes either by darke cloudes, or the roaring of the ſeas, nor any other ſuch celeſtiall threates and tokens) by reaſon wherof they are ſuddenly oppreſſed, not fearing any ſuch matter: their ſayles are rent and torne, their maſtes blowen ouerborde, their gables and anchors are loſt, and they (not able to worke, whileſt they are buſied on all ſides to attend their charges and ſeuerall duties) are conſtrained in the end with the violence of the tempeſt, to giue ouer and to leaue all to the mercie of the winde and weather, and of fortune, and to haue a care onely of their owne ſafetie: ſo did it now fall out with the Chriſtians lying before Belgrade. For they hauing their eyes alwayes regarding the toppes of the mountaines to ſee ſome ſigne giuen them from their Sentinels, had the ſword of the enemie ouer their heads, before they diſcerned or perceiued any ſuch matter. It is a wonderfullComming of Sebalias why concealed from Scanderbeg. thing to imagine how ſo great preparations, and the ſudden approch of the Infidels could be ſo concealed, that euen the very ſtones and riuers (as a man may ſay) did not reueale it. In all the warres that Scanderbeg had made, he was neuer without ſpyes, fugitiues, letters, or ſome ſuch ſecret aduertiſements of his friendes, ſaue onely at this inſtant, when he had moſt neede of them. But it may be, that the preparations for the warre of Greece being begunne, and continuing ſo long, was the cauſe he was ſo deceiued: by reaſon that Mahomet hauing his great armie in a readines for another iorney, did on a ſudden employ part of thoſe forces, and that with ſingular diligence, ſecrecy, & celerity, ſo as no report nor eſpials could eaſily preuent their cōming; as they might haue done, if an armie had bene leauied and raiſed purpoſely for this iourney. Beſides, letters and meſſengers haue not alwayes free libertie of paſſage. And as for the watches and ſcoutes which were placed vpon the mountaines purpoſely for the diſcouering of the approach of the enemie: and vppon whom principally did depende the ſafetie of the Chriſtian armie before Belgrade: they neuer gaue them any ſigne

nor token of their comming, nor it was neuer knowen what became of them.Scouts of the Albanois ſurprized by the enemie. There is great varietie and diuerſitie of opinions concerning thoſe ſcoutes: ſome ſay they were corrupted by the Turke: others affirme, that they were ſurprized, and put to the ſword by the vauntcurrers of the Barbarians, who found them verie negligently walking vp and downe, about the freſh and moſt delectable places of the mountaines, taking their pleaſure and recreation: by meanes whereof they could not giue any ſigne to the campe, as it was concluded. For my part I know not well what to thinke of it. Touching their infidelitie, I ſuppoſe it was not a thing ſo eaſie to be compaſſed: for albeit it were a matter which amongſt a few might ſoone haue bene contriued; yet amongeſt ſo many it was verie difficult, and in a manner incredible: in like caſe, that they ſhould be ſlaine it is as vnlikely: for neither were their dead bodies euer ſeene or heard of after that: nor any reliques, markes, or apparance of them: and therefore ſome doe affirme, and it is moſt likely, that they were taken aliue by the enemie. Howſoeuer it was, the other watches which were appointed to watch elſe where, could not diſcouer the enemie till they were come verie neare them: and yet aſſoone as they coulde, they gaue them ſome warning. By meanes whereof, they had a verie litle and ſhort time to make readie their companies, and to put themſelues in order for to fight with the enemie. Neither was it poſſible that Scanderbeg ſhould ſend any ſcoutes farther off, to beat the wayes, and to diſcouer the paſſages, or to prouide better for the ſafetie of his campe (as he was wont) becauſe all the whole countrey round about being for the enemie, they might eaſily haue bene entrapped by ſome ſecret ambuſhments, or openly diſtreſſed by the force of the inhabitants. And it may be, that his miſfortune and deſtinie, did not permit him to deuiſe & inuent any better remedie againſt that miſchiefe which hanged ouer his head. For we ſee it is a common and vſuall courſe with fortune to oppoſe herſelfe as a ſtepdameSentence. againſt the enterpriſes of great perſonages: and being not able to ſuffer the continuance of their good happe, nor willing that it ſhould be perdurable: ſhe doth often interrupt the courſe of their beſt and moſt glorious actions. But let vs proceed with the ſcope of our hiſtorie.
            Theſe fiue and twentie men which were ordained to watch vpon the mountaine, either by treaſon or by negligence (as hath bene 
                  •
               aied) cauſed great miſchiefe to the whole armie. For Muſache (who lay encamped next to that ſide where the enemie did approach and was to ſuſtaine the firſt brunt and onſet that ſhould be giuen) would hardly be perſwaded that the Turkes were at hand: notwithſtanding that theMuſache de Thopie brother in law to Scanderbeg, ſurprized in his quarter by the Turkes. watch did continue the allarme, and did in a manner ſhew him the duſt raiſed by the trampling of their horſes. Some ſay that he was found ſleeping in his tent: others ſay that he was playing at dice with one of the Gentlemen of the Kings priuie chamber, and that the Turkes comming vpon him vnprouided, did bereaue him of all meanes of hope to mount on horſebacke, and enforced him on foote to ſeeke to ſaue himſelfe by flying towardes the mountaine. But the moſt common opinion is: that he had ſome time and Ieiſure (though verie litle) to put on his armour, and to mount on horſebacke: and that he loſt his life fighting valiantly euen in the formoſt ranckes of his companie: and that vpon his death the reſidue beganne to flie. For aſſoone as the ſtandards of the Infidels and their vauntcurrers began to appeare in ſight, Muſache hauing ordered his troups, as well as the ſhortneſſe of the time would giue him leaue, was at the firſt in ſome doubt, whether he ſhould ſtand and abide the charge, or betake himſelfe to flight towards the maine ſtrength and bodie of the armie. But becauſe the enemie was nowe ſo neare, that he thought his flight would cauſe the greater ſlaughter of his companie: beſides, for that he tooke not the enemie to be ſo ſtrong as

he afterwardes founde them: and being vnwilling alſo to looſe his life with diſhonor by any default in himſelfe, or to abandon and forſake his Prince, and the others who were lodged on the mountaine: he ſetled himſelfe to receiue the enemie; and therefore couragiouſly he endured the charge, and ſtoutly oppoſed himſelfe againſt their furie and violence. For a time he held good, neither his courage failing him, nor his forces: and he was reſolute, not to looſe his life without a braue reuenge of himſelfe and his companie. In the ende perceiuing by the ſlaughter of his companions, that his flanckes lay open to the enemie, and that his vertue and perſeuerance was in vaine and vnprofitable, he did aſſay many times by trauerſing and courſing vppe and downe the fielde, to ſaue himſelfe and the reſt of his men by making towardes the mountaine, for other place of refuge there was none thereabouts, where he might if not auoid, yet at leaſt wiſe delay the extreamitie of the daunger. But the enemie hauing ſhut vp all the wayes by which he might ſafely make a retrait, and he being incloſed on all ſides as in a parke, with the ineſtimable multitude of his enemies: and ſeeing that both his life and honor did now hang in the ballance of chaunce and caſualtie: with a deſperate reſolution, turning his valour and proweſſe into rage and furie, he terrified the enemie with the wonderfull aſtoniſhment of his hardines and audacitie,Muſache his death and glorious end. and euen in the middeſt of them fighting valiantly, he left his life worthy of eternall praiſe and commendation, for the many worthie ſeruices done to his Prince and countrey. Tanuſee Thopie on the other ſide, albeit he werein no leſſe diſtreſſe, yet hauing a compaſſion at the miſhap of his vncle, he ſeemed to forget all other occaſions; and as a man tranſported with outrage and furie, did enforce himſelfe many times, by charging valiantly vpon the enemie, to open him a free way and paſſage. But in the end knowing all his endeuors to be in vaine, and that there now remained no other point of charitie to be ſhewed towardes him, vnleſſe he would beare him companie in the like vnhappie end; he thought it beſt to forbeare fighting: to the intent he might ſaue the reſt which were left, and hauing gathered them neere about him, he perſwaded them to ſecure thēſelues by flying. The like did Tanuſee Gynache, and the reſidue, howbeit that their flight did abate little or nothing of their daunger, nor of the ſlaughter. For the Turkes being diſperſed here and there, and deuided into ſeuerall bandes and ſquadrons, ſome of them did continue enuironing of Muſache and his companie, as long as there remained any of them liuing: and others purſuing after thoſe that fled, did neuer giue ouer the aduantage which they had gotten, but followed it to the ſingular and extreame dammage of the Chriſtians. He that ſhould haue ſeene this diſorder would haue thought, that that good fortune which had euer heretofore ſeconded the Albanois, had now left and forſaken them, to follow the part of the Infidels. Scanderbeg (whoſe tents were ſomewhat further remoued from this bickering) was oftentimes about to haue deſcended into the plaine, with a full determination to doe his beſt and laſt endeuours for the ayding and ſuccouring of his people, or by his owne death to make the victorie of Sebalias much more noble and glorious. But being earneſtly and inſtantly entreated by his Nobles, not to enterpriſe any thing but vpon aduantage, nor to expoſe himſelfe vnaduiſedly to a death ineuitable: he g
                  •
               aſhed with his teeth, and with his mouth all bloudie, he was cleane out of patience: and ſtirring vp and downe on all ſides, he tormented and vexed himſelfe with extreame griefe and diſcontentment. For this one thing which is reported of him, is not to be omitted, that whenſoeuer he was vpon the point readie to charge the enemie, & likewiſe in the heate and furie of the fight: beſides other ſtrange ſignesA ſtrange qualitie in Scanderbeg. of chaunge and alteration in his countenance, his neather lippe would commonly cleaue a ſunder, and yeeld forth great abundance of bloud: a thing oftentimes marked

and obſerued in him, not onely in his martiall actions and exploites, but euen in his ciuill affayres, whenſoeuer his choller did abound, and that his anger did exceede more then ordinarie.
            The Generall of the Painims (hauing cut in peeces the bands of Muſache together with their Captaine) followed the chaſe after Tanuſee, and the reſt which diſcamped with him: of whom he ouerthrew a great number that neuer recouered: and he left behinde him his rereward, the ſame being but weakely and ſimply guarded,Sebalias his i
                     •
                  
                  diſcretion and ouerſight. wherby you may coniecture, that he made but ſmall account of our troups that were encamped vpon the mountaine. Peraduenture he did it becauſe he ſaw them encloſed: and he thought, after the victorie of the plaine field was once fully aſſured, that he ſhould be able with eaſe to intercept and cutte them off: or it may be, for that the heate and furie of the fight, and the haſt which he made to follow the chaſe, did make him to forget them. But it was the occaſion that he loſt the oportunitie of ſeeing the finall ende of his aduerſarie, and of obtayning a full and abſolute triumph for that daies iourney.
            When the King of Albanie ſaw that there was litle or no daunger behind fromScanderbeg deſcendeth downe the hill into the plaine againſt Sebalias. the rereward of the enemies armie, he drew forth his ſquadrons with ſingular good aduiſe and iudgement: and deſcended downe into the plaine, according as the preſent trouble and confuſion would giue him leaue, placing his infanterie in the middeſt, and enuironning them with his horſemen. All this while did not they of the towne make any ſally forth vpon the Chriſtians, neither whileſt they fought, nor at their departure: which is a thing much to be wondered at, conſidering that the beſieged did plainly ſee what a notable aduantage their fellowes had gotten againſt their enemies, and that all things were ſafe and ſure on their part. It ſeemed they ſtood in feare (as it is often ſeene) of thoſe who were no leſſe affraied of them. Notwithſtanding at ſuch time as Scanderbeg did depart, the gates were ſpeedily ſet open, and the multitude ranne foorth to ſacke the campe of the Chriſtians, before that the ſouldiersBelgradians ſacke the camp of the Chriſtians. (who had purchaſed the victorie) could come to ioyne with them in the ſame. They tooke away at their pleaſure, whatſoeuer they thought good, but eſpecially the Artillerie, which they caried into the towne, with a notable crie and clamour teſtifying their exceeding great ioy.
            
               Scanderbeg without any care taken for the bodie of Muſache, at this time eſpecially,Scanderbeg chargeth vpon the Turkes who are in chaſe of the Chriſtians. wherein he had more need of reuenge then of ſuccours, put himſelfe with great furie in the tayle of thoſe who had the Chriſtians in chaſe, both beating and hewing them at their backes, and crying inſtantly to thoſe that fled, that they ſhould turne and make head againſt their enemies, & take the benefit of the new ſuccours which he brought them: without the which it is moſt ſure and certaine they had bene but in bad taking. Herewithall, thoſe Cornets of Turks which were left behinde for the rereward, and they alſo which had bene at the killing of Muſache and his troups, letting alone their companions: and our men which were together fighting, did ſcatter themſelues all ouer the fielde in diuerſe quarters; wholly applying themſelues, to gather the ſpoiles and prey of the dead bodies, which was an occaſion that Scanderbeg was greatly eaſed and recomforted, hauing the fitter oportunitie both to terrifie the Infidels, and to ſtop the flight of his owne people. For aſſoone as Sebalias perceiued that Scanderbeg did preſſe vppon his backe, and did hinder the courſe and honour of his victorie, he cauſed his Cornets to turne, and to wheele about, and went ſpeedily and roundly to encounter him, not without ſome loſſe both giuen and taken on both parties. After a while he withdrewe himſelfe aſide, cauſing his armie to retire and to recuile a litle, till he had renued the ranckes of his battell, and that he had

gathered together his ſouldiours that were diſperſed and diſordered. In like manner, Scanderbeg was not verie importunate vpon him whileſt he thus temporized and delayed the fight: but he emploied his thoughts likewiſe in the reallying of his forces, and reuniting them together in one. But the Barbarian could not long endure to ſuffer him, for though his owne battallions were ſore trauelled and wearied, and were not as yet fully reordered and redreſſed: yet did he beginne to preſſe vpon him, and he gaue a freſhe charge and onſet vppon our men: and (as it were) in diſdaine and mockerie, he threatned and vpbraided them: telling them, that now was the endeSpeech of Sebalias deriding and reproching the Chr
                        •
                     ſtians. come of the inſolencie and pride of the Albanian: and that he ſhould now receiue the condigne puniſhment of his rebellion: and he often repeated theſe and the like ſpeches, ſaying: that he would vtterly confound and deſtroy this handfull of Chriſtians both men and horſes. And in verie deede their numbers was much decreaſed: for beſides thoſe which were ſlaine vnder the conduct of Tanuſee, and in the chaſe as they fled before the enemie,, there were more then three thouſand ſlaine with Muſache, of which two thouſand were footmen and the reſt horſemen. Neuertheleſſe Scanderbeg (not vnlike a good and hardie pylot, who hauing gathered together the remnants of his ſhipwarcke, and hauing ſcarcely repaired the bottome of his veſſell, doth yet cheerefully prepare himſelfe with more courage then hope, to abide the extremitie of a new tempeſt): doth animate and encourage his ſouldiers to trie the fortune of a freſh combat: calling and crying vnto them with a furious terrible voice.
            
               Follow me (my friends) follow me your companion in armes, not to the conflict,Speeches of Scanderbeg encouraging his ſouldiers againſt Sebalias. but to the ſlaughter of theſe curſed dogges and miſcreants: and then ſharply blaming and reprouing them, he called ech of them after other by their names, ſaying: what cowardize is this that poſſeſſeth you? what ſtrange feare hath ſeized vpon you? ſhall we leaue the noble bodies of ſo many of our brethren, friends and kinſemen, here lying without reuenge? will all of you yeelde vp your ghoaſts vnreuenged? you haue not here any other then your wonted and old enemie, euen that enemie I ſay, whom you were wont to make the ordinarie ſubiect of your honour and reputation.
            
            In the middeſt of theſe and the like ſpeeches, (preſſed forward with conſtraint andThe battell of Belgrade betwene Sebalias & Scanderbeg. neceſſitie, which did inuite him to leaue and commit all to the pleaſure of fortune) he caſt himſelfe as a man forlorne and deſperate into the middeſt and thickeſt of the enemies ſquadrons, confirming by an aſſured proofe, & beyond all humaine reaſon, that ſaying of Homer: That amongſt all other vertues, magnanimitie of courage, is oftenSentence of Homer. accompanied with a kinde of furie and ſupernaturall violence. Thus did Scanderbeg fill all places whereſoeuer he came with bloud and terror, ſometimes beating downe thoſe that fled from him, and ſometimes thoſe which did withſtande him: as a warriour, that was inuincible and moſt fortunate. But if euer his valure did ſhew it ſelfe, it was at this time, when he farre paſſed and excelled all his former deedes and haughtie exploits. The reſt of his troupes likewiſe taking example by his valure, and being tranſported with rage and diſpaire, did breake in vpon the enemie, and ruſhed vppon their weapons, as men blinded and hardened againſt all perils, and followed their Generall through all hazards and daungers.
            But the ſudden accident and miſhappe of George Thopie, brother to Tanuſee, didGeorge Thopie his misfortune. put the reſidue in a great feare and aſtoniſhment: for he being throwen to the ground and almoſt ouerwhelmed with the ſhot of the enemie, our men had much a doe to free him out of their handes, and to ſet him on horſe backe. The infanterie of the Albanois could better ſaue themſelues from the violence of their enemies then from their horſes: for in many places they made way ouer their bellies, as they lay ouerthrowen vpon the ground, and ſo did put them to great ſcath and miſchiefe. By meanes wherof

(as there is nothing that doth more awaken the ſpirites of a man, or that doth make
                  Sentence. him more apt to deuiſe and ſubtillize a thouſand fine inuentions then doth neceſſitie) they did aduiſe themſelues of this policie: to ſeize vpon all the horſes of thoſe which were ſlaine, and which they coulde poſſiblie come by, both of their fellowes and of the Paynims: and ſpeedily they mounted vpon them with ſingular agilitie. This was the cauſe that very many of them were preſerued, and it did greatly ſtrengthen the reſt of the armie, for that their forces were by this meanes in a manner redoubled.
            By this time had Scanderbeg broken and diſordered a ſtrong troupe of the enemies horſe, and had preſſed in euen to the ſtandard & corps du gard of the Turkiſh General: endeuoring (according to his wonted cuſtome in moſt battels) to haue made the beginning of his victorie by their Chieftains death, & ſo to haue enforced them to yeeld him the honor of that iourney. But euen then at that inſtant thoſe two ſouldiers who (as we haue ſaied) had ſworne his death to the Sultan, did aduance themſelues in that front of the fight, and with their ſwords readie drawen did receiue him to the combat. At that verie time, and in the ſame place, Muſache de Angeline deſiring to ſuccourMuſache de Angeline wounded. and aide his Vncle, receiued a ſore wound vpon his right ſhoulder: and the reſt of the Epirots likewiſe being but fewe againſt many, were ſo plyed and kept doing on all handes, both in front and in flancke, and at their backes, and that ſo fiercely and ſo roundly, that they had no leiſure to looke after their chiefe commaunder, who by meanes thereof being now left alone againſt two (as it were) by a fatall kind of chance and deſtinie, did cauſe eche man to turne and bend their eyes to himwardes. For the two Mahometans both with their hands and with their voice putting backe and making their companions to retire, would needes by themſelues alone carrie away theCombat of Acmath and Barach with Scanderbeg. honour of the death of the Prince of Albanie: and they thought to reſerue to themſelues onely the prize propounded and promiſed them by the Ottoman. But it is a common ſaying: That, the foole is greatly deceiued of that he thinketh. Theſe twoA prouer be. Infidels did continue a while coaſting and courſing vp and downe round about him now here, now there, on euerie ſide, to take him at ſome aduantage. In the end eche of them ſetting ſpurres to their horſes, and with a careleſſe contempt of their owne death and daunger, they came vpon him brauely and with a full cariere charged this fierce enemie whom they hated moſt deadly and odiouſly. The notorious valour and notable prowes of Scanderbeg, ſo often tried and approued, did greatly comfort the carefull harts of the Albanois, as one whom they had often receiued victorious and triumphant, not of two onely, but of more enemies all at once. Notwithſtanding,Sentence. as feare maketh men to caſt many doubts; ſo the brauerie of the enemies, and their audacious defie giuen to the Prince of Epire, did make many of them to ſuſpect the iſſue of the combat. Wherefore immediately they aduanced forward with their ſquadrons, and whileſt matters ſtood yet in good caſe and entire, they enforced themſelues to their vttermoſt power to ſecond their King againſt his enemies. But he in the meane time bearing vp cloſe to both of them, did reach a full blow to the head ofBarach ſlaine by Scanderbeg. 
               Barach, and lighting vpon his face did cut him ouer the eyes, and cleft his head almoſt in twaine. The other after many blowes paſt betweene them, and no bloud drawen on neither partie, let his ſworde fall out of his hand, and immediately the Turke being verie actiue, preſſed cloſe to him with his horſe, and claſping both his armes about his necke, and forſaking his ſtirruppes and his horſe, with the whole weight of his bodie, he hanged vpon the ſhoulder of Scanderbeg, thinking to haue forced him, and to haue pulled him to the ground together with himſelfe, The Infidels deſirous to aide their companion gaue in preſently, and enuironned the Epirot Prince on all ſides. But their labour was in vaine: for Scanderbeg hauing cut off the

heade from his bodie as it did hang vppon him, freed himſelfe from the burthenAcmath ſlaine by Scanderbeg. of his enemie. You may be ſure, that this acte did notably encreaſe the courage of the Chriſtians, and made them to follow deſperately after their Generall, beating downe great numbers of the Barbarians: who now began to ſhrinke, committing a great and mightie ſlaughter amongeſt them. Theſe beginnings and firſt-fruites of victorie, did miniſter occaſion of much ſorrow vnto the Infidels and vnto the Chriſtians of great ioy and comfort: and it was taken as a good ſigne and happie token of the returne of their good fortune. But the ſtrength of their bodies, and the daylight alſo fayling both the one and the other all alike, they were enforced for that time, to giue place vnto the night. Sebalias was the firſt that made ſhew either of his feare that he durſt not, or of his wearineſſe that he could not endure the fightSebalias with his armie retireth firſt from the battell. anie longer. Whereupon all his companies, by the commaundement of their Captaines, made cloſe vp to their colours, and ſo retyred themſelues to the mountaine, before that the darkeneſſe of the night ſhould ouertake them in the field. The Prince of Epyre being farre ſpent with labour and trauell, and full of griefe and ſorrowe inſupportable, did the like alſo with his armie, ſeizing vpon an other mountaine diſtant about two miles from the enemie. There did he ſtay till it was two houres within night: at which time he diſlodged verie ſecretly, neither him ſelfe nor hisRetrait of Scanderbeg ſouldiers hauing had any refreſhing at all, either of ſleepe or victuals. For (poore ſoules) neither had they any thing to eate, neither had they any deſire thereunto, by reaſon of the extreame griefe and anguiſh of their hearts, which tooke from them all care both of meate and drinke.
            The Baſſa for that night did not enter into the towne, but hauing ſtore of victualles brought him by the Burgeſſes of Belgrade: he lodged his armie, partly in the mountaines, and partly in the ſuburbes. And placing good and ſtrong courts of gard and Sentinelles on all ſides, he celebrated his victorie with great ioy and triumph. For he was perſwaded that the Chriſtians would haue ſtayed there the reſt of the night: and that the next morning freſh and faſting, as men that were not vſed to be beaten, and that would ſeeke to repaire their honour loſt: they would haue aduentured themſelues to a ſecond battell. Wherefore hauing ſet all things in a readineſſe and in good order: by the breake of day he deſcended into the playne, ſending foorth many companies to skirmiſh with the Chriſtians, and to drawe them foorth to the fight: for although about two houres in the night he had heard a noyſe, and did diſcerne ſome ſignes, that might ſignifie their departure, yet he did beleeue, that they were remoued onely to ſome other place, where they might eyther reſt more ſecurely, or more commodiouſly dreſſe ſome ambuſcado to entrappe him and his armie. And this alſo was the cauſe that he durſt not ſende foorth his forces to ouerrunne and ſpoile the countrie, doubting leaſt he might thereby diſgrace the honour of this victorie, it being a thing verie vnuſuall with the Turkes to haue ſuch a hand of the Epyrots: and beſides the inconſtancie of fortune being an ordinarie chaunce in the warres more then in any other thing whatſoeuer. He was not therefore much diſcontented either with the flight of the Chriſtians, or becauſe he had loſt the opportunitie of fight with them againe: belike he was induced thereunto by an exceeding iealouzie of this aduantage ſo vnaccuſtomed, and of the good fortune which had befallen him, being deſirous not to looſe it after he had once gotten it. And theSebalias his want of courage in not purſuing the victory againſt the Albanois. former daies iourney did ſeeme to teſtifie no leſſe, becauſe that he being the firſt that ſounded the retrait, did therein bewray, that either he confeſſed himſelfe to be wearied and faint harted, as hauing the worſt: or elſe that he was vnwilling to renue the fight: and that he had no great deſire to meddle any more with the enemie. For I

make no doubt if Sebalias had the corage to haue preſſed hard and roundly vpon the 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , he might that day haue ended the warre of Epire: by reaſon that there was 
                  ••••
                or 
                  ••
                diſaduauntage to the one more then to the other: either in reſpect of then extreame 
                  ••••
               neſſe, or of the diſcommodity of the time: but rather if any were, the 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                had the aduantage by the great ods of their numbers, which being all h
                  〈…〉
                exceeded and ſurpaſſed the power of the Epirots, who if they could haue found any benefite or hope of ſafety by flying, there is no doubt but they would haue fled away roundly at the firſt. But becauſe the Infantery of the Albanois found that by fighting 
                  ••••
               antly, they had moſt certainety and hope to eſcape, and they were loath to acknowledge o
                  •
                makeſhew in what extremity and miſchiefe they were, eſpecially to ſuch an enemy whom they knew to be moſt inſolent, and would be puffed vp with proſperity▪ therefore their corages began to be reuiued and encreaſed, and the Turkes contra
                  ••
               wiſe grew to be abated, till at length the benefite and oportunity of the night did ſtay the courſe of their proceedings; and did helpe forward the preſeruation and eſtate of their affaires, which was 
                  •
               ar
                  ••
                in a caſe ſo vnfortunate and deſperate. And it may be that the goodneſſe of God had prouided and ordained that matters ſhould ſo fall out in that manner: to the intent the honor and reputation of ſo many faire exploits ſhould not be obſcured, nor the ſubiect of their future glory ſhould not be cutte off nor preuented, nor that the S
                  ••
               p
                  •••
                of Epire ſhould come to decay and confuſion, before ſuch time (in a manner) as it were fully raiſed and eſtabliſhed.
            The Barbarians finding their enemies to be departed, & that all places round aboutTurkes their barbarous cruelty vpon the dead bodies of the Chriſtians. were cleare and free from them, and that the countrey remained at their diſpoſition, who were now maiſters of the field, moſt inſolently they laied hands vppon the dead bodies of the Chriſtians, and conuerted the reſidue of their choller and deſpite againſt their ſ
                  ••
               ſl
                  •
               ſſe members, which they were not able to execute vpon them during their liues. Many were found yet breathing and gaſping for life, eſpecially thoſe who being troden vnder foote by the horſes, and hauing their legs and lims bruiſed and broken, did lie vpon the ground in pitifull plight, not able to helpe themſelues either by flying or fighting▪ of whom ſome of them, hauing their handes cut off were left languiſhing moſt miſerably. The report is, that many of them being grieuouſly wounded, torne, and mangled, and hauing bin beaten downe with the maces of the Turkes, and left for dead, did afterwards in the night ſecretly conuey them ſelues out of the field into other places neare adioyning of more ſurety: frō whence after that the danger was paſt, they came ſate to Croy. There were ſlaine in that fight of the Chriſtians, about 5000. men,Number of Chriſtians ſlain at the battell of Belgrade. 3000. foot, and the reſt horſemen: of the Neapolitan ſuccors, there were few or none that eſcaped: for the greateſt part of thē being with Muſache, incurred the ſame fortune and aduenture that he had, only ſome few ſquadrons of them had Scanderbeg kept and reſerued with himſelf in the mountain, whoſe harguebuſſes & other weapons in that 
                  •
               odainneſſe of the charge were to ſmall purpoſe, and did in a maner litle or no ſeruice: and ſome alſo of the Albanois which were found di
                  •
               armed or ſadling of their horſes, were oppreſſed by the Infidels: of priſoners they had about foureſcore. But the moſtNumber of Chriſtians taken priſoners as Belgrade. hideous & horrible ſight of al the reſt, was to ſee theſe bruit beaſts the Barbarians who had nothing in them appertaining to men but the ſhape only; vpon a deſire which they had to reſerue ſome marke of their pr
                  •
               uat vertue and valour, they went vp and downe amongſt the dead bodies yet panting 
                  ••
                breathing, and after they had deſpoiled them,Turkes cut off the heads of the ſlaine Chriſtians to cary with them in triumph
                     •
                  . & left them ſtarke naked, they cut off their heads according to their accuſtomed guiſe and faſhion. And in as much as the length of their iourney, & the intemperatnes of the heat, did make them to putrifie and ſt
                  ••
               ke, when they found the cariage of them to be loathſome, they did flea them, and re
                  •••
               uing the skins onely, which retained the ſhew

and forme of their viſ
                  •
               ge, they 
                  〈…〉
                them with ſtraw and ſo caried them. This barbarous 
                  〈…〉
               elty was ex
                  ••••
               ed vpon many of them eſpecially thoſe whoſe cou
                  〈…〉
                & aſpect, or their names hauing made thē better known the
                  〈…〉
                did cauſe them to be held worthy of this outrage and 
                  ••
               ious vſage
                  •
                and not onely was the head of 
                  
                     •••
                  ſ
                     •
                  che appointed to 
                  〈…〉
               y and diſhonor, but his body alſo being diſmembred and cut in quarters▪ was diſperſed in diuerſe places ouer the countrey, as if they had bene the quarters of ſome notable th
                  •••
               es or infamous traitors. The trunks likewiſe of the reſi
                  •
               ue were drawen aſide into the vallies
                  •
               rid places adioyning, being left for a prey to beaſts and birds to the intent their ſtench ſhould not infect the inhabi
                  ••••
               . To make ſhort, they might do what they liſted and without contradiction of any perſon, for that Caſtriot was farre enough from them.
            
               Standerbeg being more perplexed and efflicted with the griefe of this misfortune,Scanderbeg re
                  
                     ••
                  eth his army with new ſupplies. the deſtitute of hope to be reuenged, had filled vp the reliques of his army with a new ſupply of freſh ſouldiers, and had ſhut vp and fortified certaine paſſages in the woods and thicken of the mountaines, for feare leaſt the Turke, purſuing the victory, ſhould enter farther into the country. He was often in the mind, & gladly would he haue vndertaken ſome new and deſperat aduenture to haue auenged himſelfe vpon the enemy and to make further proofe of his fortune, which cōmonly doth ſmile & fawne againe vpon them, whom the hath caſt downe headlong from the 
                     •••
                   of her wheele, & hathSentence. made to taſte the extremity of her wrath and anger▪ ſo forward are we ſomtimes to haſten our owne daunger: but partly the vnmeaſurable force
                  •
                and fierceneſſe of the enemy, and the confidence of his late victory, and partly the length of the iourney, and the woundes of his ſouldiours yet grieuing them, did detaine him from attempting any ſuch action. The bruite of this diſcomfiture did ſpeedily fill all the countrey neareDiuers reports and rumors of the battell of Belgrade. adioyning, and all Epire with the fame thereof: and proceeding on more and more, it cauſed great griefe and infinit plaints in all places. For ſome reported that all the army was dicomfited, & the king himſelfe ſlaine▪ whether it were that they ſo coniectured, or that the common ſort did of themſelues ſo report, as it is the nature of the popular and vulgar ſort, willingly to oary newes of ſome notable leaſings, though it be neuer ſo dolorous: others building belike vpon the ſame reaſon, did giue out, that the whole army was defeated, but that Scanderbeg himſelfe alone, after long and wonderfull fight, was eſcaped ſafe by the fauor & ſwiftnes of his horſe. The moſt likely report, and that which came nigheſt to the truth was that a great number of the Epirots were ſlaine, & that Scanderbeg had ſhewed ſuch incredible proofe of a rare and diuine body, and of an invincible valour, that by the vertue of his owne proweſſe onely, he had broken the forces of the enemies, and abated their corages, and had wholly bereſt them of the honor of the battell, and that he was retired ſafe and ſound neare to Croy with the remainder of his army. Notwithſtanding in all places was to be heard nothing but lamentations, cries, and exclamations: the ancient mat
                  •
               ones and all their families continuing in teares and extreame ſorrow: and albeit they had not as yet any certainety, why they ſhould be diſcomforted or diſmaied, yet did they in griefe and mourning, attend and expect their funerals, as if they had ſeene them euen then before their eies.
            Hitherto and till this preſent, the happy and continuall good ſucceſſe of the affaires of Scanderbeg, had held in ſuſpence the infidelity of Moſes, and the rebellion earſt conceiued and concealed in his mind: but now upon this misfortune of the battell of Belgrade, and aſſo
                  ••
               e as the calamity of the Chriſtians was knowen and publiſhed, his diſloialty became alſo to be diſcloſed▪ for then taking hold on that occaſion ſo long &Moſes his re
                  
                     ••
                  lt from Scanderbeg. ſo greatly deſired, moſt impio
                  •
               ſly he conu
                  •••
               ed his armes againſt his natiue country, friends and kindred: beginning euen then to breake in peeces, and to ſcatter the remnants

of the ſhipwracke, to the repairing whereof, himſelfe before time had put to his helping hand, and which many times he had defended & preſerued. And becauſe the fact being odious in it ſelfe would ſeeme much the more diſhoueſt, if he ſhould rebell alone without any cōpanions, he thought he would procure ſome to ioine with him, as his complices and copartners, perſwading himſelfe, that the more there were found guilty & partakers of his treaſon, the more ſhould he both leſſen his own diſgrace and infamy, & it would be a mean alſo that he ſhould preſent him ſelf to the Ottoman with the greater countenance, credit and authority, who perhaps would diſdaine him, and not make any great account of him, if he ſhould come alone as a meane fugitiue and ill accompanied. For this cauſe he plotted with him ſelf how to ſeduce ſome of his moſt inward and neareſt friends and familiars, ſuch as he thought fitteſt for that purpoſe. To thē he began with a good countenance firſt to deplore the eſtate of Scanderbeg and the deſolation of Epire, then cunningly did he inſinuat and make known vnto them how the Turkiſh monark did beare him great good loue & liking, what offers he had made him to draw him to reuolt: and with great ſtore of good words did he entiſe them to take his part, & to embarke themſelues in this conſpiracy. He layd open vnto them by
                  Speeches of Moſes to ſome of his friends perſwading thē to conſort with him in his reuolt frō Scanderbeg. the diſcourſe of diuers matters, that the fortune of Epire being now altered and changed, they ſhould be conſtrained, if they did reiect the benefit of the time preſent, to ſubmit themſelues ere long to all miſeries and indignities. And what reaſon haue we (ꝙ he) to continue and liue euer vnder the fortune of Scanderbeg? to what purpoſe ſhould we employ our labor and ſpend our liues to amplifie and enlarge the glory of another? ſeeing the great Monarke of the Ottoman Empire, will elſewhere beſtow vppon vs great honor, and will giue vs good aſſurance to make vs great, and to aduaunce vs to high authority. In the end with many falſe and ſlaunderous accuſations inueighing againſt Scanderbeg, he alienated them from their allegeance, and allured them to beare a part with him in his rebellion. It may be that he would haue ſollicited many more to reuolt with him, and that he would haue drawen the common people alſo to the deuotion of the Sultan: but the name of Caſtriot, and the gracious manner of the gouernment was ſo deeply fixed in the hearts and mindes of all men, that it would haue bene more eaſie for him (as the ſaying is) to ſeparat the ſhadow frō the body, then to aboliſh or to extirpat the loue and good liking of Scanderbeg, which was ſo rooted in the affections of the communalty: for he well knew that their faith was not ſubiect to any change or variation of fortune, and that their loyalty would neuer faile nor periſh, but with the loſſe & end of their bodies & liues. And therfore the Dibrian being in doubt that he ſhould not onely loſe his labour, but he might alſo endanger his owne life and ſafety, he durſt not attempt any ſuch matter: but holding himſelf contented with thoſe conſpirators which he had already gained: after he had prouided all things in a readineſſe,Moſes his departure to the enemy. & appointed the houre for their departure, in the dead of the night he lead them to Sfetigrade there to take letters and a ſafe conduct from the gouernor, to the intent he might paſſe free throughout the dominions of the Paynims, and ſo trauell forwards to the Court of the Ottoman. The Gouernor receiued him louingly, granting him whatſoeuer he asked, both letters and armed ſouldiers to conuey him ſafely on his iourney.
            
               Sebalias remained a few daies at Belgrade, till ſuch time as he had repaired certaineBelgrade repaired and revictualled by Sebalias. bulwarkes, and had fortified the wals with earth and fagots, in ſuch places as the enemies ordinance had battered them. The ſhortnes of the time would not permit him to fortifie with ſtone and ſuch ſolid matter, becauſe he had not leiſure enough to prouide them, yet did he take order for it before his departure, and amongſt other prouiſions, he procured the place to be furniſhed with great ſtore and quantity of graine, victuals and other prouiſions, for that he had added to the old garriſon more then 700. men all

approued and expert ſouldiers. The artillery that was won from the Chriſtians was left to the towne, except certaine litle peeces, as harguebuſſes and croſſebowes, which he reſerued with the other ſpoiles of the dead bodies to beautifie the pompe of his triumph, and to preſent them to the king. Belgrade being abundantly prouided & defended, the Chriſtian hoſtages redeliuered to the citizens, and they alſo highly praiſed & commended: he tooke his leaue of them (who were both fearefull & ſorrowfull for his departure) and with great ioy & contentment he tooke his iorney to Andrinople: yet had he alſo iuſt occaſion of griefe & ſorrow to moderat & abate his exceeding ioy (albeit to men who were not accuſtomed to be victorious, nothing ſeemed ſo excellent and glorious as this victorie.) For on his part alſo there fell litle leſſe then 3000.Number of Turkes ſlaine at the battell of Belgrade. at the battell before Belgrade: and thoſe two gallants, whoſe bloud made ſome amends for the funerals of Muſache, might be well reckoned for a good recompence of their ioy conceiued by ſo bloudie a victorie. Before their departure the Turkes cauſed diuerſe pits to be digged (as is the manner amongſt ſouldiers) wherein all thoſe that had bene ſlaine of their ſide were interred: for feare leaſt the Chriſtians (returning to take the number of thoſe which they had loſt, and to burie them which were ſlaine) ſhould ſeeke in ſome ſort to be reuenged, by tearing and deforming the dead carcaſſes of their enemies. But now I come againe to our fugitiue.
            The morning after the departure of the Dibrian, aſſoone as he was found lacking, you may eaſily coniecture, what tumult, ſtirre and aſtoniſhment did ariſe amongſt theGarriſon of Dibria troubled at the departure of Moſes. companies of the garriſon: and how greatly they were grieued, eſpecially thoſe that were his neareſt and moſt familiar friends. They ſought him vp and downe here and there in great care and perplexitie. Some thought that he was ſeeretly gone to eſpy & diſcouer vpon the enemie, and that he was either dead or taken: or if not ſo, that then he would returne ſpeedily. But many being of a deepe conceit and iudgement, and giuing a coniecture by the former conſultations & ſecret aſſemblies of the day laſt paſt, wherein he and others had drawen themſelues aſide in counſell, they did miſtruſt that which was indeed: and their opinion was reputed the more likely and probable, becauſe they which were ſuſpected with him, were not to be ſeene at all. This was the occaſion that the Dibrians, but aboue all the ſouldiours of the garriſon were in great feare and aſtoniſhment, becauſe they ſaw the enemies to be victorious and yet remaining in Epire, and themſelues deſtitute of a head and commander. And their griefe was exceeding great, to ſee that their Prince ſhould be deceiued by them, whom he would leaſt of all haue miſtruſted. Neuertheleſſe, according to the time, by publique conſent, and moſt voyces of the ſouldiours, they prouided themſelues of a Chiefetaine, and of all things elſe that ſeemed requiſite for the time preſent.
            Amongſt the moſt noble and chiefeſt young men of the countrey, there were twoDemetrius and Nicholas bretheren of the family of the Beriſſians. bretheren Demetrius and Nicholas, highly commended and honored for the greatnes of their ancient houſe and family of the Beriſsians, and they had bene much and often noted to haue done the king of Epire good and faithfull ſeruice, by many valiant deeds of armes, and in diuerſe notable aduentures. Theſe two vnderſtanding the misfortune of their army, and the hard iſſue of the ſiege of Belgrade, and hauing notice likewiſe of the reuolt of Moſes, made with all ſpeede towardes the garriſon in the frontiers of the kingdom, doubting leaſt that either the feare of that ſodaine accident, or the licentiouſneſſe of the ſouldiers, ſhould cauſe them to disband themſelues: and ſo the paſſages of the Prouince might be left naked without any defence or cuſtody, eſpecially for that the report went: that Sebalias Mahomet his lieutenaunt was yet abiding in the countrey. Firſt of all therefore with good aduiſe and ready debiberation, and with no leſſe diligence, they made a leauy of ſome new forces, and ſtrengthened the garriſon,

heartening and animating them both by words and by deeds, willing them to be of a good courage, and to teſtifie their good affections towardes Scanderbeg, by ſhewing themſelues his good friends, and their willing deuotion to doe him ſeruice, and with a ſingular compaſſion of their Prince his misfortune, they deteſted and abhorred the infidelity of Moſes, telling them, that they doubted greatly, and it was likely he had conueied himſelfe from thence to helpe to bring in the Infidell, and that it would not be long 
                  •
               re he would come thither. All this was eaſily beleeued, & therefore the ſouldiers were retired into a place of more ſtrength, and all things were ſettled well and in good order, as if they had expected the enemy preſently. Theſe matters being thus eſtabliſhed, Demetrius leauing his brother with the garriſon, & being accompanied with certaine Gentlemen Dibrians, tooke his way towards Scanderbeg, making very long and painefull iourneis to aduertiſe him of the eſtate of the Dibrians.
            
            In the meane time, certaine ſpies (which had bene purpoſely ſent abroad, and diſperſed ouer the plaine countrey) did bring certaine newes, that Sebalias was departed from Belgrade, and gone away quite out of Epire: Howbeit for all that, the Prince of Epire either for ſhame or for griefe of his late calamity, being vnwilling to behold ſo vnpleaſing a ſpectacle, had no minde at all to viſite that place ſo odious vnto him, by meanes of that vnfortunate battell, and where he ſhould come but to the freſh view of his misfortunes, and to the renuing of his griefe and ſorrow: neither had he any care or deſire to ſee thoſe who were now dead, whom he could not preſerue and ſaue when they were aliue. Yet becauſe his ſouldiers, and the kinſmen of thoſe which were ſlaine,Speech of the ſouldiers of Scanderbeg deſiring that their fellowes ſlain at Belgrade may be buried. Sentence. did murmure and exclaime, ſaying: That there was no reaſon their bodies being ſo lately ſlaine, ſhould be defrauded of their ſepulture, nor be left to the ſauage and bruit beaſts to prey and tire vppon: and for that he would not ſeeme to giue them any iuſt cauſe of offence or diſcontentment, he condiſcended vnto their demand, telling them: that it was a vaine and friuolous kind of honour (though very gratefull and acceptable) to ſtand ſo preciſely vpon the buriall and funerals of the dead. So notably doth the exceeding vehemency of mens paſſions make them many times to forget themſelues, and to decline frō al reaſon and vnderſtanding. Neuertheles becauſe that thoſe which ſhould be ſent to performe that duty of Chriſtian charity vnto others, might not draw on a farther miſchiefe and dammage vpon themſelues, and by their owne deſtruction encreaſe rather then ſolemnize their obſequies, if they ſhould go thither either weake in number or in confuſion, and without order: he made choiſe therefore of 7000. theTanuſee ſent with an army to bury the Chriſtians ſlain at Belgrade. beſt & moſt able men of all his bands, that they might be the better able to aſſure them ſelues in their voyage againſt all the enterpriſes of the miſcreants, and to oppoſe them ſelues againſt any ſallies of the Belgradians. Tanuſee made great ſuite and entreaty to haue the conduct and charge of this company, which being granted him accordingly, he tooke great care for all things that concerned this iourney, and eſpecially for the body of his good friend Muſache. Wherefore with great ſpeed he tooke his leaue of the king, and without any colours, ſtandards, or other warlike ornamentes, he made haſt away towardes Belgrade.
            
            
               Scanderbeg being now returned towardes Croy, the multitude came forth to meete him without the gate: and albeit they had many times before, and by diuerſe meſſengers hard the newes of the misfortune of Belgrade: eſpecially by thoſe ſouldiers whom (being wounded in the fight) Scanderbeg had ſent away preſently vpon the loſſe of the battell: yet neuertheleſſe it was ſome comfort vnto theſe poore and vnhappy ſoules, to enquire more fully & at large of all things in particular, by ſuch as were laſt returned from the Campe: and the rather for that many falſe tales and contrary reports had bin giuen out (as is vſuall): or they had an imagination belike, that the preſence of their

Prince ſhould haue reuiued, and redeliuered vnto them thoſe which were dead and gone. The wiues, the men, the old and young all alike would pull the Captaines and the ſouldiours, without any reſpect of perſons, ſome by the hand, others by the caſſocks: and with a pitifull complaining voice would redemaund of them their bretheren, their husbands, and their children: whom they accounted and held as their moſt precious and deareſt pledges. Others would in a maner conſtraine and compell them, euen againſt their wils, to tell them that which in the end cauſed their griefe, and their greater ſorrow and diſcontentment. Some there were alſo who hauing heard comfortable newes which they neither hoped nor looked for: yet fearing leaſt they ſhould offend the troubled minds of others with their new ioy, they concealed their contentment, and conformed them ſelues in outward ſhew to do as others did, deploring the common and particular misfortune of euery one both in publique & in priuate. And there was not any of them (excepting ſuch as ſaw their friendes there preſent and in 
                  •
               ight, that had any full and hearty contentment: by reaſon that this ſecond iourney to Belgrade made for the buriall of the dead, did keepe them in continuall feare, yeelding new cauſe of care and griefe.
            
               Demetrius with the reſt of the Gentlemen of Dibria his companions, hauing ouertaken Scanderbeg vpon the way in his retrait from Belgrade, and euen as he was vpon entring into Croy, at their comming to his preſence, did firſt begin (as it were) condolingSpeeches of Demetrius and others to Scanderbeg comforting him vpon his misfortune. his misfortune, to complaine vppon the vnchangeableneſſe and vncertainety of worldly matters, and the variation of Fortune: which (ſayd they) is ſo variable and inconſtant, that ſhee will not ſuffer the proſperous and happy eſtate, eſpecially of great men, to be perpetuall or of any long continuance, but that ordinarily ſhee doth interrupt the courſe of their beſt and nobleſt enterpriſes which they think to put in execution: and though by the law of her inſtability, ſhee doth ſubiect euen the greateſt Monarchs and conquerors to the trial & experience of her croſſes and trauerſes, eſpecially in deeds of armes, and in the wars: yet he for his part was greatly bounden to praiſe the diuine clemency, that he was ſo well quit and diſcharged ofſo dangerous a miſchiefe:Fortune is nothing but a fancy. and that he ought to take this alteration valiauntly and couragiouſly, not as ſent vnto him by fortune (which in trueth is nothing but a meere fancy) but from God himſelfe for the good and wellfare of Epire, as being needefull and neceſſary to arme and harden the Epirots againſt the daunger, or rather inſolency of their continuall proſperity. The which for the moſt part doth make the noble and generous ſpirites to grow inSentence. contempt of their enemies, to neglect all care of diſcipline of armes, and in the end bringeth them to ruine & deſtruction. In this maner did they frame and hold on their diſcourſe, their ſpeeches being ſomtimes intermingled with teares, and ſo fitted to ſorrow & mourning, that it ſeemed they alone did beare the griefe of his miſfortune. AfterDeparture of Moſes made knowen vnto Scanderbeg. all this they fell to comforting of him, and carying their countenance with a ſingular aſſurance, they came at length to the fact of Moſes, and concluding their talke with that matter, they did principally inſiſt vpno this point, that it was to be feared leaſt he were gone to Sebalias, to certify him of the eſtate of the realm, & to draw him to Epire.
            
            At the firſt Scanderbeg ſtood as one aſtoniſhed, and was in a maner beſide himſelfe, remaining a good while without ſence or perſeueraunce. After a while as one that did more deſire to enquire further of matters, then to beleeue any thing that was told him, he ſpent ſome time in queſtioning with them. How mightely this good Prince was afflicted, and how deepely he found himſelfe offended by this iniury, they may eaſily imagine who haue receiued an vnkindnes of their friend, from whom any wrong is more intollerable and more hard to be endured, then from one of whom aSentence. man expecteth not any gracious nor good vſage: & ſo did Scanderbeg conceiue more

griefe at this fault and trecherie of his friend, then at the diſcomfiture and calamitie ſuſtained at Belgrade. Notwithſtanding with a princely voyce (as he was accuſtomed) he ſaid openly and aloud, ſo as he might eaſily be heard: That he did pardon Moſes
                  Speech of Scanderbeg of the reuolt of Moſes. with all his heart, becauſe ſuch was the misfortune which had alienated him frō him, as might haue made the moſt conſtant man liuing, to haue varied in his faith, and to haue fallen away from him. In ſo much alſo, that when the meſſengers and other the ſtanders by did accuſe him, that he had long ſince forethought and conceiued this rebellion in his mind, ſaying and alledging, that that onely was the reaſon why he diſſwaded the iourney of Sfetigrade, and did abſent him ſelfe from the ſiege of Belgrade, 
               the better to put his miſchieuous practiſe in execution (ſo prone are men to iudge &Sentence. interpret all things by their euents.) Scanderbeg (as growing in choler) commanded them to leaue thoſe ſpeeches: and ſpeaking out aloud, he vſed theſe words; O that it were the good will and pleaſure of God, that all treaſon & ſiniſter fortune were gone with Moſes out of Epire. As for that ſuſpition which was conceiued with ſome likelihood, that he ſhould bring in the Turkes into the countrey, that point did not much trouble him, becauſe he was credibly informed, that he was departed out of all the frontiers of Albany, & was poſting on with all ſpeed towards Andrinople Neuertheles becauſe the matter was of importance, & it behoued him to take away this terror outScanderbeg 
                     •
                  iſiteth the garriſon of Dibria. of the timerous minds of his ſubiects: & it was needful to cōfirmethe prouince which ſtood in ſome doubt by reaſon of this vnaccuſtomed accident & vnuſuall calamity: he wold ſcarce tary at Croy that night, but the next morning by the breake of day, he took his iourny into Dibria, being accompanied with Ameſe & a good troup of horſemen.
            By this time was Tanuſee come to Belgrade, where being diſcouered by the citizēs, they begā to be in as great a feare as before, & they ran ſpeedily to the wals, euery man haſting to his charge, & to his place that was appointed him: for many thought that heTanuſee before Belgrade. was come to begin a new ſiege, & they did not imagin the true occaſion of his comming: but the ſmalneſſe of his numbers, & the confuſed maner of his marching being more nearly diſcouered and perceiued, they were ſoone freed from that ſudden feare. The Epirots coming to the place where the bodies of the Chriſtians their companiōs lay ſo mangled and deformed, they could not refraine from many grieuous and bitter teares, at the ſight ofſo horrible and piteous a ſpectacle. And that (which more augmented their griefe and ſorow) was by reaſon of certaine women, who dwelling not far off, followed thither after Tanuſee (as the report goeth) to ſearch for ſome of their friends. But it was almoſt impoſſible or very difficult for them to beſtow their teares vpon the right bodies, or to honor the corpſes ofthoſe which they intended. For they were a companie of diſguiſed trunks and carkaſſes, all naked, many without heads, others disfigured, and their faces ſo corrupted, that they had not only loſt their peculiar ſhape and figure, and were impoſſible to be knowne: but they retained in a maner no ſhew nor reſemblance of humane creatures. Beſides that many of them had their fleſh gnawen to the bones by the wilde beaſtes and rauens. Yet poore ſoules, did they bemoane euerie bodie which they found, taking them for their friends, and neither could the ſtench, nor the corruption ſeparat theſe people from the bodies which they ſo ardently deſired. But to make ſhort: their eyes hauing had their fill of looking, and their griefe being ſomewhat eaſed and ſatisfied by the abundance of their teares,Chriſtians ſlain at Belgrade buried by Tanuſee and the Epirots. they were enforced by Tanuſee to digge vp manie little pits, and therein to butie them, the earth whereof being againe caſt vppon them, did make a ſhewe ofſo manie little hilles, or mountainets. Wherefore the earth being put to earth, and the funerals fully ended, their ſorow and lamentation likewiſe ceaſed and had an ende. Scanderbeg could not haue made choiſe of a fitter man to ſee this office executed, then

               Tanuſee Thopie: for when he had performed the obſequies with as great affection as was poſſible, and had diſcharged the deuoire of his amitie & friendſhip to his friends and companions: becauſe he would not haue it thought, that he was come thither to that onely intent, and ſo ſhould returne mocked and ſcorned by the enemie, he ſought out ſome fit matter whereupon to diſplay his rage and choler, and to leaue them ſome ſubiect and occaſion likewiſe of griefe and lamentation. For this cauſe he ſent abrode his ſoldiers ouer all the fields lying within view and ſight of Belgrade, who made notableTanuſee ſpoyleth 
                     ••
                   burneth all the countrey about Belgrade hauocke of all things with ſword and fire: not ſparing either trees, vines, or any thing elſe: and giuing the citizens a moſt lamentable ſpectacle through the ſpoile and deſolation of all the countrey round about them. And not content therewithall, he proceeded yet further: for paſſing on euen cloſe to the wals (which he might well do without any great danger) he omitted not to do them any dammage, miſchiefe, and diſpleaſure, which his wrath and furie could inflict vpon them. Some haue affirmed, and many do confirme no leſſe, that the garriſon iſſued out, & made a braue ſally forthSally made by the Belgradiās vpon Tanuſee & the Epirots, who repulſed them. vpon them: and partly with their ordinance, and partly with the aduenture of their perſons, did ſeeke to beate them from the walles, hauing firſt ſet fire on their ſuburbs, and that after a long, ſharpe, and bloudie skirmiſh (wherein the Chriſtians had the better) they were beaten backe within their gates. Whereupon becauſe Tanuſee ſtood in doubt leſt the next garriſons of the Turkiſh frontiers might come vpon him, and ſuddenly oppreſſe him, he would not giue anie further attempt againſt them: but with a million of curſes and execrations, he left and abandoned thoſe vnfortunat places, which were ſo infamous by the ruine and ſlaughter of the Chriſtians.
            
               Scanderbeg at his being in Dibria held many counſels & great aſſemblies, wherein he conſulted with the moſt graue and auncient perſons of that countrey: endeuoring aboue all things to ſift and ſearch out if there were any other conſpirators or conſorts of Moſes yet remaining in the prouince, or any ſecret ſparks or tract of his treaſon left behind him. And beſides all priuie and ſecret meanes vſed to enquire of it, there was publike proclamation made with ſound of trumpet, promiſing a great ſumme of money to thoſe that could and ſhould detect any ſuch conſpirators. But there was not found ſo much as any ſhew of ſuſpition of any ſuch matter. And therfore the Dibrians were highly commended for their loyaltie, and the aſſured conſtancie of their faith. Beſides that, he beſtowed great & bountiful rewards amongſt them, to continue them in their good deuoire and dutie. Moſes his goods, and ſuch penſions & offices wherewithMoſes his goods and liuings ſeized and confiſcated. 
               Scanderbeg had before honored and aduanced him, were confiſcated and ſeized to the kings coffers, and reſumed into his hands: many of which he beſtowed vpon particular perſons. The Gouernorſhip of the countrey and garriſon of Dibria was retained ſtill in the kings hands, and beſtowed vpon no man, but was kept voyd for a ſeaſon by the good liking and conſent of all▪men, eſpecially of the ſouldiers. The affaires of the Dibrians being thus ordered and put in good aſſurance with a good and ſtrong garriſon, he returned thence to Croy, where Tanuſee was alſo then ariued with his armie, the which he hauing reſigned into the hands of the Prince, he retired himſelfe in extreme griefe and ſorow to his owne houſe, where at his returne, the lamentations, ſighes, and ſorowes began afreſh to berenewed amongſt the friends and kinſmen of Muſache, euery body grieuing and mourning for his miſchance. And Mamiſa
               Mamiza the wife of Muſache celebrateth the obſequies of her husband. the widow of the deceaſed, hauing called together (according to the cuſtome of that natiō) many Ladies, Gentle womē & graue matrons, did celebrate the obſequies of her husband: longtime mourning & bewailing his death, & neuer ceaſing day nor night with abūdance of tears, to lamēt the loſſe of him which ſhe held moſt deare vnto her.
            
               Scanderbeg hauing diſmiſſed his owne army, did determine alſo to ſend away thoſe

               Neapolitans which were left aliue after the battel of Belgrade: and together with themAmbaſſade ſent to Alphonſus king of Naples▪ and the Italian ſuccours returned home. an Ambaſſade to the king Alphonſus, to certifie him of the truth of his misfortune, and to excuſe himſelfe. Accordingly aſſoone as they were in caſe to trauell, he courteouſly thanked them of their paines and companie, and ſo embarked them for Italie: which done, he tooke his iourney into the countrey appertaining to Muſache, towards his ſiſter, both to mitigate their publicke and priuate ſorrowe, and in this time of affliction and diſcouragement, to aduiſe vpon the affaires of his eſtate. Tanuſee was appointed to be Tutour and Gardian of the perſon and goods of his nephewes: who did continually carrie him ſelfe with ſuch loue, ſinceritie, care, and diligence, that greater could not haue bene found in a kind and naturall father. The honour, title, and dignitie, with the Signiorie of the countrey, did remaine in the mother, whoMamiſa her praiſes & perfections. mannaged that Eſtate▪ and gouerned the people with ſuch moderation and dexteritie of ſpirite, that there was neuer ſeene greater concord and vnitie among the inhabitants of the Prouince; then was during the time of her gouernement: which is a thing ſeldome ſeene, by reaſon that the common ſort ordinarily being mutinous and diſobedient, are hardly reſtrained within the limits of their duety and allegeance.Sentence. But herein eſpecially was the ſoueraigne prudence and ſingular iudgement of this Lady to be admired: that (as it is generally confeſſed) Scanderbeg did oftentimes vſe her as a moſt faithfull conſort, and aſſociat in the manadging of the affaires of the eſtate, and was much and vſually aduiſed and counſelled by her. Shee would neuer yeeld to any ſecond mariage, but euen to the laſt gaſpe of her life, ſhee honoured the memory of her beloued ſpouſe, not without a ſingular commendation of her continency and chaſtity: wherein ſhee continued and perſeuered moſt deuoutly, induced thereunto (it may be) not onely in regard of her owne naturall grauity and modeſty, but becauſe ſhee being a woman of an excellent and noble minde, did eſteeme the loſſe of her huſband to be irreparable. For (not to ſpeake any thing of his other vertues▪ which areMuſache his praiſes and vertues. moſt ordinary and proper to men, and whereof he gaue ſufficient teſtimony by his glorious end) he was euen by nature ſo louely and amiable, of ſo fine and pleaſing a behauiour, and of ſo ſweete a conuerſation, that no creature liuing knew better, no
                  •
                with greater facility then he, how to inſinuat himſelfe into the affections of men, and to purchaſe their good loue and liking. Beſides the beauty and comelineſſe of his perſon wherewith he was notably graced, and which is the proper obiect that women doe affect, and the elegancy of his goodly and tall ſtature, did fit ſingularly well to the perfections of his minde. But whileſt we haue our eyes thus faſtened, and our minds too too carefully buſied in contemplation of our Chriſtians, and doe tediouſly purſue the plaintes and griefes of them in particular: we doe not liſten to the ſound of Sebalias his trumpets, which doe ſummon vs to hearken vnto him, and who is now complaining that we haue ouer long delayd to giue him the merite of his due and deſerued triumph.
            The newes of his good ſucceſſe in Epire was gotten before him to Andrinople, and the manifold reports which ran of his victory did in ſome ſort draw the Turkiſh monarke to beleeue I know not what. For this vnexpected good fortune, till then vnuſuall & vnaccuſtomed, did withhold him from beleeuing the full truth of that which was reported. The comming of Moſes was the firſt obiect of the others triumph, & anMoſes cometh to Andrinople. accident that made them all breake forth into an exceeding ioy: for he arriued at the Sultans Court certaine dayes before the other, for that the way frō 
               Belgrade was more difficult to him that drew an armie after him, and who was enforced to march more leaſurely and eaſily. The Sultan learned by him the eſtate of all things more fully and certainly, giuing credit to his ſpeeches, and taking more pleaſure and contentment in

his preſence, & to ſee him alienated from his Prince, then by the report of any victory that could be brought vnto him. He did not remember nor conſider, that as the aduerſity and miſhap of Epire had drawne him thither: ſo the ſame being ceaſed, & the fortune of Albanie reſtored, might in like maner carie him away againe. Sebalias at his returne was receiued with the ſingular ioy and publicke acclamations of all the people: who ſhewed thēſelues more ioyous of this iourney, then of all the noble conqueſtsSebalias his triumph and returne to Andrinople. erſt obtained by their ſoueraigne. The captiues with their hands bound behind them, and the enſignes of the Chriſtians were firſt preſented vnto the Ottoman. After that the reſt of the ſpoiles, with the other warlike inſtruments were brought in ſight, together with the heads of thoſe that were ſlain: the which being ſold with the ſtraw within thē for their weight in gold, were throwne vp and downe the ſtreets, the children playing with them as at footbal. The poore Italians which were priſoners, were ſet to ſale, and many of them ſold to ſuch as would giue moſt. Some few of them, whoChriſtians priſoners to the Turkes put to extreme torments. were very old & aged, together with all the Epirots, were either faſtened vpon ſharpe piles or poſts, & ſo gored to death, or elſe were lifted vp aloft into the aire with hooks of iron, and ſo in the midſt of their torments, had this only comfort left them, that they died Martyrs for the name of him that died for vs, praiſing and commending the glorious end of their companions ſlaine at Belgrade, and deteſting (but all too late) their owne baſe cowardice and infamous deſire of life, that could endure to ſee themſelues reſerued to be thus tormented and ſcorned by ſuch miſcreants. But the cruelty & hatefull villany which they ſhewed vpon the Albanians, did farre exceed that which was vſed to the others: and there was ſcarce any one of them ſaued from the barbarous handling of the enemy. And they did it, either in reſpect of the hatred & deſpite which they bare to that nation, or elſe for that the Turks do ſeldome or neuer vſe to ſell any Epirots for ſlaues. For they are of opinion, that there is no nation, nor any ſlaues ofTurkes their opinion of the Epirots. what qualitie ſoeuer, ſo vnfit to be ſold as the Epirots and the Hungarians, for that they are held to be men vnmeete for ſeruice, as being proud, loftie and imperious, and ſuch as will neuer come to be good Turkes or Muſulmans in the Arabian tong ſignifieth, faithfull towards God. Speech and cenſure of Mahomet touching the battell of Belgrade. Scanderbeg his body reputed inuiolable. Muſulmans.
            When Mahomet heard the report of the chiualry and haughty exploits of Scanderbeg, ſhewed in the battell of Belgrade, he was ſtriken with ſo incredible an admiration and extreme grief, that he went away, ſaying, that his hoſt was vanquiſhed, and that the Epirots were the vanquiſhers: and that the reputation & name of Scanderbeg wold be more augmēted and renowmed by this only battell, then by any other thing done all his life time. For in very truth all men did attribute vnto him a kind of ſupernaturall excellencie, ſaying: that his bodie was euen by a fatall kind of deſtiny inuiolable, and not ſubiect to the ſword, nor to any other humane force or violence.
            
            Notwithſtanding the vertue of Sebalias had his due & deſerued honor. And being largely rewarded, he was for a long time the onely man, that was talked of amongſt the common people: as being the firſt that had made it knowne that Scanderbeg was not inuincible. Moſes alſo was not left behind, but was much made of, & highly commended,Moſes honorably entertained by the Turke. and a great and honorable penſion was aſſigned him for his entertainment. True it is, that when he demanded certaine forces of the Sultan to inuade Scanderbeg, Mahomet would not condeſcend vnto it, but excuſed him ſelfe vpon the neareneſſe of winter then approching. And that might very well be the cauſe of his refuſall: but I beleeue he did it alſo vpon a conceipt, as wiſe Iudges vſe to do amongſt the Chriſtians, who will not willingly beleeue a Iewe that is newly baptized: and therefore neither would he enterpriſe any thing vnder the conduct of Moſes, nor yet would he employ any other man, but was reſolued for a time to ſet aſide all care, and wholly to abſtaine from the warre of Epire.
            
            
               The Ambaſſadours Albanois returning from Naples loden with rich giftes afterAmbaſſadours ſent to Scanderbeg from the king of Naples and others to comfort him for his loſſe before Belgrade. the accuſtomed maner, were accompanied with other Ambaſſadours from the king Alphonſus: who being admitted to the preſence of Scanderbeg, with a long and eloquent oration, did endeuor to mitigate the bitterneſſe of his griefe and paſſion, couering his loſſe vnder the common caſualty and chance of warre, & with the ebbing and flowing of worldly affaires: ſaying, that the continuall traine of armes did oftē bring with it ſuch like accidents. And in concluſion, they offered him in the name of theirSentence. Prince, full and ample ſuccours and ſupplies of whatſoeuer he ſhould need. The king of Epire hauing rewarded them with great preſents, as one that did euen contend to ſurmount the magnificence of the Spaniard,
                did honorably ſend them away with this anſwer▪ That he neuer had any doubt of his good loue and ſingular affection, bothAnſwer of Scanderbeg to the Neapolitan Ambaſſadours. in regard of the publicke cauſe of religion, as alſo for his owne particular
                  •
               
               ▪ the ſame hauing bene teſtified by infinit acts of his bountie and magnificence worthie of perpetuall remembrance▪ for the which he did giue moſt harty thanks, with proteſtation to vſe his aide and ſuccours as his owne, when ſoeuer and as often as occaſion ſhould require. The like meſſages came vnto him alſo from other Princes and States of Italie, and from diuerſe great Seigniors and peoples his next neighbours, with theSpeech of other Ambaſſadours to Scanderbeg, touching his loſſe at Belgrade. 
               like offers and demonſtrations of loue & friendſhip▪ and they perſwaded him, that his late loſſe ought not any way to abate his courage, nor cauſe him to exceed in ſorow & diſcontentment: and they aſſured him, that moſt of the Princes & States of Chriſtendome would not make ſpare of any labour and trauell, of any coſts and expences, nor of any dangers or hazards whatſoeuer for his ſafety, and for the maintenance of his crowne and dignity. It was a ſtrange matter to Scanderbeg to ſee the newes of his diſcomfiture ſo publiſhed and ſpred abroad, and then did he begin to haue a more cleare and perfect knowledge of his diſgrace, and the blemiſh of his reputation, then he had before, whileſt the wounds of his ſouldiours and the loſſe of his men, were yet greene and freſh in remembrance. Wherefore with an vndanted corage, he did openly makeAnſwer of Scanderbeg to the other Ambaſſadors▪
                
               knowen vnto them, that they ſhould not thinke the eſtate of Epire to be ſuch as they imagined, or that they wanted ſufficient forces to recouer their good fortune: but rather that they were able to ſurmount their former exploites, and to purchaſe themſelues now greater honour vpon the enemy then euer: and with this anſwer they departed, highly contented and well ſatisfied.
            
            The winter following he ſpent partly at Groy, and partly in Dibria and other places of the prouince: the garriſon of Dibria he diminiſhed, & reduced to the ancient nūbers of 2000. horſe, and 1000▪ foot: ſetting good and ſtrong watches, and ordaining many ſpies purpoſely diſperſed abroad to diſcouer the attempts of the Infidels, who al this dead time of the yeare were not any way moleſted with the roades or inuaſions of the Chriſtians. For all the countrey for a good way round about had bene harried and waſted, ſo that to giue in any further vppon the enemies countrey, neither the quality of the time and dicommodity of the cold weather would permit: nor was Scanderbeg willing to ſuffer them: for his mind deuiſed vpon greater matters and of more importance, and he reſerued the mortall hatred of his minde to ſome more notable kinde of vengeaunce: by meanes whereof the coldneſſe of that ſeaſon did paſſe away in great tranquillity and quietneſſe.
            Now was the newe Spring come on, and both the earth began to be embelliſhed1453. and beautified with the greene graſſe, and all things growing freſh and gay, and theMoſes vrgeth Mahomet to employ him againſt Scanderbeg. ſweetneſſe of the aire made euery thing pleaſant and delightfull. Then Moſes▪
                as a continuall ſpurre in the eyes and eares of the Turkiſh Emperour, did importune and egge him on without ceaſing, and was inſtant and vrgent vpon him to begin the warre, and

to bend his forces againſt his owne nation. Mahomet who had his chiefe hope and expectation vpon him, and the time alſo ſeruing him very well, did not in any thing gainſay his deſire: for his mind did long before tend to the ſame end. And you muſt imagine, that all th
                  ••
                dead line of the winter ſeaſon (which was about ſixe moneths) whileſt Moſes remained with him in Court, he did moſt carefully ſound and examine euery particular of his actions and behauiour: in ſuch ſort, that he had noted in him great ſignes and euident demonſtrations of conſtancie and fidelitie, and of a minde wholly alienated from Scanderbeg. Beſides, the better to put himſelf in the good grace and liking of the Sultan, he had by many euident teſtimonies and tokens, giuen him proofe of his ſufficiencie and vertue, as much as was poſſible in that time of peace and intermiſſion of armes, and he made great ſhew of his ſtrength, valour, and reſolution: inſo much (as it is reported, and as afterwards Moſes affirmed it openly) that Mahomet 
               demanded of him, whether Scanderbeg had many ſuch men about him as himſelf: andSpeeches betweene Mahomet and Moſes. he anſwered moſt modeſtly, that he had infinite ſuch: And thereupon the Sultan highly commended the modeſtie of his ſpeech. Then Moſes (as it is commonly ſeene, that when ſhame keepeth vs from praiſing our ſelues openly, we do ſecretly and indirectlySentence. as it were, by circumſtance attribute to our ſelues that which we detract from the reputation and honor of another) deſcending by litle and litle & by degrees from talking of others to Scanderbeg, did ſeeke to diminiſhe his reputation, and to leſſen the opinion of his deſerts: and after a long diſcourſe, he made a promiſe vnto Mahomet, that if it pleaſed him to repoſe that truſt in him onely, he would proue him ſelfe in that warre bodie to bodie againſt Scanderbeg, and would aduenture the hazard of a particular combat: and that he would not deſire any greater numbers to worke his ouerthrow and confuſion, then an armie of fifteene thouſand horſemen onely; ſo that himſelfe might haue the chuſing, the ordering and diſpoſing of them.
            The Ottoman as he was ſoone and eaſily intreated to graunt him the charge andMoſes ſent with an armie of 15. thouſand horſe againſt Scanderbeg. commaund of this armie: ſo did he referre the whole care thereof to his iudgement and diſcretion, and gaue him the reines to do as he thought beſt. The ſouldiers which were preſt to go in that voyage for Albanie, did infinitely miſdoubt the weakeneſſe and feeble ſtrength of ſo ſmall a companie: neuertheleſſe the wonderfull confidence and braue reſolution of their new Generall did enforce them to hope well, and to conceiue ſome good opinion touching the happie ſucceſſe of that iourney. Beſides the great credit and authoritie of Moſes with his owne nation, and his ſtrong alliance within the countrey, was a matter worthie to be thought vpon, and did greatly encorage all of them, and did put them in hope, that they ſhould find great ayde by them of the countrey, which the Dibrian alſo had aſſured to the Sultan. And it may be, that he himſelfe was perſwaded no leſſe: for he gaue out, that he had had conference with ſome of the moſt auncient and principall perſons of the prouince, and that many of his confederates and intelligencers did keepe themſelues cloſe and in ſecret, and did reſt at his deuotion: and that ſuddenly, aſſoone as they ſhould ſee his troupes within the countrey, they would be readie to come and ioyne with him: and bringing a good number of luſtie and able youths, they would take armes and bend their force againſt Scanderbeg. Thus all things being throughly prepared, and he in a readineſſe to take his iourney, about the three and twentieth of Februarie, in the yeare 1453. he departed from Andrinople, diſplaying his vnhappie enſignes in the ſight, and within the proper bowels of his owne natiue countrey.
            We will leaue the ingrate and vnkind Moſes bending his traiterous armes againſt Epire, and in the meane time altering our diſcourſe, to yeeld you the more contentment by this hiſtory, let me intreate you to giue me leaue to dwell a while with that

fierce and haughty minded Prince young Mahomet, who calleth vpon me to accompanieMahomet his voia
                     •
                  e againſt Conſtantinople him in his iourney to Conſtantinople, which he hauing for a long time delayed and deferred, yet meant not to breake off nor to giue ouer for altogether. You haue read (if you remember it) in the beginning of this booke with what egerneſſe and vehemencie his aſpyring and his ambitious heart, did affect to ſee the Imperiall Diademe of Greece ſet vpon his owne head: neuertheleſſe, the iealouſie which he had to defende and reſcue one litle place in Epyre, had made a ſtay of his goodly progreſſe and glorious enterpriſe. But now vppon the notable victorie of Sebalias, thinking that his mortall enemie was ſo ouerthrowen as he ſhould neuer be able to riſe againe, he grewe into ſuch a confidence of his proſperitie, that he doubted not to proceede with his former voyage, and with full ſayles to followe his good fortune, which now ſeemed to fawne on him with a merrie and pleaſant gale of winde: as we ſee it is an ordinarie thing, that if ſome one of our actions be ſeconded with
                  Sentence. good happe, it hardeneth and encourageth vs to vndertake other matters farre more difficult.
            
            The Turkiſh Monarche, hauing commaunded a generall and ſpeedie leauie ofMahomet marcheth to the ſiege of Conſtantinople. ſouldiers both horſe and foote throughout all his Dominions, and that in more extraordinarie and exceſſiue numbers then had beene heard of in many ages, vſed an extreame kinde of diligence, and all poſſible celeritie in the raiſing of that armie, pretending that thoſe preparations were for an other warre, becauſe the Princes of Chriſtendome ſhould not haue him in anie miſtruſt or ſuſpition. Moreouer hauing prepared an infinite number of veſſels and ſhippes both for fight and for carriage of neceſſarie prouiſions (for this man of all the Ottomans was the firſt that vſed ſhipping or men of warre at ſea) he departed from Andrinople neere about the ſame time that Moſes tooke his iourney for Epyre: and with long and continuall iourneyes both day and night he tooke the way of Romania both by ſea and by lande, with an incredible traine of artillerie, engines, and other prouiſions of aſſault.Mahomet violateth the peace with the Emperor of Greece and inuadeth his Empire without preclamation or denouncing of warres. He made but a ieſt at thoſe auncient ceremonies and ſolemne obſeruations vſed by his predeceſſors and other Princes to denounce and proclaime warres before they made anie inuaſion vpon their neighbors. For violating the faith and promiſe which he had formerly ſworne, and breaking the oath and peace which he had vowed moſt religiouſly to obſerue, with the Emperour of Conſtantinople: he ſuddenly ouerranne and inuaded all the plaine countrie, and vpon the nineteenth day of Aprill, he planted his campe before that noble and famous citie, hauing in leſſe then three dayes ſtreightly girt it in, and beſieged it rounde on all ſides. His armie exceeded foure hundreth thouſand men, moſt part of which were collected and gathered out of theConſtantinople beſieged with an armie of 400000 men. Nations neere adioyning, ſuch as yet retayned and helde the name and profeſſion of Chriſtians: namely, from Greece, Sclauony and Valachia, and from amongſt the Dardanians or Raſcians: the Triballians or Seruians, and the Miſians or Bulgarians.
               Diuerſitie of Nations both Chriſtians and others ſeruing vnder the Turke at the ſiege of Conſtantinople. There were verie fewe of them naturall Turkes, but with thoſe former Nations out of Europe were mingled other troupes out of Aſia, both from Bithinia called Natolia, and from Gallatia, Lidia, or Briquia, and Cilicia which is the countrie of the King of Caramania. In this manner did theſe Miſcreants, Infidels, and Barbarians ſerue themſelues with our owne forces, and the peoples of our owne profeſſion and alliance: augmenting and encreaſing their eſtate with the aide and helpe of them onely who were the moſt warrelike and ſtouteſt Nations of all their campe, and by whom they did principally worke the ruine of that Empire, and the deſtruction of the Chriſtians.
            Concerning the citie it ſelfe, and the meanes of their defence: the whole forces

of the garriſon (ſetting aſide the multitude which ordinarily is more hurtfull thenNumbers of the garriſon in Conſtantinople againſt the Turkes. fit or apt to beare armes) did not amount to aboue 9000. ſouldiers, of which 6000. were Greekes of all ſorts both good and bad. And the other 3000. were partly Venetians and partly Genowayes. True it is, that for the better ſtrength and ſuertie of the citie (if the maieſtie and reuerence of the ſacred Imperiall name, could haue done any thing to the furtherance thereof) the Emperour himſelfe Conſtantine Paleologus
               Conſtantine Paleologus Emperour of Conſtantinople was there in perſon. But ouer and aboue this outward glorie, and externall ſhewe of his preſence, I doe not finde (and the ſubiect of this diſcourſe will declare it) that his being there did anie great good, to the preſeruation of the place. The great ſearcitie and want of munition, powder, armes, corne, treaſure to pay the ſouldiers,Negligence of the Emperor of Constantinople and ſuch like prouiſions did ſufficiently teſtifie, and make proofe of no leſſe then I ſpeake. For he did of a long time before diſcerne and knowe of the great preparations of the Turke, and he foreſawe the terrour of this tempeſt that menaced the ſtate of Greece, yet did he proceede but very coldly in making his prouiſions. Onely he had recourſe by Ambaſſadours to Pope Nicholas the fifth, to the EmperourEmperour of Conſtantinople craueth aide of Chriſtian Princes but in vaine. 
               Fredericke the third, to Charles the ſeuenth King of France, and to other Kings and Potentates of Chriſtendome, to induce and perſwade with them to ſende him ſuccours, and to ſhew them the imminent perill and approching decay and ruine of ſo noble and aunclent an Empire, the loſſe whereof could not but redound to the perpetuall ſhame and infamie of the whole name of the Chriſtians: and finally he acquainted them with the extreame miſerie which they were like to encurre, falling into the cruell and vnmercifull handes of a Nation moſt fierce and Barbarous, and more thirſting after the bloud of humaine creatures and Chriſtians, then after wine or any other liquor whatſoeuer: and in concluſion with aboundance of teares and lamentations did his Ambaſſadours labour to moue them to ſome compaſſion and commiſeration of their pitifull eſtate. But all their trauels were in vaine, and (which I abhorre to ſpeake) they found the eares of all thoſe Princes to be ſoCareleſneſſe of Chriſtian Princes of the danger and loſſe of Conſtantinople deafe, and their eyes ſo blinded, nay rather their minds ſo ſenſeleſſe, as they could not foreſee, that if the Empire of Greece came once to decay and confuſion, it would cauſe all the reſidue of Europe in time to come to be buried and ouer whelmed in the like ruine and deſtruction, to the manifeſt and ineuitable aboliſhing of the Chriſtian religion. But ſhall we thinke that they were ignorant hereof? nay rather I am of the opinion that they knew it ſufficiently: but being occupied and diſtracted with their priuate hatreds and quarrels, and with the care of their owne particular commodities, their hearts were obdurate and hardened, and they did neglect the vniuerſall good and publique welfare of all in generall. For behold and marke what was the occaſion that withheld them. Italie was drawen drie of money and treaſure, by meanes of the Schiſme in the Papacie, and by the factions of the two famelies of the Vrſins and the Colonnezes: Almaine was vexed and rent with ciuill warres, and the greateſt part of France was in the ſubiection and welneere wholly poſſeſſed by the English: and in briefe, all Europe (according to their accuſtomed manner) was deuided into ſects and partialities.
            But that you may the better perceiue both with what diligence and induſtrie the Turkes laboured to carrie and conquer this goodly Citie, and to reduce it vnder the Dominion of the Ottoman Empire: and howe the defendants alſo did diuerſly demeane themſelues, who laboured and endeuoured ſtill to retaine it in the power and deuotion of the Chriſtians, I hold it expedient here to deliuer and repreſent vnto you the true deſcription and ſituation of the place.The deſcription & ſituation of Conſtantinople
            
            
               Conſtantinople (which the auncients called Byzance) is ſituated vpon the mouth

or entrie of the ſtreight of Gallipoly, on that part where Aſia is adioyning to Europe, eche of them being ſeparated from other by a very ſtreight arme of the ſea of Helleſpont, which (extending it ſelfe into a gulfe opening with two pointes or hornes) lyethGulfe of Helleſpont deſcribed full Eaſt and Weſt, and ſo maketh a goodly hauen of two leagues and a halfe in length, and about a mile in breadth, where it is largeſt, and not aboue halfe ſo brode where it is narroweſt. On the ſides thereof it is full of nookes, ſecret turnings, and by places, in regarde whereof it is called the horne: for that the ſeuen hilles which doe aduance themſelues within the towne, doe make the gulfe to runne with manie braunches, as it were the head of a Hart. Betweene this gulfe and the ſea of Propontide,
               The ſea of Propontide. there runneth out into the ſea a mountaine not very high, like vnto a Cherroneſſe or halfe Iſle, the length whereof lying Eaſt and Weſt is litle leſſe then two ſhort leagues. The ridge of this mountaine holdeth ſtill on bending towards, and oppoſite againſt the mouth of the ſea Propontide: but to the North it hath ſeuen other ſmall mountaines or litle hilles adioyning, of which foure of them doe ſtrike into this gulf, and the greateſt of the foure is waſhed with the waues of the ſea of Boſphore,
               Sea of Boſphore or of Thrace. and repreſenteth the baſe of a triangle. For the towne and the demie Iſle are in forme and faſhion triangular. The two points or promontories of this mountaine (the one of them towards the Occident regarding the ſea of Propontide, & called Hebdomi: theHebdomi. Chriſoceras. other called Chriſoceras bending to the Northwards) do gard the entry and mouth of the harbor from the violence of the windes. From the which entry, if you draw a direct line to the ſeuenth mountainet lying more hidden & not ſo open as the others, & which doth likewiſe couer the Port againſt the Weſterne windes, you ſhall include the mooriſh playne of Pera within the boſome (as it were) of that winding circuiteThe mooriſh plaine of Pera. which maketh that continuall ridge or backe of the demy Iſle afore mentioned. The length of the hauen (as we haue ſayed) is about two leagues and a halfe, within the moſt inward recuyle whereof the riuers of Cidrus and Barbiſa do diſcharge thēſelues.Riuers of Cydrus and Barbiſa. The entry of the hauen is very ſtreight & narrow, for that on the ſide of Barbiſa (where is ſeated the towne of Pera, ſomtimes founded by the Genowayes, & now by the TurksPera or Galata. Promontory of Metopique & Cyglobia. Promontory of Damalique. Thrace. named Galata) there is a promontorie called Metopique & Cyglobia, lying againſt the South, & another promontorie alſo towards Aſia, which ietteth out euen to the midſt of the mouth of the ſtreight of Gallipolis, and is named Damalique. On the Occident where the demy Iſle or Cherroneſſe doth ioyne to the firme land of Thrace, there it doth deuide & ſeparate the hauen from the ſea of Propontide by meanes of a litle cut of land, which is ſome 50. pace in breadth, till it come to touch with the ſeuenth hill: which being the inmoſt angle of the towne towards the maine lande (as it goeth ſtill on) waxeth greater and greater, and encreaſeth more and more in largeneſſe & wideneſſe. Vpon this demy Iſle or Cherroneſſe, is ſeated the noble and famous city of Conſtantine,
               Conſtantinople ſeated vpon the demy Iſle or point of land lying betwene the gulfe and the ſea of Prepontide. Phare a tower or lanterne at the entrie of the hauen. Circuit of Conſtantinople 4. leagues and a halfe which is 13. miles and a halfe. and right againſt it vpon the otherſide of the banke of the gulfe is the towne of Galatha or Pera: the length whereof alſo butteth vppon foure points of the lande within the turnings and windings of the hauen. The cloſeſt and narroweſt part of the Port is cloſed with a great, ſtrong, and maſſye chaine of yron running from a high tower on the promontorie of Chriſocer as called Phare, to the promontorie of Metopique, where is likewiſe an other tower. Towards the firme land the citie is enuironed with a great and ſtrong wall, and with a vawmure, whereunto is adioyned a very wide and deepe ditch. All the reſt of the towne being waſhed with the ſaltwater, hath but one onely wall, yet verie ſtrong, and flanked with infinite towers againſt all aſſaults and forces, that may be addreſſed againſt them by ſea-wards. The middle part of the citie is a little mountaynous and hilly, the circuit of it (accounting three miles to a French league) containeth about foure leagues and a halfe. In this forme

and largeneſſe it was in times paſt builded and reedified by the great Conſtantine Emperor of the Romaine Monarchie, of whom alſo it had the name of Conſtantinople.
            
            Now that I haue laide downe and giuen you a view of the ſituation of the citie, whoſe ſinnes and offences (as it is to be thought) made a ſeparation betwene God and it: It followeth that I now diſcouer vnto you, what order the Turke obſerued in the ſiege thereof both by ſea and land: how he diſpoſed his bandes and companies about it: in what manner he planted his Ordinance and placed his batterie, and how he ordered his Nauie and ſea forces.
            After the place had beene well viewed, the Turkes did ſoone make their approchesThe manner of the ſiege of Conſtantinople. to the walles, by reaſon the defendants, made but meane reſiſtance, and the aſſailants being couered with baskets of Oſier, with long plankes and boordes, with targets, pauizes, and ſuch like did march in ſafetie againſt the rampiers with ſo good order and diſcretion, that they would haue made euen the moſt reſolute and expert ſouldiers to be abaſhed and appalled. The Ordinance and ſuch like engines of batterie being planted in three ſeuerall places, did beginne to batter the wals as furiouſly as was poſſible: eſpecially towards Calegarie, where was placed a Cannon of ſuch vnmeaſurableCalegarie. greatneſſe, that for the remouing thereof from place to place ſcant 50. yoke of Oxen did ſuffice: and the bullet thereof did containe eleuen handbreathes in compaſſe. Through the violence & diueliſh force of this horrible engine, the wall (thoughConſtantinople battered. it were very large and ſtrongly builded) yet was not able to make reſiſtance: but it fell out that this peece brake, and Mahomet commaunded that another ſhould be caſt greater then the former. But it was not ſo ſoone ended by meanes of the fauour and policie of Calybaſſa, who was a great friende to a Nobleman a ChriſtianCalybaſſa a friend to the Chriſtians. Baron within the citie, and one of the Counſellors to the Emperour. Neuertheleſſe the batterie was continued with great ſtore of other artillerie, and they ceaſed not to wearie the defendantes day and night: and dayly did they kill ſome, either more or leſſe with harguebuſſes, arrowes, ſlings, and diuerſe other kindes of ſhot. For the Infidels did imagine, that the defendants were but fewe in number, and that they could not long continue and holde out, nor be able to endure the labour and trauell of the ſiege. And the better to preſſe them to extremitie, and to haue his will of them by force of armes, he laboured with all diligence to digge and caſt vp trenches, to the intent the ſouldiers might with leſſe paines and daunger ſafegarde themſelues from the enemie, and haue the freer acceſſe to the foote of the wall. Moreouer becauſe he would by the aduantage of the higher place or ground, more eaſily preſent the ladders to the walles, and be able to carrie the towne, he cauſed a long and high banke of earth, equall to the towne wall to be caſt vp round about that part of the citie: and this was not all, for he cauſed alſo many towers of wood to be raiſed vp neere to the rampiers, from the which (hauing cauſed them to be couered with cowhides) he filled the ditch with earth and other ſtuffe, thinking to leauell and make plaine the way, and to haue the more eaſie acceſſe into the towne. And beſides he had an innumerable companie of logges of wood, of ladders mounted vpon wheeles, and chariots raiſed in forme of caſtels, and ſuch like engines as the Romaines themſelues could ſcarce haue found and made the like againſt the Carthaginians: and becauſe that monſtrous peece of Ordinance which was newly caſt, could do litle or no hurt at all againſt Calegarie, by reaſon of the notable and ſtrong fortification of the place, it was planted neere the port S. Roman againſt the tower Battatinea, which being beatenThe Port S. Roman. The tower Battatinea. downe to the ground, did with his ruines fill vp the ditch, and made it euen with the height of the plaine ground, inſomuch that the breach was plaine & euen for the Infidels to haue entred it, but that there was ſpeedie order taken for repairing the ſame, &

it was made ſtronger then before. Whereat the great Turke greatly maruelling, ſaid: That it was not the worke nor inuention of the Greekes but of the Latines, who were better practiſed, and more expert and induſtrious in pointes of fortification then the Greekes. Thus you ſee what was done towards the firme land.
            Towardes the Sea on that ſide which regardeth Pera, the Sultan beſieged it with a fleete of 250. ſayle, whereof the greateſt part were Foiſtes, and ſome part gallyes, of which ſome were with two, ſome with three oares on a banke. Beſides there were a great number of Frigats loaden with men and ſhot, rather for a ſhew and terrour vnto them then otherwiſe. Theſe lay at ancker in the maine a good way off, on one ſide of the hauen towards the ſea of Propontide: for they durſt not come neere for feare of the Chriſtians, but lying diſperſed, and ſometimes ſay ling vp and downe the ſea, they did ſtill furniſh their campe at land with wood, ſtones, & ſuch like neceſſaries. The port (as I haue told you) was ſhut vp with a great chaine: and beſides it was garded with 7. great ſhips or carracks of the Genowayes, and three of Creete or Candia, all of them ſtrongly bound & well chained together the one cloſe to the other, ſo as the TurkiſhA ſtratageme or wonderfull enterpriſe of the Turkes at Conſtantinople (by the counſel of a Chriſtian traitour Renegado) to get into the hauen. Nauie could not poſſibly enter into the harbor. But what did the Sultan (thinke you) to get into the hauen? by the counſell & aduiſe of a trayterous wretch a Chriſtian Renegado, he cōmanded that a certaine number of his gallies ſhould be drawen vp out of the ſea to the mountaine, and then let downe againe on the other ſide into the hauen. The Pyoners and other labourers of the campe being ſet about the worke, and hauing farre and wide on all ſides made plaine the deſcent of the mountaine, both on the one ſide & the other of the promontory of Metopique, with ſtrength & force of hands they drew vp the gallies, conueying thē vpon rollers more thē 8. miles in length, & hauing brought them to the top of the mountaine, by litle & litle they let them ſlide faire andTurkes get into the hauen of Conſtantinople eaſily downe into the hauen. Now imagine you whether this new & ſtrange ſpectacle, did not aſtoniſh and amaze the Chriſtians. They ſought by all meanes poſſible to ſinke them with force of great ſtones, or to ſet them on fire, but in vaine did they attempt it, and thoſe veſſels were the occaſion of great care and trouble vnto them: for that they being enforced by that meanes to quit the defence of the port, neceſſitie did conſtraine them to looke to the defence of the wals towards the ſea ſide, and to diminiſh their gardes on the other ſide towards the land. For the town was daily aſſaulted on that ſide to the ſeaward with a power of 70000. men, by the helpe alſo of another deuiſe which the Turkes inuented as ingeniouſly & with no leſſe hardines, the ſame more terrifying the Chriſtians then the former: the maner wherof you ſhal heare alſo.
            He builded a bridge more then 3. miles in length, from the banke or ſhore beſidesStratageme of the Turkes in building a miraculous bridg ouer the ſea of Pera at Conſtantinople. 
               Pera right againſt the towne, the which trauerſing or running ouer the ſea was ſupported with hogſheads, pypes, and other wine veſſels being faſtened & held together vnderneath with great beames and poſts of timber chained together, to the intent his army might march freely, and approch neere to the wall. I mitating therein the greatneſſe of Xerxes who paſſed his armie in like manner ouer the ſea of Boſphore out of Aſia into Thrace. He raiſed vp alſo innumerable towers ſurmounting the height of the walles, from the tops of the which, being well furniſhed with all kinds of armes and prouiſions for aſſault, the citie was inceſſantly trauelled and ſore wearied.
            I haue figured foorth vnto you the terrible appreſts and preparations of the Turkiſh Monarch, by which he ſought the ruine and deſtruction of this imperiall citie. It now reſteth that I ſhew you the order and prouiſion of them within the towne, for the defence of the place againſt the aſſaylants.
            The Chriſtians growing daily more prouident & expert, did helpe thēſelues withConſtantinople ill furniſhed with prouiſions ſuch peeces of artillerie as they had, hauing but ſmall ſtore allowed them, neither had

they any great prouiſion of pouder and ſaltpeeter: as litle alſo was their ſtore of armes and weapons, and much leſſe were they prouided of victuals. That a
                  •
               de which they had was with muskets and ſuch like ſmall ſhot, with which they could not much greeue nor annoy the enemie, by reaſon of the diſcommoditie of the place, the ſame being couered with trenches, and litle walles drie made, and caſt vp of purpoſe. Of their great Ordinance (as the report goeth) they could haue little or no vſe at all, for feare of ſhaking downe their owne walles; yet ſometimes now and then, they did diſcharge ſome of them vpon the enemie, and did beate downe both men, tents, & pauilions, together with their Pauiſados, Gabions, and other muniments and defences. The braue and furious ſallyes of the youth of the citie, did cauſe the Turks often both to feare and to admire them: and euer the aſſailants had the worſt and ſuſtained greatCourage and valure of the garriſon within Conſtantinople. loſſe in all encounters. For the walles being kept well, garded and aſſured with valiant and reſolute ſouldiers: euerie one ſtriued to doe his beſt, and to giue ſome notable proofe and teſtimonie of his valure and prowes.
            It happened about that time, that a certaine Genoway named Iohn Iuſtinian, one of the chiefe of Genoway, both for his nobilitie and great account, as alſo for his wealth and riches, did ſcoure the ſeas, and did roaue vp and downe ſeeking his fortune vponIohn Iuſtinian a Genoway made Lieutenant Generall for the Emperour within Conſtantinople. that coaſt with two good and ſtrong ſhippes of warre, and about 400. fighting men. This man (as it fell out) lying at an anchor in the port of Conſtantinople, when the towne was vpon the point to be beſieged, and conſidering with himſelfe (as became a man of courage) that he was in one and the ſame eſtate with the meaneſt of the inhabitants: and that the preſeruation of the citie did import him no leſſe, then the reſidue of the citizens: he vndertooke together with them the defence thereof with ſingular courage and magnanimitie, with ſo notable and euident a proofe and ſhew of his ſufficiencie & valure, both in repulſing of the enemie, and for his notable promptneſſe and expedition in repayring the breaches and ruines made by the Canon, that he caried away without any contradiction the honour and praiſe for a while, of the ſafetie and preſeruation of the Grecian Empire. In regard whereof he had this prerogatiue, to be choſen and allowed for the chiefe commaunder within the towne, and he had the title and name of Lieutenant Generall vnder the Emperour. Aſſoone as he had this authority committed vnto him, he cauſed the ſouldiers to be diſpoſed andThe order and forces of the Chriſtians in the defence of Cōſtantinople. Port S. Roman defended by Iuſtinian. Maurice Catanee at the Port Fountain The golden gate. Paulus Troilus and Antony de Bouchardes. Miliandre. to be diſtributed here & there in diuerſe places according to the ſeuerall occurrences of the time, and as the attempts of the Barbarians did require. He was aſſiſted by the Emperour himſelfe followed with a traine of 300. Genowayes, and a great number of Greeke ſouldiers purpoſely choſen to defend that part of the wals and rampiers which lay neere S. Roman, where the perill and danger was moſt likely and apparant. Maurice Catanee a Genoway alſo, being a braue and valiant Chieftaine, was placed betwene the Port of the fountaine and the golden gate, with 200. crosbowes Italians, & ſome Greekes intermixt with them: who with great furie did maintaine the fight againſt a caſtle made of wood, which being couered ouer with Oxe hides, the Turkes had raiſed againſt that ſide of the towne. Paulus Troilus, and Antonie his brother ſurnamed Bouchardes, did ſuſtaine the aſſault on the ſide of Miliandre, where the towne began firſt of all to wauer. In that place did they continue in armes day and night, and making no ſpare of their bloud, they ſhewed themſelues hardie and courageous, ſometimes with pykes, one while with fire workes, and another while with their croſbowes, demaning themſelues with ſuch ſtoutneſſe, ſtrength, and brauery, that their very enemies did admire them. With no leſſe valure did Theodore Cariſtin behaueTheodore Cariſtin. Theophilus Paleologus. himſelfe, who being a Greeke borne, and growen verie aged, was a notable good archer. Likewiſe Theophilus Paleologus an honourable Gentleman of Greece,
               
excellently well ſeene both in letters and in armes, and a neare kinſeman vnto the Emperour: and with them Iohn le Grand or the great, a Germaine borne, (ofIohn le Grand. whom more ſhalbe ſayed hereafter:) theſe three did defend and reenforce the breach of Calegarie, after it had bene battered and beaten downe by the Turkiſh artillerie. Contaren a noble and famous gentleman deſcended of the Contarens, one of the moſtBreach of Calegarie. Contaren. noble families amongſt the Venetians, was lodged betweene the golden gate and the towers, neare adioyning euen as farre as to the ſea: and did with ſingular reſolution, endure and ſuſtaine the force of the infidels on that ſide. The other Greeks in like maner which were placed here and there on other parts of the towne walles, did brauely aduenture and hazard their liues, to the intent they might ſhew ſome worthie tokenThe pallace imperiall. Hierome Mynot. The tower of Hippodrome. The ſea port. Chirluc. Hierome the Italian. Leonard Longa
                     •
                  ke. Chſiliport. The towers Aueniades. Gabriell Treuiſan Gouernour of the venetian foiſtes. and teſtimonie, that they were nothing inferiour to the Latines. The care and cuſtodie of the imperiall pallace was committed vnto Ierome Minot, Baily of the Venetians. The tower ſeated before the Hippodrome towardes the Eaſt, was giuen in charge to the Conſull of the Catalans. Chirluc had the defence of the port towards the ſea and of al the ſea coaſt. Ierome the Italian, Leonard Langask a Genoway, and many others had the keeping of the Chſiliport, and of the towers which they call Aueniades. The Prieſts, Muncks, and other religious perſons, being likewiſe diſtributed throughout the walles, did make ſhew by their hardie and ſetled lookes that they could doe ſomething elſe beſides praying vpon their beades, and ſinging and ſaying of maſſe. Gabriell Treuiſan Gouernour of the Venetian foiſtes being accompanied with Some ſay 400 The tower of Farrafin. The port imperiall. Anthonie Diede Generall of the Gallies. Demetrius. Nicolus Gullelle. 40. other Venetians did manfully defend the tower of Farrafin by the port Imperiall. Anthonie Diede Generall of the gallies ſeeming to be faint harted and but badly reſolued, did ſhew himſelfe more carefull to keepe aboord, and to ſaue his veſſels, then to defend the hauen which he had in charge.
            
               Demetrius the father in lawe of N. Paleologus, and Nicolas the ſonne in law of Gullelle had the charge of a conduct and great ſquadron of armed men being alwaies in a readineſſe for the ſuccours and reliefe of them vpon the walles, vppon any accident or occaſion that ſhould be requiſite. To make ſhort, all of them did ſhewe themſelues ſo cheerefull and couragious, as though they would firſt haue bene torne in peeces rather then they would haue fallen into the hands of the circumcized Infidels. And foraſmuch as neither the breach, nor the ruines of the walles, nor the thundering noiſe nor violence of the ordinance, nor the ſtrength, force, nor huge puiſſance of the enemie could nowe terrifie nor aſtoniſh them: it ſeemed that they were fully reſolued to abide all extreamities, as if this had bene the day and time, wherein they ſhould purchaſe vnto themſelues eternall renowme and immortall fame. But what
                  Sentence. Courage bootleſſe without good meanes of defence. auaileth it for men that are beſieged to be couragious and reſolute, if they want good order and prouiſion for victuals, money and munition? Neuertheleſſe, becauſe all colour of excuſe ſhould be taken from the inhabitants, by which they might pretend the neglect of their duties: & leaſt they ſhould be diſcomforted more by feare of famin in time to come, then by the terrour of the preſent danger: there was commaundement giuen, that the bread and other victuals ſhould be diſtributed, and ſhared by equall proportion amongſt the ſeuerall houſholdes and families. But there were ſome of the inhabitants ſo greedily addicted to the infamous deſire of gaine, or rather of the blood of their Chriſtian brethren, that they concealed their corne: and others againeCouetouſneſſe of the Greekes in Conſtantinople. raiſed the priſes of their graine. This villanous and wretched humor of auarice, was the occaſion not only of many great miſchiefes, but alſo of the confuſion of the whole eſtate and policie. The Emperour ſhewed himſelfe too remiſſe and gentle, and did not with ſufficient ſeueritie chaſtiſe and puniſh their diſobedience: by meanes wherof, euerie man did as he liſted: and (as the prouerbe is) they were like a company of

rattes in the corne-ſtacke. If the Emperour were at any time angred and diſcontented, he was ſoone appeaſed with the flattering words and ſmooth ſpeeches of his Courtiers, who did not ſticke in a manner to mocke and ſcorne him to his face, whilſt himſelfe in the meane time made ſemblance, as if he did not ſee it.
            A litle before this time it happened that fortune preſented vnto the beſieged ſome ſhew and apparance, that ſhe would ſupply them with reliefe and ſuccours. For ſuchSentence. is her vnconſtant and diſſembling nature, that ſhe faigneth ſometimes to fauour them whom ſhe purpoſeth to ruinate and caſt downe headlong into extreame miſerie. So fell it out with the inhabitants of Conſtantinople: Three great ſhippes of Genoway loaden with armour, ſouldiers and corne, were come from*Chios in the company of oneChios an Iland in the mediterranean ſea. other ſhip which belonged to the Emperour, and was loaden with wheat of Sicilia. Theſe being diſcouered to be neare the citie by the armie of the Infidels which kept watch towardes the ſea: and the allarme being giuen with ſound of trumpets and other inſtruments, they were preſently aſſayled by the Turkes, eſpecially the veſſellA fight at ſea betwene the Turkes and the Chriſtians. imperiall, as being more notable then the others: both the townes-men from the citie on the one ſide, and the Monarch of the Turkes from the toppe of the mountaine of Galatha on the other ſide beholding the fight and combat betwene them. The gallies bearing vp cloſe vnto them did firſt ſet vpon that ſhippe which belonged to the Emperour, inſomuch as there grew a hot and cruell fight both on the one ſide and the other. Maurice Catanee (before named) was generall Commaunder of thoſe veſſelles, who in that battell ſhewed his excellent skil and experience in ſea ſeruice, and did giue euident teſtimonie of his ſingular valour and prowes. He was ſeconded by Dominick
               Dominicke de Nouara. Baptiſta Fellizan. of Nouara, and Baptiſta Fellizan a Genoway alſo: both of which ſhewed themſelues no leſſe expert pilots then well practiſed in deeds of armes. On the other ſide the infidelles hauing in hope and conceit alreadie deuoured this notable prey and booty, and accounting it ſure their owne, did enforce themſelues to carrie away the victorie, beating ſtill and furiouſly with their Ordinance and with great ſtore of ſmall ſhot, vpon the imperiall veſſell, which defended her ſelfe very brauely by the courageous deuoire of Flectanella her patron. The oares of the Gallies flew in ſhiuers, and it wasFlectanella. a horrour to heare the ratling of the hatches, and other great peeces of the ſhipbordes which flew about, beſides the wofull cries and howlings of the Turkes as they gaue vp the ghoſt. Their Soueraigne perceiuing from the mountaine, how his armie was ill beſtead, was in ſuch rage and paſſion as if he would haue runne madde for anger: he curſed and blaſphemed, hee rent his clothes and tore his garmentes, the Pagans they lamented, and all his hoaſt was in amazement and confuſion. What ſhould we ſay more? The broyle was renued, and the fight grew more fierce and terrible, ſtill the Infidels had the worſt, and ſuch was the ſucceſſe of the fight, that a great number of Turkes being ſlaine and drowned, they were ſcant able for want of men to recouer the ſhore with their ſhipping. The beſieged did learne by ſome of thoſeVictorie of the Chriſtians in a ſea fight againſt the Turks before Conſtantinople which fled whom they tooke priſoners, and by their owne eſpials, that the Turkes had receiued a griuous ouerthrow and diſcomfiture, and that they had loſt more then 10000. of their men. The fleete wherewith they aſſayled the Chriſtian veſſels was very neere of 200▪ ſayles, part of them being of two, & part of three oares on a banke. The Turkiſh king was greatly confounded, and his forces were reputed of litle or ſmall puiſſance: for that ſo many gallies vnited and conſorted together, were not able to take nor ouercome onely three veſſels of the Chriſtians. Thus the next night following, did the ſhippes enter into the harbour without any hurt or dammage, hauing not ſo much as one man ſlaine, but only ſome of them hurt and wounded.
            
               Mahomet being highly diſpleaſed, and grieuouſly incenſed againſt Baltogle his

Admirall, did depoſe him from his charge and office, confiſcated all his goods, andBaltogle Admirall to Mahomet in diſgrace for loſſe of the battell at ſea. would ſcarce haue pardoned him his life, had not his Baſſaes and chiefe Siegniours vehemently entreated for him. In this his choller and rage he determined with cannon ſhot from the top of the mountaine of Pera towards the Eaſt, to ſinke thoſe veſſels that lay in the roade or mouth of the harbour: or at leaſtwiſe to make them leaue and forgoe the chaine. Wherefore hauing cauſed his artillerie to be bracht, he did endeuor to breake and to batter them in peeces, being aided thereunto by a CannonierCouetouſneſſe and treachery of a Chriſtian Cannonier. a Chriſtian, who for that he had bene denied a certaine penſion which he demanded, was of late reuolted to the Turks. It chaunced (I know not with what deſtiny) that at the verie firſt ſhotte he ſunke the ſhippe wherein the Captaine himſelfe was, which was an occaſion that the others for feare of the like miſfortune did retire them ſelues vnder the couert of the walles of Pera. Beſides thoſe veſſels there lying▪ in the port, there were alſo three galleyaſſes of Venice and two galliots for their ſecuritie: which the Emperour by earneſt entreatie, and for a great ſumme of money, had cauſedDiſcord betwene the Genowayes and the Venetians at Conſtantinople. to ſtay for the defence of Conſtantinople during the ſpace of ſixe monethes. Within a while after, there fell ſome debate and difference betweene the Genowaies and the Venetians: the one reproaching the other, that they had made default at this laſt ſeruice and expedition: but the Venetians hauing libertie granted them to depart, was a cauſe that this diſcord was ſoone appeaſed.
            The extremities and difficulties of the Greekes daily encreaſing, and the Paynims growing more and more audacious and obſtinate: the defendants tooke counſell, and determined vpon ſome courſe, to fire thoſe Turkiſh foiſtes which had bene conueyedIeames Cocqu
                     •
                   a venetian & other Chriſtians drowned. into the hauen. Order being giuen by Iuſtinian how the matter ſhould be put in execution: Ieames Cocqu
                     •
                  
                a Venetian being too couetous of glorie, did raſhly goe in hand with the action, & preuented the time wherein the matter was to be wrought: by meanes whereof, the Barbarians perceiuing their intent, did anticipate the enterprize, ſinking with their ordinaunce certaine veſſelles of the Greekes, and drowning many of the Chriſtians: ſome of them alſo being taken priſoners, as they thought to ſaue themſelues by ſwimming to the ſhore, were the next daye beheaded by thePriſoners Chriſtians beheaded by Mahomet. Sentence. Turkes in the ſight of the Citizens. The defendants being mightely incenſed, and waxing more cruell with this Turkiſh inhumanitie, did giue them drinke (as the ſaying is) of the ſame cuppe. For, cauſing certaine Turkes their priſoners to be brought foorth, they put them to death openly vpon the rampiers of the citie: and ſo the deſire of vengeaunce pricked on with wrath and crueltie, did exaſperate the heartes of both parties.
            
            But this mortall enemie of the Croſſe of Chriſt, to the intent he might not leaue any martiall deuiſe vnattempted that might make him Maiſter of the towne, did now bend all his endeuours to winne it ſecretly by ſtealth and ſubtiltie, and by mines conueyed cloſely vnder the ground, continuing neuertheleſſe daily and hourely the vnpleaſantMynes made by the Turkes againſt Conſtantinople, & diſappointed by the countermynes of the defendants. Iohn le Grand harmonie and roaring noiſe of his cannons and bombards. By this time had they vndermined with great ſilence and ſecrecie the rampier of the vawmure, and now began to make their preparations for blowing vp of the mine. But Iohn le Grand an Almaine ſouldier, well practiſed and experienced in that arte (whom Iuſtinian had made Captaine of a companie, and who did him great ſeruice, aide and comfort during the ſiege) by his ſingular induſtrie and prouident foreſight, did diſcouer the danger: whereupon ſuddenly was there made a ſtrong and braue ſally out of the towne, purpoſely to make proofe and tryall of the matter: which being found to be moſt ſure and certaine, did greatly trouble them within, till ſuch time as they ſaw themſelues exempted and freed from this feare, by the remedie of counter-mines which

they made to diſappoint the purpoſe of the enemie.
            The Sultan perceiuing that the vertue and forwardneſſe of the Chriſtians did cauſeDiſſimulation of Mahomet purpoſing to deceiue the Chriſtians vnder colour of a peace. all his attempts to turne to ſmoke, beganne now to fall to his wonted byas of cunning and diſſembling. He feigned him to repent that he had vndertaken this enterpriſe, falſely giuing out, that he had done it by the perſwaſion of the Hungarians: he ſent therefore an Herauld of armes to the Emperor to treat with him vpon ſome appointment of peace. But his fraude was ſoone perceiued, in that he would not condiſcend, that a fortreſſe which he had raiſed towards the ſea of Propontide, ſhould be razed and throwen downe, nor that they ſhould quietly repaire the ruines and breaches of their walles, and of the towers and bulwarkes about the citie. But that which moſt troubled the defendants was, that they could not haue any truſt nor affiance in the worde nor faith of the Sultan, who was neuer knowen at any time to haue obſerued his faithPeriurie and ſingular infidelitie of Mahomet. or othe with any creature liuing; much leſſe was it likely, that he would holde it to his enemie. The worſt of all, was the ſmall number of the defendants which gaue them cauſe of extreame griefe and ſorrow, for they were in all about a 9000. men or litle aboue, as I haue tolde you. But what is one in compariſon of a 1000. For when the defendants were diſpoſed and ordered in their places vpon the walles eche beſide other, they did ſcant ſuffice to furniſh the walles where the enemie had enuironned them both by ſea and by land. The poore Emperour in great confuſion and perplexitie, with the teares ſtanding in his eyes, did goe from doore to doore, and from houſe to houſe, imploring and entreating the citizens with his hands ioyned together, that they would aide him with their treaſure and wealth, onely for the waging of more ſouldiers, and for the hyring of ſtrange and forreigne ſuccours. But (ô monſtrous impietie, ô wretched auarice of the Greeke Nation!) they proteſted and ſwore with moſt execrable othes, that they had not wherewithall to hire any, that they were drawen dry of money by reaſon of the ſcarcetie and miſerie of the time: and yet aftewardesAuarice and impietie of the Greekes incredible and cauſe of their owne ruine. there was found ſuch abundance of treaſure within the citie, that it ſeemed they reſerued it to enrich their enemies, who were euen glutted with the exceeding riches which they found hidden there by the citizens. Howbeit ſome few of them of their voluntarie motion did contribute ſomewhat vnto him: but theſe were verie few, and it did him litle pleaſure: yea more then this what did the Greeke Emperour? He had recourſe from the citizens, to his Barons, the great Seigniours and chiefeſt nobles of the Empire: but they gaue him counſell in any caſe not to moleſt any man in this publicke extreamitie and combuſtion: but rather to take the reliques and other ſacred things and iewelles of the churches, and to ſerue his neede with them. Whereupon he commaunded that the veſſels and vtenſiles of gold and ſiluer which had bene conſecrated to the vſe of the holy temples, ſhould be coyned into currant and ready money, to be deuided among the ſouldiers, pyoners, and other perſons appointed for the repairing of the fortifications of the towne. For the alſo being wholly attentiue to their priuate profit and commoditie, and not to the good and welfare of the eſtate publike, would not labour nor do any ſeruice, except they were ſatisfied & contented of their pay.Conſtantinople newly battered and three breaches made.
            
            
               Mahomet ſeeing that his offers of peace were refuſed, and being without hope of carying the place, by any other meanes then by the blood and ſlaughter of his people: reenforced the ſiege and fight on all ſides, cauſing the batterie to be recontinued with more furie then before, till ſuch time as he had made three faire and large breaches,An aſſault proclaimed by Mahomet to Conſtantinople by which he might with eaſe enter with his troupes, and free the walles of the defendants. Then he cauſed it to be proclaimed by ſound of trumpet throughout his campe, that euery man ſhould be in a readines with his armes the next morning very

early, to giue a generall aſſault: and he abandoned the towne to the pillage and diſcretion of the ſouldiers for three dayes together, vpon condition that they did within that terme enter it, and make themſelues Maiſters of the place. It was the ſixe andCowardize of the Greekes of Conſtantinople twentieth day of Aprill when this crie was publiſhed, the feare whereof cauſed many of the Greeks to withdraw and conuey themſelues away: faigning that either they had ſome neceſſarie buiſineſſe to be done in the fieldes, or ſome other occaſion to abſent themſelues. Some pretended that they were vnable and vnfit to ſerue, others alleadged their pouertie, ſaying: that it ſtood them vpon to goe get ſome bread to relieue themſelues, and whē ſome more zelous then others, did reproue them for their cowardize, and did ſhew them that now not onely their priuate eſtate was endangered, but that the eſtate of all Chriſtendome, and the common defence of all the Chriſtians in Europe did depend vpon their valour, manhood and reſolution, they made this anſwer: What haue we to do (ſayed they) with the warres whileſt our famelies are readie to ſtarue and to die with pure hunger and famine? ſo that it was a very hard matter to get them to the walles, or to make them to abide there in defence of the place. This was the occaſion that the aſſailants taking heart and courage when they ſawe the ſmall reſiſtaunce that was made in ſome places, durſt aduenture to approachCourage and audacitie of the Turkes preparing thē
                  ſelues to the aſſault of Conſtantinople. neare the walles, and with crookes to pull downe the hogſheades, pipes, and other veſſels which the defendants had prouided there in a readineſſe to make them barricadoes for the more ſuretie of their walles: but by howe much the more the towneſ-men were diſcomforted by that proclamation, ſo much the greater was the ioy and triumph made by theſe miſcreants throughout all the quarters of their camp. Euery man made prouiſion of neceſſaries to furniſh himſelfe againſt the next dayes ſeruice, which they deſired and expected with ſuch greedineſſe and deuotion, that he was not held for a good man, who did not by his verie countenaunce, and by his geſture, bewray the heate and forwardneſſe of a braue mind and courageous. Of their whole armie, there was not a man who of all that day would either eate or drinke. Such is the nature and diſpoſition of men, that when matters do fall out to their deſireSentence. and contentment, their bodies are fully ſatisfied, and their appetite or ſtomach is quite taken from them. But ſome ſay, that this their abſtinence was enioyned them by the ceremonie of their religion. The day being ſpent, and the night come on, aſſoone as it was ſtarre-light, they fell to feaſting one another with great cheere and notable banquets: drinking and carouſing together for the moſt part of the night. This done they retired themſelues euery man to his quarter to take their reſt, with many louing embracements, kiſſes and mutuall fare-welles giuen to ech other, as if they ſhould neuer haue met againe. You ſee now how the aduerſaries prepared themſelues to the ruine and deſolation of the moſt noble and proud citie of the Orient.
            In the meane while, they within the towne hauing heard of this publique cry andCitizens of Conſtantinople their diſcomfortable and miſerable eſtate. proclamation of the great Turke, and conſidering the great preparations that were made for the aſſault, ordained a publique and ſolemne proceſſion: the Prieſtes and religious perſons with all reuerence and deuotion had recourſe vnto their reliques, to the image of the crucifixe and of the bleſſed virgin, with deuout prayers, himnes, and ſongs: their eyes ſheading abundance of teares: their hearts ſighing and groaningCatholique deuotion of the Conſtantinopolitanes. for the miſeries and miſchiefes both preſent and imminent vpon them. The common people both rich and poore, men and women; young and olde, followed after the Clergie, imploring the fauour and protection of the diuine maieſtie. Thus did they goe about the towne, enuironning it on all quarters, viſiting all the holy places, and afflicting their bodies with faſting, diſcipline and continuall orizons: and when night was come they retired euery man to their ſeuerall places aſſigned for their defence.
            
               During theſe paſſions of publique ſorrow and lamentation, the Gouernour of the towne Iohn Iuſtinian (hauing a watchfull eye and good care to all matters as one that did diligently obſerue all fortunes) tooke order for the ſpeedy repairing of the breaches and other places of leaſt aſſurance, and for the furniſhing of them with artillerie: demaunding of Chirluc (who was of chiefeſt authoritie amongſt the citizens) that he ſhould deliuer him out of the common ſtore of the citie certaine ordinance to be emploied againſt the Infidelles, which Chirluc hauing refuſed and denied him, Iuſtinian
               Grudge & hatred betwene Iuſtinian and Chirluc: and the Greeks and Latines. enflamed with extreme wrath & anger vſed theſe words vnto him. Traitor that thou art: what ſhould hinder me that I run thee not through with my ſword? From that time forward Chirluc diſdaining, that he ſhould be ſo outraged and reproached by a Latine, did beare himſelfe verie coldly in the diſcharge of his dutie. And the Greekes in generall had ſecretly conceiued a great diſdaine and enuie, that the Italians ſhould haue the chiefe commaund of them, and ſhould haue the chiefe honour of the preſeruationAmbition of the Greekes. of the citie. Neuertheleſſe the Generall by the aduiſe and counſell of Maurice Catanee, Iohn de Carret, Paul de Bouchardes, Iohn de Fornares, Thomas des Sauuages, Ladiſſe Gattaluſſe, Iohn Illyric, and many other Greekes (who ſhewed themſelues true ſeruitours to God & their countrie, did take order for the ſtrengthening of the companies, and the fortifying of the rampiers: in ſuch ſort, that the Sultan himſelfe greatly commending his prouidence and diligence, vſed theſe words of him. O that I hadSpeech of Mahomet in commendation of Iohn Iuſtinian. that Captaine neare about me, that I might honor him according to his worthines & ſufficiency: and he did by many meanes & deuiſes aſſay to allure him vnto his ſeruice. But that loyall and generous heart of his, would neuer be corrupted nor drawen to yeeld vnto his enticements.
            
            The walls of Conſtantinople were of as wonderfull great height and thicknes, as ofNegligence of the Greeks in furniſhing, fortifying and defending the walles of Conſtantinople. any towne whatſoeuer: but partly by the antiquitie of the time which had in a manner waſted, them being old and ruinous, and partly by the negligence of the Greekes which made no great account and reckoning of it, they were for the moſt part empaired and diſfurniſhed of their battlements, bulwarks & other defences. As touching the vawmure, it was verie ſtrong and in good eſtate as might be, and it was well fortified with all things requiſite for the guarding and keeping of it: and accordingly the Greeks founding all the ſuertie of their fortreſſe vpon the ſtrength thereof, had lodged all their fighting men betwene the chiefe wall and the vawmure. It was a worke and enterprize of no ſmall importance to couer and furniſh the vawmure with men ſufficient: and therefore many wiſe and expert men of good and ſound iudgement, finding fault and blaming them, did tell them, that they ought not to quit and abandon the chiefe and maine wall which was high & ſtrong made: for that by the fauor & benefit of the ſame being duely regarded and furniſhed, they might very well haue maintained and defended the other wall, and ſo haue drawen out the ſiege at length. But if the Emperour for his part did make any default by reaſon of his negligence and puſillanimitie which I will not ſpeake of: much more were they to be blamed, who had the chiefe managing and gouernment of the eſtate, namely, Emanuell Gregare (who was a litle before but a very begger and baſe fellow,) and one Neophit a MonkeEmanuell Gregare, Neophit a monke, two pillers and pollers of the ſtate of Conſtantinople. of Rhodes: two moſt notable pillers and not pillours of the common wealth. Theſe two being ordained as tutors or protectours of the eſtate, and hauing receiued huge ſummes of money, either of ſuch as died inteſtate, and whoſe goods were to come to the publique treaſurie, or by the teſtaments of diuerſe particular perſons (who bequeathed great ſummes of mony to be employed to the reparations & maintenance of the walles and fortifications: they did defraud the common wealth of the ſame and conuerted it to their priuate profite and commodity. Leauing within a while after

to the Infidels and Barbarians, the inheritance and poſſeſsion of all their infamous and ill gotten treaſure, which amounted to more then 70000. crownes. By the miſchieuousConſtantinople loſt by the couetouſnes of theeues and traitors her owne citizens. and wicked couetouſneſſe therefore of theſe theeues and ſacrilegious traitours, did that noble city come to ruine and deſtruction. Seeing then that all the actions and deedes of the Greekes, were continually fooliſh and blameworthy, it is no maruell if ſo worthy a monument and famous a bulwarke of the eſtate of Chriſtendome, founded by ſo many good Emperours, did now fall to be the prey and reward of theeues and robbers. Faine would they haue remedied this miſchiefe afterwardes, but then it was all too late: for they wanted two of the moſt neceſſary and principall things to effect it: to wit, time and money, both which they might haue remedied with great eaſe and facility, if they had intended it either with oportunity or any importunity at ſuch time as they ſaw the burthen of the warres euen readie to fall and light vpon their ſhoulders. But the malice or the negligence of that people, did put off and deferre all things from time to time, and from day to day, till it came to ruine and deſtruction. Now by reaſon that the Greekes did put their whole truſt and confidence in their vtter ditches and the vawmure: when thoſe were once loſt, and that they were forced to retire within the maine wall, which before they neglected, they were not able in the end neither to man it nor to defend it. Much more wiſely and prouidently did the Iewes, who did not employ nor aduenture their whole ſtrength and forces vpon the vtter walles of Ieruſalem when it was beſieged by Titus and Veſpaſian: but they made the one wall ſtill to mainetaine the other, and the firſt being loſt they retired to the ſecond, and from the ſecond to the third: and ſo by meanes of their fortifications,Two yeares by Ioſephus. they prolonged the ſiege foure yeares againſt the Romaines.
            
            But returne we to our Hiſtory. Whileſt the Turkes were preparing them ſelues ſo buſily to a generall aſſault, there ſprang a rumor in their Campe, vppon the report of ſome eſpials, that there was on the one ſide an army and fleete of the Chriſtians at ſea comming to the aide and reliefe of Conſtantinople: and that on the other ſide, that tempeſt of warre Iohn Huniades was marching downe towardes the riuer of * Danowe to giue battell vnto the Sultan, or to make him raiſe his ſiege. This rumourOr Danubius. troubled and terrified the Mahometiſts, cauſing them to murmure againſt their chiefeTurks murmur againſt Mahomet for continuing ſo long at the ſiege of Conſtantinople. and ſoueraigne: ſaying, that it was but raſhly and vainely done to continue and make any longer abode vnder thoſe inuincible and impregnable wals (for it was now two and fifty dayes ſince the ſiege began) and they were in great diſtruſt of their owne forces, albeit they were ineſtimable, and they diſpaired vtterly of all good fortune and of victory. Vppon theſe difficulties, Caly Baſſa the moſt auncient and ſageſt councellour of the Sultan, a man of notable experience in the warres, and one that greatlyCaly Baſſa counſelleth Mahomet to raiſe the ſiege from Conſtantinople. fauoured the Chriſtians (though in ſecrete) and had continually diſſwaded the Ottoman from perſiſting in this enterpriſe: in a ſolemne aſſembly which was now called purpoſely to conſult vppon this point, he told the Sultan: That it could not but be very perillous and daungerous for him to vrge the city of Conſtantinople any longer, the ſame being of notable ſtrength and aboundantly prouided of all things for the warre, and furniſhed with good ſtore of ſouldiers hardy and reſolute either by death or life to defend their liberty: That his aunceſters in times paſt had often, but in vaine aſſaied to conquer it, and were euer repulſed: And which was moſt worthye to be conſidered, that he was not to make any doubt, but that all the Princes and Potentates of Europe, eſpecially the Venetians and the Genowayes his next neighbours, being aduertiſed of the neceſsity and extremity of the towne, would preſently come with a braue and ſtrong power to ſuccour it: That he ought to beware how he did incenſe them and make thoſe his enemies, who were able in other places eyther

greatly to endammage them, or greatly to profit and pleaſure them. Thy puiſſaunce (moſt redoubted Prince ꝙ he) is incomparable, and thou ſhalt better augment and enlarge it by the peace then by the warre, whereof the euents and ſucceſſe are alwaiesSentence. doubtfull and vncertaine, and full of inconſtancie and mutabilitie. Calybaſſa had ſcarce ended his perſwaſions, but Zagan ſecond Councellour of the Turke: a man that was both younger in yeares, of a more hotte and fierie courage, and one that was emulous of Calybaſſa, and the mortall enemie of the Chriſtians, interrupting his ſpeeches, thus alleadged to the contrary.
            
               The Ottoman forces (quoth he) are ſo mighty, and are ſo ſeconded with good fortune,The Oration of Zagan coū
                     ſelling Mahomet to continue the ſiege and to aſſault Conſtantinople. and they are generally in ſo good eſtimate and reputation, that all the worlde ſtandeth in awe and is afraied of their power and greatneſſe: ſo that to doubt of any impediments from Europe, or to hope for any other then a fortunate and glorious iſſue, were in a manner a crime of manifeſt treaſon againſt the maieſty of the Ottoman Empire. Why then ſhould the Sultan leaue this ſiege vppon any vncertaine newes and reports? or vppon fained tales and ſurmizes of vaine poſſibilities? who knoweth not that the Latines are farre vnable to furniſhe them with any ſuccours? The Genowayes are in diſcord and ciuill garboiles: the Venetians haue enough to doe to defend them ſelues againſt the Duke of Milan: as for other Princes farther off, it is well knowen they are all by the eares amongſt them ſelues, each conſuming other with their ciuill warres.
            
            The Eunuch, who was the third vizir to the Sultan confirmed the ſpeeches vſed by Zagan: and Thuraca the Saniacke of Romania durſt not take part with Caly Baſſa,
               Thuraca Saniacke of Romania. but encouraged Mahomet more and more to continue the ſiege, whereunto of himſelfe he was vehemently enclined: in ſo much that the inferiour Chiefetaines and leaders did all with one conſent and voice exclaime, ſaying: It behoueth the MonarchSpeeche of the Turkes captaines calling for warre. and ſoueraigne of the Turkes both to purpoſe and to put in execution things high, hard, and difficult: for by ſuch actions onely doe men purchaſe honour and immortall glory. 
               Mahomet being greatly animated and egged on by their perſwaſions, anſwered thus vnto them: Well then my friends (quoth he) you will that we ſhall trieAnſwer of Mahomet to his counſellors and captains perſwading him to hold on his ſiege. 
               our fortune, and it liketh me exceedingly wel. For what was the puiſſance of the great Alexander? was it incomparable? nay was it not farre inferiour to our forces? was that army of his (wherewith he conquered the whole world) more to be feared and redoubted then this of ours here before Conſtantinople? Which of our predeceſſors, either father, grand-father, or great-grandfather, did euer beſiege this place ſo well accompanied with armed forces, ſo well prouided with warlike weapons, engines, or other preparations, as we now are? Go to then Zagan, make ready our companies, let our troups be ſet in order for the aſſaulting of the towne, and to the intent that they of Pera may not (during the aſſault) either hinder vs behind at our backes, or giue them of Conſtantinople any ſuccours, let their towne be encloſed and beſet on all ſides.
            
               Caly the chiefe Baſſa to the Sultan ſeeing this concluſion, did ſecretely aduertiſe theCaly Baſſa aduertiſeth the Greeke Emperour of the purpoſe of the Turkes. 
               Greeke Emperour of the ſame, perſwading him neuertheleſſe not to be diſmaied nor diſcomforted by the temerity and folly of this young Prince ſo inſolent and ſo furious: that he ſhould not feare their menaces, who were themſelues fearefull and timerous, howſoeuer they made ſhew and ſemblance to the contrary. Only he wiſhed them to keepe good and carefull watch, & to behaue themſelues ſtoutly and conſtantly in ſuſtaining the aſſault. The Emperour, whileſt the Turkes were preparing againſt the morrow to aſſaile the town, did on his part alſo call an aſſembly of the Senate and principall Barons, and chiefe citizens, with all the Captaines and commaunders of the generall companies both Denizens and ſtraungers, to whom being all together, he

began to vſe theſe or ſuch like ſpeeches.
            Moſt noble Lords, moſt worthy captains, and moſt chriſtian ſouldiers, you ſee the
                  Oration of the Emperor of Conſtantinople to his nobles, captaines, and ſouldiers before the aſſault to encorage them. houre now approching, wherein the city is to be aſſaulted by our enemies: you know the dangers that do alwaies accompany an aſſault. Of all military actions and martiall ſeruices, either in field or fortreſſe, there is none more terrible, none more fearefull, bloudy or cruell, then to maintaine a breach againſt reſolute and hardy aſſailantes, it being an ordinary thing in that caſe, for men to ſtand and fight vppe to the knees in bloud, death and wounds attending them on all ſides: yet muſt you not recule, nor be diſcouraged, when you ſhall ſee your Captaines, your kinſmen or your friends, dying and yeelding vp their ghoſts at your feet: but perſiſting reſolutely & with vndaunted hearts, you muſt hold out againſt the enemy as long as any one of you is left aliue. If any of you haue that miſtruſt of your ſelues, that you cannot finde in your hearts to abide the ſight of the ſlaughter, withdraw your ſelues a Gods name to ſome other part of the walles, that you may be there emploied about ſome other needefull occaſions, wherein alſo your ſeruice ſhall be very acceptable: for all men cannot be equally and alike reſolute. You haue had ſufficient triall of the fury and forces of your aduerſaries for theſe 52. daies wherein you haue bene beſieged, and you haue no reaſon now at this preſent to be more terrified or aſtoniſhed, then you haue bin heretofore, for they are the ſame men ſtil that you haue found them in the former fights. You are not now to fight for a petty village: for ſome ſmall caſtell of litle price or reckoning, and wherein you haue litle or nothing to looſe: but you fight for the church of God & his holy religion: for the honor & ſafety of the ſacred Empire: for your own natiue towne and countrey, the chiefe, principall, and Imperiall city of the world: wherein your wiues, your children, your parents, your friends, and all your chiefeſt and deareſt treaſures, do come running vnder the ſhelter of your armes both behind and before you, and on all ſides, imploring your vertue, your valour, and extreameſt reſolution for their defence and ſafety, which without your deuoire will be vtterly loſt and deſtroied, and euen in a moment come to ruine & confuſion. What a deſolation ſhould we ſe if theſe barbarous miſcreants, ſo couetous and thirſty of the bloud of Chriſtians, who haue ſworne to put all to the ſword, ſhould come and ſtrew your faire▪ſtreets, and fill vp your ſumptuous houſes with dead bodies and carkaſſes? how lamentable a ſpectacle would it be to ſee ſo many wiues, maidens, and yong infants violated? the beautifull temples builded by the piety and deuotion of the Chriſtians our fore-fathers now to be polluted, burned, and deſtroied? The only way to auoide theſe miſchifes is to goe againſt theſe hell hounds reſolutely: to oppoſe our ſelues againſt them manfully, and to ſet aſide all feare of danger, and all care and reſpect of death, which though we could ſhun for the time preſent, yet in the end will it be ſure to make an end of vs all without exception.
            
            Immediatly vpon this exhortation, the whole aſſembly with a ſetled & fierce countenance,Aſſault to Conſtantinople by the Turkes. did vow & promiſe that they would all die before they would do otherwiſe: and ſo encoraging ech other, they followed their Generall to the ſeuerall places where it pleaſed him to appoint them: and there with good deliberation did they attend the time of the aſſault. It was not long ere they heard the Infidels preparing their artillery and other engins, & drawing of their chariots with their caſtels or turrets vpon them with their ladders vpon wheeles, their towres of wood, and ſuch like inſtruments for the aſſault: and in an inſtant the Turkiſh army to the ſeaward did enuiron the Port & the wals on that ſide: for you muſt note that preſently after midnight, the Turks vpon a hope & greedines of the prey, being vnpatient to ſtay and attend the breaking of the day, did preſent them ſelues in armes before the walles, and began the fight whileſt it was yet darke, continuing the ſame euen till it was day: But they were ſo plied with

ſtones & ſhot from aloft, that they were not able in the obſcurity of the night, to keepe themſelues out of the danger of the defendants, ſo that fighting ſtill with great diſaduantage, they caried away nothing but ſhame and infamy, with the loſſe of infinite of their braueſt and fierceſt ſouldiers. The light of the day hauing chaſed away the ſtarlight: Mahomet himſelfe came forth with the ſtrength of his army, and after he had giuen the ſignall to begin the aſſault, he commanded that Conſtantinople and Pera ſhould be attempted both together and at one inſtant, becauſe the Greekes ſhould not ſuccour ech other: himſelf alſo appointed euery Colonell with his regiment to a certaine ſpace and quantity of the wall, to the intent that euery one of them being to fight ſeuerally, and in the place particularly aſſigned vnto him, both the valour and proweſſe of them that deſerued and did beſt, ſhould be more apparant and manifeſt, and by the emulation of praiſe and glory they might the more animate each other in the conflict. With the like counſell and aduiſe were the companies of the ſea army diſtributed in order, with an expreſſe charge & commandement, that euery one ſhould make his approch in the quarter appointed vnto him at one and the ſame time. In this maner the ſouldiers being diſpoſed and marſhalled both on the one ſide and the other, the aire reſounding with the noiſe of trumpets, drums, and cornets, to incenſe them that fought, the fury of the aſſault began to encreaſe, and to be renued ſtill more and more, continuing with great aboundance of bloud and cruelty. The Pagans bending their bodies, and ſhrinking in their heads, did couer them ſelues with their targets and pauiſhes, and ſo marching on roundly preſented their ladders to the walles, and with an exceeding audacity ſtriued to get vp, and to mount vpon the rampiers which had bene newly mended & repaired. The defendants receiued them as coragiouſly, beſtowing vpon them great heapes and plenty of ſtones, pots, bals, and launces of wilde fire, ſcalding oile, ſeething water, and ſuch like: powring downe alſo vpon them a whole ſhower of ſhotte, darts, and arrowes, and neuer ceaſing to ouerturne the ladders, and to tumble thē from the top downe to the bottome. In the meane time they which preſented themſelues to the breach with the pikes in their hands, were likewiſe valiauntly reſiſted by others, who preſsing brauely forward & ruſhing vpon them, did not ſtrike in vaine: but beating downe innumerable Infidels, ſome ſlaine, ſome maimed, they ſcattered that battalion: hauing giuen them ſuch entertainment, that many being left dead vpon the placeTurks repulſed from the aſſault. were made ſure for euer aduenturing themſelues againe in the like hazard: and the reſidue of the Turkes (as men that could do no good, and whoſe former heate was well cooled) did now ſeeme to deſire to be diſpenſed withall, that they might not for that day returne any more to ſo bad a banquet, and they began to retire themſelues the ſame way they came. Then Mahomet enraged with ire and madnes went to meete and to encourage them, and he called ſometimes to one, ſomtimes to another by their names, eſpecially ſuch as were men of marke and chiefeſt eſtimate. Some he conſtrained by menaces, others he perſwaded by promiſes, and did ſo much preuaile, that he madeAſſault renued at Conſtantinople by perſwaſions of Mahomet to the Turkes. them to take part againe, and thereuppon they reenforced the aſſault: then might you haue ſeene ſome climing vpon their fellowes backes, other creeping vp like cats, and making themſelues way vp to the wals: againſt the pikes of their enemies, many alſo marching cloſe together and in troups vnder the couerture of their targets, & bearing downe their heads, hauing gained the foote of the wall, did mount to the tops of their ladders: & then with the one hand they labored to lay hold vpō the enemies weapons, & with the other graſping cloſe by the battlements, they ſtriued to get aloft vpon the wals, & there to haue raiſed the Turkiſh enſignes. But the promptnes, vigor, & hardines of the defendants, did far exceed the attēpts of the aſſailants, ſtil beating them down and ouerthrowing them in infinite numbers with pikes, ſtones, and other weapons,

and with caſting of boyling pitch vppon them. It was a braue ſight to ſee how Iohn
               Induſtry and vertue of Iohn Iuſtinian. 
               Iuſtinian with his ſword in his hand, & accompanied with a ſquadron of armed men, now here, now there, did with might and maine beare in vpon the enemy, where as he ſaw them thickeſt, ſtill ouerthrowing and diſperſing them where ſoeuer he came. One while would he redreſſe and confirme the rancks where he ſaw them to faile or to moue: another while with a watchfull eie and ſpeedy pace, would he giue and ſend ſuccours where they needed, and both with the valour of his hand, aſwell as with the eloquence of his ſpeech, he encouraged them on all parts both to do well and to hope well. The preſence of the Turkiſh Monarch did no leſſe further the obſtinacy & reſolution of his people, both by often exhortations and continuall ſupplies of newe and freſh troups who ſucceded chearfully in the places of thoſe which were either ſlaine or repulſed, not ſuffering the defendants to haue any leiſure to reſt or to breath thēſelues, although they performed their deuoire & duty beyond all reaſon & humaine power: yet by reaſon that their nūbers were ſo ſmall, it could not be but they ſhould at length be driuen to the laſt point and exigent of all extremity. Neuertheleſſe they ſtill ſhewed them ſelues in countenance and outward appearance reſolute and deliberate, and that they feared no perill whatſoeuer. In this eſtate did they mainetaine themſelues continually ſtout and vnuanquiſhed, not ſuffering the aſſailantes to glory or to boaſt themſelues of any aduantage againſt the towne, vntill ſuch time as their Chieftaine and gouernour Iuſtinian (by the permiſsion of the cruell deſtinies which nowe beganne to contrary this miſerable and wretched city) in the heate and fury of the fight, & where the wall was moſt endangered, whileſt he oppoſed him ſelfe moſt ſtoutly againſt the enemy, with a company of braue and gallant men, prodigall & careleſſe of their liues, moſt vnhappily receiued a wound behinde vnder the arme hole, being ſhotte with an arrow by one of the defendants ſtanding within vpon the walles.
            Behold now a ſtrange caſe and a wonderful: He which of late by the only terror ofIohn Iuſtinian wounded and fainteth, forſaking his charge his name did appall his enemies, and did adde a corage and confidence vnto the Chriſtians: he which ſhewed himſelfe as a ſecond Mars, and with his arme all bloudy euen to the elbow, did flie like a tempeſt amongſt the Turkiſh ſquadrons, preparing the victory for the Greekes, now alas onely 3. or 4. drops of bloud diſtilling from his owne body, did put him quite out of heart, and as one vtterly forlorne he fainted and gaue ouer, forgetting al his former glory, the remembrance of his duty, and the ſafety both of himſelfe & his countrey. For perceiuing his wound to bleed much, he withdrew him ſelfe ſecretly out of the preſſe, & remoued frō the place without ſpeaking euer a word, going into the towne to haue his wound dreſt, being vnwilling (as himſelf afterwards confeſſed) to haue a ſurgeon called thither: for feare leaſt his ſouldiers, who were then fighting with great fury in that place, ſhould be partakers of his feare, & ſo be diſcoraged by his miſhap. Thus whileſt he thought to auoide one inconuenience he tumbled into a greater miſchiefe. The Emperour hearing of his departure, and ſuppoſing that his abſence would be the loſſe of the towne, as his preſence had bene the preſeruationEmperour of Greece his ouerſight. of the ſame, did commit a ſecond diſorder worſe then the former: for without leauing any man of marke or reckoning to ſupply his office, or to commaund in his place, he went himſelfe in perſon and followed after him to cal him backe againe, endeuouring to cauſe him to returne. But Iuſtinian more deafe then a Haddocke, and obſtinate beyond all reaſon, or rather tranſported with extreame feare, coulde not be entreated by any prayers or perſwaſions to tarry and abide: but cauſing the gate of the city to be opened for him, he promiſed that as ſoone as his wound was dreſſed he woulde returne incontinent. All the gates and portes of the city by which men ſhould paſſe through from the vawmure into the towne, were cloſed and barred vppe, becauſe

all waies, and hope of retrait being taken from the ſouldiours, euery man ſhould determine either to vanquiſh the enemy or to die with honour. But what followed vpponThe Chriſtians diſcomforted and out of hart vpon the departure of their Generall. this accident? The Chriſtians which were at the breach, as ſoone as they had loſt the ſight of their Generall, began to looſe courage likewiſe and to be out of heart. Then might you haue ſeene ſome of them make haſt to retire, and to withdrawe them ſelues out of the preſſe: others began to fight more ſlowly and laſily, and at laſt all in generall beginning to faint and to deſpaire, betooke them ſelues to a ſhamefull and ignominious flight. Whither do you flie you poore and ſenſleſſe wretches? doth your ſafety now conſiſt in your heeles? what, doth your reſolution depend only vppon one man ſo fraile and mortall? If your walles be loſt haue you any other by which you may be couered and protected? or will you returne againe into the wombes of your mothers there to hide you from your enemies? Are you ignorant, or haue you forgotten it, that theſe barbarous miſcreants are ſo mercileſſe and cruell, that they haue no reſpect of ſexe nor age: and that their faſhion is to deuour and ſwallow vp all ſortes and degrees of perſons in one and the ſame gulfe of vnſpeakeable miſchiefe without all pity and compaſſion.
            
            The Colonels and Captaines of the Turkes ſeeing the countenance of the Chriſtians; as ſoone as they perceiued them to faint and wauer, they encouraged their ſouldiours, and with high clamours animated them on to ſcale the walles, which were in a manner quite forſaken and abandonned. Then the Infidelles (who had already deuoured in hope the rich promiſes of the Sultan, and were greedy of reuenge for the loſſe of their bretheren, friendes and fellowes, that lay ſlaine before their eiesConſtantinople taken by the Turkes. in the ditches of the towne:) they began to preſſe forward in good and cloſe array, and with greater feruency and violence then at any time before. Some of them forced through the breaches, others by their ſcaling ladders got ſpeedily to the toppe of the rampiers, and in a moment made them ſelues maiſters both of the ſecond or vttermoſt wall, and of the rampiers and bulwarkes thereof, chaſing thence the Greeke ſouldiours: who being now quite diſcomfited ſought to ſaue them ſelues by flying into the towne, through that gate which was lately opened to Iuſtinian.
            
            In this diſarray and foule confuſion, the Emperour alſo forgot him ſelfe and his duety, which was to haue held good, and to haue died with his armes in his handes. But he becauſe he would not fall aliue into the handes of the Infidelles, turned his backe likewiſe moſt ſhamefully, and holding company with the reſt that fled, as heEmperour of Conſtantinople ſmoothered in a throng by his owne ſubiects, flying from the Turkes. ſtriued to enter in at the city gate in the middeſt of the preſſe and throng, being regarded no more then a priuate perſon, hee was borne downe forcibly to the ground, troden and trampled vnder foote, and ſo moſt miſerably ſmoothered. It is a ſtrange thing and worthy to be obſerued, that in ſo great a feare and confuſion, amongeſt ſo great a multitude of ſouldiers and valiant men, onely two were found and no more, who contemning the preſent perill and all feare of death, did ſtoutly oppoſe their bodies as a bulwarke for the defence and for the ſafety of their countrey: and preferring religion before life, and an honourable renowme before their priuate ſafety, did euen vow and conſecrate them ſelues to the death, fighting valiantly euen to the laſt gaſpe.The death and honourable end of Theophilus Paleologus and Iohn of Sclauony. The one of them was Theophilus Paleologus the Emperours kinſeman: the other was Iohn of Sclauony, a man otherwiſe of a meane and ſeruile condition, but in his end noble and honourable. Theſe two reputing it an extreame ſhame and diſgrace to flie away, did for a great while all alone ſuſtaine the fury and violence of the Barbarians, and hauing ſlaine many with their owne hands, in the end being oppreſſed with the multitude, and rather tired then vanquiſhed, they did yeeld vp their glorious ſoules vnto God, amongſt the heapes of the dead bodies of their enemies. Iuſtinian who

during this time had conueyed himſelfe to Pera, went from thence by ſea to the Iſle of Chios, where falling ſicke, either by meanes of his wound, or for griefe and ſorrowe,Death of Iohn Iuſtinian. within fewe dayes after departed out of this life, hauing moſt ſhamefully loſt the fruite and benefite of that incomparable glorie, which he might eaſily haue purchaſed. For without all doubt moſt happy and fortunate had he bene, if he had continued his firſt reſolution to die valiantly and honorably vpon the walles of Conſtantinople.
            
            The Turkes hauing wonne the Vawmure, chaſed the Chriſtians towardes the towne: and entring the port, pell mell together with them, they ſlue of Greekes and Latines about an eight hundreth within the gate. From the body of the Emperor (being found and knowen by of his coate armour) they did cut off the head, and faſtened it vpon a pike, carying and ſhewing it vp and downe for a token and ſigne of victorie, whileſt others in the meane time hauing gotten to the top, and gayned the chiefe and maine wall of the Citie, with ſhot, arrowes, ſtones, and ſuch like, chaſed thence the citizens: who hearing the alarme at the gate ranne thitherwards, thinking to haue ſhut it, and to haue made a Barricado to keepe the enemie from entring. But the gate being alreadie wonne, and the walles now voyde of defence, the infidels became maiſters of the towne, exceedingly triumphing, both for the conqueſt of the place, and for the infinite riches and treaſures which they found there ineſtimable. The furie and the victorie of the ſouldiers was ſoone and eaſily to be diſcerned by the cryes and howlings of thoſe whom at the firſt entrie they beat downe to the ground, killing and cutting in peeces all thoſe whom they encountred with armes on their backes or weapon in hand. After the furie and heate of the ſlaughter was ſomewhat appeaſed, they gaue them ſelues on all parts to prey and pillage, ranſacking the towneConſtantinople ſacked with all horrible exceſſe of villanie for three dayes together. of all things with extreme rapine and greedineſſe: and after the ſack was ended what Iliads are able to recount the particulars of the infinite diſorders, exceſſe, villanies, and enormities, which that barbarous, impious, and infamous people, addicted to all voluptuouſneſſe, auarice and crueltie, did dare to exerciſe vpon the wretched and miſerable inhabitants? O how pitifully and horribly were they forced and violated, no ſexe nor age being ſpared or pardoned! they confounded and intermingled murthers with whoredomes, and whoredomes with murthers, greedily ſeeking to ſatisfie their brutiſh and vnſatiable humour of lecherie, whereunto that nation of all others is extremely and mightily giuen ouer and enclined. They ſhamed not to put in irons as well the old men who were decrepit for age, as the young lads and tender maidens whom the fortune of the towne had reſerued aliue: whom alſo being coupled and chained together, they draue before them with great deſpite and deriſion. And if by chaunce there happened any maiden, woman, or young boy, any thing beautifull and comely to looke on: euerie man ſtriued who ſhould haue them to abuſe them in moſt villanous and ſhamefull maner: which was an occaſion alſo, that many times they would like brute beaſtes one kill another. The like alſo would they do when they lighted vpon any bootie that was of great value, were it either ſacred or prophane: for ſo many would ſet hand on it together, that oftentimes they would murther each other for the ſame. And by reaſon that their armie was compound of diuerſe nations, differing in language and in manners, there was no kinde of villanie or impietie (how hatefull and enormious ſoeuer it were) but it was ſuffered to the ruine and extreme deſolation of this miſerable citie. The Temple of Saint Sophie (whoſe like was neuer ſeene, builded by the Emperour Iuſtinian) being ſpoyled of all her ornaments and ſumptuous riches, which were innumerable, both of gold, ſiluer, and other precious veſſels: and being contaminated and polluted with all kind of filthineſſe and villanie poſſible to be imagined, became nowe an infamous Burdella or

ſtewes, for vncleane perſons and Sodomites, and a ſtable for horſes, as other churches and holy places in like maner were conuerted to like prophane vſes. The bones and honored reliques of the Saints, were caſt foorth, and throwne about the ſtreetes and publike places, to be troden vnder foote, not by men onely, but euen by the dogs, hogges, and ſuch like. The images of the crucifixe and of the Saints, were either trailed through the dirt, or broken in peeces with axes and hatchets. The rare and exquiſite libraries how litle were they reſpected and regarded by thoſe brute and vnreaſonable beaſtes the enemies of all ſciences and good learning? What notable and extreme torments did they inflict vpon the ſeruants of priuate particular men, to conſtraine them to reueale and diſcloſe their maiſters goods and hidden treaſures? The report is, that they drewe foorth from vnder the earth in diuerſe places an ineſtimable quantitie of gold and ſiluer, and other iewels of exceeding great price, which the vnfortunate and vnhappie citizens, for feare of the ſiege, had hidden vnder ground: which abundance and ſuperfluitie of wealth, had it pleaſed God, that they had beſtowed and employed in munitions, and vpon other neceſſities for the defence of the towne, they might perhaps haue ſaued both their liues and goods, and the libertie of their countrey. But in them was that ſaying then verified; That couetous men do notSentence. poſſeſſe their owne gold and riches, but their gold and riches doth poſſeſſe them.
            
            The ſacke of the citie hauing continued for three whole dayes together, there was nothing nowe left, nor remaining in the towne (which of late was moſt fortunate, happie and rich) but a moſt hideous ſhewe and ſight of all barbarouſneſſe and inhumanitie, ſuffering an indigne and lamentable ſeruitude of her citizens: who toNumber of Chriſtians priſoners taken at the loſſe of Cō
                  ſtantinople. the number of three ſcore thouſand, being bound and manacled, were drawen and caried out of the citie, into the campe and tentes of the Barbarians. It is reported for a certaintie, that Mahomet hauing made a magnificall and ſumptuous banquet to his Baſſaes and Captaines, euery man being full of wine and dainties, and him ſelfe (it may be) litle better then drunken, cauſed all the priſoners to be brought before him, and as if he had a deſire to glut the hearts and eyes of his gueſtes with the innocentCruelty of Mahomet more then barbarous bloud of the Chriſtians, and as a man may ſay, to mixe his wine with bloud, he commaunded, that the principall and chiefeſt perſons, who were of greateſt eſtimate and calling, ſhould haue their bodies deuided and ſawed a ſunder in the middeſt whileſt they were yet aliue, taking a ſingular delight and pleaſure at this inhumane ſpectacle and extreme crueltie. Some of the chiefe Officers and ſpeciall friendes of the Emperour Conſtantine (which remained yet aliue) being called alſo before him, he reproued and blamed very ſharply, for that they did not perſwade their Maiſter either to demaund peace, or to deliuer the towne into his handes: and thereupon he put them likewiſe to the ſword, as he had done the others. Chirluck aboue mentioned,Chirluck his notabl
                     •
                   infidelitie and trecherie. hauing determined to currie fauour with the tyrant, did impute all the fault, and layed the whole blame thereof vpon the Peratines and the Venetians, who (as he ſayd) did ayde and furniſh the Emperour Conſtantine with men, money, munition, and counſell: and that Conſtantine for the loue of them did maintaine the warre againſt him. Moreouer, the wicked wretch, who had euer ſought aduauncement by lyes and ſiniſter practiſes, did accuſe Caly Baſſa to be a friend to the Greekes, and that he had often written to the Emperour, comforting him, and encouraging him toThe death of Caly Baſſa betrayed and bewrayed by Chirluck, and executed by Mahomet. hold out: and to proue his wordes true, he ſhewed foorth the letters vnto the Sultan, which he had reſerued expreſſely and of purpoſe. The Emperour of the Turkes being more feloniouſly incenſed then before, did reſolue vtterly to deſtroy Pera: and ordained that Caly Baſſa, being depriued of his authoritie, and of all his goods, and being faſt bound and fettered, ſhould for a while be put in ſafe keeping, and ſhut vp

within a certaine tower at Conſtantinople: from whence within fewe dayes after he was conueyed to Andrinople, and there executed, to the publike griefe and ſorowe of all the Turkiſh hoaſt. But the diſloyall and trayterous Greeke did not eſcape the due puniſhment of his malice and infidelitie: for hauing firſt loſt his two eldeſt ſonnes in the warre, the third being ſlaine before his eyes by the commaund of Mahomet, andThe death and deſerued puniſhment of Chirlucke. the fourth being reſerued to the abhominable luſtes of the prophane tyrant, the father was enioyned and enforced to hang and ſtrangle him ſelfe with his owne handes.
            With no leſſe cruelty did the Turkiſh Sultan vſe the forainers and ſtrangers whichThe death of many noblemen priſoners to the Turke and executed. were taken vpon the loſſe of the citie. TheHierome Minot. Contaren and other Gentlemen of Venice twice ranſomed Cardinall of Rome the popes Legat priſoner and ranſomed. Bailiffe or Gouernour of the Venetians with his ſonne and other Nobles of his company were beheaded. Likewiſe the Conſull of the Caraconenſians or Catalans with his two ſonnes had the like end: and Contarin a Venetian Gentleman, of the familie of the Contarines, with ſixe other Gentlemen Venetians beſides him, who had before agreed and payed their ranſome, yet had drunke alſo of the ſame cup, if they had not payd ſeuen thouſand Duckets more once againe for their redemption. Iſidore Ruthenian Cardinall of the ſea of Rome, who had before bene ſent Legate à Latere from the Pope Nicholas the fift, hauing diſguiſed him ſelfe, fell into the hands of a ſimple ſouldier, and by meanes of a great ſumme of aſpres which he payd him, he eſcaped and got him libertie.
            The inhabitants of Pera ſeeing the deſolation of Conſtantinople, layed aſide their armes, and without attending any ſummons from the Sultan, they came foorth ofPera voluntarily yeeldeth to the Turkes. the towne, and bringing their keyes with them, they layed them downe at the tyrants feete: who hauing receiued them to mercie, with ſufficient ſhewes of grace and fauour: and ſhortly after hauing cauſed his armie to enter the towne, againſt all faithPeriurie and infidelitie of Mahomet to the Peratines. and publicke honeſtie, he cauſed it to be ſacked, the rampiers to be diſmanteled and broken downe: and afflicting them with a thouſand miſchiefes and calamities, he cauſed their children to be ſold for ſlaues, their matrones to be defloured, the olde men to be enchained, the yong men to be murthred without any regard or difference had of age, ſexe or condition: not ſparing their temples, pallaces, nor other edifices
                  The wordes of the oracle are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Name of Conſtantine fat all to Conſtantinople. Helen the mother of Great Conſtantine daughter of Coilus king of great Brittain. Exhortation of the Author to all Chriſtians.
                and buildings. Thus we ſee that the very ſame happened to the noble city of Conſtantinople, which was once foretold and prophecied by the oracle to the Macedonians: namely: That the name of Conſtantyn was fatall to that towne, and that during the raigne of Constantyn, it ſhould finde her beſt and worſt fortune. For as Conſtantyn the great the ſon of* Helen, was the firſt that founded that Empire, and did adorne and enrich that Imperiall city: ſo this Constantyn the ſonne of another Helen, alſo was the laſt Emperour, after that this Empire had endured eleuen hundreth twenty and one yeares.
            This city that was the Queene and Lady of all the townes in the world, hauing receiued and endured ſo many miſchiefes and calamities by the cruell and villainous handes of theſe theeues and brigandes, it ſtandeth vs vppon to be moued by their examples: to the intent we may more narrowly aduiſe our ſelues of the plagues that doe hang ouer the heades of other peoples and cities, and that ſtanding in awe of the rigorous and ſeuere iudgementes of God, we be the more allured and ſtirred vp to his ſeruice and obedience: and hauing our recourſe vnto him with continuall praiers, and daily ſighes and gronings of our ſoules, we ſhould entreat his diuine clemency, that it would pleaſe him to preſerue his Church and his people, and to moderate the paines and puniſhmentes inflicted vppon them. And let vs not onely meditate vppon the example of their puniſhment, but let vs remember alſo what were

the ſinnes and crimes of the Greeke nation, and of their Emperours in thoſe daies. Let vs conſider their great exceſſe and vſurpations, their hatefull diſcordes and ciuill warres, wherewith they rent and tore in ſunder that famous Monarchy: ſo ſhall we be incited by the ſorrowfull and lamentable end of that Empire, to liue more modeſtly and ſoberly, to nouriſh and entertaine concord and amity: chaſing and repelling farre from vs, all diſtruſt, ambition, couetouſneſſe, and the deſire of vengeance, or any other thing vnlawfull, whereby the common peace and tranquillity ſhould be troubled or diſturbed: for feare leaſt that either being diſmembred or conſumed by a mutuall & inteſtine butchery amongſt our ſelues, we fall into the ſame misfortune and calamity which is befalne and happened vnto the Greekes.
            
            The end of the eight Booke.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               MOſes with an armie of Turkes entreth into Epire, and is encountred by Scanderbeg. The priuat combat of Ahimaz a Turke with Zachary Groppe an Epirot. Moſes hauing challenged Scanderbeg to a particular combate dareth not abide him. The battell of Oronichea between Moſes and Scanderbeg, wherein the Turks are ouerthrowen and Moſes put to flight, who at his returne to Conſtantinople being in great diſgrace with Mahomet, poſteth ſecretlie into Epire, and ſubmitting himſelfe to Scanderbeg, is freelie pardoned. Ameſe the nephew of Scanderbeg reuolteth from his vncle and flieth to Mahomet with his wife and children Iſaac Baſſa accompanied with Ameſe, is ſent by Mahomet with an armie againſt Scanderbeg, who hauing leauied a power to receiue them, retireth with his forces and giueth place vnto them. Iſaac marching freelie ouer the countrey, proclaimeth Ameſe king of Epire. Scanderbeg hauing by his fained flight brought the Turkes into ſecurity, ſodainly ſetteth vpon their Campe. The famous battell of Pharſalia: wherein Iſaac Baſſa is put to flight, with a notable ſlaughter of the Turkes, and Ameſe is taken priſoner, being ſent to Naples by his vncle, there to be kept in priſon. Mahomet being encombred with great warres ſeeketh to haue peace with Scanderbeg, which being refuſed, he ſendeth Hamur and Synam with two ſtrong armies to defend his frontiers. And Scanderbeg likewiſe fortifieth the borders of Epire. The frontier war betweene the Turks and the Epirots. Hamur maketh a new motion of peace vnto Scanderbeg. Alphonſus king of Naples dieth, and Ferdinand his baſe ſon ſucceedeth him in that kingdome, vnto whom Scanderbeg ſendeth an Ambaſſade. Ameſe is brought backe into Epire, and is reſtored to the grace and fauour of his vncle, by whom being licenced to goe againe to Mahomet to practiſe the deliuery of his wife and children, at his returne to Conſtantinople, he is there poyſoned by the Turke.
            
            
               IN the ſacred Scriptures it is written, that Zedechias and the other Iewes caried away captiue vnto Babilon, did mock and deride the Prophet Ieremy when he for told them of the captiuitie and deſtruction of Ieruſalem. We reade alſo that if Caſſandra had bin beleeued by Pryam hir father, Troy had notProphecies foretelling the ruine of Empires and eſtates. bene burned by the Greekes, nor reduced ſo miſerably into duſt and aſhes. If the Romans had giuen credit to the prophecies of the Sibils, their monarchie had not bene ruinated & troden vnder foot. But in very truth, this is an infallible rule, and vndoubtedly to be beleeued: that Empires, Realmes and Kingdomes haue their vndoubted age limited, neither more nor leſſe, then as mortall men haue their birth &

beginning, their increaſe, their continuance, and their declining. For albeit ſuch prophecies,Empires and 
                     •
                   kingdoms haue their time and age limited. admonitions and diuine reuelations haue and do ordinarily forerun & preceed the ruine of Monarchies and Empires: yet ſo it is, that when their prefixed time is come, it behoueth them to fall and come to nothing, maugre all the counſels & endeuorsPredictions of the ruine and deſtruction of Conſtantinople. which humane wiſdome can deuiſe. The Greeks do affirme, that diuerſe perſonages & men famous for the holineſſe of their conuerſation & learning, did for many ages long before diuine & prophecy of this horrible tempeſt, which ſhould ſwallow vp and conſume the Empire of the Orient. Amongſt others, one Leon ſurnamed the ſage (as they ſay) made a certen table, which being hidden in ancient times, was found within the Monaſterie of S. George in Conſtantinople, containing therein certen litle ſquadrons or ſcutcheons, within the which were ſeuerall letters, that diſtinguiſhed theLeon the ſage his table of the Emperours of Conſtantinople. order and ſucceſſion of the Emperours of Conſtantinople: and ſo many quadrants only were contained in the table, as would comprehend all the Emperours from Conſtantine the great the firſt founder of that Empire, til the laſt end & deſolation of the ſame: & that all the ſaid quadrangles were filled with ſeueral caracters, but only that wherein the laſt Emperour was to be placed. They deliuer alſo that there was another, a deuoutMorſena his prophecie of Conſtantinople. man called Morſena, who prophecied, that a certain people or nation, being excellent archers ſhould ariſe againſt Conſtantinople, who ſeizing vpon her noble port or hauen, ſhould vtterly exterminate and expell the Greeks out of that imperiall Citie. And laſt of all, they adde the prophecies of Sibilla Erithrea, who foreſhewed likewiſeSibilla Erithrea. the ruine of the Greeks. But howſoeuer it be, the finall iſſue and euent of that vnfortunate Citie hath made it manifeſt, that the Great Conſtantine was ill aduiſed, when he tranſported and tranſlated the Imperiall ſeate, and all the ornaments thereof, from the citie of Rome to that place. For albeit it cannot be denied, but that Conſtantinople wasConſtātine the Great ill aduiſed in tranſlating the ſeat of the Empire frō Rome to Conſtantinople. a place very fit and agreeable for the greatneſſe of that Empire, yet neuertheleſſe the Heauens and the deſtinies would not permit, that the ſame ſhould continue ſtill to be the ſiege of the Romaine Empire. For as euery region and all particular townes, haue their fatall and ineuitable neceſsity and their particular maners, rites and conditions: ſo cannot thoſe things be tranſlated elſewhere from their naturall ſeate without notable inconuenience: notwithſtanding that they be the ſame perſons, and though they doe retaine their wonted lawes and cuſtomes. For that the inſtruments and celeſtiall conſtellations of another climate do ordinarily change and alter the humors and affections of the perſons that doe there dwell and inhabite: whoſe manners iointly with the deſtinies, doe in the end cauſe the alterations which happen in them, which was manifeſtly ſeene by the tranſportation of the Romaine Monarchy to the Greekes, and Aſiatickes. For from thenceforth their Emperours, their ſouldiers, their legions, and armed forces being choſen and furniſhed out of thoſe countreis, it came to paſſe that being deuided into factions and partiallities, by the naturall ambition and inconſtancy of that nation: and being growen effeminate by the ſoft, nice, and tender delicacies of the Orient, they were not able after a while to repulſe the incurſions and often inuaſions of the Barbarians. And Rome it ſelfe in the meane time and all Italie (whom God had determined to puniſh) wanting a chiefe head and ſupreame commander amongſt them, and not retaining, but by litle and litle neglecting and looſing their auncient military diſcipline, and that martiall rigour and ſeuerity, which was neceſſarily to be obſerued amongſt ſouldiers & men profeſsing armes, they became a prey vnto ſtrange nations. Wherefore we may well ſay, that it is happened vnto this Empire, as vnto a beautifull and goodly tree, which in hir own naturall ſoile doth bring fourth pleaſant and good fruite, but being remoued and planted in a ſtrange ground, in the end by litle and litle it becommeth barren and withered.
            
               I doubt not Gentlemen, but both your eyes and your eares haue bene wearied and 
                  •
               loyed to ſee and vnderſtand the large diſcourſe and recitall which I haue made of thoſe dolourous and lamentable misfortunes befallen to your Chriſtian brethren. I will ceaſe therefore to ſpeake anie further of this ſorrowfull ſubiect, and will followe the tract of our Moſes, whom (me thinkes) I heare calling to me and complayning himſelfe worthily, for that I haue ſuffered him to ſtay ſo long in the heate and ardour of his rebellion, which leadeth him on againſt his naturall Prince and natiue countrie, to the intent we may ſee what will be the end and fortune of that his iourney.
            The ſeaſon and time of the yeare, which now beganne to grow more milde andScanderbeg prepareth to receiue Moſes in Epire. temperate, the frequent and often renued aduertiſements, and the rumour publiſhed and ſpread abroad concerning the approch of Moſes into Epyre did perwade the king to haue his forces in a readineſſe. Wherefore with a notable good courage and reſolution, he attended the comming of this new enemie, howbeit with a more milde affection and leſſe hatred, then he vſed towards others that came in armes againſt him. He could not yet let it ſinke into his minde, that the Dybrian did beare him any hatred, or did carrie the minde of an enemie towardes him, or that ſo ſlight, or rather no occaſion, ſhould cauſe ſo ſuddaine and great a chaunge of his faith and fidelitie, which had bene notably tryed and approued in ſo manie battelles and for ſo manie yeares. He thought rather that it might be, he vſed this as a cunning ſtratageme and policie, to leaue ſome teſtimonie to the poſteritie of his great renowme, and for the confuſion and grieuous ruine of the Miſcreants. And although it were ſo that he marched as an open and apparant enemie againſt his countrie, yet was he in good hope, that the ſight of his natiue ſoyle, and the preſence of his auncient friendes and fellow citizens would by litle and litle drawe him to a more charitable and friendly reſpect, and ſo aboliſh all his enmitie and ſiniſter affections earſt conceiued againſt his Prince or countrie. But howſoeuer it was he had his army in good order, and in a readineſſe againſt all hazards and euents: being fully reſolued, either with armes in hand to vnderſtand the mind and intention of his friende, or with a moſt ſharpe and ſetled courage and indignation to fight with him as his open enemie. Neither did he greatly care to proceed againſt him with any policies and ſtratagemes to ſurpriſe him vpon the way, becauſe he knewe well that his troupes were not exceſſiue great, nor much exceeded his owne forces, but that both in number and valure they were ſufficient to receiue him, and to hazard the fortune of the field with him. And it may be alſo that he held it no eaſie matter, nor of ſmall daunger to allure or drawe him into his ſnares, who was an old and expert arts maſter in ſuch ſleights and ſubtilties, and ſuch an enemie as had bene familiarly acquainted with his manner of gouernement and proceedings in martiall ſeruices.
            This then was the occaſion, that Moſes entred free and without any diſturbanceMoſes entreth into the lower Dibria to Oronichea or the fields of Pharſalia. into the lower Dybria and encamped in Epyre neere to the plaine of Oronichea, which hath beene ſo famous for ſo manie great and notable victories, eſpecially through the defaite of Muſtapha: yet did not he attempt anie thing eyther by procuring the inhabitantes to reuolt vnto him, or to ſpoyle and waſte the countrie in anie cruell and hoſtile manner. For he was aduertiſed, that the King of Epyre did approach, and hauing a deſire and determination to beginne the warre with a priuate and ſingle combat betweene himſelfe and Scanderbeg bodie to bodie: he thought it more meete and conuenient to proceede with open force in plaine and ſet bartell, then by trifling skirmiſhes, or by roades and inuaſions to waſte, ſpoyle, and ſacke the Prouince. Scanderbeg made no long delay, but meeting with him euen in the

open and plaine champion, he made readie his forces to the conflict. Immediatly beganne a great murmuring in the army, and the ſouldiers in a certaine diſdaine and deſpight to ſee him, could hardly be reſtrayned vnder their enſignes, but that they would forthwith haue charged vppon the enemie. Euen as a kinde and naturall father when he ſeeth his owne ſonne ſtanding and behauing him ſelfe inſolently before him (whom a damnable deſire of rule, and a wilde youthfull diſpoſition, impatientAn elegant compariſon. of the yoake hath drawen into armes againſt him) is then loaden and ſurcharged with care and griefe, and euerie moment doth temporize and ſeeke delayes, marching forwarde but ſlowly, and ſeeketh firſt (though in vaine) by ſweete wordes and perſwaſions to conuert and diſſwade him from his obſtinate and diſobedient courſe, deferring as long as he can, the puniſhment of him whom he loueth ſo dearely, and is loath to triumph in the lamentable victorie of his owne bloud and bowels: euen ſo the King of Epyre preſſed on with loue and pietie, did looke vppon Moſes then in armes, and furiouſly raging againſt him, did iudge diuerſely of his minde and affection. Willingly he would haue demaunded a word, and haue had ſome ſpeech with him, and he would gladly haue ſounded the nature and diſpoſition of his olde friend, wherewith he had beene ſo familiarly acquainted; or elſe he would haue treated with him by Ambaſſadours and friendly counſels: But neither the Maieſtie of his royall eſtate and dignitie, nor the rigour and ſeueritie of armes, nor the furie and inſolencie of the ſouldiers (who were now readie to skirmiſh and to beginne the fight) would permit and ſuffer him to doe any of theſe thinges, whileſt they were more deſirous, that his fault ſhould reſt betweene God and his owne conſcience, rather then the enemy ſhould thinke they ſtood in any doubt or feare of him. But Moſes his mind ranne on no ſuch matter: his thoughts tended to another end: for he preparing himſelfe to put that in performance, which he had earſt promiſed to the Turkiſh Monarche was in a mind preſently to haue giuen the onſet vpon the enemie, had not the prompt audacitie and hardineſſe of Ahimaz a priuate ſouldier, interruptedAhimaz. and deferred for a while that his purpoſe and enterpriſe: for this Turke addreſſing him ſelfe towardes the Dybrian ſayd,
            
               Giue me leaue worthie Generall, firſt to lead thee the waye, which the GoddesSpeech of Ahimaz to Moſes, deſiring leaue to fight a combat. themſelues haue layed open for thee to attaine vnto this preſent glorie. It ſeemeth vnto me (I know not how) an vnfit thing, and nothing agreeable vnto the right vſe of armes, that we ſhould come abruptly to trye the fortune of all our forces in a pitched and maine battell, and not to beginne the fight by ſome ſmall and light attempt.
            
            The deſire of this ſouldier was ſoone approued, and he was permitted to arme himſelfe for the combat, and withall to ſend a trumpet to the King of Epyre, to vnderſtand his pleaſure, if he would conſent that before the beginning of the fight, both the one part and the other ſhould make tryall in this manner of their valure and good fortune. The trumpet being ſeene to approach, Scanderbeg did imagine (according as he wiſhed) that the Dybrian would haue drunke water with his wine: but when he vnderſtoode the ſumme of his meſſage, the name and regard of Moſes beganne by litle and litle to vaniſh out of his remembrance: neuertheleſſe that which he demaunded was accorded vnto him. But ſome of the Epyrots (as the report goeth) made this anſwere: That if the Turkes would, they were and would be readie by a priuate and particular combat of ſome fewe perſons, to exempt the two armies from the perill and hazard of a ſet fielde. Thus at the ſame time, that the Trumpet on the one ſide did retyre with his anſwere to the Turkiſh armie, on the other ſide one of the Epirot horſemen, Zacharie Groppe being followed with the clamours of thoſe of his

owne companie came forth very couragiouſly and in very great haſte preſented himZachary Groppe deſireth leaue to fight the combat with Ahimaz. ſelfe to his Prince, deſiring him to giue him the honour and preferment of this combat. Scanderbeg receiued him very courteouſly, and with very good ſpeeches highly commended and magnified his vertue. His companions that helped to arme him prayed vnto God to giue him, not more ſtrength and valure, nor more hardineſſe or courage, but onely the fortune and good happe of Maneſſey. He made choiſe of no other then his ordinarie and vſuall weapons: onely he wore vpon his armour certaine rich ornaments as is the guiſe of ſouldiers. The Paynim who was in nothing inferiour to his aduerſarie, was the firſt that tooke the fielde, imagining that there ſcant durſt anie man come to encounter him: but aſſoone as he ſawe the partie (with whom he ſhould haue to deale) to come into the fielde throughly armed, and with his launce vpon his thigh marching right towardes him, he addreſſed him ſelfe vnto him, and cryed all aloft: Soft and faire, ſoft and faire (quoth he) noble
                  Speeches betweene Ahimaz and Zacharie Groppe before their combat. Knight, we ſhall haue time enough to ſeeke our owne misfortune. And therewithall he entreated him, that they might talke together, and hauing enquired the name and the degree or eſtate of the Epyrot, he beganne to propound certaine conditions not much vnlike thoſe which once were propounded and ſcorned by Paul Maneſſey, in the like action. Whereunto Zacharie, interrupting his ſpeeches as vaine and friuolous, replyed, That he could wiſh with all his heart, that he had more and better meanes to content his deſire: and (if it were his fortune) to make his victorie the more glorious. This ſaide, ech of them turned about and withdrewe themſelues apart, and being gone ſo farre, that the full courſe of their horſes might makeCombat betweene Ahimaz and Zachary Groppe. their ſtroakes the more violent, ſetting ſpurres to their horſes, and giuing them the reynes, they tooke their carreer eche againſt other with their launces in the reſt. Neither of them fayled in their courſe, notwithſtanding their ſtrokes were in vaine, for that their launces piercing into their targets, which were couered with barres of ſteele, did flie in peeces without any hurt done vnto their bodies: yet they holding on their carreer, encountred together with their bodies ſo rudely, that both horſe and men tumbled to the ground. The two champions yet whole and vnwounded, ſpeedily got vp vppon their feete, and leauing their horſes, with their ſwords drawen did affront ech other, and beganne a fierce and cruell conflict. Fortune would that the ſight of this combat ſhould be diuerſely enriched and beautified, imparting her fauour equally vnto them. For hauing continued a long time in fight, and no bloud drawen on neither ſide, their ſwordes fell out of both their handes: it might be long of the crookedneſſe and heauineſſe of their Cimitaries, which are fitteſt for horſemen, and leſſe eaſie for them that fight on foot: or peraduenture it was by reaſon of wearineſſe, or for lacke of aduiſement, and through their ouermuch heat and haſtineſſe in fighting. Hauing loſt their ſwords, they did caſt away their targets alſo, and (as two ſtrong and mightie wraſtlers vnarmed) with their bare handes, they faſtened eche on others bodie, doing their beſt and worſt by wraſtling to ouerthrowe ech other. The two hoaſtes ſtood and behelde them, with equall and like meaſure both of hope and feare. After they had thus a long time wraſtled and tugged together, reſting themſelues nowe and then among: and neither of them able to moue or to force, and throw ech other to the ground, they came at length to the laſt proofe of their force and ſtrength, and lifting vp one the other from the earth, they tumbled and fell both of them together, the Turke vnderneath with his belly vpwardes, and the Epirot full vpon him, who very quickly and nimbly ſetting hande on his dagger, ſtabbed him with it into the throate. Ahimaz by little and little beganne to waxe faint, and his handes leauing their holde, the vanquiſher (hauing

freed himſelfe from him) with great ioy and triumph and with infinite acclamationsVictorie of Zachary Gr
                     •
                  ppe againſt Ahemaz who is ſtaine. of the Albanians, got vp vpon his feete, and laying hold vpon his ſworde which lay neere him, he did cut off the head of his enemie, yet gaſping and drawing of breath. And being thus loaden with that and his other ſpoyles, he went his way faire and eaſily towardes his fellowes who were comming to meete him. For you muſt vnderſtand that both their horſes at the beginning of the combat, were gotten and fled to the campe of the Chriſtians, which the common ſort interpreted as a good token of their victory and good fortune. Zacharie had no leſſe recompence and rewards giuen him by Scanderbeg, then Maneſsey had before for the like deſert; but the praiſes and commendations giuen him by the whole army farre exceeded, becauſe both the difficulty and the variety of the combat did ſeeme to amplifie the merit of the champion, and did more adorne and beautifie the honour of the victorie.
            This good happe hauing giuen vnto the Chriſtians an aſſurance and entry to the entier fauour of fortune, and hauing put Moſes in a maruellous anguiſh and griefe of heart (notwithſtanding that his troupes being terrified with the ill ſucceſſe of their companion did diſſwade him by all meanes poſſible) yet he giuing the ſpurres to hisMoſes challengeth Scanderbeg to the combat. horſe, & galopping ouer the field (as yet ſmoaking with the bloud of the Turks) went apart towards Scanderbeg, and with a high voice challenged him to the combat. The ſuddenneſſe and ſtrangeneſſe of the act did aſtoniſh and amaze all the Epyrots, and they did with a kind of horror, deteſt the noueltie and rareneſſe of ſo wicked and inſolent an action: inſomuch as they ſtood ſtill as men ſtricken mute or dumbe with that accident. As yet was not all loue and pietie quite baniſhed & exiled out of the heart of the king of Albany: but ſtanding for a time in doubt and mammering with himſelfe, he was loth to defile his hands with the bloud of his old friend & familiar: but the other perſeuering in his importunate defiance, and withall vpbraiding him in moſt iniurious and deſpightfull manner, it made him to forget all right and equitie, inſomuch as being filled with wrath and anger, though his Nobles did enforce themſelues to haue retayned him, and would haue taken vpon them this reuenge, yet would he not be perſwaded, but made towards the Dibrian who ſtaied for him. Moſes as ſoone as heMoſes flieth from the preſence of Scanderbeg comming to combat with him. ſaw him comming, ſuddenly turning about, gallopped towards his companie, and was ſo aſhamed that he durſt not abide nor ſpeake a word vnto him, but cauſing his whole army preſently to ſet forward, he made them ready to the battell. The Prince of Albany in the meane time returned to his forces, who were nothing diſcontented with this adieu betweene them: and eſpecially the Turkes for their partes were very glad of it, knowing well the great and manifeſt inequality that was betweene the two parties. He that ſhould compare the brauerie of the challenge made by the defiant with the ſhamefulneſſe of his flight, would thinke that either Moſes being aſhamed of his promiſe made to the Sultan, was willing to be acquitted of it as of an ill debt, and that being terrified with the preſent daunger, it made him to turne his backe: or elſe that he did it of a fooliſh and raſh preſumption, thinking that Scanderbeg would not haue ſtirred out of his place to meete him, and himſelfe confeſſed no leſſe afterwardes at ſuch time as he returned into Albany. But for my part I am rather of this minde, that God, euen that great God which hath eſtabliſhed the kings of the earth in theirSentence. thrones, hath imprinted in their countenances certaine characters of his diuinitie, which maketh them venerable and terrible aboue other men. And ſo Moſes who had neuer ſeene his King in choller and diſpleaſure with him, could not then beare nor endure the maieſtie of his angrie viſage: ſo that herein he verified the olde and common prouerbe: namely, when the eye ſeeth that it neuer ſaw, the heart thinkethA Prouerbe. that which it neuer thought.
            
            
               Immediatly vpon this retrait, the Albanois beganne to make forwardes, ſending forth on all parts ſuch cries and clamors as are vſually heard in armies that are victorious. Scanderbeg albeit both the ſtrength and reſolution of his forces (which were to the number of 6000. horſe and 4000. foote) and ſo many good ſignes and auguriesNumber of Scanderbeg his forces againſt Moſes. did manifeſtly foreſhew his certaine and aſſured victorie: yet did he not omit any thing notwithſtanding, that might ſerue to the obtayning of the ſame: were it either for his perfect and exquiſite arte and cunning in ſetting and ordering of his battels, or in encouraging of his ſouldiers: for being returned from that vaine defie giuen him by Moſes, he vſed theſe ſpeeches vnto them.
            You haue great reaſon (my good ſouldiers) to aſſure your ſelues this day of the
                  Oration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers encouraging them in the battell againſt Moſes. victorie ouer your enemies, in that God hath ſent you theſe manifeſt preſages of his aſſiſtaunce in theſe their two Champions: of whome the one with the loſſe of his head, and the other by his moſt ſhamefull flight, hath giuen you an aſſured pledge of your good and happie ſucceſſe. For my part I could haue bene content to haue employed the ſtrength and furie of my armes elſe where, if the inſolencie and infidelitie of this rebell would haue permitted mee. But ſeing he (as one tranſported from all reaſon and honeſtie) doth ſeeme to contemne and deſpiſe the friendſhippe and kindneſſe which hath beene ſhewed him, and doth confound all rightes both diuine and humaine: what charitie reſteth now to be extended vnto him, but that you fight valiantly for your countrie, for your wiues, for your children, and for your Prince, who is borne and dedicated onely for your libertie and tranquilitie: of the which this wretch and miſerable fugitiue ſeeketh to depriue you: endeuouring to bring you into the bondage and thrauldome which you haue heretofore endured? Many other ſpeeches and perſwaſions did he vſe vnto them, which were both begunne and ended with a great noiſe and crie amongſt the ſouldiers, and they went on preſently againſt the enemie, who made no leſſe haſte to encounter with them.
            The hoaſt of the Albanois was deuided into two wings, wherof Muſache de Ange
               Order of Scanderbeg his b
                     •
                  tt
                     •
                  ls againſt Moſes. 
               line had the charge of the one, and Giurize de Vladienne, had the leading of the other. Scanderbeg left not his wonted and ordinarie place in the middle battell betwene the winges, which was reenforced and ſtrengthened with a good ſquadron of pykes and holbards, and certaine Italian horſemen. In the head of the wings had he diſtributed his archers, crosbowes, and ſuch of his people as ſerued with ſhot. And thus was both the Cauallerie and the Infanterie diſpoſed as well in the battallions of the vauntgard ordained for the firſt charge and onſet, as alſo in the rerewarde, and laſt ſupplies, which were ordained for the ſeconding of the fight. Moſes made one onelyOrder of Moſes his battell againſt Scanderbeg. front of his horſemen, of whom he placed in the head of the battell about a foure thouſande for the firſt charge and encounter of the enemie. The like number did he ordaine at their backes, in which place alſo he had beſtowed, with eſpeciall choiſe, manie of his ſtouteſt and moſt reſolute ſouldiers, both to ſtay the former, if they ſhould either be affraied, or happen to flie before their enemies, as alſo to aide them if they ſhould be harde beſtead, and to repreſſe the furie of the enemie: by meanes whereof the rerewarde (which him ſelfe commaunded, and helde neere at hande) might haue the more leaſure to prepare themſelues eyther to aſſayle and charge vppon the enemie, or elſe (if neede were) to remedie any diſorder: and if anie misfortune ſhould befall them, to prouide for himſelfe with more ſuertie and ſecuritie. The Dybrian was enuironned for the moſt part with Epyrots, and hee had purpoſely aſſured and flanked him ſelfe with them: both becauſe (the language and the manners of that Nation being moſt familiar vnto him) he might

the more commodiouſly be counſelled by them, as alſo ayde them vppon any occaſion. To many of them alſo he had giuen the charge of companies, and other degrees of commaund in this battell, without any diſlike or contradiction of the Turkes, becauſe he had abſolute and full power from the Sultan to diſpoſe of all matters to his owne liking.
            The forefronts of both the armies being come with great furie to handyſtroakes,The battell of Oronichea, betweene Moſes and Scanderbeg. the Chriſtians did preſſe and beare in vpon the Infidels with ſuch ſtrength and violence, that they in the forefront of the enemies vowarde were ſoone beaten backe and repulſed: inſomuch that their Enſignes alſo being forced to retyre, many of them in the middle battell were ſo terrified with this chaunce, that (notwithſtanding the cries of their fellowes who recalled them from their flight) yet for all that, quitting their rankes, they beganne to forſake the place, by meanes of a number of our harguebuſſiers: who being aduanced very aduenturouſly, had ſo ſtricken them, both horſe and man, with feare and terrour, that diuerſe of them were ouerthrowen and beaten downe, and the reſidue had litle liſt and leſſe reſolution to abide there any longer. The Dibrian ſtood not ſtill at any time, but beſtirring himſelfe with notable induſtrie on all ſides, ſometimes here, ſometimes there, with a braue courage, and without all regard of death or daunger, did animate and encourage his ſouldiers both by wordes and by deedes: and by his preſence did reeſtabliſh and ſtrengthen the battell in diuerſe places. As yet was not the ſecond battell fully ouerthrowen and diſordered, by reaſon of thoſe forces which (as we ſaid before) were placed behind for a ſupply to ſecond and ſupport them. Notwithſtanding the continuall and often charges giuen vppon them by the Prince of Albanie, did in the ende make them faint both in courage and in ſtrength, and in deſpight of all their reſiſtance the Albanois with their ſwords in their hands did make themſelues way through them euen to the rerewarde, there to carrie away the honour and laſt conſequence of the whole battell. Moſes ſeeing that, did ſpeedily ſet forwarde with his owne Cornet: and being attended with a ſtrong battallion of all the braueſt men and beſt mounted, he came to that ſame place, endeuouring to reenforce and to reaſſure them. And true it is, that by his comming, the Chriſtians found the victory ſomwhat more bloudie, but of neuer the leſſe aſſurance and certaintie: For that the other ſquadrons of the Epyrots following cloſe after their fellowes, and euen at the backe of Scanderbeg, and the two wings (which ſtoode in a readineſſe round about them) did in a manner beſiege and hemme in the Paynims on all ſides. As long as Moſes held good, there was no regard had of them that fled, but for a while his abode made the Chriſtians to keepe together, by reaſon that he endured their charge with great courage, and would not for a long time giue ouer, notwithſtanding the great ſlaughter & butcherie that was made of his people. When he ſaw Scanderbeg comming againſt him, he durſt not abide nor tarrie to encounter him, but ſhunned his preſence with all his power, and would not come to the combat with him: onely he did hearten on and preſſe forwarde againſt him the ſtrength of all his forces and troupes as many as he could poſſiblie, thinking without any hazard of his perſon to haue brought him to his laſt ende, by whoſe ſafetie the eſtate of Albanie could neuer come to ruine. On all ſides did the Chriſtians preſſe vpon the Infidels both in flanke and in front, and they neuer thought of comming to their generall, till ſuch time as they had both wholly ouerthrowen the enemies vauntgard, and broken their maine battell, and gotten many of their colours and enſignes, together with the ſlaughter of diuerſe Leaders and Captaines, whoſe heads being faſtened vpon the points of launces and pikes by ſome of the ſouldiers, did wonderfully augment (as the faſhion is) the feare and terrour of the reſt. For all this was not Moſes
               
ſeene to make any ſhew, or to haue any minde of flight, notwithſtanding that both his ſides were left all open, being altogether diſarmed and disfurniſhed of people, and that the fortune of the fight was nowe growen vtterly irreparable and deſperate. Yet neuertheleſſe ſtill rallying and gathering about him thoſe forces which were ſcattered and diſperſed, and with reproaches and rebukes obiecting their cowardize vnto them, he renued and continued the furie of the fight, giuing vnto his aduerſaries freſh occaſion both of trauell and of daunger, and making the iſſue of the battell to be long and doubtfull. The King of Albanie wondering at the obſtinacie, or rather furieSaying of Scanderbeg concerning the obſt
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     y of Moſes in the battell of Oronichea. of this warriour, did openly proteſt, that he thought that Moſes would not haue fought ſo egerly, neither for his countrie, in caſe he had ſeene it in danger to be ruinated, nor for his proper children, if he ſhould haue ſeene them before his eyes drawen into ſeruitude and bondage. But Scanderbeg being accompanied with Ameſe, Tanuſee, and the two Streezes his Nephewes, did againe make towards him with great furie and violence: and ſome of the Epyrots calling him by name, did will him to ſtay and expect the crowne of Epyre which was prepared for him: but neither the brauadoes, nor the force of them that charged him, could any thing daunt or aſtoniſh the noble courage of the Dybrian. For now at the laſt being ſtrengthened and backed with the reregarde of his armie which ſtoode neere him, he did with ſingular valure both receiue the charge and repulſe the violence of the Albanois. Here now it happened, that one of the Turkes (whoſe dexteritie was nothing inferiour to his hardineſſe and vertue) ſeeing Scanderbeg to preſſe directly forwards, and to make towards him, ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, and with his launce bearing full vpon him, heScanderbeg felled vpon his horſe croupper by a Turke whom he killeth. did encounter him ſo rudely, that he bare and ouerthrew him backwardes vpon the crouper of his horſe: and the Infidelles ſuppoſing he had bene dead, did with a huge crie and exclamation teſtifie the triumph and ioy they conceiued of that accident. It was an occaſion alſo, that both the flight of the Barbarians was deferred for a while, and that the butchery and ſlaughter of the others was farre greater then otherwiſe it would haue bene: for their courages now beginning to be reuiued, and they comming to take hart againe, the Barbarian whoſe hand had once bene fortunate againſt the perſon of Scanderbeg, did now once againe demaund and vrge him to the combat, as though it had bene a conqueſt onely due and allotted vnto him. But our peereleſſe Chieftaine being ſetled within his ſaddle, and hauing recouered his ſtirrups, and the conceipt of this vnwonted diſgrace making the bloud to ariſe in his face, he would not ſuffer that any other but himſelfe ſhould take the reuenge thereof: And thereforeVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Moſes and the Turks enraged with anger, he made towards his enemie, aſſailed him moſt furiouſly, and folowed him ſo hard, that hauing giuen him many cruell and mortall wounds, & him ſelf not hurt at all, in the end the Infidell fell downe dead at his feete. The Turke being thus ouerthrowen and ſlaine, Scanderbeg paſſed on, and with an high voice calling for Moſes, he addreſſed and bent all his furie againſt him, who (I doubt not) would haue abidden and ſtood to him, if not for any hope of the victorie, yet at leaſtwiſeMoſes his flight. for his honour and reputation: if both the daylight and his companie had not quite forſaken him whileſt himſelfe was earneſtly buſied in fighting. But his people flying, he was enforced to doe the like: and the ſoldiers which had followed him into Epire as their Generall, did now accompanie him in his flight alſo. The Epirots, eſpecially ſuch as were young and luſtie, left not to follow the chaſe, and to make after him for the ſpace of a mile and more, in hope to haue taken him either aliue or dead, whereof they knew Scanderbeg was very deſirous. Many of the enemies which were found hindmoſt were put to the ſword, but as for Moſes he eſcaped ſafe and ſound: and being verie skifull in the waies and paſſages, yet tired and ouerwearied with extreame

trauell and hunger, he got to a place of ſuertie together with the infamous reliques of his armie which exceeded not aboue foure thouſand men at the moſt. There reſting and refreſhing himſelfe he attended the day-light. Of the Epirots there were not wantingNumber of Turkes left aliue at the battell of Oronichea. fully one hundreth, and about a foure ſcore hurt: who notwithſtanding their wounds, and the darkneſſe of the night, did fall to ſacking of the Turkiſh tents, and to gather the ſpoiles of them which were ſlaine. Amongſt all the priſoners there was but one onely of any ſpeciall marke and reckoning, and he being grieuouſly wounded, had yeelded himſelfe to Zacharie Groppe: onely this Turke was ſaued from the ſword, and was afterwards ranſommed at a deare rate. As for the others (were it either without the knowledge, or with the command of Scanderbeg) they were all of them ordained to diuerſe torments, being made the ſubiect of reuenge, ſo to ſatisfie the fury of the ſouldiers, who were not yet appeaſed for the crueltie ſhewed by the Turkes at Belgrade, ſo that this execution of theſe Infidels, did in ſome ſort pay the intereſt of their former loſſes and iniuries.
            The victorie thus obtained, and the baggage, both their owne and that of the enemies, being gathered together and truſſed vp, the armie retyred to their firſt lodgings,Triumph of Scanderbeg & the Epirots for the victory againſt Moſes and the Turks. where the ordinarie garriſon was eſtabliſhed: there did not they make any long ſtay, but Scanderbeg in great triumphe the fourth of Aprill, tooke his iourney towards Croy. Now beganne the olde dolour and griefe to be quite forgotten, and extinguiſhed by this new ioy and gladneſſe: the time it ſelfe (which is the beſt medicine for ſuch maladies) hauing by little and litle mitigated the violence and extremitie of that paſſion. Now were the ſpirits and mindes of all men refreſhed and recomforted,Sentence. by reaſon of this happie and gladſome victorie, the celebration whereof was ſolemnized among the Dibrians with longer feaſtings, and with more vniuerſall ſports & games, then had bene vſed at any time for the triumph of any good ſucceſſe obtained againſt their enemies: for they did eſteeme the ignominie to be now purged and taken away, which the fault and offence of another might ſeeme to haue drawn vpon their whole countrie, and that they had now giuen certaine and euident gages and tokens of their faith and fidelitie, which was in ſome ſort ſuſpected to their Prince. In like manner there was ſent a ſolemne Ambaſſade vnto Naples with many notableAmbaſſadors from Scanderbeg to Alphonſus king of Naples. and worthie preſents, which were as ſignes and markes of their new proſperitie: and might teſtifie to the contentment and ioy of his friend the king Alphonſus, that the diſhonor of Belgrade, and the domeſticall treaſon of Moſes was now reuenged and recompenced. This Ambaſſade was honourably entertained, and within a whilePlombin in Thuſcane beſieged by Alphonſus in his warre with the Florentines. after returned home againe from the King of Naples loaden with moſt rich and honourable preſents: notwithſtanding that (by meanes of the late warre with the Florentines and by the ſiege of Plombyn which had bene in vaine attempted) Alphonſus himſelfe was in a manner drawen drie both of men and money.
            In this meane ſeaſon, Moſes and his companions hauing wandred ſomefew daies vp and downe vpon the marches of Albanie, knew not what way to take, nor what courſe to reſolue vppon. For the ſhame of his diſcomfiture did put him in feare to approach or to repayre to Conſtantinople, or to preſent him ſelfe vnto the Sultan: beſides to attempt or enterpriſe any thing further againſt the King of Epyre, either for the aboliſhing, or for the excuſing the blemiſh and diſgrace of his misfortune: the ſmall numbers of his men, & their abated courages would not permit him Notwithſtanding as his own mind was haughty and couragious, ſo did he hope to gaine them alſo to condeſcend & agree to his deuiſe: and his concluſion was, that he wold proue all meanes to draw them to his mind, and to perſwade them to that courſe. The argument which he tooke to induce them vnto it was vpon this: That oftentimes things

which are moſt deſperate being hazarded with a ſetled reſolution, do come in the end to be more fortunate then thoſe that are done with beſt aduiſe & conſideration: that vnto men vanquiſhed there remaineth no other hope of ſafetie then by victorie: and
                  Speeches of Moſes perſwading the Turke his ſouldiers to make ſome new attempt vpon the Epirots. that it is the dutie of martiall men, either by a triumphant and glorious life, or by a memorable death to ſeeke the aboliſhing of ſo great ignominie and diſhonour. And to this purpoſe did he vſe many ſpeeches to the like effect: promiſing them moreouer that by reaſon of his great practiſe and skill in the waies, places, and paſſages of the countrie, he would conduct and leade them without any danger both by day and by night (which themſelues ſhould thinke beſt) euen to the campe of their enemies: and the rather for that (as he gaue them to vnderſtand) the armie of the Epirots was retired backe to Croy, and that the garriſon left vppon the frontiers was not comparable vnto them neither in number nor yet in valure. But how is it poſſible to perſwade them who are in a maze and terror? By the cries which they made, and the claſhing of armes and weapons, they ſhewed how they did miſlike the counſell of Moſes, and immediatly they began to take their way towards Greece. Needfull it was for the Dibrian to hold his peace and to be ſilent, and to frame himſelfe to the will and pleaſure of them all: the conceipt whereof made him ſo ſad and penſiue, as one that had bene now drawen to puniſhment and execution. Thus this vnfortunate and vnhappy man was enforced once againe by his ill fortune (which did accompanie him) with many grieuous and ſecret ſighes and groanes, to abandon the ſweet ſoile of his natiue countrie, which he had once before forſaken by his ouer vaine and wilfull diſloialtie.
            Betwene the time of the departure of Moſes from the Sultan, and his returne backe againe to Conſtantinople, there paſſed almoſt two Monethes, during which ſpace, for that there was no certain report nor tidings brought vnto the Ottoman of that whichMahomet his imaginations of Moſes ſucceſſe in his iorney. had happened: his long ſtay was an occaſion, that he thought things to be in another caſe then indeede they were. He was diſtracted into diuerſe and ſundrie opinions, ſometimes imagining that Moſes was beaten and diſcomfited: ſometimes that his armie was betrayed and ſold by him vnto Scanderbeg. One while he would imagine (as his deſire was) that Moſes was come to combat bodie to bodie with Scanderbeg: But then he doubted leaſt he being ſlaine by the Prince of Albanie his forces ſhould incurre the ſame misfortune, or at the leaſt be brought in bondage and thraldome to his enemie: another while he would thinke otherwiſe: and (as euerie man doth flatterSentence. himſelfe in beleeuing that which he either hopeth or feareth,) ſo would Mahomet perſwade and ſooth himſelfe in this conceipt, that Moſes was victorious in the combat: that the deſire of ſpoiling the countrie, and of reducing the prouince vnder his commaund and obedience, did draw him on to proſecute his victorie, to follow his good fortune, and to prepare vnto himſelfe the crowne and ſcepter of Epyre, which had bene promiſed him. But now the arriuall of Moſes, ſhewing all things to be farre otherwiſe then he pretended or expected, and the ſhamefull ſpectacle of thoſe reliques of his armie which were returned, did breede a moſt grieuous diſcontentment and offence both in the hart of the Sultan himſelfe, who was euen mad for anger, and inMoſes at his returne out of Epire to Conſt antinople is in publique diſgrace amongeſt the Turkes. the eyes of euerie priuate and particular perſon: inſomuch that Moſes was generally condemned and reproued: all men reproaching and accuſing him, that he had either by his faithleſneſſe and infidelitie, or by his raſhneſſe and temeritie deſtroyed all the flower of Greece, and in a moment had erected and reſtored the courages of their enemies, who were earſt in diſmay and confuſion vpon the calamitie of Belgrade. The Dibrian himſelfe being both aſhamed and mindfull of his misfortune, as alſo of hisMoſes iuſtified by his ſouldiers. flight, could not endure to come in the ſight of men, nor to heare the ſlaunders and reproaches which were ſpoken of him. How be it the good and fauorable reports of

his ſouldiers, (who therein did ſhift the blame from themſelues alſo) did make him well thought of by verie many: for they did openly giue out and maintaine it, that he had done the dutie and deuoire, and had performed the part both of a wiſe and prudent Chieftaine, and of a valiant and hardie ſouldier, in the battell againſt Scanderbeg: and that there was neuer any man that did ſtriue with more obſtinacy and courage to renue and reſtore the fortune of the fight declining to the worſt. And whereas they reproched him for not performing his owne challenge and defie giuen to Scanderbeg; that they imputed to the inuincible vertue and valure of Scanderbeg, and to the daily hazard and chance of wars: ſuch and ſo great was the fauor and good opinion, which this worthie perſonage had gotten in the harts and minds of his ſouldiers the Turks, by reaſon of his exceeding courteſie, and the popular facilitie which was in him: butTurkes vſe to honour vertue and valure 
                     ••
                  en in their enemies. much more by meanes of his rare valour and vertue in the field, and by his excellent deſerts ſhewed in the warres: the which kind of perfections and good qualities, the Turkes do vſually loue and cheriſh aboue all other things, euen in their very enemies: inſomuch that if the doubtfull chaunce and hazard of warre (as it oftentimes falleth out) do deliuer them any priſoner that is a man of valure and vertue, they doe commonly relent towardes him from their naturall and accuſtomed crueltie, and do intermit ſome parte of their furious and bloudie diſpoſition, which ordinarily doth reigne and abound in them: but to ſuch as are cowards and faint-hearted, they do alwaies ſhew themſelues moſt ſeuere and extreame: for they ſay that ſuch men, ſeeme to be borne onely for their bellies, and to conſume victuals: and therefore they hold them vnworthy to liue, affirming that it is expedient, that they ſhould be deſtroyed and made away.
            All the perſwaſions and excuſes vſed to the Turkiſh tirant, could not by any meansMoſes in the diſpleaſure of Mahomet and in daunger to loſe his life. mitigate and mollifie his hardened and obſtinat heart, but that he could and would by ſome meane or other haue wrought the reuenge of his loſſes, & of his anger vpon the poore Dibrian, whom the conſideration of his owne miſfortune did ſufficiently torment. He would neuer harken vnto his ſubmiſſion, and nothing could ſatisfie him but that the venim and malice of this furious and outrageous Prince, would haueMahomet his Nobles and friends entreat him in the behalfe of Moſes. lighted vpon the head, and ſeized vpon the life of Moſes (although there was nothing in him to be reprehended but his fortune) if ſo be that the interceſſion of ſome of the moſt ſpeciall and inward friends of the tirant, had not moderated the outrage of his paſſions: telling him, that the bad and ill vſage of this ſtranger, would alienat all others from his ſeruice, and detaine them from hauing refuge or recourſe to his Maieſtie. Thus Moſes hauing obtained pardon of the Sultan his diſpleaſure, though with much adoe, & all proces & proceedings againſt him being now diſanulled, yet did he neuertheleſſe continue in that contempt and baſe account and ſo much diſdained: that from thenceforth there was ſcarce any care or order taken for his maintenance. Notwithſtanding, wiſely and with a good countenance, he diſſembled all theſe indignities and diſgraces, caſting and diſcourſing diuerſe thoughts and imaginations in his heart: he tooke litle or no ſleepe or refreſhing: but being now come to be the iuſt & vnpartiall iudge of his owne errours, he began to conſider and meaſure, on the one ſide the greatnes of the danger and perill, and on the other the reproach and infamie which he had purchaſed, to be eſteemed as a rebell and a traitour. Thus was he diſtracted not knowing what to do, nor what counſel to take, nor what would become of him. For ſo is it commonly ſeene, that none is perfect in this world: and it behoouethSentence. for the moſt part, thoſe which are the moſt wiſe and ſageſt perſons, that once in their liues they do commit ſome one fault or other. In the end after many long and vnprofitable diſcourſes, this was his reſolution, and this laudable deſire entred into

his heart: to leaue and forſake the Infidell, who knew not how to eſteeme nor iudge of the actions of men otherwiſe then by the iſſue and euent of things, and not by the intent of the parties that doe them. He determined therefore, to returne againe to his natiue countrie, to yeeld himſelfe into the hands of his Prince, and to ſubmit himſelfe to the mercie of Scanderbeg, whom he had ſo highly offended: hoping that by this his repentance he ſhould aboliſh, if not the note, yet at leaſt the paine and puniſhment which he had moſt worthily deſerued, and in ſo doing, he ſhould auenge himſelfe alſo of the vngratefull Ottoman: and a ſpeciall reaſon that induced him therunto was, that he was aſſured, that the clemencie and courteſie of his Prince did farre exceed the badneſſe of his merits and miſdeedes. By this concluſion hauing quieted and ſetled his mind, he did daily deuiſe with himſelfe, how he might eſcape and get away. The night (as it fell out) was the fitteſt time for his purpoſe, and therefore diſlodging in the edge of an euening, ſo as the watch could not perceiue his departure: he made one whole and continuall iourney both of that night and the next day following, not reſting in any place, nor ſuffering his horſes to breath themſelues, till ſuch time as being entred into that part of the countrie of Thrace which confineth vpon Macedonie,
               Moſes returneth into Epire he paſſed on the reſt of his way with more pleaſure & eaſe both for his bodie and for his mind. Thus within few dayes being entred into Epyre, he tooke the next and ſhorteſt way poſſible to the garriſon where he was wont to commaund, purpoſing to goe from thence and to proſtrate himſelfe at the feete of Scanderbeg. Aſſoone as the Dibrians perceiued him to be come, their harts ſeemed to relent euen at the verie ſight of him: in ſuch ſort, that immediately there began to be reuiued in them the deſire of their former conuerſation with their auncient and wonted Captaine. They grew into vtter forgetfulnes and obliuion, how he had peruerted all rightes both diuine and humaine, in being diſloiall to his countrie, to his citizens, and to his proper bloud and kindred. They could not welcome him without abundance of teares, and ſo with infinite ſalutations & embracements, they conſumed and ſpent the greateſt part of that day: and then being giuen to vnderſtand by them, that the King was not farre from thence, he chaunged his determination of going to Croy, and went preſently to ſeeke out his Soueraigne. A great number of the garriſon did accompanie him, to the intent he might be the better graced in preſenting himſelfe before his preſence, and might the more eaſily obtaine his pardon. The euening was now neereMoſes cōmeth to Scanderbeg and proſtrat craueth pardon of his rebellion. at hand, when as he (according to the vſage and faſhion of that Nation) putting his girdle about his necke, did holde on his way till that he came where as Scanderbeg then was, whom he found walking before his tents. Preſently vpon the ſight of the King, in extreame griefe and ſorrowe he fell vpon his knees, and proſtrated himſelfe at the feete of his Prince, the teares trickling downe his cheekes, and in moſt humble manner, he beſought his Maieſtie to forgiue him his offence, and to graunt him pardon, not for the reſpect of any his forepaſſed merits, but onely in regarde of his meere bountie and royall clemencie: proteſting and vowing, that if it would pleaſe him to remit his fault, and to graunt him his life, he would moſt willingly conſecrate and expoſe the ſame from henceforth for the encreaſe and honour of his Realme, and for the libertie of his countrie. They which accompanied him did not faile to entreat for him. Scanderbeg tooke him verie gratiouſly by the hand, and cauſed him to ariſe,Moſes reconciled to Scanderbeg. and without any difficulty or delay did freely pardon him, and receiued him to his grace and mercie: and after many embracements and friendly ſalutations, he fell into ſpeech with him, deuiſing and conferring moſt friendly of certaine particularities and enterpriſes of the Turke: teſtifying ſufficiently by the manner of his behauiour, that his heart was throughly reconciled vnto him, and was free from all paſſion of

rancour, malice and miſtruſt.
            I doe not thinke it any ſtrange matter in Scanderbeg, that he receiued Moſes to his mercie: but that he ſhould ſo readily and with ſuch facilitie be drawen to pardonClemencie and rare humanity of Scanderbeg. him, who had ſhewed ſuch notable hatred, had vomited foorth ſo many iniuries and had attempted ſo notorious a miſchiefe againſt his Prince: that he ſhould no ſooner haue a ſight of him or heare him ſpeake: but he ſhould ſo bountifully and with ſuch aſſured commiſeration and clemencie rather diuine then humaine, receiue him into his good liking and former amitie: and euen then alſo when the griefe conceiued for the death of thoſe (who were lately ſlaine) was yet ſcarcely forgotten, nor the woundes of the hurt yet throughly cured: this is a matter ſo rare and ſtrange that it cannot be thought nor imagined without great wonder and admiration. And beſides all this: euen at that verie time, and within fewe dayes vpon his returne, he tooke ſpeciall care and gaue order, that his goods, which had bene confiſcated andMoſes reſtored to his former liuings, offices and dignitie. deuided amongeſt particular perſons, ſhould be reſtored vnto him, together with all his lands and offices: whereat the people tooke great pleaſure and contentment. Thus by this milde and moderate demeanour, this courteous Prince did purchaſe both vnto himſelfe eternall praiſe and commendation, and to the other, a generall aboliſhment of his reproach and infamie: and all remembraunce of offence was quite and cleane extinguiſhed out of the heartes of the people of Albanie. For the ProuinceIoy and triūph of the Epirots for the returne and reſtitution of Moſes. imitating the modeſtie of their King, did ſeeme as willing to burie all their griefes in obliuion, and they made ſhew thereof by bonfires, and ſuch like tokens of triumphe which they publiquely demeaned for the reſtitution of their Moſes: Whereunto the King alſo added a perpetuall edict and decree: enioyning and commaunding all his ſubiectes, that from thenceforwardes no man liuing ſhould make any ſpeeches or mention of that offence. Wherein he verified that ſaying of the Poet.
            
               It is often ſeene, that facile clemencie
               of ſuch as mildly vſe their victorie,
               Hath cauſed manie to finde commoditie,
               by being vanquisht by their enemie.
            
            Nowe if Epyre and the Albanois on the one ſide did triumphe for ioy of theMahomet diſcontented at the departure of Moſes. reconciliation of their Moſes, Mahomet on the other ſide had loſt all patience, when he vnderſtood that he was returned into his country. With notable inuectiues he accuſed him, not ſo much for the miſhappe of his ouerthrowe, as of pure and manifeſt treaſon, imagining as a conſequence of this accident, that his flight and rebellion which he had ſo ſimply beleeued, was euen from the beginning one of the ſtratagemes and policies of Scanderbeg. He tooke counſell therefore concerning his proceedings in the warre of Epyre, and how he might be reuenged. But amongſt manie opinions there debated, that onely preuayled, by which he was aduiſed to abſtaine altogether from armes for that yeare: ſuppoſing it neceſſarie to attende ſome fit occaſion and opportunitie, or to employ all the forces and power of the Ottoman Empire for the reducing of this Nation to order and reaſon. Which opinion was receiued ſo much the more willingly, for that there was ſome rumour and report of troubles and tumultes towardes from out of Aſia, and from the Perſians. Neuertheleſſe a garriſon was ſent to be vppon the borders, yet not ſuch as was of ſufficient ſtrength and puiſſance, either to repreſſe the roades or brauadoes of our men, which they made ordinarily vpon the countrie, or to ſerue the turne and needfull occaſions of the Sfetigradians and other places neere adioyning. The King

of Epire likewiſe hauing learned the deliberation of the Sultan, both by the aduertiſementes of Moſes, and by his owne intelligencers, did for a time diſmiſſe all thought and care of the warres, ſaue that vppon the newes of the comming of this garriſon, he aſſembled a running Campe, and for ſome few daies kept himſelfe cloſe in ambuſhments vppon the borders. But the Barbarians paſsing no farther then Alchria, made all that expedition to turne to nothing: and therefore hauing prouided for diuerſe affaires of conſequence, and hauing left Moſes in that place, he retired with the Queene to a countrey on the ſea coaſts commonly called Redona, there to recreat himRedona. ſelfe for the reſidue of the ſommer, where he paſſed moſt part of the Autumne in hunting and ſuch like exerciſes of pleaſure.
            I cannot but in this place acknowledge in him that which the famous captaine Scipio
               Continency of Scanderbeg. the African was wont to require in al excellent chieftaines and generals of armies, and that was his notable continency towards womankind, which was admirable, aſwell in regard of his owne wife, as of others likewiſe: for he would commonly ſay:
                  Saing of Scanderbeg touching incontinency in ſouldiours. that nothing was a greater enemy, nor more pernicious to the ſtrength & vigor both of the body & the mind, then the immoderat company of women, and that it behoued ſouldiers by continuall trauaile and labour, by daily watching, by ſleeping vpon the ground to tame their bodies, and to ſubdue & keepe vnder thoſe immoderat paſſions and whot affections of luxuriouſnes: thus by ſuch kind of ſpeeches & by his owne example, he would vſe to repreſſe & reſtrain the ſouldiers from viſiting their houſes too often and with ouermuch curioſity. This one thing is moſt memorable alſo in Scanderbeg,
               Diſcipline obſerued by Scā
                  derbeg in his Campe. that there was neuer ſeene in his Campe any whores, or ſuch like baggage, or trugs (as they now terme them:) but he obſerued amongſt his ſouldiers a certaine and ſeuere kinde of diſcipline, according to the vſage and cuſtome of the auncients, and he retained them in a wonderfull and reuerent regard of religion, both in words and in deedes. And it may be that this was it that encreaſed and maintained ſo long time this eſtate of Albany in ſo great glory and felicity: neither is it vnlikely but that God being by thoſe meanes drawen to fauour and bleſſe them, did ſo ſharpen both the ſwords and the ſpirites of the Albanois.
            
            During the time of this reſt from armes, Moſes had his minde ſet on nothing ſo much, as to ſeeke out ſome inuention, and by ſome notable enterpriſe, both to repaire his owne honour, and with one and the ſame meane to be reuenged vpon the ingratitude of the Sultan. An euident example, that we ought not altogether to deſpaire of the amendement of men when we ſee them in any ill courſe, but rather thatSentence. we receiue them kindly to grace and fauour. For Moſes hauing augmented the garriſon, and the numbers of his bands being doubled, he did daily exerciſe him ſelfe in ſacking of the countrey, thinking to haue drawen foorth the Turkes to encounter with him: ſometimes in the day would he make out with a ſmall company, ſometimes in the night and in ſecrete with greater forces: and continually would he light vppon ſome one or other, putting them to the ſworde whom hee found either as ſpies, or going on foraging, or vpon ſuch like ſeruices, but the Mahometans not dating nor venturing to come abroad to any purpoſe, nothing was done worthy the remembraunce.
            As Moſes on the one ſide did all his deuoire and emploied his beſt meanes to aboliſh and waſhe away the infamy of his former miſdeedes: ſo on the other ſide (I know not how) it came to paſſe, that ſome deuill and wicked ſpirit, or rather the misfortune of Scanderbeg, or the ineuitable force of the deſtinies, did raiſe vp Ameſe toRebellion of Ameſe againſt Scanderbeg. be the inheritour and ſucceſſour of the like wickedneſſe no leſſe damnable and miſchieuous. There are many things in this place which doe depriue me of all deſire to

proceede any further in this diſcourſe, for that the remembraunce of theſe domeſticall and ciuill affaires, and of the ingratitude of men, is not onely vnpleaſing and grieuous vnto me, but I doe euen abhorre to write of them, and the rather for that I could neuer find any certaine cauſe of his flight. Euery man hath his opinion, and the moſt part of the reports which goe vppon it, are without any ground or foundation of trueth. For this cauſe I will imitate the Painters, who as they vſe with their Penciles to ſhadowe things, ſo will I couer and conceale this in ſilence as a thing both ſuperfluous in this Hiſtory, and litle pleaſing to the readers. For omitting the iealouſie which he conceiued at the kinde entertainment and reconciliation of Moſes, I doe thinke for my part, that there was no other cauſe nor occaſion of his reuolt, out that onely which (as we haue ſaied) was practiſed to corrupt Moſes: to wit: The working & ſollicitations of the Turkiſh officers neare adioyning, and of their agents interpoſing and dealing betweene them: for you muſt ſuppoſe, that this was no hard matter for the Infidell to doe, but that he might many and often times by ſecret meſſengers communicate and treat with Ameſe: for he was poſſeſſed of a goodly countrey, faire and large in the confines of the Turke, by the liberality and bounty of his vncle: who thought it not good nor conuenient to retaine him longer in Court, without any patrimony or meanes to mainetaine his eſtate. There was another reſpect alſo which did incite the Ottoman who (as wee haue ſaied before) was now occupied and buſied in the affaires of Aſia, to practiſe with Ameſe and to gaine him vnto him: becauſe being of the bloud royall, and neare vnto the Crowne, and withall knowing him to be in credite and fauour with the people, he was perſwaded, that they would gladly yeelde to ſubmit them ſelues to his dominion, much rather then to Moſes, if they were once preſſed with any the leaſt perill and daunger that might be. Theſe ouertures and faire hopes being preſented to the thoughtes and imaginations of Ameſe, by perſons purpoſely appointed to inſinuate the ſame vnto him, did finde ready and eaſie entraunce into his young and tender heart. Thus we ſee, that the mad and franticke deſire of rule and Empire, doth make men not onelySentence. faithleſſe and diſloiall, but alſo ouer credulous and light of beliefe.
            
            Now Ameſe being made wary and aduiſed, as one whom the misfortune of another had ſufficiently warned, and ſufficiently inſtructed in all points, becauſe he wouldAmeſe goeth to Mahomet with his wife and children. not goe nor preſent him ſelfe to the Ottoman with the perill of his life, or with any ſhew or ſhadow of ſuſpition: he tooke and led away with him both his wife and his children, as thoſe that ſhould aunſwer for his true and plaine meaning, and ſhould acquite him from the ſuſpect of any crime: and he deliuered them vnto the Infidell, as the ſure and certaine gages of his faith and fidelity. His departure bred maruellous tumult and aſtoniſhment throughout all the Prouince: euery man thought it very ſtraunge, and was inquiſitiue after the cauſe and motiue of this his rebellion, conſidering that beſides his neare kindred, he was continually held and reputed by Scanderbeg, as the companion and conſort of his Empire and royalty. This accident being reported to his vncle, he tooke it very impatiently, and with his friends and familiars, he beganne to complaine and bemoane his hard fortune. Muſt this (ſayd he)Speech of Scanderbeg touching the rebellion of Ameſe. needes fall out to make vp the meaſure of my trauels and ſorrowes, that I muſt be aſſaulted with domeſticall and ciuill warres? Am I ſo odious, or is my countrey ſo vngratefull vnto me? or is it the honour of this Crowne and ſcepter, that is ſo deſired and held ſo precious: but Ameſe (it ſeemeth) did beare enuy to Moſes, well, if God, if the right and law of nations, and if your vertue do not deceiue me, he ſhall yet haue greater cauſe then euer to enuy him.
            
            The winter ſeaſon being now begunne, and the fieldes being naked and bare

of gra
                  ••
               e or other fruites, did put Scanderbeg in hope, that he ſhould for a time be freede from the preparations and trouble of the enemy: and there was good and apparaunt occaſion to induce him to be of that mind, and to beleeue that Ameſe would attend and ſtay for the ſpring of the yeare, for the ſetting abroach of his new plots and enterpriſes. For this cauſe he retired with all his traine to Croy, not taking anie care for the leauying of any forces or other preparations of the warre: and there he ſpent and conſumed the winter, oftentimes viſiting the garriſon of the Dibrians, and preparing him ſelfe by his eſpials and ordinary gardes to be in a readineſſe for the trauels and daungers that were ſhortly to enſue.
            The ſight of Ameſe did not ſo much moue the Turkiſh Monarch, as did afterwardes the ſpeech which hee vſed vnto him: for the valour and ſufficiency of this perſonage cauſed him to haue him in admiration, after hee hadde once heard himDeſcription of Ameſe his perſon and qualities. ſpeake, and that he knew his prudence and wiſedome by the grauity of his diſcourſe and ſounde reaſons. For as touching his ſtature, it was ſo ſmall and ſo vnſightlie, that at the firſt appearaunce it could not yeelde any ſhew of thoſe ſecret and rare perfections of his minde: but in recompence of that defect of his perſon, hee hadde an heart extreame haughtie, and he was of ſo quicke and ſharpe a conceipt, and of ſo delicate and ſubtile a ſpirite as none could be more. Of all men he was moſt impatient, and could leaſt away with eaſe and idleneſſe: and (which in men couetous and deſirous of Empire are the principall and chiefeſt partes to gette them honour, and the good grace of euery man) his liberalitie and courteſie were no whit inferiour to his other vertues. What ſo euer he got either by the purchaſe of his owne vertue and valour and by the fortune of the warres, or by the beneficence and bountie of his vncle, he did wholly depart and diſtribute it amongeſt his ſouldiours and his friendes: he was very officious and ſeruiceable to all men, very familiar and eaſie to be acquainted with, and (as occaſion did require) he could diſſemble ſingularly, and with excellent good skill and cunning. By theſe qualities had he gained ſo great authority and good liking in the heartes of all men, that next to Scanderbeg I doe not know any one man that was ſo beloued, and reuerenced both of the people and of the ſouldiours: in ſo much that ſome haue affirmed, that there wanted not diuerſe of the moſt priuate and inward friendes of his vncle, who did often admoniſh him to take good care and regard to a minde that was ſo ſtirring and ſuſpitious. But as he would not be perſwaded to credite any ſuch conceipt, ſo did he make litle or no account thereof. Notwithſtanding in proceſſe of time, when his flight and rebellion came to be knowen and manifeſted, he was ſooner drawen to beleeue the report thereof in him, then he was before of Moſes, and he then began to call to minde the naturall diſpoſition of the man, which had beene better obſerued and marked by others then by himſelfe. But to our purpoſe.
            
               Ameſe being admitted to the preſence of Mahomet, did not fill his eares with idle and inſolent promiſes and vaunts as Moſes had done: but colouring the cauſe of his reuolt and repaire to the Sultan with one onely reaſon, to the intent his ſpeeches might not be accounted either vaine and inconſtant, or fained and diſſembled, he began in this manner to ſpeake vnto him.
            Thrice happie and inuincible Monarch, if it be lawfull for vs to recall to memorieOration of Ameſe to Mahomet. the errours and iniuries which we haue in times paſt committed againſt thy Maieſty: it might well and rightly be ſayed, that we are now come to receiue the worthy and deſerued puniſhment of our offences, rather then the hope and expectation of any honours and dignities. For wherein could wee haue treſpaſſed and offended more grieuouſlie againſt the Empire of Ottoman, then we did in that action

of ours heretofore executed in the warre of Hungarie? at that time, when with equall and no leſſe infidelity we both betraied thy army in the battell of Morana, and when we tooke Epire, by deceipt and fraud out of thy hands? the true originall and fountaine of ſo many miſchiefes and calamities? of all which enterpriſes and practiſes I doe confeſſe that I was a partner and conſort. For it behoueth me now, being in the preſence of your Maieſty, not to ſtand vppon the defence and iuſtification of my doings, but onely to plead my contrition and repentaunce: but I hold it a vaine thing to ſtand in any feare or doubt before ſo prudent and gracious a Prince, conſidering that my age at that time, and my youth inclining to his owne misfortune, and my minde being but badly ſtaied in her deliberations and counſels, did then perhaps deceiue and beguile me. I was then lead to beleeue my vncle, and did ſuffer my ſelfe ſimply to be perſwaded of many things, and being entiſed with a deſire of rule and gouernment (a diſeaſe properly incident to that age) through too much credulity forſaking thy ſeruice, I followed him and the hope of his faire promiſes: but as my vnderſtanding encreaſed with my years, I ſoone began to diſcerne the ſecrete diſloialty of my vncle, and that this my reuolt from the Ottoman obeiſance, was more pernicious to me then to any other. By my labours and by my aide, hath Scanderbeg recouered and amplified his eſtate. Long did I ſtay and attend to ſee, if he would offer me any part or portion of the poſſeſsions which were mine owne inheritaunce, deſcending vnto me (if not from my aunceſters) yet in the right of my father: and I did looke that hee ſhould haue yeelded me ſome recompence and reward for ſo many trauelles and perils which I had endured. Within a while after he got himſelfe a wife, and begat a new heire and a new ſucceſſour to his Crowne: and as concerning that litle which he did for me, the very ſhame of the world did driue him to doe it: for perceiuing that he could not with any honeſty ſuffer mee ſtill to remaine and to continue within his Court as a priuate perſon, he aſſigned me out a litle corner of Epire, the moſt vileſt and worſt place of the countrey, where (whileſt he vſurped all the reſt vnto him ſelfe) I ſhould haue ſpent and conſumed my dayes in obſcurity and baſe account. I had much a doe to moderate my ſelfe, my heart being not able to digeſt the ignominie: neuertheleſſe the qualitie of the time, and the naturall pride and arrogancie of the man, did enforce me to conceale and diſſemble all things, for feare leaſt vnder pretence and colour of ſome ſuſpition, he might ſodainely circumuent and ſurprize me, as he did of late George Streeze his ſiſters ſonne, whom with ſuborned accuſations of ſuppoſed crimes, hee deſpoyled well neare of all his liuings and dominions. Willingly would I (moſt worthie Ottoman) haue hadde recourſe vnto thy Maieſty, and I would gladly haue forſaken and abandonned my ingrate vncle, and the infamy of his Empire: but the remembraunce of our former rebellion, and of our ſo many outrages, done againſt the Crowne and dignity of Ottoman, did terrifie and detaine me vntill this preſent time: wherein by the diuine permiſsion, following the aſſuraunce of thy faith and promiſes, I am now come vnto thee glad and ioyous. Thou haddeſt no ſooner giuen me any ſigne and token, thou haddeſt no ſooner called and inuited me, but that ſpeedily and with all diligence, I conformed me to thy will, and I came running vnto thee, to whom my mind had ſo long time bene affectioned. I did not defer & put off my comming, neither did I ſtay till ſome misfortune might befall to Scanderbeg, or that thy good fortune were increaſed, as did Moſes lately: ſo that thou haſt no cauſe to thinke or to coniecture, that either feare, or the doubt of any iminent daunger, did make me to haue a regard rather to my owne good, then the fulfilling of thy commandements. And in trueth, (moſt noble Mahomet) I haue not left any matter of ſuſpition either

for thee to diſtruſt my fidelity, or in my countrey of Epire, whereby I ſhould deſire to returne thither hereafter: behold here the aſſured bonds of my aduiſed and ſettled determinations, and the perpetuall gages of my faith and fidelity, euen my wife and my children. Behold (O Mahomet) all the goods that nature hath graunted vnto me: whatſoeuer it be wherein I can take any pleaſure or delight during my life, euen that which is moſt deare and precious in the eies of mortall men, thou haſt it here preſented vnto thee. I haue brought vnto thee thoſe precious iewels, which if they were in the hands of enemies, I ſhould labour to free them: euen ſuch a pledge as may make any faith (howſoeuer doubtfull and ſuſpicious) to be moſt firmely tied and bound in all aſſured loialty: all other things (ſaue them) I haue left behinde me, becauſe in my haſty and ſecrete flight, I could not poſsibly make prouiſion of any other cariage or neceſſaries. And albeit I might all at leaſure and in ſecurity haue truſſed vppe and brought my baggage with me: what honour hadde it bene for me to bring vnto the preſence of ſo puiſſaunt and rich a Monarch, the ordures and dregs (as it were) of my former eſtate and fortune? The greateſt and the only thing which I can preſent vnto thee is my faith and loialty, which in truth is the vttermoſt that my ability can afford: of the which if thou require any further, or more certaine aſſurance, I ſubmit my ſelfe wholly to any other order whatſoeuer your Maieſty ſhall ordaine. I am not come hither to giue or to preſcribe lawes, but to take lawes and to be commaunded: I will not promiſe with fifteene thouſand men to ouerthrow thy aduerſary, and to tame the pride of the Albanois: the misfortune of Haly Baſſa, and of ſo many other braue and valiaunt Chiefetaines, and the freſh and rare (though moſt bloudy) victory of Sebalias, may ſerue for an example, to teach and learne me, how I promiſe any thing beyond my power and ability. But this I proteſt vnto thee (moſt puiſſant Ottoman) that thou ſhalt not want in mee any readineſſe or willingneſſe of my beſt ſeruice and fidelity. As for other matters, either concerning the euent of theſe affaires, or the reuenge of thy iniuries or outrages, thou haſt no reaſon, as the Lord and maiſter of his ſlaue: a moſt expert and approued warriour of an vnskilfull and ſimple ſouldiour: to expect or looke for any counſell, or to thinke that I am to giue any aduiſe or direction.
            
            This Oration of Ameſe could not ſeeme to the Ottoman to be diſſembled or diſguiſed, both for that he propounded many things true and apparaunt, as alſo becauſe his faith did manifeſt it ſelfe ſufficiently in that hee had brought with him his wife and children. Some ſay that ſhee was abuſed and deceiued by her husband, and againſt her will drawen out of Epire: others (as it is moſt likely alſo) doe affirme, that ſhee yeelded her ſelfe voluntarily to be the companion of his flight and fortune, hauing bene ſecretly informed by him, that the Crowne of Albanie was promiſed him by the Sultan. So we ſee, that ambition is common both to the one and the otherSentence. ſexe indifferently.
            
            The tyraunt did very well accept, and did greatly approue the deliberation of Ameſe, and did aſsigne him an exceeding great and honourable penſion. As for the meanes and manner of proceeding with the warres, there was no ſpeech nor talke had at that time: for that ſuch matters (according to the wonted cuſtome) were appointed and debated in full councell and aſſembly of the Baſſaes: for the late calamity and rude diſcomfiture receiued by Mahomet before Belgrade in Hungarie, once calledBelgrade in Hungary: alias Alba Graeca: or Taururum commonly called Greiche
                     •
                   Wiſſemburg. 
               Alba Greca or Taururum, had greatly weakned the ſpirits, and abated the courages of the Barbarians: for in that battell had Mahomet himſelfe bene grieuouſly wounded and put to flight by Huniades, with the loſſe of 40000. men, beſides all his artillery, baggage and munition, which he was conſtrained to leaue there behind him, for the

gages of his raſhnes and temerity: and in very truth ſuch and ſo grieuous was that ouerthrow,Battell of Belgrade in Hungary wherein Mahomet was wounded & ouerthrowen by Huniades. that Mahomet did neuer ſhew himſelf ſo penſiue and ſorrowfull for any dā
               mage or loſſe that he euer receiued: his mind being continually both night & day diſquieted, on the one ſide with an extreame deſire of reuenge: and on the other ſide being perplexed and mightely troubled for feare of the like fortune, which had once befalne him ſo vnhappily. Wherefore the affairs of Hungary being ſoone intermitted and giuen ouer by a cōmon and generall aduiſe, it was concluded & agreed, that the reuengeCounſell of Mahomet and his nobles for the war againſt Scanderbeg. of that diſhonor ſhould be taken vpon Epire, and the rather for that they could not at one and the ſelfe ſametime conueniently intend both the one & the other expedition. Beſides Ameſe had told them, that they were not to thinke vpon any attempt againſt the Hungarians with meane preparations, but with great & ſtrong forces: for that the fiercenes and valour of that people, did require a ſtately and royall kinde of puiſſance: and them ſelues alſo were not willing no
                  •
                thought it conuenient, that the aduantage of this occaſion, offered them by meanes of Ameſe his preſence, ſhould be delaied or deferred. For theſe cauſes (Ameſe being appointed to go as a companion, and in a maner as a guide and director in the iourney) there was a publique commiſsion graunted forth for the leuying of an army of 50000. horſemen: and the Sultan would not haue refuſed to yeeld to the gathering of a greater puiſſance, if the ſame had beene demanded; ſo greatly did he affect the reuenge both of his owne iniuries and his ſubiects, deſiring in ſome ſort once to determine and to bring to an end theſe difficulties and troubleſome tumults of Albanie.
            
            The ſpring being ſpent in theſe preparations, the heate of ſommer began now to1456. come on, by which time all things being in a readines, the king of Turkes inſtigated and vnceſſantly vrged on by Ameſe, who (as ſome ſay) was created a Saniacke, did diſpatchAmeſe created a Saniacke by Mahomet. Iſaac Baſſa and Ameſe ſent with an army of 50000. horſe againſt Scanderbeg. Ameſe captain ouer 5000. horſe. away his army, encouraged with great promiſes, and well inſtructed with good precepts and directions. Iſaac the Baſſa of Romania had the honour to be Generall of thoſe forces without any diſlike or diſcontentment of the Chriſtian fugitiue, who notwithſtanding (becauſe he ſhould not be ſeene altogether without any degree of honor or authority in the army) had the charge of fiue thouſand horſemen.
            The Epirots were litle pleaſed or contented at the newes of theſe mighty preparations, but eſpecially the Dibrians: for the ſouldiers in thoſe partes had diuerſe conceipts and imaginations (as it is ordinarily ſeene in ſuch caſes) what meanes might be vſed either to receiue or to repulſe the enemy, whether by ambuſhmentes, or in the plaine and open field, and in ſome place purpoſely appointed: or whether this warre ſhould be decided by delaying and temporizing, and by obſeruing of opportunities and aduauntages. One thing there was that did more aſtoniſh them then all the reſt, and that was: that though the rumour and report of the comming of the enemy did encreaſe daily, yet on their partes, they ſaw not any leauie nor muſter of any armie yet begun, nor no remedy prepared againſt a miſchiefe ſo imminent, and a daunger that was ſo neare haſtening vppon them. For, to ſaie the trueth, this rumour at the firſt did not greatly moue Scanderbeg, for that eſpeciallie hee could not be perſwaded, that Mahomet bending all his hatred and malice againſt Epire, would let paſſe in ſilence, or forget the ſhame and diſhonour of ſo great and foule an ouerthrow as he hadde latelie receiued in Hungarie. Neuertheleſſe he made all poſsible and diligent meanes by his intelligencers and eſpialles diſperſed here and there on all partes, to learne the certainety of all the attemptes and actions of the enemy, as well as the tumult and confuſion of thoſe new troubles and commotions would permit him, to the intent he might ſhape him ſelfe ſome new courſe in his counſels and proceedings: But vpon the many aduertiſements brought him, and eſpecially vpon the comming of

certaine fugitiues when this doubt began to be diſcouered, and that he was certified both of the numbers and of the qualitie of the armie that came againſt him: and that his nephew alſo was there in perſon, with expreſſe commaundement to the Baſſa to crowne and inueſt him King of Albanie: he did not any further prolong the raiſing of his forces, which he had forborne till then to aſſemble and gather together.Councell called by Scanderbeg for the reſiſting of Iſaac, Ameſe and the Turkiſh armie. He called therefore a councell of the Princes his confederates, and of the chiefe and principall of the country, and certen Dibrians, to deliberate & take the aduiſe of euery man vpon this matter. All of them repaired into the lower Dibria into the ſame place where their campe was wont to lie: thither alſo came Moſes with ſome of the principall of his garriſon, to vnderſtand the reſolution and concluſion of the councell. There was a great number of voluntarie men which came thither out of diuerſe coū
               tries, and a multitude of young and luſtie perſons drawen thither onely for the deſire of prey and bootie: by meanes whereof, euen in an inſtant, he had gotten together a ſufficient, faire and goodly armie, and (it may be) nothing inferiour to that of the enemie, if you regard their valure though farre vnequall in reſpect of their numbers. You ſhould not haue heard of any thing amongſt the ſouldiers but brauadoes and vaunts. Ech man conceiuing in his hope the honour and ſpoiles of the enemie, and magnifiing their owne prowes and fidelitie, and promiſing vnto themſelues wonders, did thinke it long that they did not encounter with the enemie, who (ſaid they) ought to be preuented & to be aſſaulted before he ſhould be able to come within their borders. Neither the numbers ofſo many thouſands, nor the redoubted name or renowme of the Baſſa could terrifie or aſtoniſh them. They had forgotten Sebalias & the wounds and ſlaughter receiued before Belgrade, ſo greatly were the haughtie courages of our Albanians encreaſed by the freſh victorie obtained againſt Moſes, & the new deſaſter of Mahomet in Hungarie: and the latter Belgrade made them forget the former. Yet did they all relie vpon the counſaile and directions of their Prince: who iudging that this forwardnes of his ſouldiers was in ſome ſort to be repreſſed, he began to caſt his eyes downe to the ground, and ſo diſſembling by his countenance part of that which he caried concealed in his thoughts, as if he had bin deuiſing & imagining vpon ſome high matters and of great importance, he propounded vnto them all in generall the ſumme and ſubſtance of his deliberation: acquainting them alſo with the meanes which he ment to vſe againſt the enemie, and with the conſequence and greatnes of the perill, ſpeaking vnto them in theſe or the like tearmes.
            Amongeſt all other things which the diuine wiſdome hath left vnto mortall men 
                  Oration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers being redy to march againſt Iſaac Baſſa and Ameſe. Nature of hope and of feare or diſtruſt. in the ſtrange varietie and diuerſitie of worldly actions, to afflict and torment their mindes: theſe two (moſt worthie Albanois) are the moſt principall, to wit: hope and feare: the former is more plauſible, and befalleth commonly to mindes that are high and haughtie (I will not ſay) vainly addicted: the other is more prudent and leſſe giuen to blood & cruelty. For albeit ſhe do in ſome ſort prolong and protract the deſires of men, yet doth ſhe neuertheleſſe ſeaſon them, and is as it were an excellent good medicine to cure many infirmities within them. Hence it is that thoſe auncient Captaines were wont more vſually to be victours who feared and miſdoubted all things, then thoſe who neuer doubted nor feared any thing. Hence alſo it proceeded, that
                  Saying of Hanniball touching Fabius Maximus & Terentius Varro. the great Carthaginian termed Quintus Fabius his moſt grieuous and daungerous enemie, who to his owne Citizens ſeemed ſlothfull and timerous: ſaying that Terentius Varro was more daungerous to his owne countrie, the State and people of Rome, then he was to his enemies. But why do I attribute that ſtrange and diſhoneſt ſurname of feare to that thing, which more properly doth merit the name of counſell and ſage aduiſe: for my part I care not how you name it: this is certaine, & cannot be

contradicted, that from it onely is deriued all the auncient diſcipline, and the ſeueritieMartial diſcipline deriued from feare or diſtruſt. of martiall gouernment, inuented and practiſed by our forefathers. She it is that doth nouriſh and entertaine hope, and ſhe neuer doth any thing but it commeth to a good and happie end. She carieth her eyes before her, behind her, and on all ſides, and with equall balance ſhe doth poize and meaſure things preſent with things future and to come hereafter. You may now geſſe what my meaning is by this my ſpeech, which is verie fit & prope
                     •
                   for this time, and to correct & chaſtiſe your ouermuch forwardnes. I thought it good (my fellowes & companions in armes) firſt to diſcourſe with you, & to ſound your affections before I would innouate any thing in the conſiderations of this war, to thintent that I might either frame my ſelfe to your opinions, or (as your diſcretion hitherto hath bene) you might conform your ſelues to my iudgment and diſcretion. You haue heard of late, and your eares are full of the daily rumors and reports touching the ſtirres and tumults of the warres which are daily prepared and addreſſed againſt vs. Behold the Baſſa of Romania who with the flower of all Europe, and with the ſtrength and puiſſance of the Ottoman Empire doth now knocke euen at our gates: and yet my courage would ſerue (as euer hitherto it hath done) & I durſt aduenture and hazard the battell againſt him: neither do I doubt but you haue the aduantage. Notwithſtanding againſt ſo mightie an enemie, whoſe forces are ſo huge and immoderate, it behooueth vs rather to vſe prudence and good counſell, then the wonted furie and fierceneſſe of your courages. The notable and famous defait of Haly Daſſa, ſo many famous and memorable triumphs and victories obtained euen till this time, your reſolution gotten and teſtified by ſo many goodly exploits ſucceeding ſo happily, do perſwade and aſſure vs, that we haue both the courage and the power to meet and affront the Turkiſh forces in open field: but the vnſtable and vnconſtant chaunges and alterations of the warres, and the naturall diſpoſition of fortune ſo vnknowen and vncertaine, will make men who are ſage and wiſe, to forget and to miſdoubt all theſe matters. To ouercome alwaies was neuer particular nor proper to anySentence. man, nor was it euer hereditarie to any perſon. New actions and attempts do dayly demand new counſels and directions: Albeit yeſterday you did ouercome as conquerours, yet cannot you aſſure your ſelues to day that you ſhall haue the ſpoile of your enemies, or the ranſomming of their priſoners. Victorie is like a traueller or paſſengerSimilitude. vpon the way: ſhe turneth and windeth hither & thither, not hauing any certaine dwelling or abiding place. Howbeit that vertue and prudent counſaile bethe principall meanes both to purchaſe and to retaine her: yet neuertheleſſe oftentimes it falleth out that when you haue ſagely and aduiſedly guided and conducted all things, yet wil fortune, the chaunce of warre, and certaine caſuall accidents challenge a great part and portion of the victorie.
            
            In the end and concluſion of his oration, he layed open vnto them the inconueniencesScanderbeg deuiſeth with his ſouldiers for the manner of his proceeding againſt Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkiſh forces. that do vſually and infallibly accompany a battell, be it either gained or loſt: and that therfore it was requiſite to intrappe the enemie by traines and ambuſhes, and not in the plaine and open fieldes: yet ſo as this muſt be done with iudgement and diſcretion, and that they muſt be ſurprized when as they leaſt dreamed and thought vpon it, when in full hope and ioye of victore, their heartes were caried and tranſported with ouermuch licence and libertie, and that they did neither feare nor miſdoubt any ſleight or ſubtilties, which as then he ſaid could not be done, becauſe they had bene before enſtructed and learned to beware by others miſhaps, and the examples of their owne fellowes: and beſides for that they had Ameſe his wicked nephew, the domeſticall plague of his owne natiue countrie, who would inſtruct the Infidels to foreſee and auoid the policies which himſelfe at other times had learned and

practiſed in the ſchoole of his vncles experiēce. Notwithſtāding in the meane while, becauſe he wold take away all matter & oportunity from the enemy of exerciſing any crueltie, or to obtaine any victory vpon his ſubiects, his opinion was, that all the people and inhabitants of the plaine countrey ſhould retire themſelues into the fortreſſes and ſtrong holds: which alſo ſhould be aſſured with ſufficient garriſons, againſt all accidents & chances whatſoeuer. For (quoth he) who knoweth the ſecret deliberatiōs of Mahomet? It may be, that himſelf in perſon doth follow after the Baſſa, pricked on with the deſire which he hath had of a long time to worke ſome notable & ſingular reuenge againſt vs: and therefore it is good to feare and doubt all things, to the intent we neede not be in feare nor doubt of any thing.
            
            This oration of Scanderbeg being pronounced with the great ſilence of the whole aſſembly, Tanuſe & Vranocontes who had earneſtly intended to his ſpeeches, did ariſe out of their places, and with infinite praiſes did publikely approue the ſame, ſaying, 
                  Speech of Tanuſee & Vranocontes touching the oration of Scanderbeg. that Scanderbeg had ſo exactly diſcourſed of this matter in euery part, and that his diuine ſpirite and admirable prudence had ſo well comprehended and conceiued all pointes: that nothing was wanting to be conſulted on, or to be put in execution, which concerned the common and particular good of them all. Hereupon the former heat and forwardneſſe of the common ſouldiers began to be mitigated, and their 
                  Anſwer of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers being inquiſitiue what courſe 
                        ••
                      would take againſt the Turkes. audacitie grew into a warie and profitable kind offeare. Some of them could not be contented, but they would needes intreate and humbly require their king, to ſhewe them by what courſe and meanes he meant to ouercome and repell the enemy: But Scanderbeg ſmiling anſwered, that it ought to ſuffiſe them, if they did relye and put their truſt in him, and that himſelfe would incurre one and the ſame fortune together with them, and that if he ſhould promiſe and aſſure them of any thing, it would be to ſmall purpoſe in this caſe, where fortune might vſurpe vnto her ſelfe ſo great power and priuiledge.
            
            Immediately hereuppon Scanderbeg hauing taken order for the parting of theScanderbeg fortifieth and furniſheth his countrie with all neceſſarie prouiſions againſt the comming of Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkes. Prouince, and the diſtributing of the ſeuerall charges and offices: the Siegniours and chiefe Captaines, by the appointment and commaund of their Generall did ſeuer and betake themſelues into ſeuerall parts and places of the countrie: ſometimes diſpoſing and beſtowing the garriſons which had bene deliuered them, into the fortreſſes and ſtrong holds, and ſometimes conueying thither victuals and other munitions to furniſh all of them, both one and other. This was the occaſion that there was ſome delay made, and the rather alſo for that the harueſt was not yet throughly inned, nor the corne cleane caried out of the fields: and the rumor euerie day growing more & more that the Barbarians approached, (for that the caſe required haſte and quicke diſpatch) the ſouldiers as well as the husbandmen were imploied in that buſineſſe: and they conueyed all their corne partly in the ſheaffe, and partly threſhed out, into the townes and caſtelles, to haue it ſafe and ſure from the handes of the enemie. By this meanes, they were well and ſufficiently prouided both of men and victualles for many monethes. Scanderbeg hauing left Moſes to commaund ouer the reſidue of the armie, went to Croie, and ſtayed there ſome three dayes taking order for diuerſe matters and vrgent affaires: eſpecially for the remoouing of the Queene and her houſhold from Petralba. From thence returning to Dibrya, he beganne to goe in hand with his buſineſſe, and with a watchfull eye and diligent care prepared himſelfe for the receiuing of his nephew, whom he determined to entertaine and vſe as a mortall andIſaac and Ameſe with the Turkiſh army enter into Albanie. meere enemie.
            By this time had the hoaſt of the infidels cut ouer the greateſt part of Macedonie, and were nowe entred vppon the confines of Albanie, and hauing ſent foorth their

vant
                  •
               urrours before them, they did warily diſcouer the countrey farre and wide on all handes, to the intent they might not fall into the vſuall and accuſtomed ambuſhments of Scanderbeg. And the report is that for that onely conſideration Ameſe would neuer ſuffer them to marche by night: affirming, that his vncle would neuer be ſo fooliſh, as to encounter or ſtay for ſo mightie and puiſſant an enemy either in the day time, or in the open and champion countrey: but would aſſay rather by the fauour and benefite of the darke night to put in practiſe his accuſtomed ſtratagemes, and thoſe ſuttle traynes which were moſt vſuall and familiar with him in martiall exploites. But Scanderbeg on the other ſide, although he had long before hand prouided all things in a readineſſe for his retrait, if neede ſhould require it: yet would he not by any meanes diſlodge, till he had true and perfect intelligence, that the Turkes were come very neare him, and that he might in a manner perceiue the duſt of theirScanderbeg retireth from the Turkes. horſes: and then truſſing vp baggage, he ſpeedily diſcamped and forſooke that place, in ſuch ſorte, that they which followed and came on behinde him might very well diſcerne him, as hee marched on before them. The Turke would not follow after, nor put himſelfe in purſuit of him, by reaſon of the difficultie and roughneſſe of the way, and for feare of ambuſhes. Onely he ſent certaine horſe after him, giuing them in charge to trouble and moleſt him as much as they could poſsibly, and to learne, what courſe and way hee helde, and whither hee went. Wherefore the armie of the Infidelles being entred into the vpper Dybria by the way of Alchria, they did marche on ſtill with a fayre and eaſie pace: continually diſcouering and ſearching farre and wide on all ſides. When the coaſt was founde to be cleare and ſafe from the enemy, the Turkiſhe companie with exceeding great ioye did diſperſe themſelues abroad ouer all the countrey. But as this kinde and manner of victorie, ſo eaſily gotten, was very pleaſing and gratious vnto the ſouldiours, now waxing inſolent through ſecurity: ſo did it no leſſe grieue them afterwardes, for that they could not finde nor meete with any pillage in the fieldes, nor light vppon any fit matter to ſatisfie their couetous minds and inordinate appetites. Thus held they on their march till it was about an houre before noone: and then both becauſe they would ſtay for the returne of their vauntcurrours, and alſo for that they would reſt and refreſh them ſelues of their long iourneis, and the extreame heate of the weather, they beganne to make a ſtand, and went to lodge them ſelues neare to Oronichea in the ſame Dibria, neare adioyning to the ſame place, where our men at other times had vſed to encampeOronichea in the vpper Dibria. them ſelues. There pitching their tentes, they ſpent the time in councell and conſultation, till ſuch time as their vauntcurrours returned vnto them: abſtaynig in the meane while both from meate and drinke, or any other kindes of refreſhing. For before their diſlodging in the morning, they had taken a ſufficient repaſt, by the aduiſe of their Generall, for feare leaſt if by ſome chance and caſualty that morning, they ſhould haue bene driuen or enforced to fight, and that the hazard of the battell ſhould haue protracted the conflict, as many times it doth: they might not be enforced alſo to fight with hunger as well as with their enemies. All this while did the ſouldiours take great delight curiouſly to ſuruey the place where, our men had of late encamped, and they walked vp and downe on all ſides, yet not without ſome ſuſpition of daunger: in ſo much that they neither durſt diſarme them ſelues, nor yet leaue their watch and ward: but the moſt part kept continually neare to their ſtandards and guidons all on horſebacke. And thus for two houres at the leaſt did they patientlie abide, keeping good watch and ward, till ſuch time as they which hadde bene ſent abroade for the diſcouerie, being returned againe, did bring report of that which they had ſeene and learned: namely, that the Epirot and his troupes did

drawe downe towardes the ſea coaſtes on that ſide whereas the Citie of Liſſa lay:The citie of Alexium or Liſſa and being demaunded what numbers they were, they aunſwered, that they were ſeant ſufficient to make vp a good and perfect * Legion. Howbeit the truth was, thatA legion containeth 6000. the armie of the Albanois did amount to more then eleuen thouſand fighting men, whereof ſixe thouſand were horſemen, and the reſt footemen. But the errour of the Turkiſh ſcouts (as I ſuppoſe) grew of this: that our men being in Dibria, had ſent all their infanterie with their cariages, to paſſe on faire and eaſily before: fearing leſt if they ſhould haue expected the enemies comming any thing neare at hand, and ſo ſhould haue bene driuen to march in haſt, they wold not haue bene able to haue made ſuch ſpeed, as to haue gotten time enough into ſome ſure place of ſafetie: and after the footmen (as I haue ſayd) marched the horſemen, euen in the ſight almoſt of the Turkiſh armie. So you ſee the occaſion why the foote forces of the Epirots were not diſcerned by the vantcurrors of the Turkes.
            It may be, that ſome perhaps more curious obſeruers of matters then others, will demaund vpon what reaſon, or what commoditie Scanderbeg could find in this aduiſe and conceipt of his, in not giuing place to his aduerſarie, till he ſaw him euen cloſe at his backe? & why he made his retrait rather towards Liſſa, then to any other part of the countrey? But I will, if I may, ſatisfie theſe men with the ſame reaſon that perſwaded me: & my opinion herein is nothing repugnant vnto thoſe men, whoſe faith and diligence I haue moſt followed in the continuance of this hiſtory. Beſides, the effect and ſucceſſe of things being curiouſly conferred together, may ſufficiently manifeſt the truth thereof. The diſſembled and counterfet feare of Scanderbeg did euidentlyStratageme of Scanderbeg in retiring from the Turkes. declare, that his firſt ſtratageme in ſtaying for the coming of the enemie ſo neare him, was to make a ſhewe, that he meant to fight, and to hazard the fortune of the field in a maine battell: but that, ſeeing the infinite multitude of his enemies, and the preſent danger and extremitie of the perill conſidered, did ſeeme to put him in ſuch feare and terror, as if he had bene enforced to giue backe, and to change his mind & reſolution: to the intent that by his ſhew of flight, he might make the Barbarians more confident and hardy, and with more looſeneſſe and licentiouſnes to ſcatter abrode, & to disband themſelues from their ſtandards, which he could not by any meanes haue wrought without great ſuſpition, if the flight of the one & the coming of the other had bene more diſtant and farther off. Moreouer, he directed his courſe & ſhew of flight rather towards Liſſa then to any other place, becauſe that way ſeemed to be choſen as the fitteſt and ſafeſt for men who made ſhew of feare: whereas otherwiſe if he had put him ſelfe in the other way amongſt the thicke forreſts and wooddie valleys, it was to be doubted, that he ſhould haue made leſſe ſhew offeare, and haue giuen greater cauſe of ſuſpition and coniecture to the enemy purſuing him, of ſome ſecret ambuſhments layed and diſpoſed to intrap them. Beſides it is to be beleeued, that he had an intent & purpoſe, by this faire ſhew and policie (which the iſſue alſo did after make manifeſt) to deceiue and ouerreach his enemie: vpon whom being caried away with credulitie, and ſtragling looſely abrode, he purpoſed to giue the onſet on that ſide, which neither the footſteps of them that fled, nor the maner of the place to which they fled, did any way make to be ſuſpected. For we ſhould do Scanderbeg great wrong, to thinke or to confeſſe, that ſo ſage and aduiſed a Chiefetaine would haue made choiſe of this courſe, only vpon a vaine and light conſideration, without any eſpeciall conceipt andIſaac Baſſa demaundeth Ameſe his opiniō concerning the flight of Scanderbeg. purpoſe. Hereof was Ameſe an infallible witneſſe, who albeit he were of a very ſuttle and ſearching ſpirit, & had a ſharpe and quicke inſight in all matters, yet could he not keepe himſelf from the traines of this old warriour: for when the Baſſa (being ſomewhat doubtfull & troubled in his mind vpon the ſleights & ſubtleties of Scanderbeg,
               
did demaund of Ameſe what he thought to be the cauſe of this his ſo extraordinary and continuall flight, the like whereof he had neuer vſed?
            
               My vncle (quoth Ameſe) did expect and attend for the forces of Moſes: and thereforeAnſwer and cenſure of Ameſe touching the flight of Scā
                     derbeg. hauing ſuddenly aſſembled only a running campe, according to his wonted maner, he did feed him ſelfe with his wonted hope of victory, till ſuch time as ſeeing him ſelfe deceiued in his fooliſh imaginations, and that he can not abide in ſafetie within his owne dominions, nor be able to oppoſe him ſelfe againſt ſuch huge and puiſſant forces, he is fled towardes Liſſa to get ayde and ſuccours of his neighbours the Venetians.
               
            
            This reaſon of Ameſe ſeeming very likely and probable, was allowed and held for good, no man ſpeaking or alledging any thing to the contrary. Howbeit to thoſe that ſhall with wiſedome and aduiſed deliberation examine matters according to the rule of reaſon, this interpretation made by Ameſe of his vncles actions, can not but ſeeme very raſh and temerous, if not vaine and fooliſh. And to proue that Scanderbeg did not thinke any thing of ſo ſmall a troupe as that whereof Moſes had the commaund, nor did any whit feare the greatneſſe of the daunger, this onely point doth ſufficiently confirme it: becauſe that all things in the countrey of Dibria were diſpoſed in as good order, as if the Turkiſh Monarke him ſelfe had bene expected there in perſon. There was nothing at all, neither cattell nor any other thing of worth or value left in the whole countrey: and was not that a peremptorie argument of ſome notable feare, and of a counſell moſt aduiſed, and of a ſound deliberation: ſaue onely to ſuch men whom either fortune, or rather the immutable will of God, hauing predeſtinated ſome mortall and deadly chance, had depriued of all ſenſe and vnderſtanding, as of the principall part of their ſtrength and puiſſance? But I will not any longer blame this credulitie and light beliefe of our enemies, ſeeing it miniſtred occaſion to our Chriſtians of ſo notable and famous a victory, and of immortall renowme & glorie.
            The Baſſa perceiuing that by the flight of the Epirots, all hope and occaſion was taken from him to purchaſe any honour by deeds of armes in that iourney, after dinner was ended, he aſſembled the chiefe Captaines and commaunders of the armie to conſult and deliberate vpon their occaſions. In this Counſell it was propounded and debated,Councell held by Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkes for their proceedings againſt Scanderbeg. whether the campe ſhould ſtirre for that day or not, and by what way, maner, and meanes they ſhould purſue the enemie: whether it were beſt to continue in that place, and there to abide till ſuch time as they might haue ſome certaine newes of his attempts and practiſes, and what the enemy intended to do. Ameſe and ſome others were of opinion, that they ſhould not ſtirre for that day, but ſtay there till the next morning: notwithſtanding the pluralitie of voyces caried away the matter, and the worſt opinion preuailed againſt the better: for they alledged, that the returne of Scanderbeg, after he had prepared and gotten new ſuccours, would ſcarce be performed in foure dayes: that they ought to take the benefite of the time and the occaſion: that it behoued them to march forward chearefully and roundly in ſacking and harrying the reſidue of the prouince in their paſſage, and not to ſtay till (Scanderbeg hauing reenforced and augmented his troupes, the inhabitants of the countrey might in the meane time (vpon the feare and terrour of the report) flie into the ſtrong holds, and forſaking and leauing their houſes, graunges, and ſheepe-cotes voyde and emptie of all prey and bootie, might by that meanes make their victory vncertaine, and their voyage without all profite and commoditie. Wherefore the trumpet ſounding ſpeedily to horſe, no man ſhewed him ſelfe backward in executing the commaundement of their Generall: but all of them (teſtifying by their high cryes and clamours, that they did approue the new decree and concluſion of the Councell) in a moment

truſſed vp their baggage and with Enſignes diſplaied beganne to march forwarde. Ameſe likewiſe was not much diſcontented with this their reſolution, but being of a cherefull and good courage againſt all caſualties and occurrences, he imagined there would be litle or no daunger for a day or two, of anie alarmes, or attemptes made by Scanderbeg: howbeit, that in matters of warrefare, thoſe counſailes whichProuidence and circumſpection of Ameſe in the warres. did forecaſt and doubt moſt daungers, and which were moſt warie and politique, did continually more pleaſe and like him then anie others, becauſe euen in the leaſt errour and ouerſight, there conſiſted no ſmall weight and importance. And therefore he admoniſhed the Baſſa to proceede in theſe affaires prudently and with good order and direction, for feare leaſt by the immoderate couetouſneſſe of the ſouldiers, their prey and bootie might not onely turne to their infamie, but might alſo proue lamentable vnto his people. All theſe thinges therefore were carefully regarded, the battallions and ſquadrons were wiſely ordered and deuided into diuerſe partes, with a ſtreight and expreſſe charge and commaundement, that no man vppon payne of death ſhould diſranke nor disbande him ſelfe out of the battell where he had his place aſſigned him, without the ſpeciall leaue and licenſe of the Generall, albeit they ſhould happen to ſee all the wealth and riches of Epyre before their eyes: for that where time ſhould ſerue, they ſhould haue free libertie to take whatſoeuer they could ſeize vppon. The ſouldiers for that time ſhewed themſelues verie conformable and obedient in that which was commaunded them, till ſuch time as their couetous fingers (itching at the faire ſhew of the goodly things forbidden them) did finde fit matter whereupon to ſeize and to lay hold. But before the departure of the armie, the Baſſa hauing made his prayers to God, that he would vouchſafe to graunt him the grace to be able to tame the inſolencie of the Albanois, and to obtaine the honour of all thoſe trophees and victories befallen to Scanderbeg for ſo manie yeares together, he called Ameſe vnto him, who was then ordering andAmeſe proclaimed king of Epyre by Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkiſh army. diſpoſing of his regiment: and after he had openly graced him with manie goodly prayſes and commendations, he cauſed him by the voices of the ſouldiers to be proclaimed king of Epyre: and with a long and ſuperfluous inuectiue, deteſting and diſgracing Scanderbeg and all his worthy deedes and notable exploites. Ameſe refuſed not this good fortune, but from thence forward he ſhewed himſelfe prompt and cherfull in all his doing: diſpatching his affaires with ſingular diligence, and currying the fauour and good will of the people both in deedes and in words.
            Theſe things thus done, the hoaſt of the Barbarians (hauing ſent forth their vantcurrours to diſcouer and beate ouer the plaine countrie) did now beginne to march forwarde: part of their baggage being put before in the vaward, and part following in the rereward of their armie. The way which they tooke was (by the conduct and direction of Ameſe) to that part of Epyre which lyeth to the Eaſtward of Croy, and was diſtant from thence about 80. miles: the which for that it was leaſt furniſhed with forces, did ſeeme to be more eaſily expoſed to prey and pillage: beſides they had an intention alſo, that as their troupes ſhould approch neerer vnto the walles (if occaſion did ſo ſerue) they might all vnder one make themſelues Lordes of the towne. Neuertheleſſe by reaſon of the continuall and vehement heate, they went not farre that day, neither did they finde vppon the fieldes, any the leaſt recompence of their paine and trauell: ſo wilde and waſt did the countrie appeare on all partes, as if it had beene a meere and ſolitarie deſart. This made the Mahometan to redouble his feare and ſuſpition, beſides that the ambition of the man did mightily trouble and torment him, leaſt that the Chriſtian eyther by his abſence, or by his continuall delayes refuſing the fight, ſhould conſtraine him to returne vnto Constantinople
               
without any purchaſe or increaſe of honour and reputation. For there was no kinde of bootie to be found at all (which ordinarily, is eſteemed to be a part of the victorie) neither had they any ready meanes without artillerie, to get them any honour by the beſieging of any townes. As for the waſting and ſpoiling of the corne, frutes and trees: the burning and fireing of townes, and ſuch like calamities, being the ordinarie appendants of the warres, they are commonly and oftentimes reſerued to the laſt and extreame rigour: for that in very deede, they doe ſeeme rather to teſtifie and to declare a certaine rage and furie, then any benefit or commoditie of reuenge. Beſides, they had ſome hope alſo (ſuch as it was) to come to fight with Scanderbeg, and to bring the Prouince vnder their ſubiection, if ſo be he durſt preſent himſelfe to the combat. And theſe (it may be) were the eſpeciall cauſes and conſiderations, that detained and withheld them from ſuch acts of hoſtilitie.
            The heate of the ſunne growing by litle and litle to be abated, by reaſon of her declyning towards the Weſt, the ſweete and pleaſant ſhade yeelded great refreſhing to the bodies of the ſouldiers, who were ſore wearied, and well neere ſpent with extreamitie of heate, of harde trauell, and long iournyes. To the intent therefore they might take the benefite of ſo ſweete a refreſhing, they doubled their way and began to ride a good round trot. But the Baſſa commaunded them to make a ſtand, not daring to paſſe on any further, by reaſon that the night approached and drew neere. In the meane time him ſelfe in perſon with part of his armie encamped on an high mountaine which lay aloft on the left hand, after he had firſt cauſed Ameſe and certaine horſemen to take a viewe of the conueniencie and ſituation of the place. The reſidue of his armie was lodged all alongeſt the valley, and in other places in as great ſafetie as might be: and there was ordained good watch and warde, ſeuerall courtes of garde being placed both in the plaine and vppon the mountaines round about, eſpecially on that ſide that lay towardes Liſſa, and which they moſt ſuſpected. In this place, the night being thus ſpent and conſumed, the next day by the common aduiſe and conſent of them all, they purpoſed to take their iourney into * Emathia.
               Or Pharſalia.
            
            Here hath it beene auerred by ſome writers, that certaine Peyſants of the countriePeyſants of Albany ſurpriſed by the Turkes. of Albanie were ſurpriſed as they deſcended vndiſcreetely out of the forreſts next adioyning: and being put to tormentes, for feare of death they did reueale manie of Scanderbeg his ſecretes▪ For you muſt note, that there be in Epyre manie mountaines full of ſuch huge thickets, ſo wooddie, and ſo difficult of acceſſe, that the people of the countrie doe holde them ſelues in more ſafetie in thoſe places, then in the beſt and ſtrongeſt fortreſſes: and there is no power nor puiſſance of the enemie (be it neuer ſo great) that can driue them to forſake thoſe places. Some alſo haue added this moreouer, that certaine fugitiues came the ſame night to yeelde themſelues vnto Scanderbeg: and that certaine Scoutes or Eſpyals of theEſpials or Scouts of the Turkes ſurpriſed by the Albanois. Turkes, falling into the handes of the Chriſtian courtes of garde, were put to the ſword, excepting one onely: who being by good happe ſaued aliue and brought before the King (who was then preparing for his iorney againſt the next morning) did enforme him of manie things particularly concerning the purpoſe of the enemie: by meanes whereof it may be eaſily imagined, and not without ſhewe of credite, that he was a principall meane and authour of the victorie of the Chriſtians which followed ſoone after. For my part it ſhall ſuffice, that without eyther approuing it for a truth, or reproouing it as fabulous, I haue ſimply made recitall of it. And therefore referring the truth thereof to be iudged by others, I will betake my ſelfe to the proſecuting of thoſe affaires, which hauing bene for a while intermitted vpon

the comming and arriuall of the Turkes, doe now reuoke and call vs backe to conſider of them.
            You haue heard how the flight of Scanderbeg towardes the towne of Liſſa, was not ſuch as the aduerſe partie had imagined: but hauing nowe gotten farre out of the ſight of the enemie, he went vnto thoſe partes of the countrie which laye vppon the frontiers of Albanie, where were manie and diuerſe paſſages into the Prouince by which the enemie might eaſily be ſurpriſed. There did he abide for that day, attending the ſetting of the Sunne: and then leauing there his Enſignes, and being accompanied with a verie fewe horſemen, he went vppe to the toppes of certaine mountaines, from whence he might well diſcouer all the plaine countrie about * Emathia. Then calling to remembraunce the ſpeeches of hisOr Pharſalia. priſoners afore mentioned, hee diſpoſed and beſtowed certaine Scoutes vppon theScouts placed vpon the mountaines by Scanderbeg to obſerue the paſſing of the Turkiſh army. toppes and edges of the mountaines, who hauing little ſtreamers or penons (according as the manner is) were admoniſhed and charged to holde them vp aloft, that they might be ſeene wauing in the ayre, and that towardes the ſame ſide where they ſhould ſee the enemie encamped, they ſhould throw downe thoſe penons from the toppe to the bottome. Other ſignall then this they had not at that time, neyther by fires, nor other watches for the night. True it is, that the moſt worthie, and in a manner, the beſt ſouldiers were appointed to ſtande Scout in that place, amongeſt whom was Peic Manuell, a Gentleman of no leſſe wiſedome and policie,Peic Manuell. then of hardineſſe and good reſolution in deedes of armes: becauſe that the weight and conſequence of their whole affaires did conſiſt in the diligence and truſt of theſe Sentinels. This done, he returned in the dead of the night into his campe,Ambuſcado dreſſed by Scanderbeg againſt Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkes. where hauing paſt the moſt part of the ſame in reſt and ſilence, he diſlodged verie ſecretly without any noiſe, and he had not ridden farre with all his forces, but that he put himſelfe in ambuſcado in the bottome of a certaine valley verie neere vnto that watch which we laſt ſpake of: determining not to depart, or to remoue from thence before he had deliberated and taken counſell for his proceedings, and that he might take his directions, by the ſigne and token which ſhould be made vnto him by thoſe ſtreamers.
            It was ſcant fayre day breake, but that the Baſſa drewe his troupes foorth of the campe, hauing a purpoſe and determination by preuenting the heate of the day to enter into the plaines of Emathia, where (as he vnderſtood) was remayning ſome bootie that would be abandoned to the prey of the ſouldiers. Not pawſing therefore vponIſaac Baſſa with the Turkiſh armie in the plain fields of Pharſalia. the matter, he beganne to march forward verie early, whileſt the leaues and graſſe of the fieldes were yet moyſt with the dewe of the morning: and troade with their feet, greedie of prey and pillage, vpon thoſe fieldes that are euen yet famous through the bloud and ſlaughter of the auncient Romaines. But to the intent that a caſe and accident ſo maruellous, and ſo ſhortly after enſuing might not be without ſome preſage, there be many who doe affirme, that the Generall his ſtandard-bearer, hauingSignes and tokens prognoſticating the great ſlaughter in the future battell betwene the Turkes and the Chriſtians. ſtumbled at the ruines of an old wall (as there are many ſuch in thoſe quarters which doe bound the landes and poſſeſſions of priuate perſons) both horſe and man with the ſtandard alſo fell ſo rudely to the ground, that his companions were conſtrayned to take him vp halfe dead, and to helpe him againe to horſebacke. Notwithſtanding they made not any account of the matter, but onely tooke it as a warning to the reſidue to looke better to their feete, and to eſchewe that place. And it may be, that we alſo ought to make as little account and reckoning of ſuch ſignes and tokens, rather then to followe the vanitie of ſuch fonde coniectures in this accident: ſeeing that both the libertie of mans free will, leading and guyding him in ſuch

actions, and the good doctrine and inſtructions of Chriſtian religion doe ſeeme to argue and teach vs the contrarie. But yet one other thing there is, wherein I knowe not howe I ſhould gaineſay it, or diſſent from others who haue affirmed, that the Vultures, and Rauens, and ſuch like fowles which vſe to frequent and hunt after carrion and dead carkaſſes, did flie in ſuch aboundance into thoſe places, (as it were foreſhewing the great effuſion of bloud that was likely ſhortly to enſue) that the verie heauens ſeemed in a manner to be darkened with their huge numbers. Beſides, there was an other verie ſtraunge and wonderfull ſigne (which I had almoſt forgotten) and which I ſee no reaſon why it ſhoulde be neglected or nor regarded, and that was, that in the ende of the ſpring that ſelfe ſame yeare, (as it is reported by them that ſawe it) the heauens did raine downe bloud vppon the earth Of which ſignes, there is not any of them that proceeded from the acte of anie man or earthly creature: neither was it in the power of mans counſell or prudence, to foreſee, or to preuent the effect of thoſe accidents.
            Manie are the influences which did deſcende downe from the heauens by certaineDiſcourſe of the author vpon celeſtiall ſignes & prognoſtications of future accidents. ſecret and vnknowen cauſes of thinges, and it is often ſeene, that ſundry both good and euill chaunces are manifeſted vnto vs by the operation of the ſtarres and the celeſtiall bodies, the which whileſt we doe diſdaine to obſerue, wee doe referre them to meere accidents and caſualtie, and we doe not vſe eyther the ſeruice and miniſterie of our owne prudence, nor the induſtrie of our owne counſelles to purchaſe vnto vs the fauour and bleſſing of the diuine bountie, nor to turne away the anger and threatnings of the heauens. For what reaſon haue we to thinke, that this extraordinarie flight of ſo manie birdes and fowles of the ayre, or thoſe ſhewers of bloud, which fell from the heauens ſhould denote or foreſhewe the ruine and deſtruction of the Infidels rather then of our owne friendes the Chriſtians? were it not perhappes, that by the ſage aduiſe and counſaile, and by the temporizing of the Chriſtian Chiefetaine, and dexteritie of his good inuention: The ſtarres were (as it were) forced, and this notable victorie was in a manner purchaſed from theSentence. 
               heauens▪ For as the ſaying is, The wiſe man hath Dominion ouer the ſtarres and celeſtiall bodies: and for my part I doe aſſuredly beleeue, that the hunger of thoſeSapiens dominabitur aſtris. Vultures, might very well haue bene deluded, and the earth might ſufficiently haue beene ſatisfied with that bloud onely which fell from the heauens, if the obſtinate and wilfull prudence of men had not drawen downe vppon them ſelues the violent influence of the deſtinies. The truth whereof appeareth in this: for that if we ourſelues haue not anie vertue nor puiſſance, if wee can challenge vnto our ſelues no right nor interreſt in our earthly actions, but that theſe preſages muſt of neceſſitie be followed with ſuch ineuitable effectes: then what ſhould it profit or auaile to commaund or admoniſh men to take armes and to haue recourſe to the iuſt defence of warres, if our reſiſtance ſhould be vaine and bootleſſe? Or to what end ſhould we ſurcharge mankinde with the denunciation of long griefes and lamentations only to make their eyes the beholders or feelers of that miſchiefe which ſhall neuer befall nor come vpon them? aſſuredly much more cheerefully and comfortably ſhould we leaue this world, and depart out of this life, if that hope did entertaine and feede our hearts euen to the laſt gaſpe: and it would make our death and laſt end more pleaſing & leſſe terrible vnto vs. Howbeit that it is a common prouerbe and vſuall in the mouthes of all men, That miſchieues foreſeene, do leaſt harme and offence: the which (it may be)Sentence. we will graunt to be true in thoſe kinds of miſchiefes, which are wont to diſpoſe and prepare the mind of man, & not to diſcorage or diſmay them. For there is no thought nor cogitation more deadly and pernitious, then that which miniſtreth vnto men

equall abundance of teares, and like rage of paſſions in the time both of life and of death.
            But whileſt I buſie my ſelfe I know not how to play the part of a Philoſopher, I feare me I doe digreſſe from the office and dutie of an Hiſtoriographer. Returne we therefore to our diſcourſe where it was diſcontinued.
            The entrie of the Paynims within the plaine countrie of Pharſalia, was quickely manifeſted and made knowen to the inhabitantes by the ſound of the artillerie, in the fortreſſes next adioyning: giuing thereby an aduertiſement to ſome of the people, who were iſſued out with their beaſtes to feede them in the fieldes. Vpon this ſignall and token giuen them, you may imagine that there was none of them, but made haſte ſpeedily to auoide ſo great and imminent a daunger: and it is to be ſuppoſed, that ſome of them which were diſperſed and ſcattered fartheſt off, did make ſo great haſte to free themſelues from the enemie, that they left part of their beaſtes for a prey and bootie vnto them, not being well able vppon ſuch an extreamitie (wherein they were) to vſe conuenient ſpeede, to ſaue and preſerue them from their violence and furie. At the ſame inſtant likewiſe, the ſtreamers which were placed for a token vpon the mountaines, did giue Scanderbeg occaſion to diſlodgeScanderbeg coaſteth the armie of the Turkes with his forces c
                     •
                  
                  nertly amongſt the mountains. with his campe, who with good reaſon and iudgement, coniecturing which way the Barbarian tooke, calling backe his ſcoutes, and arraunging his companies in good order, he diſmarched ſecretly by the couerts of the valleyes, and the ſecret paſſages of the mountaines, ſtill following the Baſſa a farre off without being apperceiued, till ſuch time as he thought that he had gotten neere enough vnto him. Then alſo putting him ſelfe againe in an ambuſh with all his forces, and attending till it were night, he reſted him ſelfe neere vnto a certaine hill, named by the inhabitantes, Tumenistiola: after that he had firſt ſent foorth ſome to ſtande ſcoutes, andScanderbeg putteth himſelf in an ambuſcado neere the mountaine Tumeniſtiola. had ſet the watch, ordering all thinges in good and conuenient ſort. The Mahometans in this meane while were not idle, but they ſpent and employed, not onely the morning, but the whole courſe of their march all that day in ouerrunning, ſpoyling, and ranſacking of the plaine countrie, being growen to a certaine contempt and licentiouſneſſe which by litle and litle was engendred amongſt their troupes, becauſe they ſaw no bodie to reſiſt or to encounter them in the way. All this did Scanderbeg diſcerne full well, but his deliberation was not to purſue after them with ſo ſmall forces, they being ſcattered and diſperſed in a plaine that was ſo large and ſpacious, nor yet was he minded to giue the onſet vpon them in ſuch ſort as he might any way endaunger his forces in the fight, but he did rather deſire that their audacitie and licentiouſneſſe ſhould ſtill encreaſe and grow more and more. In that manner therefore hauing followed them all that night, he forbare to touch, or in any ſort to meddle with their campe, by reaſon of the difficulties of the places, being not able, but with great trouble, to carrie his troupes in the darke through thoſe thicke and huge forreſtes and woods: as alſo becauſe he aymed at a certaine draught and policie of warre, which he had of long time before conceiued in his thoughtes, by meanes of certaine drummes, trumpets, and clarions (whereof ſhall be ſaid more hereafter) and by which he did reſerue himſelfe to a ſtraunge and miraculous kinde of combat. For this cauſe the Infidels being ſuffered to reſt in quiet, they ſpent that night in diuerſe pleaſures and paſtimes: and euen Ameſe alſo tooke a great ioy and contentment to ſee himſelfe carried and attended (though ſomewhat too ſoone for his honour) thorough the campe, with diuers ſongs of ioy and meriment amongſt the common ſouldiers, as if he had alreadie obtained the ſoueraigntie and peaceable poſſeſſion of the eſtate of Albanie. Not that their minds were wholly freed from all feare or ſuſpition,
            
               
               But rather (ſuch is the deſire of mortall men) that it draweth with it moſt commonlySentence. a kinde of credulitie, and maketh vs to beleeue that things will fall out according to our owne deſire and expectation. So did that leaſure and quietneſſe of three dayes continuance (wherein they were without any diſturbance of their enemies) cauſe the Barbarians to frame and conceiue vnto themſelues a vaine licenſe in their owne conceipts and imaginations, as if they had beene alreadie poſſeſſed of the victorie.Negligence & ſecuritie of the Turkiſh army. Thence it proceeded, that all things more and more enclining to negligence, the watches were leſſe carefully regarded, inſomuch as they placed not any ſcoutes nor court of gard, but onely on that ſide where they feared moſt daunger, namely from the way and coaſt bending towards Liſſa.
            
            The darkeneſſe of the night being now chaſed away by the comming of the day light, the Turkes were prouiding and preparing themſelues to follow on their roads and excurſions: and therefore by the breake of day diſplaying their Enſignes, they fell to ſpoyling and robbing that part of the countrie which remained as yet vnſpoiled, filling it with all kinds of outrage and beaſtly crueltie: and their hoaſt with theirIſaac and the Turks encampe betwene the riuer of Mathia and the waters of Albulae. baggage alſo remoued to a certaine plaine lying betweene the riuer of Mathia and thoſe waters which the inhabitants name Albulae: placing their gardes and Sentinels towardes Liſſa only, where they doubted and imagined the greateſt daunger. At the foote of the mountaine Tumeniſta, which hath his aſpect to the Weſt, towardes the open champion were placed certaine horſemen to aſſure that paſſage. As for their campe, it was excellently well fortified: for the one halfe of their armie remained there ſtill for the garde and defence thereof: and I finde that the Baſſa himſelfe, and manie of the chiefeſt and moſt principall perſons of the armie did continue and abide there with the campe, whileſt that Ameſe (as being more skilfull and better practiſed in thoſe marches) had the conduct of thoſe forces that went abroad to forrage and preySuffades. the countrey, with the which all at randome he ranne vp euen to the Suffades (as they tearme them) and to the ſeacoaſts. The husbandman and the peyſant had not withdrawen and conueyed away all from the fury, ſpoyle, and couetouſneſſe of the Barbarians, becauſe they did not thinke that the King would haue ſuffered them ſo long to vſe that licenſe and libertie, and to haue beene vnmet withall. True it is, that he might at that time haue done ſome worthie and notable exploit, whileſt their forces were ſo deuided a ſunder, if he had roundly inuaded their campe: but he was not yet come ſo neere them, neither could it ſo cōueniently haue bene done, but that the forces which were harrying and ouerrunning the countrie, vpon the noiſe of the alarme might haue beene called home, and ſo they might eaſily haue encloſed the Albanois betwene both their powers. But hunger and the heate of the day hauing now cauſed them to returne to their campe, the bootie was deuided amongſt the ſouldiers: howbeit, it was but of litle or ſmall value, and did rather ſharpen their appetites, then ſatisfie or content them. By this time were our men alſo drawen together, and being gotten vp to the toppes of the mountaines, they were ſeized of the aduantage of the place: whereupon with their armes nowe readie in their handes, they did prepare themſelues to call the Mahometans to an account of their voyage and iorney which they had taken.
            If you had ſeene how Scanderbeg was buſied and did beſtirre himſelfe, you mightAn ellegant and excellent compariſon. aptly haue compared him to one, who expecting at his houſe ſome great companie of gueſts, and being to make them ſome magnificent and ſumptuous banquet, with moſt exquiſite dainties and viandes prepared more then ordinary, dareth not to truſt his ſeruants, nor yet to referre the care thereof either to his friends, or to his wife, but will ſee it done with his owne hands: ordaining, fitting, and diſpoſing all things moſt

carefully: and with a doubtfull countenaunce caſteth his eyes vpon all the diſhes, and vppon all partes of the table, eſpecially if by reaſon of the meane eſtate of the man, the preparation be more ſparye then is conuenient for the number of his gueſtes: and ſetting out all things to the beſt ſhew, with a skilfull and diligent hand, he doth ſo amplifie and encreaſe them, as they may at the leaſt ſatisfie and fill their eyes, if not the hands and bellies of the banquetters. In like manner the King of Epyre courſing and galloping vp and downe the hilles and mountaines neare adioyning, ſtayed not long in any one place, but he placeth Moſes in one quarter, and Tanuſee in another: the Streezes on this ſide, and others on that ſide: and appointing vnto euerie man his particular charge and office, he admoniſheth and inſtructeth them: and not truſting in the ſufficiencie and capacitie of any of them in a caſe of that conſequence, and in that importance of his affaires; ſometimes he goeth before, ſometimes he followeth after: and to be breife, he maketh his handes and his eyes the witneſſes of all that is done. He vieweth and reuieweth all his troupes, he examineth if all be well, and ſtill is he deuiſing and caſting, how to diſpoſe and order all things to the beſt. And to the intent that the terrible obiect which he prouided for his enemies might the more aſtoniſh and confound them: he vſed this ſleight and inuention which I will ſhew you.
            To euerie ſquadron he aſſigned a great number of trumpettes, drummes and ſuchStratageme of Scanderbeg. like inſtruments of warre, more then is ordinarily he vſed any troups, the which he had expreſly prouided of purpoſe. After this he ordered his armie both horſe & foot according to the commoditie of the place, and the quantitie of his forces. He reſerued for his owne regiment the moſt part of his armie to wit, 4000. horſe, and the like number of footemen, with the which he went without delay, and ſeized vppon Tumeniſta.
            
            The Baſſa his armie, namely they which were wearied with their long and tediousSecuritie and negligence of the Turkes. incurſions in harrying and preying of the countrie in the morning, at their returne were laid all along, and did reſt themſelues here and there ouer the large plaine, hauing left their horſes feeding without either ſaddles or bridles: beſides that, few or none kept neare their enſignes or any good order. Some laye in the ſhadowe and made merrie with that which they had purchaſed: others hauing fed at full, lay wallowing on the graſſe and ſlept without all feare or ſuſpition. Some paſſing away the time in plaies and ſportes of all ſortes and vſuall amongeſt ſouldiers, did ioyfully beguile their eyes of ſleepe, and the extreame heat of ſummer: albeit they were ſcarce able to hold vp their heads for wearineſſe and want of ſleepe: for then was the worſt time both of the yeare and of the day, by reaſon of the extreame heat of the moneth of Iuly, and the height of the ſunne which was not then paſt the middeſt of the heauen, which made their watches & courts of gard alſo to be as negligent in the other parts of the campe. For amongſt them likewiſe, euery man was bent to take his eaſe and to ſpend away the time in mirth. No man had his armes nor his horſe in a readines: but the moſt part hauing caſt away all feare and doubt of the enemie, had laied aſide alſo the care and conſideration of all good order and martiall diſcipline.
            The Baſſa himſelfe with the great men and Commanders of the armie, and Ameſe
               Conſultation of Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkiſh Chieftains for their proceedings againſt Scanderbeg. their Councellour (whom the buſines eſpecially concerned aboue the reſt) being in conſultation within their tents, were in a maruellous care & perplexitie, what courſe they ſhould reſolue vpon at their next remoue from thence, and on what ſide they ſhould find any new ſubiect of honour and commendation. The counſell was deuided into two diuerſe opinions: one was, that they ſhould ouerrunne all the Prouince with ſword and fire, and ſo make the ruines and ſpoiles of the countrie to remaine as

the marks of their victory: the other (which was propoūded by Ameſe,) was, that they ſhould march right towardes Croy to ſound the wils of the inhabitants whether they would ſubmit themſelues to the nephue of Scanderbeg & accept of his gouernment: & that they ſhould terrifie them by threats and menaces in caſe they did refuſe to harken vnto them: as that they ſhould ſee the totall ruine and deſtruction of Albanie, & a perpetuall ſiege before their walles, and that in the end they ſhould be enforced to endure the yoke of a moſt miſerable and ſhamefull ſeruitude and bondage: That they ſhould not build vpon the ſlowe ſuccours of Scanderbeg, nor truſt to their fond counſelles, who ſhould perſwade them to attend and depend vpon the hope and expectation of his long lingring preſence. This latter aduiſe was approued as the moſt certaine and beſt opinion, and the other was in no part followed: onely they made ſome ſtay for a while, and thought it not yet beſt to remoue their campe till ſuch time as the feruentneſſe of the heate, and the wearineſſe of their bodies were ſomewhat abated and refreſhed. But Scanderbeg did not any longer temporize: for hauing both ſatisfied and inſtructed his eyes from the toppe of Tumenista, he animated and diſpoſed hisScanderbeg marcheth to fight with Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkiſh armie. ſouldiers, telling them what order they ſhould obſerue and keepe: how they ſhould by their inuaſions terrifie their enemies, and on what ſide they ſhould charge and preſſe vpon them. But firſt of all beholding that court of garde of thoſe Turks which lay at the foote of the mountaine, ſome of them ſleeping ſoundly, other keeping but ſlender watch and ward, himſelfe deſcended in great ſilence by the other ſide of the mountaine with eight men onely, and had the cutting of all their throats, leauingA court of gard of the Turkes cut in pieces by Scanderbeg. them there to keepe an euerlaſting watch, one of them onely being excepted, whom the ſwiftneſſe of his horſe, and his flight ſaued from the like ſlaughter. By this meanes the other troups of the Chriſtians (after that this court of gard was diſpatched) began to deſcend vpon the plaine vnknowen to the enemie. He that was eſcaped, went running in the meane while with all poaſting ſpeed towardes his fellowes, and with a fearefull crie, he filled all the hoaſt of the Barbarians, giuing them the allarme, and telling them: that Scanderbeg was there: that the gard was cut in pieces, and that all the forces of the Chriſtians were comming, and were euen at hand. Hardly would the Turks haue beleeued theſe newes, if his feare had not giuen them ſufficient likelyhood thereof through the death of his companions. For neither did they feare any danger on that ſide, neither did they doubt of the ſo ſudden comming of the enemie. But Ameſe was not of that mind: for he was eaſily perſwaded of the truth of this alarme: and therefore haſting ſpeedily and readily to his troupes, he enforced them quickly to mount on horſebacke, & encouraged them to the vttermoſt of his power. Many of them were wakened, partly by the noiſe of the enemies comming vpon thē, and partly by their companions, who cauſed them to leaue ſleeping. For nowe that Scanderbeg ſaw his ambuſhments to be diſcouered, he commaunded his infanterie preſently to follow him with as great ſpeed and celeritie as was poſſible: and immediately as the enemie was preparing to receiue him, he charged and gaue the onſet vpon them moſt furiouſly with the huge clamours and horrible cries of his ſouldiers, the ſame being augmented and encreaſed with the brimme noiſe of the drummes,Scanderbeg ſurprizeth the Turkiſh campe by a ſudden inuaſion. trumpets and tamborins which were purpoſely placed on all ſides to annoy and terrifie the enemie by the conceipt and imagination of a great and mightie armie: and alſo to giue aduertiſements to the other bands that lay cloſe embusked in the mountaines. Ameſe being ſeconded with his owne regiment of horſemen, and with certen others who had bene appointed for the garde of the campe, was the firſt that made head againſt the Chriſtians, and did moſt ſtoutly ſuſtaine the firſt charge. Many alſo came thither on foote, hauing no leiſure in ſo great haſt and extremitie, to ſaddle and

make readie their horſes. The tumult and the terrour was wonderfull in all partes of the campe, and the Turkes ſtood as men mightely amazed and aſtoniſhed: ſo great and extreame was the feare which ſeized vpon them at the verie ſight and name of Scanderbeg. The Baſſa ſtood firme within his campe and would not moue a foot, till ſuch time as he ſaw all his ſquadrons in order and good array, and that his flanckes were well defended with treble forces of the choiſeſt horſemen well armed and appointed. But during theſe preparations, it ſeemed that the heauen & earth were confounded by reaſon of this new and vnexpected alarme, and with the ſtrange clamours & diuerſe ſounds of the ambuſhments now diſcouered. On euerie ſide did the mountaines and next vallies reſound with the noiſe, ſometimes of the men, ſometimes of the trumpets, drummes and clarions: and ſometimes with the maruellous ſound of infinite harguebuſſes, which did incredibly augment the feare and terror both in the hearts and in the eyes of the Turkes: who eſteeming themſelues as men loſt and vtterly vndone, did thinke that the power and puiſſance of all Epyre, Sclauonie, and their confederates, had bene aſſembled and conſpired together to their deſtruction. And therefore they began to flie on all hands before that euer Moſes with his troups alone could get downe into the plaine from the mountaines: and yet did not their flight ſeeme ſure and ſafe enough vnto them, by reaſon that all the wayes and paſſages were in a manner ſhut vp and taken from them. Beſides, euen their horſes being frayed in diuerſe places, did either ſhake off their headſtals, or breake their bridles, and being thus feared, did ſcape out of the hands of thoſe who were making them readie. Neuertheleſſe Ameſe miſtruſting the ſtratagemes and the politique inuentionsAmeſe encourageth the Turks againſt the Epirots. of his vncle, did ſoone and eaſily comprehend this his cunning and ſubtiltie. And therefore he cried out vnto his companie on all ſides: that they ſhould not in any caſe be affraied of theſe falſe alarmes: that theſe deuiſes were for the moſt part the onely hope and refuge of ſuch as had but weake and ſmall forces: that they ſhould quietly attend and ſuſtaine their enemies, without any miſdoubt of theſe vaine clamours, and that the iangling noiſe of their trumpets, and other ſuch braſen inſtruments, and the ecchoes and outcries of their fearefull voices, were but fruteleſſe and idle ſhewes purpoſely doubled and augmented to put them in feare and terror. With theſe perſwaſions he drew many of them out of euery companie, yet in a great doubt and mammering, being vnreſolued, whether it were beſt to flie or to hold good againſt the enemie. For neither did the one ſeeme to be honeſt in the preſence of their Captaine, and things being yet in good eſtate: neither were they of ſufficient ſtrength to reſiſt againſt their enemies, their courages being diſmayed and abated in ſo ſudden an aſtoniſhment: inſomuch, that it would haue required a long time to haue confirmed them in a good reſolution, and to haue put them in full heart and courage againe.
            All this notwithſtanding the Baſſa being no leſſe reſolute then Ameſe, cauſed hisThe battell of Pharſalia betweene Iſaac Baſſa and Scanderbeg. Enſignes to march on and entred the combat with notable reſolution. As he was aduauncing himſelfe to the aide and ſuccours of Ameſe, in hope if he met with Scanderbeg to oppreſſe him: Moſes and the reſidue of the Chriſtians following cloſe at their backes, were now come vpon the open plaine, and helde him ſhort from proceeding any further. Neuertheleſſe the Dibrian cauſed his men to make a ſtand and to holde bridle, ſtaying till Tanuſee and Piec Manuell (who had the charge and commaund of a ſquadron of archers and harguebuſſiers) were aduaunced and came forward as farre foorth as himſelfe. They being now drawen and vnited all together, the battell beganne to grow rough and furious on all ſides, and the horſemen from all partes did ruſh violently vpon their enemies. The footmen for their partes alſo wrought wonders; and the harguebuſſiers plaied vpon the troupes of the Paynims
               
where they ſaw them thickeſt not beſtowing any of their ſhot in vaine. Whereupon the Baſſa being hardly preſſed and annoied with the mortall ſhot of thoſe bullettes, was conſtrained to giue backewardes: and being repulſed and driuen to retire within his trenches, he ſawe his ſquadrons diſordered and out of rancke. Then our footmen caſting their bowes away at their backes, and leauing their harguebuſſes, beganne verie nimbly and lightly to come to handie blowes and to vſe their ſwords, ſtill following and preſſing hard vpon the Turkes in wounding and killing of thoſe which were next vnto them, and whom they found ſcattered and out of order. Great was the ſlaughter and butcherie throughout all the companies, and much blood was ſhed both of them that fledde, and of them alſo that fought. But he that had ſeene how Scanderbeg and his troupes did beſtirre themſelues on their partes, would haue wondred and admired at the ſight and ſpectacle of ſo many miſchieues, and mortall miſfortunes that repreſented themſelues on that ſide of the fielde. For it was another manner of ſlaughter that was made there then in any other parte of the battell, by reaſon that their forces and power being the greateſt, might the more eaſily worke the greater effectes. Beſides that, the Infidels on that ſide were ſurprized more ſuddenly, and almoſt all of them were found diſarmed and vnprouided, lying ſleeping along vpon their bellies: by meanes whereof their enemies might the more freely paſſe ouer their bodies being the more ſubiect to their furie and violence: and they might make themſelues the better way by their ſwordes. Here alſo did the footemen abandon the vſe of their arrowes and harguebuſſes, and hauing onely either ſwords, dartes or pikes in their hands: ſometimes they did wound thoſe which fled, behind and at their backes: and ſometimes did runne their horſes through the bellies, ouerthrowing thoſe that were mounted vpon them. All the hardineſſe and audacitie, or the feare and flight of the Turkes on that ſide did wholly depend vpon the reſolution of the Chriſtian fugitiue, who with a countenance more and more aſſured, made head againſt the Albanois: and one while by his voice, another while by the dexteritie and valure of his valiant deedes and prowes, he would aduertiſeAmeſe encourageth the Turks in the battell. & will his troups to hold good, and only for a litle while to endure with patience, til ſuch time as the firſt fury & violence of the Albanois were broken, ſaying that afterwards he would vndoubtedly deliuer them an eaſie and vnbloudie victory: that the ſmall numbers of the Chriſtians had nothing to hope on but the furie of their firſt charge & onſet, the which being once paſt & cooled, their forces alſo & their courage would ſoone faint and faile, and come to nothing. This did he as long as he could prolong the conflict, hoping that the other handes which were diſperſed ouer the champion would rally themſelues and renue the combat. But his expectation of thoſe ſuccours grew ſtill more and more to be vaine and fruſtrate: for many of them were ſurpriſed and taken vp by the way, and the reſt by the extreamitie of their feare were aduiſed to betake themſelues to flight. In ſuch ſort, that the number was not great ofAmeſe his companies put to 
                     •
                  light by Scanderbeg. thoſe Turkes that preſented themſelues to the encounter of a iuſt and full battell: but the moſt part of them were murthered and like a many of hogges, had their throats cut by the Albanois. Moſes embracing and laying hold vpon this occaſion, and ſo goodly an opportunitie, and hauing an earneſt affection and deſire to repaire and recouer his former honour, would not ſuffer the Baſſa to take any breath: but crying with a loud voice, (as he was a man very fierce and vehement) at euerie blow giuen with his ſword, and at euery motion and caſt of his eyes.Speech of Moſes encouraging his ſouldiers to the battel againſt Iſaas Baſſa.
            
            Here, here (quoth he) my companions: cheerefully let vs charge, and brauely let vs breake in vpon theſe dogges and barbarous Miſcreants: let not this glorious ſhewe of their great and huge battels, let not theſe magnificall names of Baſſaes aſtoniſh

nor amaze you. Theſe are no other then the infamous reliques of the ouerthrowe of Belgrade in Hungarie: they are all ouervehelmed and buried in feare, in ſleepe and in drunkenneſſe. Preſſe vppon theſe their bootleſſe and vnprofitable gardes, follow on and purſue them brauely and couragiouſly, ſatisfie your hands with their bloud, that you may ſatiate your hearts afterwardes with the rich ſpoiles and booty of your enemies.
            
            If theſe ſpeeches and perſwaſions had the power to chafe and incenſe the courages of the Chriſtians, much more were they encouraged by the conſideration of that precious recompence which they ſaw prouided for them by meanes of the victorie, and which they had in a manner alreadie gotten. Notwithſtanding there were ſome ſquadrons of Turkes, who being more mindfull of the honuor and dutie of good ſouldiers, then of the ſafetie of their liues: being aſſembled together in groſſe, and a good band alſo of others on foote, could not in any caſe be broken by their enemies. The fight ſtanding vpon theſe termes, Scanderbeg had ſent certen horſemen after his nephew to purſue and follow him, ſtreightly charging and enioyning them in any caſe not to kill him: who hauing taken him aliue, and the victorie being made ſure on that ſide of the field, he haſtened with a thouſand footemen or thereaboutes, and ſome fewe horſemen to that place where the Baſſa ſtoode vppon his defence. For,Ameſe taken priſoner. the reſidue of his troupes after they had gotten the victorie, would not be drawen from following the chaſe as long as the flight continued. But on the other ſide alſo, the reſiſtaunce of the Turkes was cleane broken and ceaſed by the promptneſſe and valour of certaine Harguebuſſiers whom Moſes had led thither. And the Generall of the Infidels with all the reſt had quite forſaken and abandoned their campe. All thoſe which were found on foote (excepting ſuch as by good happe hadVictorie of Scanderbeg. againſt Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkes in the battell of Pharſalia. found either their owne or ſome other mens horſes and ſo did eſcape) were either ſlaine or made priſoners, Scanderbeg (as long as he ſawe anie poſſibilitie or likelyhood that the enemie might againe ioyne or reenforce thēſelues) did follow and purſue hard after the Baſſa: but he ſaued himſelfe by the fauour and ſwiftneſſe of his horſe who caried him cleere away out of the ſight of them that had him in chaſe. Thoſe which accompanied him in his flight, had not ſo good fortune as himſelfe, but aMeſſeit a Saniacke taken priſoner. good number of them were taken priſoners: and amongeſt others a Saniacke called Meſſeit. Neither the Dibrian nor any other of the Chriſtians had neuer any mind nor care of profit and commoditie as long as the chaſe endured, and whileſt they had the meanes and power to kill and to followe in execution of the enemie. On all ſides there were bound and fettered great troupes of thoſe who yeelded themſelues, and had throwen downe their armes.
            This battell, (or howſoeuer you liſte to tearme it) continued vntill ſuch time as the night comming vppon them, did finde them to be both Conquerours, and to haue the victorie. Neither the exceſſiue wearineſſe of the ſouldiours, nor the darkneſſe of the night approaching and comming on, could not withhold their handes from labouring to reape the accuſtomed prize and reward of their victorie. The carkaſſes of the dead yet hotte and trembling were deſpoyled, and manie were euen then alſo put to the ſworde. There were gotten from the enemie twentie faire and goodly enſignes or ſtandardes. Of priſoners there were about fiue thouſand: the horſes and other moueables of all fortes were giuen to the ſouldiers as the recompence of their long labours and trauelles, and they were ſo many that they couldNumber of Turkes ſlaine in the battell of Pharſalia. hardly be valued. Touching the number of thoſe which were ſlaine, the reportes are diuerſe: they which do reckon with the moſt, do account 30000. and they which do reckon with the leaſt, do yeelde to 20000. Of the Chriſtians there were wanting abone

a ſixtie or little leſſe, as is generally agreed 
                  •
               o all partes.
            It is not to be denied, but that this ſo notable a victorie▪ and which coſt 
                  ••
                litle bloudſhed, did far exceed and ſubfaſte all humane ſenſe and reaſon: yet ought not the ſtrangenes of the thing to be offenſiue to the eares of the readers: for if we will looke into the infinite examples of antiquitie which are equally to be marked as being of the like qualitie, be they either Romains, Greeks, or ſtrangers: this ou
                  •
                accident cannot want either ſaith or credit. There were found manie tents and pauilions in their enemies camp readie dreſſed 
                  ••
                appointed, which for that night were not at all remoued, but were generally aſſigned to the vſe of the victors, to the end they might ſafegard their bodies which were fore wearied and we
                  •
                with bloud and ſwet, from the vnholſome ayre of the night and making within them good and great ſwet, they ſerued them as fit and conuenient places to feaſt and triumph in for the publicke ioy of that victory till the next morning. O the pleaſant ſport of vnconſtant fortune▪ ô the ridiculous eſtate of humane affaires▪ 
               Scanderbeg is now Lord and Maiſter of the lodgings of the Baſſa the Generall of the Infidels: and the reſt of the Epirots likewiſe doe enioy and poſſeſſe the tentes and commodities which were not prepared nor prouided for them. In many places they found cloath, and napkins readie layed, and the victualles ſet vpon the tables; wherewith they were merrie and made good cheere at their owne pleaſures. Thus was the common and vſuall prouerbe verified. That there is a great diſtance betweene the cuppe and the lippe. Many horſes were found there alſo readie ſaddled and brideled, as though they had ſtayed and attended for their maiſters to mount vppon their backes, but they ſawe them lying dead at their feete. But this notable ſpectacle of this new accident and euent, and an euident teſtimonie of the mutabilitie and inconſtancie of fortune, was Ameſe the King his nephewe. Of late he being a King of three or foure dayes continuance,Ameſe brought priſoner to Scanderbeg with ſingular arrogancie and inſolencie, did ouerrunne all the fieldes of Emathia, and was attended vppe and downe the Turkiſh campe with the handes and voices of the common ſouldiours: but nowe behold how with his handes bound behind him, with out any wordes ſpeaking, and his countenance caſt downe, he is ledde towardes his vncle, to be made a ſpectacle, to the eyes of the common ſouldiours: who being victorious againſt him, were aſſembled to contemplate and looke vpon him, inuiting them all to commiſerate his miſhap: and ſome of them to lament and bewaile his hard for me.
            The next morning, Scanderbeg fearing leaſt ſo many dead carkaſſes heaped vp together, eſpecially in that hot ſeaſon, might with ſtench infect the aire, he did vſe towards them the laſt worke of charitie which could be ſhewed toward enemies, burying the maiſters and horſe
                  •
                (altogether in many pitte
                  •
                digged vp of purpoſe. There was a great number found dead vpon the ſhoares and banckes of the next riuer, and of the waters of Albulae, according as their feare and flight had caried them. The fieldes of Emathia (which had bene of old times of antiquitie much renowmed for many great and notable battels) were made much more famous by this iorney and by this great ſlaughter of the Turkes. The greateſt part of the day was emploied in burying and enterring of the dead bodies: ſo that by this meanes, the reſort of ſo many birdes and foules to that place (as is before mentioned) fell out to very litle or no purpoſe at all. Theſe things thus accompliſhed, the Albanians tooke their way towardes Croie: for hauing gotten ſuch good ſtore of pillage and ſped ſo well, they tooke no great care of forraging: beſides that, the territorie of the enemie was a good way off; and many of them alſo (as you may geſſe) were not eſcaped ſcotfree and vnwounded from this long fight and conflict.
            
               At their diſloding from thence, there were two ſouldiers of one ſquadron or companyA quarrell between two priuate ſouldiers, for ſharing of their booty. who fell to ſome words, and were an occaſion that the departure of the King of Albany was ſomewhat hindred. Theſe two at the beginning of the battell, had agreed to ioyne together in the Fortune of that daies iourney, and whatſoeuer booty was gotten by either of them, ſhould be deuided and ſhared equally betweene them. After which, hauing plied themſelues well in there buſines, and hauing made a good hand, when they came to make partition, they fell to ſome difference and altercation vpon the matter: and (as is vſuall in ſuch caſes) from thence to iniurious and reproachfull ſpeeches of the one againſt the other: ſo that in the end comming to try the matter by the ſword, they were ready to cut each the others throat, for the deciding of their controuerſie, & to know who ſhould be the maiſter of that which was the cauſe of their debate. Scanderbeg being aduertiſed hereof, cauſed both of them to be called before him: and demaunding of them if they had dined, they told him, yea: then ſmiling (as
                  Speech of Scanderbeg to two ſouldiers quarrelling together. he was a man giuen to be mery, and one that delighted in ieſting) Bacchus (quoth he) hath made you enemies: and I will that Bacchus and not Mars, nor any other of the Gods ſhall make you friends. And after he had ſecretly reprehended & rebuked them, he ſent them away, commaunding them to goe and drinke together: and hee willed Vranocontes to make an end of the contention betweene them, and to ſee that ech had his right and ſhare of the booty equally and alike.
            As the Albanois were now marching towards Croy, there met with them a multitude of the countrey inhabitants, and others who had hidden themſelues in the next forreſts till the end of the fight, beſides the citizens of Croy alſo: all which with a wonderfullTriumph of Scanderbeg for the ouerthrow of Ameſe and the Turkes in the battell of Pharſalia. ioy, with high cries and ſounds of inſtrumentes went with them on to Croy, ſo as a man could hardly haue ſeene a more goodly triumph: nor a more pompous ſhew: ſo gloriouſly and triumphantly did they march into the towne. For Scanderbeg (to make the ſight the more beautifull and notable) cauſed all his army to follow after the multitude, well and orderly arraunged in battell array, and ſo to paſſe on euen into the ſuburbs. There was not any one of them (were he neuer ſo baſe and meane) but had at the leaſt one horſe gotten from the enemy, and loaden with infinite ſpoiles, which they cauſed to march before thē. Moreouer the priſoners being bound and tied together by two & two, in a long traine went before the King, and did greatly augment the pompe and ſhew of the triumph: and many of them, for the better acknowledgement and confeſsion of the victory vnto their enemies, were made to cary the enſignes and ſtandards which had bene gotten from them. Likewiſe the pauilions, tents, and canapies of the Turkiſh Generall being of purple colour, and making a goodly ſhew and oſtentation, were caried by ſome of the ſouldiours of the Albanians, who bare them aloft, openly diſplaied, and ſpred abroad of purpoſe, as if they had bene ready dreſſed and prepared for the Generall: which gaue no ſmall grace and ornament to the reſt. Ameſe had moſt earneſtly and humbly entreated his vncle not to leade him to Croy in this infamous and miſerable eſtate of a ſlaue and captiue: and therefore he was ſuffered to goe at liberty, and in another manner of order then as a priſoner, marching ſide by ſide with the Saniacke that was captiue alſo. To conclude, at their entry into the city gate, the companies were diſmiſſed and licenſed to depart: the ſouldiours were ſent away ioyfull and glad to their owne homes, after that the prey and booty, both priſoners and all the reſt, had bene equally deuided and parted betweene them, as largely as they could expect or demand. The enſignes and other things which ſerued for publique ſhew & ornament, and fell as due to Scanderbeg, were caried with great demonſtration of ioy into the city. The Saniacke & Ameſe were put vnder ſafe cuſtody, till ſuch time as they ſhould be otherwiſe diſpoſed of.
            
               I meane not to ſpeake any thing of the great feaſtings and ſolemnities which were vſed by the Albanians, for the celebrating of this victory, and which for many daies together they neuer intermitted. For it is now time that I conuert both my minde and my matter to ſtrange and forraine nations: and to conſider what ioy they conceiued vppon the report of this victorie. The fame and renowme thereof being diſperſed into all the regions neare adioyning, and euen into the heart and middeſt of Italie and other countries of the Chriſtians, it ſeemed litle inferiour vnto that which had bene formerly reported of the victory gotten againſt Amurath before Croy, and it was held to be comparable to any other exploit were it neuer ſo happy and fortunate: the admiration thereof did euen rauiſh euery man, and they could not ceaſe to wonder at the rareneſſe of the matter, when they heard the diſcourſe of the ſingular ſufficiency, and of the notable dexterity of ſpirite of this prime and peereleſſe Chiefetaine: and euen to this day is the memory of this notable victory preſerued in thoſe parts: for whereas the inhabitants of that Prouince haue a vſe and cuſtome (according to the laudable manner and vſage of the old and auncient ages in times paſt) to ſing ſongs and ſonnets in their ſolemne banquets and publique feaſts, containing a rehearſall of the moſt famous and noble deeds of their aunceſters, and of the worthy perſonages of that countrey; this victory eſpecially (as one of the moſt notable, and more excellent then all others) hath bene inſerted amongſt the reſt, and it is more often and commonly vſed in their ſongs & ballads then any other whatſoeuer. Infinit were the preſents that were ſent vnto Scanderbeg, infinite were the feaſts and banke
                  •
               s which were euery where frequented: and infinite were the congratulations which were vſed from all parts, according as that nation hath euer in ſuch caſes vſed and accuſtomed. This preſent victory ſeemed to haue annihilated and entinguiſhed the memorie of all thoſe loſſes and diſcomfitures which the Turks had ſuſtained, vnder Haly Baſſa and Muſtapba: yea all the honours and commendations purchaſed by their old and later actes, were now no more talked of in regard of this laſt exploit. The calamity of Belgrade ſeemed now fully & ſufficiently reuenged: and this reuenge had ſufficiently refreſhed and diſcharged euery man his minde, from all ſorrow, griefe, and ſadnes. The only pleaſure and whole delight of all men both ſtrangers & others, was to walke and wander vp and downe thoſe victorious fields, and often to viſit & ſuruey the grounds which did ſeeme yet to cary a froath with the bloud of the Mahometanes: their onely ſolace and recreation was to enquire of euery particularity, where ſuch an ambuſcado was laid in couert, and on which ſide the enemy was ſurprized & aſſailed? euen Mahomet himſelfe was no leſſe amaſed & maruelled at the ſtrangenes of this victory: for by a ſhamefull confeſsion of his owne feare, within a while after, he did allow the honour of this iourney, vnto his enemy: for when he ſaw his forces ſo broken & diſperſed, and had learned by the Baſſa the order of the battel, and the occaſion of his ouerthrow, (although perhaps there were many points wherein both the Generall & all the hoſt did deſerue worthily to be blamed) yet without any maner of reproofe giuen them, or in any ſort inueighing againſt them: he ſwallowed vp in ſilence (contrary to his wonted maner) the grief & bitternes of his ſorrow and diſcontentment. It behooued him now to thinke vpon the redeeming of the priſoners, eſpecially of the Saniake, whoſe impriſonment vexed and grieued him extreamely, and made him greatly aſhamed, in regard of his degree and the greatneſſe of his merites. Hee concluded therefore to take orderMahomet maketh meanes for the ranſoming of Meſſeit his Saniacke and other priſoners. for his deliuerance, and ſome other of the chiefeſt and moſt eſpeciall perſons: as for the reſt he made no reckoning of them. Wherefore the money was made ready & prouided, partly by the friendes and kinſemen of the priſoners, and partly out of the coffers of the Sultan, as the cuſtome and manner is. The onelie thing they ſtayed on was.

That Scanderbeg ſhould ſet downe the ſumme of their raunſome, and that ſome meſſenger ſhould be ſent from Epire, which might bring a ſafe conduct for them who were to deale in this matter. Scanderbeg at the requeſt of the Saniacke (who nominated two of his moſt faithfull and truſty ſeruants to that office) diſmiſſed them to go vnto the Sultan, and to procure ſome order for their deliuery: the ſumme demaunded was fifteene thouſand Crownes for the Saniacke his owne perſon, and about forty thouſand for the others, which was ſoone agreed vnto and graunted accordingly.
            Before that this Ambaſſade was to paſſe into Epire, Ottoman being deſtitute of allConſultation of Mahomet with his Baſſaes touching the war of Epire. good counſell, and being rather broken then chaſtiſed with ſo many & ſo great loſſes, did in vaine torment his mind perplexed with ſo many cares, and the ſundry opinions of his Baſſaes did diuerſly diſtract him, not knowing what courſe to take. Some aduiſed him wholly and altogether to abſtaine from the warre of Albany, till ſuch time as the tyrant being free and diſcharged from all other troubles and diſturbances, might himſelfe go in perſon with his beſt forces, and the whole ſtrength of his Empire, for the finall ſubuerſion of the Albanois. For by reaſon of his late misfortune in Hungarie, and the tumults newly raiſed in Miſia, he had but bad meanes then to vndertake or effect any ſuch matter. Others not miſliking nor reprouing the former opinion, did perſwade him to ſend a ſtrong garriſon to the confines of Macedony, which might be enioyned not to enterpriſe any thing vpon the enemy, neither of their owne voluntary motion, nor yet by any prouocation of their aduerſaries, but onely to haue a care to the ſafety & ſecurity of the frontiers. Many alſo (vpon the former reaſons of the wars wherewith the Sultan was encombred) thought it not amiſſe (and they had reaſon) if that a truce for certaine yeares were demanded of Scanderbeg: during the which, the Ottoman Empire might breath it ſelfe from ſo many miſchiefes, and till ſuch time as they might finde ſome better oportunity, to bring this fierce and vnruly enemy vnder the yoke of ſubiection: for the ſecond opinion ſeemed not to be allowable, becauſe in the middeſt of ſo many ambuſhments, and againſt ſuch ſtirring ſpirits as the Albanians were, there was no ſafety for any weake and ſmall garriſon: and to ſend thither anie ſtrong and puiſſant forces amiddeſt ſo many newe accidents, and in ſuch commotions and troubles of the warres, could not be done conueniently without a thouſand diſcommodities. This councell being the moſt profitable, albeit ſmally honourable, and in ſome ſort too too baſe and ſeruile, was beſt allowed by the greater part of the aſſembly. Mahomet for his part though this counſell did not a litle diſpleaſe him, who had alwaies abhorred to make ſhew of ſuch baſe and vile humor, yet becauſe he could not well compaſſe all matters, nor ſettle his affaires, hauing ſo many enemies conſpired againſt him, and his eſtate being in a manner rent a ſunder and diſtracted, with ſo many great occaſions, his proud and haughty courage did not thinke any thing what ſoeuer to be either ſhameful or infamous, or to his diſhonor. Hereupon he cauſed oneMahomet ſeeketh to haue truce with Scanderbeg. of thoſe to be called before him, who was to cary the ranſome of their companions, and to him he opened the whole ſecrets of his conceipts: enioyning him expreſly to deale with the Saniacke in his name, and to will him to take vpon him the charge and managing of this matter, and to confer with Scanderbeg vpon the ſame. He ſent alſo particular letters vnto the Saniack (which afterwards came into the hands of the Chriſtians) wherin he wrote vnto him: that in ſeeking the amity of the Albanois, and in the treating of the peace betweene them, he ſhould haue a ſpeciall care and good regard to the reputation and dignity of his Maieſty: for feare, leaſt if he ſhould ſhew himſelfe too affectionat or too humble in the purchaſing of the ſame, the enemy might grow too proud and inſolent, and fall to diſdaine both the demander & his demands equally and alike. The meſſenger went on his iorney more glad and chearfull for this his commiſsion;

then for the redemption of his owne perſon, and of his companions: for he was fully perſwaded, that now for a time this thorne would be drawen out of their feet, & that the Turks being in reſt and quietnes on thoſe parts, ſhould a litle breath & refreſh thēſelues, from ſo many trauels which they had endured. But his expectation was fruſtrat, & Mahomet found himſelfe much deceiued of his hope: as at other times both he & his father Amurath had bin the like. For when as Meſſeit (in counting of the money brought for their ranſome, did interpoſe and propound many ſpeeches vnto Scanderbeg according to the intent and inſtructions of his Lord & maſter: the Albanois tooke the money very willingly, but as touching thoſe motions & ouertures propoūded for the peace betweene them, he ſhewed himſelfe ſo vnwilling, that cutting off his talke, he would not ſuffer him to proceed with his ſpeeches, but gaue him this aunſwer.
            
               I haue not (ſaid he) ſo often heretofore euen in the worſt & hardeſt times of my aduerſity,Anſwer of Scanderbeg to Meſſeit refuſing to haue truce with Mahomet. refuſed the conditions of the peace which you then demaunded, to the intent I would now agree vnto thē in my proſperity: neither hath this my good fortune (ſuch as it is) ſo depriued me of the knowledge of mans eſtate and fraile condition, or of the inſtability of humaine nature, that I do dare to promiſe vnto my ſelf, the continuall & permanent poſſeſſion of the ſame: or that I do aſſure my ſelfe, that I will alwaies ſo inſolently diſdaine your amity. It may well be, that Fortune may put on her falſe maske and viſage, & may make vs in time petitioners vnto you for a peace perhaps far more ſhamefull & ignominious. Notwithſtanding whatſoeuer it be that the ſecret originall and occaſion of matters, and the vnknowen order of the deſtinies, may bring vppon a man: yet are not we determined at this time in any point to alter our mindes, or to detract any thing from our former reſolution. We do repute al kind of amity with you moſt ſhamefull and ignominious, as long as we ſee ſo many outrages & iniuries offred on all ſides vnto the Chriſtians: as long as we ſee ſo many wounds, and ſo much bloud lately and newly ſhed, wherewith both all Greece and the fieldes of Hungary are now ouerflowen. Shall we recompence the late loſſe of Morea with ſuch a peace? ſhall we with a moſt baſe and cowardly truce, ſhame and diſgrace that notable victory, and the late glory of the Hungarians before Belgrade? let Mahomet as long as he will ſeeke for peace, as for vs we will purchaſe our quietnes by the ſword: and hauing once gotten and attained it, we will by the ſword likewiſe ſeeke to maintaine it: and the rather for that it is not only your exceſsiue iniuries, or your notorious diſloialty, but a certaine naturall diſpoſition that hath made vs your enemies, & the hatred (wherwith the one of vs is armed and hardened againſt the other) is perpetual and immortall. For my part I am your enemy, euen by birth & by natiuity, and the enmity which I beare you is hereditary: my deſire is not ſo much to get me honor & reputatiō vpon you, as to ſeeke the iuſt deſerued reuenge of the bloud of my friends which you haue ſhed, and of the bondage both of my ſelfe and my people the Albanians: and I am fully reſolued, neuer to make an end of theſe my trauels, till ſuch time as I haue either reſtored my citizens to their auncient eſtate, or rendred this my life vnto you, to whō it is ſo hatefull.
            
            All this could not make the Saniacke to deſiſt from his purſuite: but putting him in mind, of the variable ſucces of wars, & withall repeating vnto him many accidents of diuers ages and times paſt, as fit examples to that purpoſe and effect, he told him, that if he did take ſo great a pleaſure, & were ſo deſirous of war: he might after the truce was once expired, returne to armes, and that he could neuer want occaſion to reuiue the wars: that he demanded only truce for ten yeares, during the which time the forces & courages of the Albanians might be greatly repaired, and might be the better able to attaine to a more notable reuenge, and to purchaſe themſelues new honor & reputation. Scanderbeg by litle and litle ſuffred himſelfe to be perſwaded, & he began ſomwhat

to relent from his firſt obſtinacy, ſeeming to hearken more willingy to the demands of the Saniacke Neuertheles he would not in any caſe yeeld to any abſtinency of arms, not ſo much as for a moneth only: except that both Sfetigrade and Belgrade might beMeiſſet Saniacke and other Turkes priſoners ranſomed. yeelded vnto him for a recompence. Thus without any thing concluded, did Meſſeit and his companions returne to their owne country: howbeit he had truce granted till ſuch time onely as he had acquainted the Turkiſh Monarch with the conditions propounded by Scanderbeg in caſe the peace proceeded. There were many other Turkes permitted to depart in the company of the Saniacke (beſides thoſe 40. which were ranſomed:) vnto whom the king of Epire did freely, and of the magnanimity of his owne mind, grant their liberty, ſuffring them without ranſome to returne into their country: the reſt alſo which remained, were deliuered out of priſon: ſome of them becommingScanderbeg ſendeth preſents & ambaſſades to moſt chriſtian princes perſwading them to concord and to take armes againſt the Turkes. Chriſtians and being baptized, did plant themſelues to dwel in Epire: the reſidue were diperſed abroad for preſents in a maner to all the kings of chriſtendome: to the kings of France and Spaine, beſides thoſe ſlaues was ſent a great quantity of horſes and other ſpoiles of all ſorts: and to other Princes were ſent other the like preſents. The citie of Rome as it had bin filled with the renowme of this victory, ſo was it repleniſhed with many of the trophees & ornamēts of the ſame. Thus did Scanderbeg determine to the vttermoſt of his power to bind vnto him by his curteſie almoſt the whole world. Together with theſe giftes and preſents did he ſend ſolemne ambaſſades, who had giuen them in charge to exhort all Princes Chriſtian to concord and amity, and earneſtly to pray them, that they would now at the length awake out of their long & dead ſleepe, and that they would chaſe away that miſt of darknes wherewith they had bin ſo blinded: and conſider more aduiſedly, the imminent ruine which was threatned to the Chriſtian liberty and religion: that they would at the laſt ſeeke to redeeme it from the miſerable and wretched yoke and ſeruitude of the Infidels & Mahometans, otherwiſe they ſhould be well aſſured, that the plague which by litle and litle did grow within their bowels, would in the end pierce into their hearts. Scanderbeg ſent alſo (which I may not omit) diuers preſents vnto his great friend Alphonſus, which were ſo magnificent, that they caried the ſhew of a very beautifull and goodly triumph. Ameſe his nephew was ſent alſo together with theſe preſentes vnto Naples, where he was kept in a moſt ſtraight and cloſe priſon, for the Sultan tooke no care for his deliuerance: and if he had made any ſuch motion, I doe aſſure my ſelfe, that all the golde of the world would not haue redeemed him, for he was condemned to perpetuall impriſonment.
            The mind & laſt reſolution of the king of Epire, touching the treaty of the peace between them being related vnto Mahomet: he eſteemed ſo ſlightly of the matter, that he would not vouchſafe him any aunſwere: ſuch was the haughtines and fiercenes of his minde, notwithſtanding, that he were hard preſſed on all ſides with infinite affaires of great importance, both from the partes of Hungary, and by daily diets and aſſemblies which he knew very well were continually gathered againſt him throghout all chriſtendome, by the procurement and earneſt meanes of the Popes holines. He prouided therefore a moſt ſtrong and puiſſant garriſon to be ſent into Epire, for the ſurety of hisHamur and Synam ſent with two ſundry garriſons to defend the Turkiſh frontiers againſt the Albanois. countrey, according to that which (as we lately told you) had bin before decreed in his priuat and ſecret councell. Hamur and Synam had the charge of this commiſsion, both of them being expert and polliticke warriours, and ech of them had 10000. horſe, and 4000. foote: which number was iudged to be ſufficient both to weary out the forces of Epire, and to haue terrified euen a moſt ſtout and puiſſant enemy: notwithſtanding ech of them was expreſly forbidden to attempt any thing againſt him, whatſoeuer occaſion and oportunity were offered them, only he recommended vnto them, & gaue them in charge to looke to the defence of thoſe limits which were aſsigned vnto thē.
            The whole ſommer being ſpent in this maner, both on the one ſide & the other, it

was now about the middeſt of Autumne: at which time theſe troups being diſlodged from Conſtantinople, the report thereof preuented their cōming, & was brought to the eares of Scanderbeg, who was ignorant of all this practiſe, for that he relied vppon the word of the Saniack, & he did expect ſome anſwer from the Sultan, whether he would either accept or reiect the ſumme of his demaunds: for this cauſe departing from Croie with all ſpeed poſſible, he went preſently into Dibria, where hauing leauied new forces, & renued his old companies, he attended the aduerſary with great deuotion, who ſtaid not long but that they came within 10. miles of the Albanois, where they encamped: but did not in any ſort enter vpon their confines. Scanderbeg ſtirred not at all, but hearing that the Infidels approched, he preſently ordered his troups ready to the fight, & ſo kept himſelf quiet within his camp. For the common bruit which ran vpon the comming of theſe forces, did giue them out to be ſo great & puiſſant, that it made himHamur and Synam with their forces encamped neare Alchria in Macedony. to imagine, that the enemy would come & ſeeke him out in that ſame place, & would not ſticke to aſſault him in his campe. And afterwards hauing notice by his eſpials and skouts, placed vpon the mountains, that they were encamped vnder Alchria, & that al their cariage were diſpoſed in that place: he ſuppoſed that the morning next folowing after they had refreſhed their bands, they would make towardes him, and offer to giue him battel: wherefore in the darke of the night, and in great ſilence & ſecreſie, he filled certaine woddy places, & vallies neare adioyning with armed men, thinking to haue encloſed them in the middeſt of his forces, and ſo to haue ſurprized them, if they had come forward according as he expected. Two daies and 2. nights did he expect them in this maner: but he could neither haue a ſight of the enemy, nor yet heare any newes or tidings of them. Wherefore Scanderbeg being impatient of all delaies, determined the day following to go and viſit them, and to prouoke them forth to fight: but word was broght him, that the hoaſt of the Infidels being deuided into two parts, Hamur did abide ſtil at Alchria, & that Sinam with the reſidue of the army, did take the champion plaine fields of Pologue towards Mocrea, where was the commō entry into the lowerSynam marcheth with half the Turkiſh forces towardes Mocrea & the lower Dibria. 
               Dibria & Modriſſa. For Alchria where Hamur did make his abode, was adioyning to the vpper Dibria & to Sfetigrade. Thus with notable aduiſe, they lay cloſe vpon both the Prouinces of Dibria: to the intent they might hold the Albanians in continual alarums, both on the one ſide & the other. Betweene theſe two garriſons or armies, there was 30. miles at the leaſt: for ſo much is it from Modriſſa to Sfetigrade. Wherefore the king of Epire hauing drawn together his ambuſhments that lay here and there diſperſed, and hauing ioyned all his forces in one campe, determined to leauy a new ſupply for the ſtrengthning of his bandes, to the intent he might the more conueniently part them into ſeuerall quarters, & ſo prouide for the preuenting of all perils on either ſide. All things being ſufficiently prepared, and his troups being quickly augmented with 1500. footmen, newly leauied (for it was not poſsible ſo ſodainely and readily to leauie horſmen) he deuided them as ſpeedily, though not into like and equall numbers: Tanuſe, and one of the Streezes Scanderbeg his nephewes, and Peic Manuell, with the third part of thoſe forces were appointed to haue the cuſtody of the lower Dibria: & in caſe they found Synam any thing earneſtly enclined to the ſpoile of the countrey, that they ſhould make head againſt him, & repreſſe his attempts: for on that ſide was the danger much leſſer, & the entrance into the confines of the Albanians was the more difficult, by reaſon that the places were not ſo acceſsible, but (being naturally ſtrong and defenced) were entermingled with the vallies of Mocrea, and with many rough and ragged mountaines, ech ſeuered & deuided within themſelues, yet ſo entangled & combined, that although they were reckonned and comprehended within the lower Dibria, did they diſtinguiſh neuertheles the realm of Albany from the territories of the miſcreants. Notwithanding, both Tanuſe & his company were ſtraightly charged, that they

ſhould not in any caſe ſcatter them ſelues, nor be drawen out of thoſe limittes whichTanuſee with others appointed for the defence of the lower Dibria againſt Sinam were preſcribed them, nor that they ſhould not in any ſort aduenture vppon the enemy, but onely in the defence of their owne ſafety. The reſt of the army did Scanderbeg retaine to himſelfe in the vpper Dibria, hauing alſo Moſes in his company. Wherfore hauing thus reſerued the better part of his forces, and eſpecially his horſemen, & conſidering that the paſſages there were more free & open for the enemie to enter on that ſide into Albanie, he determined (if he could) to draw forth the Infidell to hazard the fortune of the field, and to aduenture the chance of a ſet battell. And he made no longScanderbeg marcheth againſt Hamur purpoſing to draw him to the fight. delay, nor dwelt not vpon thoſe dumpiſh conceipts of his imaginations: but (becauſe winter approched, which is an enemy to warlike exploits) before the daylight of the next morning did appeare, he departed from his campe, hauing with him 1000. horſe, and tooke his way directly toward Alchria. Before his departure he very warily conueyed a good number of ſouldiers into certaine thicke woods and other daungerous places, for feare of being encloſed betweene Sfetigrade and the campe of the enemie. Hauing marched on for a while in the darke of the night, & placed his men here and there in ambuſhments neare the towne, he went backe againe to his campe: and not reſting him ſelfe any thing at all (for that now it was about the dawning of the day) he commanded his companies to march, & to carie with them victuals onely for one dayes prouiſion. As for the cariages and their tents, they were not at all remoued, but he left a ſtrong troupe of good ſoldiers for their ſafegard & defence. The whole morning was in a maner ſpent in theſe preparations and in marching: ſo that he came at length within a mile of his ambuſcado. By that was it time to take their repaſts, and it behoued him to deuiſe vpon ſome new meane how to begin the fight, and to drawe forth the enemy. This was an eaſie matter for men that had bene long practiſed in that facultie, and yet neuertheleſſe it required great wiſdome and good aduiſe. Moſes deſired to haue the honor of that employment, and it was not denied him: and in verie truth amongſt all the Albanians hardly could a man haue choſen any other more fit or expert to entiſe forth the enemy, & to ſurpriſe him. Scanderbeg gaue vnto him 600 horſe, doubting leaſt if he ſhould go more meanly accompanied, the policy might be the more eaſily diſcouered. But altogether in vaine was this his enterpriſe: for Moſes hauing ſpent the greater part of the day in fruitleſſe skirmiſhes, returned againe to Scanderbeg, whom he found at his wittes end, and not knowing what courſe to take againſt the enemy: for to ſet vpon the Painim within his trenches with his whole forces, both the diſcommodity of the place, & the towne being aboue him, which commanded ouer the place, vnder the ſuccor whereof, Hamur had entrenched himſelf, did certainly aſſure him that he could not do it without euidēt danger. Nothwithſtanding hauing lead his forces to a hil neare adioyning, he ſtaid there vntill night, and then he made a ſigne to his ambuſhments, that they ſhould retire to the body of his army: the morning following he diſplaied his enſignes in the field, & by light inuaſions, he waſted all the countrey on that ſide: thinking by the indignity of that miſerable ſight, to haue moued the enemy to make forth of his trenches, but the Pagan continuing in his wonted patience, & diſdaining the defence of a thing of ſo ſmal value, & which might be ſo perillous vnto him, kept himſelf ſtill within his campe: notwithſtanding I haue heard, that immediatly after the hauocke made by the Albanians, & euen as they wereMeſſenger ſent from Hamur to Scanderbeg. ready to truſſe vp their baggage, there came an Herald from Hamur to Scanderbeg, to acquaint him with the intent and meaning of the Ottoman: and beſides to pray and intreat him, that he would not weary both him ſelfe and his enemies with this vnprofitable kind of reuenge, by which he did deſtroy rather that which was his owne, then what was belonging vnto others: and conſidering that no man made any meanes, nor hadde any intent to hinder him, but that they did leaue all vnto him to vſe it at

his owne will & pleaſure: whereupon the king of Albany is ſaid to haue returned himAnſwer of Scanderbeg to the meſſage of Hamur. this anſwer: that well might they for a time delay and put off their misfortune, but they ſhould not be able altogether to auoyd it: for that he was reſolutely determined to ſpare for no dangers nor miſhaps, but he would in the end bring and enforce them to the combat. In this maner did they depart a ſunder, for the coldneſſe of the winter now beginning to approch, it was thought requiſite that theſe determinations ſhould be deferred to another ſeaſon. Wherefore Moſes being appointed with his ordinary bands to haue the cuſtodie and defence of the prouince, and the moſt part of the army being licenced to depart, Scanderbeg in the meane time with a ſmall company went to viſit the lower Dibria, which was then vnder the commaund of Tanuſee. There likewiſe did he not forget to put in practiſe the like ſleights and pollicies, in hope to haue entrapped Synam: but all his cunning and deuiſes vaniſhed away to nothing: wherefore leauing there one of the Streezes with a very ſmall company, Scanderbeg him ſelfe tooke his iourney towards Croy.
            
            During this winter was Moſes very troubleſome vnto the Mahometiſts, & he continually diſquieted them with his daily alarums: notwithſtāding it was more in ſhew then in ſubſtance, and therfore Scanderbeg willed both him & thoſe of the garriſon of Modriſſa to deſiſt from purſuing any ſuch further attēpts, for that they loſt both their time & their labor. Moreouer it is reported, that thoſe of Mahomet his garriſon, as they had before in times paſt, ſo did they now againe vehemently pray the Chriſtians, that they would not with ſuch obſtinacy ſeeke to purchaſe vnto thēſelues an enemy, who would not be drawn to haue any hoſtility with them: inſomuch that neither condeſcending nor according any thing to their deſire, nor yet much contradicting their requeſts, matters were protracted and drawen on till the comming of the new yeare. The ſpring being now come, Scanderbeg reaſſembled his forces, and lead them againſt1457. the Barbarians, hoping by his daily skirmiſhes, to draw them forth to fight. One daie amongſt the reſt he had a deſire, being entred with great brauery vpon the country of Alchria, to force and giue an onſet vpon the campe of the enemy, but he was ſoone repulſed without any great labour, both by the liuely reſiſtance of the Infidels, as alſo by the ſituation & aduantage of the place, which of it ſelfe was very ſtrong, and hardly to be approched. The Epirot, how beit for that time he was diſappointed of his hope, yet being no whit diſcoraged, determined to augment his troupes, that ſo he might be the better able to effect his deſire, but he made no great haſt to put it in execution, both becauſe the glory and profit would be very ſmall that would grow by that attēpt, as alſo for that it could not be compaſſed without great perill and manifeſt danger: neuertheleſſe he maintained the enterpriſe, onely to the intent that the ſouldier being kept ſtill exerciſed in armes (as it were in their particular trade and profeſsion) ſhould not waxe 
                  •
               lothfull, and be ſpoiled with idleneſſe.
            Thus whileſt that the warres went coldly on, both on the one ſide and the other,Hamur conferreth with Scanderbeg, & perſwadeth him to peace. 
               Hamur ſuppoſing that it would not only be for the great profit & publike good of the prouince, but that it would purchaſe himſelfe in particular great honor & reputation with the Sultan, if he could by his dexteritie diſſwade Scanderbeg from the purſuite of armes: he procured from him, by meanes of one of his people, licence to come and ſpeake with him. Hereupon purpoſely he went to Dibria, carying with him very rich preſents, where Scanderbeg at that time did ſoiourne with his campe. After mutuall greeting and ſalutations paſt betweene them, he tooke occaſion to begin his ſpeeches vpon the great benefits and commodities which enſue of peace, & vpon that concerning which he had before time treated with him▪ & ſo by a long circuit of words he endeuored to alter his mind, and to perſwade him to yeeld to his requeſt. Afterwards giuing him to vnderſtand the particular deſire which he had to be in his good grace

and fauour: he came to the end and concluſion of his ſpeech, wherein he oftentimes repeated and ſounded it in his eares: how goodly and pleaſant a thing it would be to ſee thoſe two great and puiſſant Princes conioyned and vnited in amity and concord. Scanderbeg would not with diſcurteſie reiect the gifts of the Barbarian, but accepting them very graciouſly, did returne him other in counter change of no leſſe value. And as touching that which he propounded vnto him concerning the league of peace with his Maiſter, he made him this anſwer, as it were in choler and diſcontentment.
            So ſuſpected (quoth he) is the faith, & ſo captious and deceiptfull is the demeanourAnſwer of Scanderbeg to the ſpeeches of Hamur perſwading him to peace. 
               of Mahomet towardes vs, that we can hardly digeſt and endure any ſpeeches of his friendſhip & amitie. It is not long ſince that we had an Ambaſſade frō him, by which we vnderſtood the ſumme of his demaunds: and we returned him againe with ſuch conditions as we thought meet and conuenient for the honor and profit of the eſtate of Albany: whereupon we expected his anſwer (for as touching other matters he was at libertie to follow his owne will and pleaſure:) but whileſt that we reſted in this expectation, and that the treatie remained in ſuſpence on either partie, and though we in the meane time had layed aſide our armes: yet did he ſo deſpiſe and contemne vs, that he thought vs vnworthy of any anſwer, which he ought not to haue done to his mortal enemy. Wherfore touching this motion of peace which thou haſt propounded, we are not minded to heare any further ſpeeches: but as concerning thy ſelfe in particular, if there be any thing wherein we make any offers of curteſie to our enemy in the midſt of our common rancor and hoſtility, there ſhall be no default nor goodwill wanting, ſo farre forth as thy deſerts ſhall require it. As touching the ſurceaſing from armes, and giuing ouer the ordinary rodes and excurſions of our ſouldiers, I can promiſe thee nothing, neither will I tye my ſelf to any thing: for I cannot be drawne to like of any appointment: but ſeeing that I my ſelfe haue bene ſo diſdained, as greatly do I diſdaine to grant it. And albeit our vehement and ardent deſire of reuenge, in regard of thy owne honeſt and good cariage, may be ſomewhat abated and mitigated, yet aſſure thy ſelfe, that our publike hatred and enmitie ſhalbe in no part diminiſhed. And if peraduēture either the varietie of times or of fortune, do make vs that we ſhew not our ſelues ſo fauorable in this caſe: yet (it may be) that this our priuat friendſhip ſhall not be altogether vnprofitable, but that it may fall both to thy benefit & honor.
            
            
               Hamur, after he had kiſſed the hand of him that was both his friend and his enemy, retired himſelf to his company, being neither altogether contented nor yet diſcontented with this anſwer. Si
                     ••
                  m in like maner within a while after preſented himſelf with the like flatteries before Scāderbeg, at ſuch time as he vnderſtood of his being in thoſe quarters: and he found him not more obſtinate, then did his companion: for both the common people, and the moſt part of the Albanian ſouldiers enclining to the peace which had bene ſo long demanded, did ſhew that they wold not make it very ſtrange nor difficult to accord and agree vnto it. Wherfore their minds growing by degrees to like of eaſe and quietneſſe, the garriſons were in ſome ſort leſſened and diminiſhed: in ſuch ſort, that that Sommer was ſpent and paſſed ouer without any troubles or tumults, or rather in great ſlouth and idleneſſe.
            About this time happened the ſorowfull and vnhappy death of Alphonſus king ofThe death of Alphōſus king of Naples. 
               Naples, the report whereof being brought to Scanderbeg (who was then buſily employed in ciuill matters concerning his eſtate, and in other affaires of the prouince
                  •
               ) it did ſo ſequeſter and withdrawe him from all occaſions both publique and priuate, and it did ſo wound his heart with ſuch extreme ſorowe and deepe griefe, that (hauing loſt all remembrance of his late victorie, and letting paſſe all care and regard of his enemies) for many dayes together in great diſcomfort he mourned for the

loſſe of his deareſt and beſt friend. And to ſpeake the truth, this king was not vnworthie to be lamented with the long and continuall plaints and teares of the Epirots and other his confederates, but euen the whole world might well deplore his death. And how beit the cleare teſtimonie of his heroycall vertues hath bene publiſhed and highlyThe praiſe and commendation of Alphonſus king of Naples. aduaunced by ſo many worthy and excellent perſonages, yet might it be imputed vnto me for a great fault & ouerſight, if I ſhould not by the way (as it were) in a word or two touch it. It may well be ſayd: that when this Prince died, there departed the onely and beſt Mecaenas that then liued. For all degrees and qualities of perſons, both learned and martiall, as wel ſcholers as ſouldiers were left deſolate & deſtitute of their beſt patron, and had iuſt cauſe to be ſad and ſorowfull for his loſſe. With him was extinguiſhed the iuſt and true reward both of letters and of armes, and the true ornament of all commendable exerciſes. There was not his like ſeene for many ages before: nor (be it ſpokē without the diſpleaſure of the poſterity) was there euer any one ſince him that was ſo vpright an eſtimator of the vertues and merits of other men. And it is no ſmall matter to be wondred at, that being a Prince of ſo rare & incomparable curteſie, affabilitie, clemencie and liberalitie, yet no one Prince of his time did leaue ſo great riches and treaſures behind him. Good cauſe therfore had Scanderbeg to bewaile and lament the loſſe of ſo truſtie and puiſſant a friend: from whom (if we reſpect either his abilitie, or his willingneſſe) he might at all times and vpon all occaſions haue drawne any thing, both for his honor, and for his profit, as out of a plentifull treaſurie & ſtorehouſe prepared for his owne priuate and particular vſe. One thing onely there was, which did in ſome ſort comfort him, & aſſwaged the bitterneſſe of his grief that was that he ſaw himſelf depriued ofſo good a frend, by the extremity & courſe of his aged years, and not by any rigorous or iniurious right of nature, or by other caſualty. That pietie and dutie which reſted on his part to be performed in this behalf, he diſpatched it preſently with all prudence and celeritie, ſending away with all ſpeed his AmbaſſadoursAmbaſſidors ſent by Scāderbeg to Ferdinād king of Naples vpon the deceaſe of his father Alphonſus vnto Ferdinand his ſonne: both to deplore the accident of the king his father, as alſo to congratulate him (as the maner is) of his new crowne and dignitie: and by the remembrance of his fathers benefits, & of the friendſhip and amitie which he bare to the eſtate of Albanie: to renew and increaſe this alliance and confederacy between them. This ambaſſade was alſo accompanied & furniſhed with moſt ſumptuous preſents, as he had alwayes vſed and accuſtomed: and they had expreſſe charge and order to bring backe Ameſe with them, who had neuer ceaſed to practiſe and make meanes by the authoritie and fauour of his friends, and the commiſeration of his owne miſfortune, that he might be reconciled and reſtored to the fauour and good grace of his vncle. He was as yet priſoner vnder ſure and ſafe cuſtodie: and albeit in this chaunge of the affaires of Naples, & in this new greatneſſe of Ferdinand, there were many and great alterations: and that in this new and publike time of ioye, the priſons were ſet open, & moſt of the priſoners ſet at libertie, yet to the intent that Scanderbeg might not haue cauſe to find himſelfe aggrieued, if he ſhould haue bene freed, there was eſpeciall care and order taken to keepe him ſtill in ward, as a certaine & ſure pledge of his vncles iuſt anger. This Ambaſſade was receiued and entertained with great honor & good cheare, ſuch as the tumult and ſtirres of that new kingdome would permit: for ſo it was in very truth, that all things were then in trouble & diſorder: and the peace of all Italie was broken and diſturbed by the deceaſe of the late king Alphonſus.
            
            
               Ameſe being brought backe into Epire, was againe committed to priſon, and carefullyAmeſe returned into Epire: and reconciled to his vncles fauour. kept in ſure and ſafe cuſtody by the order of his vncle, though not ſo ſtraightly as before: and that ſeueritie and rancour which yet remained, began by litle and litle to be aſſwaged, by the daily lamentations, teares and petitions of his nephew: in ſuch ſort

that within a while after of a fatherly loue and tender affection, he gaue him both his life & liberty, and reſtored him to his former eſtate & dignities. Then Ameſe bethinking himſelf of the gages which he had left with Mahomet, was in great feare & doubt that if he ſhould take the benefit of his vncles liberality, it might fall out euill with his wife and children. For this cauſe, after he had with great reuerence and humilitie yeelded thanks vnto the king for his great bountie and ſingular fauour, he ſpake vnto him in this maner.
            Sir, it hath pleaſed you only in reſpect of your own patience & clemency withoutSpeech of Ameſa to Scanderbeg vpon his deliuerie out of priſon. any particular merits or deſerts of mine, to haue a regard of my ſafetie, and to grant me my life: it is reaſon therfore that I alſo haue ſome care to the life and welfare of others: for feare leaſt if my ouer carefull deſire to maintaine my owne ſafety & eſtate do make me to embrace your liberalitie, it may cauſe me to looſe them by your beneficence & bountie, which I haue heretofore too careleſly loſt by mine owne diſloyaltie. My poore and guiltleſſe wife is abiding with the Sultan, my tender infants and innocent children are there likewiſe: as yet are they ſafe and aliue, and ſo long will Mahomet ſuffer them to liue, as he ſhall thinke me to be your priſoner. But if the cruell tyrant ſhall once perceiue, that by giuing me my life & libertie, you haue eſtranged me from him, and that I am retired to your obeiſſance, the rigorous and ſeuere creditor, will preſently either teare them in peeces, or will make ſale of thoſe gages of my faith and promiſe, and their innocent bloud ſhall beare the paine of their fathers fault. It behoueth me therefore (if your Maieſtie thinke it good) that with ſome deuice I delude the Ottoman, to the intent that I may preſerue thoſe my pledges, and till ſuch time as I may finde ſome good oportunitie to free them for altogether. This night will I flie out of the towne, as though without your knowledge I had broken priſon, and ſo will I returne vnto Mahomet. There, partly by detracting and ſlaundering of their actions, and partly by hearing them detracted by others in the preſence of that credulous Prince (as I was wont to do when I was in fauour with him) I will bring him into a perſwaſion by my diſſimulation and faigning: that I am as much or more deuote to his ſeruice now at this preſent then I was at anytime heretofore: to the intent that all matter of miſtruſt being taken out of his mind (if he haue conceiued any during the time of my impriſonment, and by reaſon of my long aboad with you, I may be the better able in the end to get away with all my family. It is in you much to further this my inuention, if you will make ſhew openly, that you are highly diſcontented at my flight, and doe impute the fault to them, vnto whoſe charge and cuſtody you had committed me. In the meane time, you may be fully aſſured, and I humbly beſeech and intreat you ſo to thinke of me, that during all that time which I ſhall be there expecting the houre of my eſcape, you ſhall haue me to be a faithfull eſpiall and intelligencer, to aduertiſe you of all things which the tyraunt ſhall conſult or determine vppon. He ſhall not imagine any thing, he ſhall make no preparation that ſhall come to my knowledge, but you ſhall haue preſent and ſpeedie notice of it.
            
            
               Scanderbeg did eaſily accord to his requeſt: telling him that ſeeing he had grauntedAnſwer of Scanderbeg to the ſpeech of Ameſe. him his life, and all other things which might ſerue thereunto, either for an ornament, or to his contentment: that hee ſhould not any way hinder him to vſe it to his beſt profite and aduauntauge: that he would in the name of God take it and employ it to the preſeruation of him ſelfe, and thoſe alſo who might lawfully claime and challenge him to be their debtour, both for their liues and alſo for their liberty. Go thy waies therefore (quoth he) take thy time and do as thou ſeeſt cauſe, and onec at the length correct thine owne folly whileſt thou haſt time and leiſure ſo to doe.

We do giue credit to thy ſpeeches, and do allow of thy enterprize. If thou doeſt giue any faith or credit to the Barbarian, or doeſt continue & ſoiorne any long time in his companie: thou ſhalt neither hurt nor deceiue any body but thy ſelfe only: for thou muſt thinke that thou ſhalt bring both thy ſelfe and thine into extreme danger both of bodie and of ſoule. At what time ſoeuer thou returneſt, thou canneſt not do any thing more to our liking and contentment, and thou ſhalt be alwaies kindly and hartily welcome.
            All things being conueyed & accompliſhed according to the plot which they had layed: Ameſe by the meanes of his vncle, was ſoone ſhifted both out of priſon and our of Croy. The next morning his flight being publiſhed and ſpread abroad, the negligence of his keepers was reprooued with ſome ſharpe and hard words. At his comming to Conſtantinople, he did ſoone and eaſily perſwade the Sultan what he liſted. Notwithſtanding he was not fully and wholly reſtored to his former eſtate, honours and penſions, which had bene at the firſt beſtowed vpon him: the default whereof was not becauſe his faith was in any ſort ſuſpected, but for that ſuch was the iniquity and defect of his fortune. As concerning his returne againe into Epire, all his promiſes fell to be vaine, and ſorted to no effect, were it that he tooke no care, or made no account of it, o
                  •
                that he wanted the meanes and oportunitie to conuey himſelfe away from thence. Whatſoeuer was the cauſe thereof, the report is that within few monethes after he died at Conſtantinople, leauing there behind him both his wife and his children. Many do hold that Mahomet cauſed him to be poiſoned, being not ableAmeſe poiſonned by the Turke at Conſtantinople. to ſuffer and endure him in his ſight, whom he held to be the author of his memorable deſaſter and miſfortune in Emathia. Thus when he leaſt ſuſpected and miſtruſted, there did he finde the vengeance and puniſhment of his treaſon. Such was the end of this perſonage, worthy no doubt to haue his name made immortall, if the greatneſſe of his minde, which was ſo greedy of raigne and Empire, had bene by nature ſeaſoned and tempered with ſome more moderation of ſpirite. But he that would be the chiefe and aboue all others, and could not endure the gracious and gentle yoke of his vncle, it happened vnto him as to thoſe of whom Plato ſpeaketh: who ſhunning the ſmoke and ſhadow of ſeruitude, doe fall into the very flame and raging fire of bondage.
            
            All this while did Hamur and Synam continue in quiet, not being in any ſort moleſted by Scanderbeg, vnleſſe that the licenciouſneſſe of the ſouldiers might ſometimes perhaps, without his leaue and licenſe, innouatand make ſome change and alteration. He himſelfe riding vp and downe the countrey, ſometimes amongſt the Dibrians, and ſomtimes in other places of the Prouince, did erect many buildings, and enlarged many things to the benefit and ornament of the Prouince, eſpecially in Emathia: where many goodly markes of antiquity lay defaced and ouerthrowen. The Ottoman in the meane time ceaſed not by the hands of Hamur, and Synam ſtill to ſollicit and to ſet forward the matter which he had ſo many times aſſaied: for the idleneſſe and long reſt of the Chriſtians, did put him in a certaine and aſſured hope, that he ſhould attaine to the end of his deſires: but hee could neuer effect any thing touching the generall truce which he ſo deſired: how beit that Scanderbeg did obſerue his priuate amity with the people of the Ottoman, by meanes whereof the minds of all men being by litle and litle allured with the ſweetneſſe of reſt and quietneſſe, the hatred and enmity on both partes began to grow more moderate, and all the effectes of a publique and generall peace, the bare name and title thereof onely excepted came to haue their full force and operation.
            The end of the ninth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE TENTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THE warre betweene Mahomet Emperour of the Turks & Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia. The originall, continuance, the variable accidents and ſucceſſe of the warre of Naples betweene the families of Arragon and Aniow, with the deſcent and actes of the kings, of Naples to the time of Ferdinand the ſonne of Alphonſus. Iohn the ſonne of Rene Duke of Aniow warring vpon Ferdinand king of Naples, is ayded by the Count Picenin and the ſubiects of Ferdinand who rebell againſt him. Ferdinand ayded by the Pope and the Duke of Milan his confederates, and being ouerthrowen in two battels is beſieged within Barletta. An Ambaſſade is ſent from Ferdinand and his confederates to Scanderbeg praying his ayde againſt the Duke of Aniow. Scanderbeg making truce with Mahomet paſſeth with an armie by ſea into Italie, and raiſeth the ſiege of Barletta. The armie of the Pope and the Duke of Milan ioyne with Scanderbeg. The battell of Segian betweene Picenin and Scanderbeg, wherein the armie of Iohn Duke of Aniow being diſcomfited, he flyeth out of Italie into France. Ferdinand is restored to his kingdome and reconciled to his ſubiects by Scanderbeg, who hauing bene highly honoured by the Pope and the Princes of Italie, and royally feaſted by Ferdinand, hath certen townes in Apulia giuen vnto him and his heires, and that done he returneth againe with his armie into Epyre.
            
            
               IT is moſt euident and apparant, that the changes and alterations which do occaſion the ruines & grieuous accidents of Empires & eſtates by ſeditions or warres either ciuill or forraigne, do not happen in this world by any fatall kind of deſtiny: eſpecially, if they be ſuch as they fall together in diuers and ſundry places, or neere about one and the ſametime. For we ſee that ſuch changes do neuer chance, but that firſt ſome frantique humors, & inordinate deſires in the ſpirits of great perſonages do alwaies preceed & go before them: and they are the ordinary meanes to ſtirre vp the authors of ſuch accidents to moue or to prouoke needleſſe & vnneceſſary wars. Whereby you may ſee, that the iudgement peruerted, & the furious paſſions of Princes are the firſt & next puniſhments of their ſins and offences, and the originall cauſes of their ruine & miſerable end. For when God (being angred at their iniquities) doth draw ſome men to the iuſt execution of their deſerued puniſhment, he doth depriue them of their ſenſes, & he doth ſo bind & ſhut

vp their eies, that they doe inconſideratly caſt themſelues headlong into the gulfe of their owne perdition which they haue drawne vpon themſelues for want of good aduiſe & counſell. For the reaſonable part of their mind, and the naturall vnderſtanding being troubled and diſtracted by that inueglement & blindnes laid vpon them, doth produce erronious counſels: and their mad and outragious affections do carrie and tranſport them out of the bounds of reaſon, and make them cruell & vnſatiable, euen without any reſpect of their owne liues and welfare. Hence it is that rancours, partialities & diſtruſts do proceede & haue their originall: and then of theſe do ariſe wars both ciuill and forraigne, in the which men being drowned and ouerwhelmed, they find themſelues plagued and afflicted with notable miſchiefes and calamities, or with perpetuall ruine and endleſſe deſtruction.
            Now ſeeing the forepaſſed ages of antiquitie haue often felt the like reuolutions of eſtates & gouernments in the body of the Chriſtian cōmonwealth (by means wherof the Turkes and Mahumetiſts haue appropriated vnto themſelues the Empire of Conſtantinople, and haue gotten firme footing in their Signiorie, encreaſing it exceſſiuely only with the reliques of the eſtate of the Chriſtians) we ought therefore to acknowledge & confeſſe, that all thoſe chaunges haue happened by the ſecret and immutable decree of God for the puniſhment of our ſins and impieties. For in ſtead of reforming our ſelues by his diuine admonitions, and making profit of thoſe examples, which he from time to time hath ſent vs, not only the Kings and Potentates ſecular & temporall: but euen thoſe alſo who were the chiefe Prelats, and had the rule & gouernment of the Church, would neuer be drawen to conſider of the ſame, but neglecting their owne duties, ſuffred themſelues to be caried away by fond & fooliſh deſires, & by the vnreaſonable ambition of their corrupt humors, ſtirring vp troubles and lamentable tragedies both by Schiſmes & diſſentions amongſt thēſelues, & by mutuall hatreds & diuiſions amongſt the peoples of all eſtates chriſtian: by means whereof, they haue let ſlip out of their hands, and vtterly loſt (which I cannot but deplore and lament) the moſt excellent & fitteſt occaſion that could euer haue happened, to tame the pride and inſolencie of the Painims with eaſe and facility: and to aboliſh both the law and memory of the Turkes out of Europe. The order of the times, and the courſe of this my hiſtorie do admoniſh me to make ſome mention, and to diſcourſe of this matter.
            You haue heard how Mahomet being beaten in one yeare with a double misfortune in Hungary & in Epyre, was brought to this exigent & neceſſity to demand peaceVVarre betweene Mahomet king of Turkes and the Perſians. Vſuncaſſan king of Cappadocia and Armenia. Malaoncre or Demire king of Perſia. Gampſa Sultan of the Parthians. Deſpina daughter of Iohn Cō
                  nenes Emperor of Trapezond. Ambaſſade of Vſuncaſſan to Mahomet. or at leaſt a long truce, of one who was but a meane & pettie Prince of Albany, to the intent he might breath himſelfe a litle from ſo many miſchiefes & grieuous loſſes, & to reeſtabliſh his eſtate which was ſore ſhaken & encombred. On the other ſide you are to know, that in a maner at one and the ſame time, Vſuncaſſan (diſcended of the Aſſumbeians of the Turkiſh race) and king of Cappadocia, Armenia, & other Prouinces neere adioyning, hauing lately ſlaine in battell Malaoncre, or (as others will) Demire king of the Perſians, a Prince iſſued from the auncient ſtock of Gampſa great Sultan of the Parthians: & hauing vſurped his Realme & Seepter, did ioyne himſelf in mariage with Deſpina the daughter of Iohn Comnenes Emperour of Trapezond, and the cauſe why theſe two Monarches did ſo contract alliance together, was to be the better able to preuaile againſt Mahomet king of the Turkes.
            This new and gallant Conqueror Vſuncaſſan being puffed vp with the wind of his proſperous fortune, and with the forementioned croſſes and aduerſities of Mahomet, did ſend vnto him an ambaſſade with moſt rich and ſumptuous preſents, ſelected out of the huge treaſures of the Perſians, for a ſhew and oſtentation of the glorie of his victorie, praying him that he would abſtaine from moleſting of Trapezond & Cappadocia,
               
in regard they appertained vnto him as the right & dowry of his wife: (for euen lately before had the gouernor of Amaſia ouerrunne and ſacked Cappadocia, and did make euen Trapezond it ſelfe to ſtand in feare of the alarme.) The Turkiſh Monarche taking it very ſcornefully and in ill part, that one (as he thought) inferiour vnto him, ſhould ſeeme to giue & preſcribe lawes vnto him, & (as it were) braue him in his freſh and late receiued calamitie: and therewithall the felicity and reputation of this young Prince being very diſpleaſing vnto him, he prepared with extreame ſpeede and diligence, a mightie army, making prouiſions for the warre both by ſea and land againſt him, and tranſported it into Aſia: and hauing cauſed one part of his nauy & ſea forces to go before right to Pontus & Sinope towards Trapezond, himſelf followed after with incredible celeritie, & as if he had wings to flie withall, he went cleane through Aſia with all his forces, & preſented himſelfe (beyond the opinion & expectation of all theMahomet broken and defeated in two ſeuerall battels by Vſuncaſſan world) euen to the view of Vſuncaſſan, by whom he was brauely receiued, roughly & ill handled, and greatly weakened in two moſt fierce & cruell battels. The one of which was fought by his Lieutenant Amurath Baſſa a Greeke (diſcended of the bloud of the late Emperors of Conſtantinople, and who loſt his life in that battell) vpon the banks of the riuer of Euphrates: the ſecond by Mahomet himſelfe in proper perſon, in which he was repulſed & beaten back, & purſued euen into the trenches of his camp.Battell of Toccara betweene Mahomet and Vſuncaſſan. Howbeit in the third battell foughten at Arſengua or (as ſome ſay) at Tabenda now named Toccara in the fields of Anſerina, he reuenged his former loſſes, breaking the courſe of the good fortune & precedent victorie of his aduerſaries, by the helpe of his artillery, whereof he had infinite ſtore, cauſing it to play vpon his enemies euen at the inſtant that they were to begin the fight, & to giue the onſet. For the horſes of the Perſians being terrified & diſperſed with the vnuſual noiſe & thundering of the ordināce,Vſuncaſſan ouerthrowen in battell. Zeinalda eldeſt ſonne of Vſuncaſſan ſlaine. did conſtraine Vſuncaſſan to yeeld to his misfortune, & to looſe the honor of the field, and being put to the retrait, he left his eldeſt ſonne Zeinalda dead vpon the place. Now come I to my matter, & I ſay, that Mahomet being reduced to tearmes of ſome extreamity, and his affaires ſtanding but in an euill caſe by theſe cruell ouerthrowes which did in a maner ſhake his eſtate & Empire, might at this time haue bene beaten downe without euer being able to riſe againe, if Italy & the other Prouinces of Chriſtendom would haue giuen eare & harkened to the continuall praiers and admonitions of theChriſtians by their ciuill diſſentions haue occaſioned the greatneſſe of the Turkiſh Empire. 
               Hungarians, the Greekes, and the Albanians. But they contrariwiſe being more deafe then had docks, did purſue their priuate quarrels, and mutuall hatreds & contentions, and (which was much worſe) not contented to nouriſh the fire of domeſticall & ciuill warres, they drew ſtrangers to be partakers of their warres, and to beare a part in the ſubiect of their paſſions: for they implored the aide & ſuccors of the Albanois in fauor of Ferdinand the baſtard ſonne of Alphonſus (who had appointed him to be his heire to the Realme of Naples) againſt the houſe of Aniow, to whom in right that kingdomKingdome of Naples an example of the varietie and vnconstancie of fortune. Neapolitans their humor & diſpoſition. 1458. Ferdinand baſtard ſonne of Alphonſus ſucceedeth vnto the kingdome of Naples. appertained. And in very truth that Prouince or people of Naples hath ſerued in all ages & times of antiquitie, for a notable example of the variety of humaine things, and of the vnconſtancy of fortune. For finding the yoake of them that commaunded ouer them to be ſmally gratious or pleaſing vnto them: they were neuer contented, and (as Publius Sulpitius well ſaide of them) they did neuer liue in quiet, except then onely when they had none from whom they might reuolt, or againſt whom they might rebell. The manner thereof behold by that which followeth.
            Vpon the deceaſe and death of Alphonſus King of Naples, (whereof we haue alreadie ſpoken) Fernand or Ferdinand his naturall ſonne, though illegitimate, did enter vpon the crowne, and was ſeized of the Realme by the order of the laſt will and teſtament of his father, & by the diſpenſation of Pope Eugenius the fourth, which was

confirmed alſo by Nicholas the fifth. But Calixtus the fourth within a while after vnderſtandingCalixtus 4. claimeth the kingdome of Naples by Eſcheate. of his death, the tenth day following by an expreſſe Bull pronounced the crowne of Naples to be void and eſcheated to the See of Rome, forbidding Ferdinand vnder the paine of excōmunication, any way to intermeddle with the adminiſtration & gouernment therof: abſoluing alſo all the Princes & Nobles of the kingdom from acknowledging any dutie or alleageance vnto him. Ferdinand hauing gotten the copie of his depriuation, did appeale from the Pope to the next generall Councell: but Eugenius being taken away with a ſick neſſe only of ſome three or foure daies continuancePeter Lewes Borgias Nephew to Pope Eugenius competitor of the crowne of Naples againſt Ferdinand. Iohn Duke of Calabria. (euen at the inſtant that he had ſtirred vp Peter Lewes Borgias his Nephew, to be a competitor to the Realme of Naples) it was the occaſion that Ferdinand found ſome remedie againſt the troubles that were prepared againſt him. Notwithſtanding this death of the Pope did not extinguiſh all tumults within that kingdome: for Iohn ſurnamed Duke of Calabria, the ſonne of Rene Duke of Aniow was then (as it fell out) at Genes in Italy, and the faction of the houſe of Aniow did ſtand waiting but for ſome opportunity being ready to take armes, & to begin ſome tumult vpon the leaſt occaſion that ſhould be offred: notwithſtanding that Frances Sforce Duke of Milan (whoFrances Sforce Duke of Milan tooke part with the Arragonois) did by an ambaſſade ſent vnto the Princes and Nobles of Naples, encourage and exhort them to perſeuer in their fidelitie and deuotion to their new Prince, and had retained them for the moſt part either by loue or by force in their dutie and allegeance.
            But becauſe the originall of this warre, and the ſubiect of ſo many hatreds & enmities which haue both giuen cauſe of encreaſe to the power of the Ottomans, & did keep the States of Italy for a time in ſuſpence, & held the greateſt Princes of Chriſtendome for many yeares in care & perplexity, ſhall not remaine vnknowen vnto vs: it ſhall be needfull for vs to haue recourſe vnto the times that were before, & in continuing the diſcourſe therof from thoſe daies to this preſent, we muſt in ſome ſort repeat the matter (as it were by way of an Epitome) from the firſt originall of thoſe troubles.
            
               Charles the 2. king of Naples, Sicily, and Ieruſalem, nephew to the French king S.
               Charles the ſecond king of Naples, and Mary his wife their iſſue. Charles Martell king of Hungarie. 
               Lewes, & his wife the Lady Mary, daughter of Stephen king of Hungary, had 9. male children borne in wedlocke betwene them. Of thoſe 9. we find that foure had iſſue, & of them we are now to entreat. The firſt was Charles ſurnamed Martell, the other three, Robert, Lewes, and Philip: Martell the eldeſt ſonne ſucceeded by the right of his mother to the kingdome of Hungary, but he died before his father, leauing Carolobert, or (as the Italians in one word corruptly doe call him) Caronumbert: his ſonne & ſucceſſor in Hungary. Charles the 2. being departed this life in the yere 1309. Carolobert
               Carolobert king of Hungarie. pretending a claime to the crown of Naples, as deſcended vnto him by the right of his father, did ſtand in cōtention for the ſame with his Vncle Robert, who alledged on the other ſide, that becauſe Martell the father of Carolobert, & his elder brother was neuer ſeized of that kingdome, therfore the ſame was to deſcend vnto him immediatly by the death of his father. This great & famous queſtion being debated and vehemently argued amongſt the Lawiers of that age, (to know which of them ought to ſucceede in the realmes & dominions ſimply deſcending) either the Vncle or the ſonne of the elder brother, who neuer was king: it was in the end decided by Pope Clement the 6, who gaue ſentence for Robert and adiudged that he ſhould ſucceed into the kingdome & crowne of Naples. And Baldus of Peruſa a famous Lawier in that age, ſaith, that theBaldus a famous Ciuilian of Peruſa. reaſon which moued the Pope to giue that iudgement, was inregard of the publique & common commoditie, and in reſpect of the great good merits and admirable wiſedome of the ſaid Robert; and he ordered the kingdome of Hungary to the Nephew.
            
               Carolobert then king of Hungarie had two ſons, Lewes king of Hungary & Andrew
               
or Andreas, and Robert who was crowned king of Naples, Sicily, and Ieruſalem begotLewes 3. ſonne of Charles the ſecond king of Hungarie Duke of Duras. Philip 4 ſonne of Charles Prince of Tarentum. 
               Charles ſurnamed without land, who likewiſe dying before his father, left 3. daughters Ione, Mary, & Margaret. Now Lewes the third ſonne of Charles the 2. was Duke of Duras, & had iſſue Charles of Duras hereafter mentioned. The fourth ſonne of the ſaid Charles was Philip Prince of Tarentum in Italy, and he had iſſue a ſonne named Lewes who ſucceded his father in that principality. Now Robert king of Naples approching neere his end in the yeare 1342. did ordain by teſtament that Ione the eldeſt daughter of his ſonne Charles ſhould inherit his crowne and kingdom of Naples, on condition ſhe did eſpouſe her ſelfe to Andrew his Coſin the ſonne of Carolobert. This yong PrinceſſeIone Queene of Naples maried with Andrew younger ſome of the king of Hungarie. Auerſa. being thus made Queene vpon the condition afore mentioned, did marry with the ſaid Andrew, with whom being vpon a time at Auerſa, ſhe ſent vnto him in the night time, praying him to come vnto her, pretending that ſhe had matters of importance to impart vnto him: who comming to her in great haſte, was there taken and hanged vp at an yron grate with a lace or girdle of ſilke and golde wrought by theAndrew the husband of Ione Queene of Naples murthered by his wife. Second mariage of Ione Queene of Naples. hands of the Queene herſelfe. The occaſion of this murther (as many pretend) was for that this young Prince (albeit he were of a youthfull and luſty conſtitution) yet could not ſatisfie the inſatiable luſt & appetite of his wife: beſides that ſhe was incenſed therunto by reaſon of the conſpiracies of thoſe of her bloud and kinred, who did aſpire to the ſoueraignty & crowne of Naples. But whatſoeuer was the cauſe therof, ſhe tooke immediatly to her husband (or as ſome ſay) for her paramour, Lewes Prince of Tarent aboue mentioned, her coſin german. This crime and horrible fact of Queene Ione, did ſeeme vnto al men ſo odious & execrable, that ſhe made the good renowm & memorie of Robert her grandfather, to be now very ill reputed and badly thought of, and theLewes king of Hungarie cō
                  meth with an armie againſt Ione Queene of Naples for reuenge of his brothers death. report of her deteſtable behauiour was ſpeedily publiſhed and ſpread abroade in all places. The Pope himſelf began to take the matter in hand, & perſwaded with Lewes king of Hungary to vndertake the reuenge of his brothers death, and ſo drew him into the Realme of Naples with a moſt puiſſant and mightie armie, in the yeare 1348. notwithſtanding the often letters of Queene Ione wherein ſhe excuſed and purged her ſelfe of this miſdeede and the murther of his brother.
            At the comming and arriuall of the Hungarian king into Italy, the ſudden takingSulmo. of Sulmo did ſo terrifie the reſt, that they preſently ſubmitted themſelues to his deuotion, inſomuch that the Queene hauing her Tarentine in her company, fled into Proence, leauing in her place Charles of Duras to haue the commaund and gouernement of her kingdome, who being alſo vanquiſhed and taken in battell, was by the ſentenceCharles of Duras ouercome in battell, taken and beheaded by the king of Hungarie. of the king of Hungarie beheaded, as being priuie and partie to the death of Andrew. Of this Charles there was a ſonne left, likewiſe named Charles of Duras. The Hungarian by this meanes in leſſe then three monethes had gotten the poſſeſſion of the Realme of Naples, and hauing left a ſtrong garriſon of Hungarians within the countrie, he retyred himſelfe into his owne kingdome, carying away with him that young Prince of Duras. Hereupon the Pope being vrged and preſſed with the daily and continuall purſuit and entreatie of the Queene, tooke the care of her affaires into his owne handes: ſending into Italy Guy of Limoges, Cardinall of Port being his Nephew, who knew ſo well how to handle & conuey his matters, that he brought both parties to an accord vpon theſe conditions, that Ione ſhould be reſtored to her realme and title of Queene of Naples: and as for the Tarentine, that he ſhould only enioy the name of Prince of Tarentum: & moreouer, that after her deceaſe, all her right & intereſt in her kingdome ſhould remain to the king of Hungary & his ſucceſſours. Thus Ione being reeſtabliſhed, within a while after, ſhe knewe ſo well how to handle her matters, & ſo to practiſe with Pope Clement, that in the yeare 1352. he crowned Lewes the

               Tarentine Prince, King of Naples: and yet ſo that he procured alſo the King of Hungarie, to confirme the peace with both of them which had beene formerly concluded betwene them. In recompence whereof the Queene graunted vnto the Pope by way of contract and ſale, the citie of Auignyon, which was part of her patrimonieAuignion purchaſed to the See of Rome by Pope Clemens. and inheritance, but ſo as all that money which was due vnto the Church for the yearely fee and ſeruice of the kingdome of Naples, from the time that ſhe came to the crowne, was allowed and deducted in the bargaine betweene them. About a three yeares after, the Tarentine dyed, being waſted and conſumed away by the exceſſiue vſe, and ouermuch companying with the Queene. But ſhe ſtayed not long withoutThird mariage of Ione of Naples. a companion, for ſhe coupled her ſelfe in mariage with Iames of Arragon, the infant of Maiorque: who was reputed the moſt gentle and courteous Prince liuing in that age. Him did ſhe retaine with her, not in the title of King, but onely as Duke of Calabria. Within a few monethes after, this Prince alſo died, the Queene cauſing him to looſe his head, for that (as ſome ſay) he was ſomewhat too amorous with another woman beſides the Queene. Yet there be ſome who affirme, that ſhe did only diuorſeFourth mariage of Ione Queene of Naples. her ſelfe from him ioyning her ſelfe in the fourth mariage with Otho Duke of Brunſwicke deſcended of the noble family of Saxonie, who at that time warring in Italy was in the pay of the Church, in the yeare 1376. and with him ſhee liued in ſolace and great pleaſure: during which time, it happened that Pope Gregorie the ſecond dyed in the yeare 1378. This Pope brought backe the Court and ſiege of the Papacie, vnto Rome after ſeuenty foure yeares, that Clement the fifth had tranſported it to Auignyon, to the great griefe and preiudice of the Romaines, whereof immediatly proceeded that great Schiſme in the Church, vpon the which our hiſtorie doth in ſome ſort depend. And to the intent the matter may be the more apparant, it ſhall be neceſſarie that I ſet downe the motiue and firſt occaſion of that Schiſme.
            The chiefe and principall men of Rome did ſecretly deſire and entreate the CardinalsThe motiue & occaſion of the Sciſme in the Church of Rome. which were aſſembled in the Conclaue for the election of the Pope, that they would at their requeſt chooſe one that was a Romaine, or at the leaſt an Italian, to the intent the Court might be ſtayed, & not remoued from Rome. The people with high voices and mightie clamors, cryed out in all the ſtreetes and places of the citie, that they would haue one of their owne nation: by meanes whereof, thoſe reuerent Prelates, fearing the tumult or the violence of ſome ſudden outrage, did agree with one minde and conſent to elect an Italian, with an intent afterwardes (when time and place ſhould ſerue) and that the ſtirres of the popular ſort were appeaſed, to proceede to a free election of ſome other who ſhould be taken & acknowledged for true Pope indeede. They therefore being entred into the Conclaue, and the commotion and inſolent demeanor of the common people continuing and increaſing, and being readie to breake open the doores vpon them, they made choiſe of one Bartholomew of Naples, Archbiſhop of Barie: vpon the tenth of Aprill in the yeare aboue mentioned, and they named him Vrban the ſixth. Some write that they choſe him vpon theſe conditionsVrban the 6. created Pope. expreſſely, that notwithſtanding that election, whenſoeuer he ſhould be warned thereunto by them, that he ſhould renounce and reſigne the name and dignitie of Pope, and that they bound him thereunto with a ſtreight and ſolemne oath, which he promiſed and ſwore to performe. The election being accompliſhed, the Colledge of Cardinals wrote their letters vnto the Potentates, and Catholique Princes of Chriſtendome, that the ſame was holily and lawfully done, and themſelues for a time did acknowledge it to be ſo. Within a while after, eighteene Cardinals, or (as ſome ſay) fewer (of which the moſt part were French men) obtained leaue and licenſe of the Pope (who then lay at Tyuoly) vnder pretence of the extreame heat of the moneth of

Iuly, that they might leaue and be abſent from the Court for a ſeaſon. Hereupon by ſeuerall wayes, they tooke their iourney & met all together, firſt at Anagni, and from thence at Fondi, to the intent they might proceede in the election of a newe Pope, and this they did by the intelligence and practiſe of the Queene of Naples, who vnder hand had offered free libertie and ſecuritie within her dominions to conclude and go through with this election: her reaſon was, becauſe ſhe perceiuing her ſelfe not to be as yet thoroughly aſſured of the Hungarians, did deſire to haue a Frenchman made Pope, and ſuch a one as might be at her deuotion. In the end, when Vrban and they could not, or would not be brought to any good nor friendly accorde: they cauſed him to be cited to appeare at Fondi, and there they debated and handled the matter by certaine actes and proceedings in law, onely (in a manner) at the direction and pleaſure of Maſter Nicholas of Naples, who at that time was a moſt famous Lawier, andM. Nicholas of Naples. one of the Queenes Counſellors, and a moſt mortall and deadly enemie to Vrban. On the other ſide the Pope cauſed them to be cited, and in the end did excommunicate them for contumacie: and in the end, both parties caring but litle the one for the other: the Cardinals pretending that the See was voide, in September following at Fondi did make a new election, obſeruing therein all the vſuall and accuſtomed ſolemnities: and they declared for Pope, the Cardinall of Geneua, named Clement the ſeuenth, and immediatly they made it knowen vnto all Kings and Princes Chriſtian that they ſhould account Clement for the true Pope & not Vrban. To Vrban did cleaue and adioyne themſelues all Italy, Almaine, Hungarie, and England, with many other Princes and Eſtates of Europe, and he kept his ſeat at Rome: Clement remoued his ſeatClement the ſeuenth made Antipope. to Auignion, and to him did adhere the Realmes of France and of Spaine. Thus you ſee the firſt motiue and occaſion of this Schiſme and diuiſion in the Church, by the which (continuing aboue forty yeares) both the whole eſtate of Chriſtendome was greatly preiudiced, and the inſolencie and power of the Turkes was mightely augmented.The Cauſe of the enmitie betweene Pope Vrban and Maiſter Nicolas of Naples.
            
            But to the intent you may both the better conceiue that which hath bene alreadie declared, and be inſtructed of that which is yet behind: I holde it expedient not to conceale the cauſe of the enmitie which grewe betwixt Pope Vrban and that lawyer aboue mentioned. This Maiſter Nicholas was an excellent aduocate: and in many cauſes and proces which Vrban had had in the Court of Rome before his aduancement to the papacie: he was for the moſt part retained with the aduerſe parties againſt Vrban, as it often falleth out to ſuch as exerciſe the office of aduocates. Vrban being afterwards become Pope: diuerſe Kings and great Princes (as the manner is) ſent their Ambaſſadors from all parts to congratulate the holines of his aduancement to the papacie, and to ſweare obedience vnto him. The Queene of Naples was not one of the laſt: but ſhe ſent vnto him Maiſter Nicholas. The Pope (according to the vſuall cuſtom) made a great and ſumptuous banquet for all of them: at the which euerieDiſgrace offered by Pope Vrban to M. Nicolas Ambaſſadour for the Queene of Naples. one hauing taken his place, and the Ambaſſador of the Queene being ſeated in one of the moſt honourable and higheſt places, as repreſenting the perſon of his Queene: Vrban commanded the vſher of the hall to diſplace him and to ſet him lower with ſome diſgrace to the honour and reputation of this Ambaſſadour. He wiſely diſſembling the iniurie and his diſcontentment, tooke it verie patiently: and at his departure from the feaſt being in the company of a certaine Cardinall his friend, whoSpeech of M. Nicholas touching the diſgrace done him by the Pope. was offended likewiſe at this diſgrace offered him: and vſed ſome ſpeeches to comfort him, willing him to attend and ſtay his time. Maiſter Nicolas then made him this anſwer: tuſh (quoth he) I haue two ſoules, the one of them I haue vowed to God only: the other I will giue to him that is willing to haue it: and from thenceforth he
               
perſwaded with the Queene (who of her ſelfe was ſufficiently vnconſtant) to become the extreame enemie of Pope Vrban: and Maiſter Nicolas, was the chiefe Counſeller and principall procurer of the proceeding of the election of Pope Clement. Thus you may ſee howe great and wa
                  •
               ghtie a matter it is, to outrage or iniurie any man of a haughtie ſpirit and of a great courage.
            
               Vrban hauing made peace with the Florentines, Peruſians and others that had rebelledIone queene of Naples depriued of her realme by Pope Vrban. againſt Gregorie the eleuenth his predeceſſour: bent and emploied all his endeuours and deuiſes, how to reuenge himſelfe vppon the Queene of Naples: inſomuch as by a ſolemne iudgement he depriued her of her realme and Kingdome: in regard of manie crimes and offences, and eſpecially for that ſhe had fauoured and maintained the Schiſme, and had yeelded her obedience to Pope Clement. Hereuppon he inueſted Charles of Duras, with the Kingdome and crowne of Naples, and he wrote his letters vnto the King of Hungarie (with whom the ſayed Charles
               Charles of Duras inueſted with the crown of Naples by Pope Vrban. was then abiding) That he ſhould ſend him vnto him, and that he would crowne him, and put him in poſſeſſion of that Kingdome. On the other part Clement the Antipope, not thinking himſelfe ſafe enough at Aniow, for feare of the armie of the Romaines which had alreadie taken the field: he ſpeedily ſent a meſſage vnto the Queene, willing her to ſend him certaine forces, and a good and ſufficient conuoy to conduct and bring him ſafe vnto Naples: but the Neapolitans being aduertiſed of his comming, betooke themſelues to their armes, and with great tumult they told the Queene plainely, that they meant not to be troubled with two Popes at once, not to enter into the warre vppon that cauſe and quarrell. She therefore and Clement retired to the caſtell, where hauing fortified themſelues for certaine daies, and in the end finding that it would not be for their benefit to ſoiorne or ſtay anyIone Queene of Naples and Pope Clement flie to Auignion. longer in Naples, the Queene cauſed three gallies to be trimmed and made readie; in two of the which ſhe imbarked Clement and his Cardinals, and her ſelfe getting abord the third: and with a proſperous gale of winde, hauing put to ſea, in few dayes arriued ſafe vnto Auignion.
            
            
               Clement being viſited in great honour and reuerence by the French men, and (the proceſſe of the two Popes being ſeene and examined by the parliament of Paris) he was pronounced to be the true and lawfull Pope, and Vrban was denounced to be no Pope but a Sciſmatique: in ſuch ſort that both the kings of France and of Arragon did ſo take and acknowledge him, and did yeelde him their obeiſſance and ſoueraigne honor. In like manner the Queene Ione being roially entertained & honored, did receiue great and rich giftes, but principally of Lewes Duke of Aniow, the ſecond ſonne of Iohn king of France, whereupon ſhe ſeeing her ſelfe to be a ſole woman and without any iſſue, and more then that, being truely enformed of the practiſes and enterpriſes of Charles of Duras and the Biſhoppe of Rome (who did daily multiply and increaſe in ſtrength and puiſſance) ſhe did adopt the ſaide Prince for herLewes the firſt Duke of Aniow, adopted by Queene Ione. ſonne: and ordained him to be the heire and inheritour of her kingdome, giuing the ſame expreſſely vnto him after her deceaſe: and Clement by his authoritie did approue and allow the donation made by the Queene, and in the yeare 1379. there were made letters Pattentes and authenticall Charters to that effect. This was the firſt ground and foundation of the rights, which the ſecond diſcent of the houſe of Aniow did for a long time pretend vnto the realme of Naples. Theſe thinges being fullyIone returneth to Naples. eſtabliſhed and concluded, Ione returned to Naples, whileſt that Vrban in the meane time, perſiſting continually in his depriuation of the Queene, and the inueſtiture of Charles of Duras, did earneſtly and vehemently ſollicite the King of Hungarie both by letters and by agents to ſet forwarde that enterpriſe, and he preſſed

him ſo much the more, for that Charles being then with a great and puiſſant armieTreuiſa. of Hungarians vpon the confines of Treuiſa againſt the Venetians, by the direction of the Hungarian King, who was confederate with the Genowaies and the Siegniour of Padua againſt the ſtate of Venice: he was alreadie in a manner at the end of the iourney. Charles being fully enformed and verie well acquainted with the intent and pleaſure of the King, and verie deſirous to reuenge the death of his vncle, but much more greedie & deſirous of ſo rich a crowne: in the yeare 1380. tooke his iourney with eight thouſand Hungarians and a thouſand Italians, and came to Rome, where Vrban receiued him with the greateſt pompe and triumph that can be imagined, and created him Senator, which is the chiefeſt degree of honour amongſt the Romanes. Afterwardes the yeare following, hauing ſtrengthened himſelfe with many other companies, eſpecially with the armie of the church, he marched directly towardes Naples: into the which, by meanes of his practiſes with the Citizens, he entred at one of the gates: whileſt that Otho being accompanied with the Queenes forces, did iſſue out at another gate, of purpoſe to affront and fight with him. In concluſion, being poſſeſſed of the towne, and conſequently of the whole realme and eſpecially of the perſon of the Queene: he cauſed her by the iudgement and direction of the King of Hungarie, who had expreſly written vnto him to thatIone queene of Naples put to death. effect, to be executed and put to death in the ſame place, and with the ſame kind of puniſhment, which ſhe not long before had cauſed Andrew her husband moſt wickedly to endure and ſuffer. Her ſiſter the Ladie Marie was executed in like mannerMarie ſiſter to Queene Ione executed. being at that time the widdowe of Robert late Countie of Artois: to whom ſhe had bene a moſt diſloiall and vnchaſt wife, and was greatly defamed for her diſhoneſt familiaritie with Maſter Iohn Bocace ſo greatly renowmed amongeſt the Italians
               Iohn Bocace. for his eloquence and great learning: who in fauour and commendation ofFlammette & Philocole. this Ladie, made thoſe two elegant bookes in the vulgar Italian, entitled Flammette & Philocole.
            
            The affaires of Naples being ſetled in good order, Charles returned to Rome whereCharles of Duraz crowned king of Naples he was annointed and crowned King by Vrban with great ſolemnitie and triumph. Yet for all this were not the troubles appeazed nor ſuppreſſed in thoſe countries: for the Duke of Aniow Lewes, hauing bene before ſolicited by the Queene, andLewes Duke of Aniow entreth the realme of Naples with an armie. being ſupported both by Clement and alſo by the French, both to ayde and ſuccour that vnfortunate Princeſſe, as alſo to diſpoſeſſe Vrban of the Papacie, being readie to march with an armie of thirtie thouſand men, or (as ſome ſay) of fiue and fiftie thouſand, notwithſtanding the death of Ione, he entred into Italie in the purſuite of his owne right and title: and comming into the kingdome of Naples, he paſſed as farre as Apulia vpon the territorie of Barie with good ſucceſſe of victorie: but there being encloſed and preſſed vpon with the troupes of the Count Alberic of Barbian
               Alberic de Barbian. Generall of the church forces, and being enforced to come to the tryall of a battell, he was ouerthrowen with a great ſlaughter of his people in the yeare a thouſand three hundreth eightie three: by the default of the Count Anguerrant, called theThe ouerthrow of Lewes the firſt Duke of Aniow. Lord of Conſey: who being ſent after the Duke with a ſupply of twelue thouſand horſe did not keepe on his way directly: but a diſire tooke him to force Arezza in Thuſcane, whereas he ſhould haue made haſt on his way, and haue gone on to haue ioyned himſelfe with the Duke: who being ſore hurte in that battell with fiue ſeuerallLewes the firſt Duke of Aniow dieth at Biſeilles. wounds, (whether it were that his Phiſitions and ſurgeons did not well heale and cure him of his wounds, or were it through the griefe and ſorrow of his misfortune) he died the yeare following at Biſeilles.
            
            The French being expelled out of the realme of Naples: to the intent it ſhould

not want new troubls and tumultes, fortune made Pope Vrban and Charles King ofCharles King of Naples & pope Vrban enemies. 
               Naples mortall and deadly enemies. The occaſion thereof was thus: The Pope being by nature ſomewhat rude, and of litle ciuilitie in conuerſation, was come to Naples to obtaine his part of the frute and benefite of this late obtained victorie: where he claimed a promiſe of the King of Naples, & vrged him vpon the ſame a litle too rudely,Boutill nephew to Pope Vrban to make one Boutill his nephewe Prince of Capua: who was a moſt vile and baſe fellowe & a man of no vertue nor other good deſert, and beſides he would haue had the King to haue giuen him alſo the Dutchy of Duras. The King was not verie well pleaſed at this motion, but delaying his aunſwer, he put him off cunningly for a long time. The Biſhop of Rome on the other ſide did inſiſt and vrge him verie hard to bring his purpoſe to effect, but all was in vaine: inſomuch that growing into ſuſpition the one of the other, from thence they proceeded to open enmitie. Charles making a faire ſhewe and carying all matters honeſtly, yet did beare ſo good an eye vppon the Pope, that he coulde neither goe nor ſpeake freely at his pleaſure: but he being willing to get from him, obtained leaue to goe onely vnto Mocrea to chaunge the aire: where he beganne to deuiſe and to conſult vppon the depriuing of Charles, cauſing him to be cited, and that proces ſhould be framed againſt him. The King in like caſe did practiſe with ſome of the Cardinalles his friendes, to depoſe Vrban from his ſeate: and to this end, himſelfe in perſon accompanyed with his forces went to Nocera, ſaying: That he was come thither by his aſſignementVrban beſieged by Charles within Nocera. to preſent him with his obedience, and to the intent hee would be neare at hand, to heare the iudgement that ſhould be giuen againſt him. During this ſiege, ſome ſallies and skirmiſhes there were made, in one of the which Boutill was taken and impriſonned. The Pope being enflamed with wrath and anger, diſcharged his choler vppon ſeuen of his ſayed Cardinalles, whome he cauſed to be ſhut vppe in cloſe and ſtreight priſon, and in the ende hauing them tormented cauſed them to dye as Siſmatiques and fauorors of Charles. Whileſt theſe things were in working, the Pope inuented a meane to get himſelfe out of Nocera by the helpe of a greatVrban eſcapeth out of Nocera to Genes and curſeth Charles king of Naples ſumme of money which he gaue vnto Saint Seuerin and Raimond Vrſin: who conueighed him in gallies to Genes, where being retired, he curſed the King of Naples. This Prince being neare to the end and period of his fortune which ſeemed to fawne vppon him and to flatter him: vnder the pretence and colour of a newe crowne,Death of Lewes King of Hungarie. tooke his iourney into Hungarie: where the Princes and Nobles of the countrie did greatly deſire and verie earneſtly expect his comming, and did offer vnto him the ſcepter of Lewes their King, who was of late deceaſed without any other iſſue then one onely daughter.
            
               Charles before that time had eſpouſed Margaret the ſiſter of Queene Ione, and by her had two children a ſonne and a daughter, Ladiſlaus & Ione: at his departure from Naples into Hungarie, he left the gouernment of the Kingdome vnto theCharles king of Naples choſen and crowned King of Hungarie, ſlaine at Bude. Queene his wife and certaine of the chiefeſt and moſt noble Barons of the realme: himſelfe being crowned King of Hungarie with the outwarde conſent and liking of Elizabeth the Queene and widdowe of the late King, and her daughter Marie: (who notwithſtanding did it altogether of diſſimulation:) with in few dayes after by their practiſe was ſlaine at Bude in the yeare 1388. The death of this Prince gaue occaſion of new troubles and tumultes at Naples: whereby the houſeMargaret Queene of Naples and her children flie to Gaietta. and faction of Aniow grewe to be ſo fauored by fortune, that they became Lordes of Naples: and the Queene with her children was conſtrained to retire herſelfe to Gaietta. This meane while Lewes the ſecond ſonne of Lewes aboue mentioned, (at the requeſt of thoſe that were of his faction) ſent to Naples for their ayde and

ſuccours fiue gallies. But Boniface the ninth a Neapolitan hauing nowe obtainedBoniface the 
                     •
                   made Po
                     •
                  e. the Popedome in the yeare of our Lord a thouſand three hundreth ninetie, did diſanull and reuoke the cenſures and curſe which Vrban his predeceſſour had denouncedLadiſlaus ſon o. Charles crowned King of Naples by Pope Boniface Lewes ſecond Duke of Aniow corwned king of Naples by Pope Clement & entreth Naples. againſt King Charles: and he inueſtd Ladiſlaus with his fathers kingdome: and cauſed him at Gaietta to be crowned King of Naples, Sicile, and Ieruſalem: as in like manner the ſame yeare Lewes the ſecond Duke of Aniow tooke the crowne of Naples at the handes of Clement, by the purſuie of the King of Fraunce, and thereuppon made his entrie and was receiued into Naples in great honour and magnificenſe by thoſe of his faction: howbeit that many of the Nobles and gentlemen, adhering and taking part with Ladiſlaus, did openly refuſe to acknowledge Lewes for their Soueraigne. Thus theſe two Kings contending for one onely crowne, did confound all things with moſt piteous diſorder, and deſtroyed the countrey: which they laboured and ſtriued eche of them to obtaine as his proper patrimonie: till ſuch time as the Partizans of the houſe of Aniow (wanting money and treaſure (the ſinewes of the warres) cauſed the veſſelles and vtenſiles of gold and ſiluer belonging to the Churches of Naples, to be molten and made into money for the paiment of their ſouldiours, by the leaue and permiſſion of Clement: who ſhewed himſelfe to haue ſmall deuotion and litle conſcience. But all this notwithſtanding, the Count Alberic of Barbian being created Conſtable by Laaiſlaus, preſented himſelfe with a ſtrong armie before Naples: and after many aſſaults and braue repulſes, he entred the towne and brought it vnder the obedience of the Dirrachium,
               Ladiſlaus the ſon of Charles of Duras recouereth Naples. with the reſt of the realme alſo: and the ſooner for that Lewes himſelfe was abſent: (who ſeeing himſelfe in weake and feeble eſtate, and the towne to be deuided by the tumultes and practiſes of Ladiſlaus (whoſe places and ſtrong holdes were well and ſufficiently furniſhed) had withdrawen himſelfe apart out of Italie into Prouence.
            
            This done, Ladiſlaus in the yeare of our Lord 1403. went into Hungarie, toLadiſlaus made King of Hungarie. take vpon him the crowne of that kingdome, which the Nobles of the countrie did caſt vpon him: and euen in an inſtant returning thence againe to Naples, he conceiued in his haughtie and ambitious heart the dominion of Rome it ſelfe, by reaſon he ſawe it deuided and diſtracted by ſundrie factions and ſeditions: the which after heLadiſlaus taketh Rome by force. had twice attempted by force of armes, at the thirde time he caried and entred it as a conquerour in great pompe and triumph. This his proſperitie growing odious to the Italians, was a cauſe that Lewes gat the Florentines, and the Legat of Bologna to enter into a firme and ſtrong league againſt Ladiſlaus: the which being concludedAlexander the fifth made Pope at the counſell of Piſa. by Lewes his Ambaſſadours, he himſelfe departed-ſpeedily from Prouence, and being arriued at Piſa, he kiſſed the feete of Alexander the fifth, then made Pope at that Councell: who confirmed him in the inueſtiture of the Realmes of Naples, Sicily, and Ieruſalem, pretending that Ladiſlaus had forfeited them by his occupation and ſeizing vppon the citie of Rome. Yet did he refuſe to crowne him,Lewes confirmed in the realme of Naples by Pope Alexander. for that Clement had lately done it in Aulgnion, neuertheleſſe he created him Gonfalonier of the Church, with eſpeciall charge to march againſt Ladiſlaus the enemie of the Church, and the fauourer and maintainer of Gregorie the twelfth, who had beene depoſed in that generall Councell.
            
               Lewes firſt made a iourney into Prouence, and afterwardes in the yeare 1410. being returned to the territories of Rome: he there had aſſembled and vnited both his owne forces and thoſe of the Pope, vnder the charge and conduct of Paul Vrſin, and Sforce Cottignole. Ladiſlaus with his armie was at Roque Seiche, betweene Pont Corue, Saint Ange, and Saint German. Lewes comming againſt him,

and affronting him in ſet battell, gaue the onſet vpon him moſt couragiouſly, in ſomuchThe battell betweene Lewes of Aniow and Ladiſlaus of Duras Kings of Naples. as the conflict grewe moſt furious and cruell: and the prowes both of the one part and of the other was noted to be admirable: ſo that hardly could it bee diſcerned who was like to haue the better. The two Kings in their proper perſons did that day ſhew themſelues both good champions and ſufficient Chieftaines, and they left not any thing omitted that was worthie of generous and noble Princes. In the ende Sforce on the one part, and Paul Vrſin on the other, did charge ſo furiouſly with all their forces vpon the troupes of Ladiſlaus, that they made them to giue ground, ſo that being not able any longer to keepe themſelues in order, they were quite broken and diſcomfited. The battell being finiſhed, each partie retyred into his owne quarter, not any one remembring to purſue the victorie, nor toVictorie of Lewes not purſued. follow after the enemie that was defeated: who thereupon hauing gathered his ſpirits vnto him, and hauing gotten the leaſure to rally his forces, and to conſider of the matter: it cauſed him afterwardes to ſay, (at ſuch time as he deuiſed or had any ſpeech of this battell) That if his enemies had done their deuoire to vanquiſh him thoroughly, and to haue gotten a full victorie: the firſt day they might haueSpeech of Ladiſlaus king of Naples of the battel betweene him and Lewes Duke of Aniow. made themſelues maſters both of his perſon and of his kingdome, the ſecond day (if they had followed him) they might haue beene Lordes of his Realme, but not of his perſon: and the third day, neither of his perſon nor of his kingdome. After this ouerſight, Lewes neuer enterpriſed any thing in Italie, but retyring himſelfe into France,
                neuer ſet foote more in that countrie: hauing eyther by ignorance or I knowe not howe, ſuffered the benefite of ſo memorable a victorie to ſlippe out of his handes, which made Ladiſlaus ſole and abſolute King of Naples. Yet was he not at reſt from newe attemptes, being of a ſtirring, troubleſome, and ambitious ſpirite, as much as anie that euer liued. For he reuiued his olde attemptes, firſt againſt Rome, which ſucceeded accordingly as he wiſhed, and after alſo againſtLadiſlaus poiſoned. the Florentines in which expedition, comming to Peruſa, he fell ſuddenly ſicke, and dyed without iſſue in the yeare of our Lord 1414: being (as ſome ſay) poyſoned the moſt ſtraungely that poſſibly could be imagined. The noueltie thereof ſeemethAuarice & vnchaſt loue two moſt pernitious miſchieues. in my opinion, worthie to be inſerted in this place: to the intent it may ſerue for an inſtruction and enſignment to the poſteritie, how pernitious are the effectes of auarice and vnchaſt lone.
            
            
               Ladiſlaus was enamoured of a young damoſell of ſingular beautie, the daughter of a Phiſition, who (being corrupted and inueigled with an exceſſiue ſumme of money paied vnto him by the Florentines) did giue vnto his daughter an ointment of the iuice of napel (being a preſent and moſt ſtrong poiſon) perſwading her (as it was anA ſtraunge kind of poyſoning. eaſie matter for him being her father, and ſhe a ſimple ſoule of no deepe reach or conceipt, and beſides extreamely deſirous of the loue of the King) that if ſhe did annoint herſelfe therewithall when ſhe was to haue the companie of the King: his affection towardes her would be augmented by the one halfe. The ſillie wench did willingly doe as her father had aduiſed her: whereof ſhe died within a while after: and Ladiſlaus likewiſe being infected with the ſame poyſon loſt his life the verie ſame time.
            His ſiſter the Ducheſſe of Guelders or Sterlich (as ſome will) being afterwardes named Ione the ſecond by the death of her brother, obtained the crowne of Naples:
               Ione the ſecond Queene of Naples. this woman was nothing inferiour but rather did farre ſurpaſſe the firſt Ione her Aunt in all kind of lewdneſſe, whoredome and damnable laſciuiouſneſſe and incontinencie: & ſhe caried herſelfe ſo much the higher, in pride and inſolency then the other, becauſe ſhe ſaw herſelfe ſuddenly aduaunced to ſo high a dignitie, beyond all

hope and expectation: and beſides for that ſhee found the eſtate of Naples in peace and quietneſſe, and (as it were) aſſured vnto her, were it becauſe ſhee had no competitor to the Crowne, or by reaſon of the great forces and huge numbers of ſouldiers which her brother had left her: for ſhee had an army of 1600. horſe, lead by excellent and moſt expert Captaines. Of this Queene there was openly and commonly ſpred a certaine verſe in Latine in manner of a prophecy, the effect and ſubſtance thereof in Engliſh is this.
            
               The latter Queene of Duraz line deſcending,
               Of Naples Crowne shall be the finall ending.
            
            Scarce was this Lady enſtalled and ſettled in the ſiege and roiall throne of the kingdome, but ſhee committed the whole managing and gouernment of her perſon, andPandolphel Alop, the loue or paramour of Queene Ione the 2. her eſtate to Pandolphel Alop a Neopolitan county, whom ſhee hadde nouriſhed and brought vp from his infancy and tender youth, and with whom ſhee was extreamly in loue, and beyond all meaſure. For hauing lead him with her (as one of her houſhold traine into Gelderland, after her husband was dead, ſhee brought him backe againe with her into Italy, keeping him continually neare about her perſon, not without the publike infamy of their loue and ſecret familiarity. In the end when ſhe had intelligence of this bad report that ranne vppon them, and did vnderſtand the enuy that thoſe of the Court did carie to Pandolphel: ſhee maried her ſelfe to maiſter Iames
               Queene Ione the 2. maried to Iames of Narbon County of March. of Narbonne, countie of March, deſcended of the roiall bloud and houſe of France, and her alley and kinſman: vpon this condition notwithſtanding, that he ſhould not vſurpe nor take vpon him the name of King, but ſhould hold himſelfe contented with the title of Prince of Tarentum, or County of March, at his choiſe which pleaſed him. The Captaines and great men of the kingdome being both iealous, and bearing aSforce Cottignole. mortall hatred to Pandolphel, and to Sforce Cottignole afore mentioned (in whom only the Queene ſeemed to repoſe her ſpeciall truſt and confidence:) they gaue to vnderſtand to the County Iames, that he ſhould not doubt to come to Naples, aſſuring him that they would ſo effect the matter as he ſhould be king. And accordingly as ſoone as he was entred within the Realme, all the nobles and captaines went to meet him as farre as Beneuent, and ſaluted him by the name of King: onely Sforce ſaluted him by the name of Count & no otherwiſe. This act (by the iudgement of the whole company) was held to be a very proud and arrogant part, and worthy to be puniſhedIulius Caeſar of Capua. with impriſonment. Iulius Caeſar of Capua, one of the Captaines of the company, began to grow into ſome altercation of words, and hard ſpeech with Sforce in the preſence of the count: but Sforce (vnder colour of parting and keeping them a ſunder)Sforce made priſoner. was lead into a chamber, and there arreſted as a priſoner: and his company or traine that followed him, were ſacked and ſpoiled of that which they had brought with them. After this the Count being arriued at Naples, and receiued with great triumph both by the nobles and common people, who openly called & proclaimed him king:This is the principall fortreſſe of Naples. Pandolphel beheaded. Michelet. Margaret ſiſter of Sforce her hardines and generoſity. he had by intelligence* Chaſtelnoue, or the new Caſtell deliuered vnto him: and Pandolphel being taken within the ſame, loſt his head: and Sforce being kept vnder ſure and ſafe cuſtody, had bene put to death likewiſe, had it not beene for Michelet a famous Captaine, who being at Tricaric, and hauing ſodainely armed the companie of Sforce, poſted preſently towardes Naples, being accompanied with Margaret the ſiſter of Sforce, and the wife of Michelin of Rauignan, a braue Captaine and fine warriour: who arming her ſelfe, and being aſsiſted with certaine men at armes, belonging to her husband: when they were come neare Naples, they tooke priſoners foure Gentlemen Neapolitanes, whom the County had ſent with ſafe conduct towards Tricaric, to treat vpon ſome accord and agreement with Michelet. Theſe did ſhe threaten,

that ſhe would cauſe them to be hanged, if her brother were not deliuered vnto her: which was the occaſion of the liberty of Sforce. This was not the laſt ouerſightCount Iames his ouerſight and folly. of the County, for beginning alſo to deale ill with the Neapolitans, and depriuing ſometimes one, and ſometimes another of their offices throughout the realme, he beſtowed them vpon Frenchmen, and ſequeſtring the Queene from all commaund and management of the eſtate and publicke matters, he held her ſhut vp as a recluſe in her lodgings: beſides that he lay very ſeldome and litle with her, ſometimes alſo vſing her roughly, and with outragious ſpeeches, whereat euery man, and eſpecially theQueene Ione of Naples her ſubtelty and policy. chiefe perſons of the Court began to grudge and murmure: but the Queene for all that ſeemed nothing diſcontented, but diſſembling her malicious minde and ſecrete malice, by a feminine craft and ſubtelty: ſhe made ſhew as if that kind of life did pleaſe her wonderfull well, as being remoued and eſtranged from cares and toileſome trauell: and ſhee gaue her ſelfe to dancing and reuelling (whereunto the French are naturally enclined) and ſo paſſed away the time in great ſhew of ioy and gladnes, how beit that by ſecrete ſignes and ſighes, and ſometimes by cloſe and couert ſpeeches, ſhee did ſufficiently bewray and open vnto her priuate friendes, her ſecrete griefe and diſcontentment.
            Matters thus ſtanding betweene the Queene and the Count: Iulius Caeſar (who wasIulius Caeſar of Capua intendeth the death of the Count: offereth his ſeruice to the Queene. of late the firſt man that moued and incenſed the Count againſt Pandolphel and Sforce, and had thereby brought the Queene to conceiue a mortall and deadly hatred againſt him) hauing now forgotten the outrage and iniury which he had offred (a vſuall matter in men giuen to be iniurious:) he began now to ſound the affections of the Queen, and in the end offered him ſelfe to worke the death and deſtruction of her husband. The Queene being both wary and circumpect, and yet malicious, and ſeeing occaſion now offered her to effect two ſeuerall things at once, both to auenge her ſelfe of the iniury receiued by Iulius, and to recouer the good grace and fauour of her husband with her owne liberty: ſhee made countenance to harken vnto him, and to take great pleaſure and contentment in his diſcourſe: counſelling him to be well aduiſed, and accordingly to reſolue himſelfe: and that at the end of eight daies he ſhould come againe vnto her, to lay downe ſome order for the execution of the enterpriſe. Thus hauing licenſed Iulius to depart, and in the meane while beginning an extraordinary kind of ſadnes, ſhee ſecretly diſcloſed all the practiſe to the Count, ſhewing her ſelfe very carefull of his ſafety, and her diſability to reſiſt againſt the inticements and inſtigations of that traitor: and eſpecially ſhee offered to the Count, that he him ſelfe ſhould both ſeeIulius Caeſar his treaſon bewraied by the Queene. and heare the trechery of Iulius. Wherefore the eight day being come, ſhee conuaied him behind the curtaines of her bed, with ſome of his moſt truſty and faithfull friends well armed, and afterwardes ſhee cauſed Iulius Caeſar to be called into her chamber, who hauing diſgorged and powred forth all the miſchieuous and villanous ſpeeches that might be deuiſed againſt the Count, and againſt the Frenchmen, did from point to point there make knowen and declare vnto the Queene, what his platforme and deuiſe was to contriue the death and deſtruction of the Count. Hereupon he iſſuingIulius Caeſar executed. preſently out from the place where he ſtoode, and had heard all his talke, cauſed him to be apprehended, and openly to be executed.
            This demonſtration and ſhew of the good will and affection of the Queene to the Count her husband, was the cauſe of her full releaſe and perfect liberty. By meanes whereof, maiſter Ottin Carracciole being made chiefe of the nobility, and Anequin Morinell of the comminalty, by the conſent and intelligence of many that conſpired and were confederate in the action: they inuited the Queene one day into the towne to a feaſt, and from thence did conduct and conuey her in ſafetie into the fortreſſe or

tower of* Capua: and immediatly they ranne to armes, and ſeized vppon the towne,Capouana a caſtell within Naples. Count Iames made priſoner in Chaſteau de loue a Caſteli within Naples. Iohn Carracciole, the minion or paramour of Ione Queene of Naples, made Grand Seneſchall. Sforce enemy to the Grand Seneſchall. and with great fury ſacked it and chaſed all the French officers out of the city, and the Count himſelf they impriſoned in the Caſtell named de Loue. Thus the Queene being reſtored to her abſolute power and ſoueraigne authority, ſhee tooke vnto her for her minion and paramour, Iohn Carracciole, a fine young Gentleman, and of an excellent beauty, and him ſhe created Grand Seneſchall, or high Stuard of Naples. This man being not able to abide and endure the greatneſſe and authority of Sforce, had a determination both to depoſe him from all credite and countenaunce, and alſo to depriue him of his life: whereof Sforce being aduertiſed, and being for that cauſe become enemy to the Seneſchall, did ſeize vppon Naples vnder colour that he would deliuer the Queene from the tyranny and power of the Seneſchall. The Queene being mightily incenſed with anger, depriued him of the office of Conſtable, and ſtirring vp the common people againſt him, commaunded to kill him. In the end a peace and accord was concluded betweene Sforce and the Queene, wherein it was ordered, that theCount Iames reſtored to his liberty. Seneſchall ſhould be baniſhed to Rome, and that the Count Iames ſhould be reſtored to his liberty according to the firſt couenants of the agreement made betwene them. This Prince being deliuered, imagined, and beat his braines vppon nothing elſe, but how he might ruinate both Sforce and the Queene: and ſhee in like caſe on the other ſide, conceiuing an extreame griefe for the exile of her Seneſchall, was wonderfully diſpleaſed with Sforce, and maligning him extreamly, did deuiſe his ruine and deſtruon as the onely author of her ſorrow and diſcomfort: in ſuch ſort, that ſhe did ſoone condiſcend to the will and minde of the Count her husband. Sforce being enformed of the daunger wherein he ſtoode, did very finely worke and contriue the reſtitutionCount Iames forſaketh Naples, and returning to France, becommeth an Hermit. of the Seneſchall, whoſe returne, and the reconciliation of Sforce with the Queene, did ſo feare and terrifie the Count, that he fled ſecretly to Tarentum, and being purſued by the Queene with an army, hee made his laſt retraite into Fraunce, where he paſſed the reſidue of his daies in the vowes and habit of an Hermit.
            Theſe things thus paſt, Braccio Fortebraccia of Peruſa, in the yeare one thouſandBraccio Fortebraccia of Peruſa warreth vpon Pope Martin the 5. Sforce ſent with an armie to the aide of the Pope by the Q of Naples. Sforce oueruerthrowen by Braccio is depriued of all authoritie in Naples, and Braccio hired by the queen in his roome. Queene Ione depriued of her kingdome by the Pope. foure hundreth and nineteenth, did warre vpon Pope Martin the fifth, who hauing recourſe vnto the Queene of Naples, that held that Crowne of him as Feodary of the Church of Rome: and becauſe he had crowned her Queene of Naples, he obtained ſuccours of three thouſand horſe, vnder the charge and commaund of Sforce, both to the great contentment of the Queene her ſelfe, and of her Minion Carracciole, who had long before bene deſirous to be ridde of him: and Fortune miniſtred her fit matter and occaſion to effect her deſire: for ſo it fell out, that Sforce was ouerthrowen by Braccio, whereupon the Queene depriued him of all his honors, eſtate and authority, and ſhe retained the ſaied Braccio into her pay and ſeruice. The Pope being highly offended with this ingratitude, tooke Sforce into his pay, and hauing communicated all his affaires with him, he fell to agreement and compoſition with the Peruſin, and depriued the Queene of the fee of the Realme of Naples: and he declared for king in her ſtead, Lewes the third Duke of Aniow, the ſonne of Lewes the ſecond, and of Ioland of Arragon, in the yeare 1420. Sforce according to the will and direction of the Pope, tooke part with Lewes, and put him ſelfe in his pay, and by his practiſes hauing gotten poſſeſsion of the towne and caſtell of Auerſa, kept them to the vſe of Lewes: who in the moneth of Auguſt next following, did preſent himſelfe before Naples with a ſtrong and mighty army by ſea.Alphonſus king of Arragon beſiegeth Boniface in Corſica. Port Siracuſan.
            
            About the ſame time it happened that Alphonſus king of Arragon, being departed from Barcelona had aſſailed Corſica by ſea: and held ſiege before Boniface, a caſtle ſubiect to the Genowaies, and named of olde the Port Siracuſan. The Pope being

at that time in Florence, there was one Don Garzia a Spaniard, who being a verieDon Garzia Spaniard. wiſe and politicke perſon, was ambaſſador from Alphonſus to his holineſſe: Queene Ione likewiſe had her ambaſſadour there alſo, named Anthonie Caraffa, otherwiſeAnthony Caraffa, alias Malice. 
               Malice. This Malice had a motion to the Spaniard, that if hee would perſwade with the King his maiſter, to take the cauſe of the Queene into his handes and protection, that he for his part would procure that ſhe ſhould adopt him for her ſonne, and ſhould declare him for her ſucceſſour in the kingdome of Naples: and ſo cleanly did they conuey this their practiſe and conceipt betweene them, without the knowledge and priuity of the Pope: that they concluded to goe together to Plombin, and from thence to Corſica, towardes the King Alphonſus: vnto whom the matter being propounded, it was held long in debate and doubt: for that Alphonſus and Lewes were coſins in the third degree, and there hadde beene expreſſe capitulations and couenaunts betweene them (when Lewes firſt began his attemptes for Naples) whereby Alphonſus had promiſed not to moleſt him in that his enterpriſe. But theSentence. deſire of a Crowne is too great and goodly a thing for men to make a conſcience how and by what meanes it be gotten: for how ſo euer it was, the effect made itDeſire of a Crowne knoweth no conſcience. cleare and manifeſt, that Alphonſus in the end did accept of the offer made vnto him, yet would he not in any caſe ſet foote within the Realme, before that the Queene had confirmed all the whole matter by authenticall writings drawen betweene them, and that ſhe had put into his handes the two fortreſſes of Caſtell noue, and De loue. TheſeAlphonſus adopted by Q. Ione and receiued into Naples ſureties being deliuered, and the Charters of the adoption and ſucceſsion of the Realme being orderly done and diſpatched, and the ſiege alſo being leauied before Boniface, Alphonſus was receiued with exceeding honour into Naples, and was lodged in the Caſtell de loue. Many and diuerſe were the warlike exploites and martiall ſeruices that paſſed betweene Alphonſus and the Queenes forces on the one ſide, and Lewes and Sforce on the other ſide: but in proceſſe and ſucceſsion of time, (I know not how nor why) the * Arragonoys and Catalans began to grow in diſlike and diſfauourSpaniards, their pride and enuie. with the Queene, and with the Grand Seneſchall, and there grew diuerſe ſuſpitions both on the one ſide and the other. The Spaniards could not endure with any patience nor abide to heare the people cry (as they went vp and downe the towne) God ſaue the Queene, long may the houſe of Duraz proſper, with ſuch like acclamations: beſides in all publicke edictes and proclamations, there was no mention made of any other, then of the name of the Queene onely, and therefore Alphonſus determined to preuent her in that, which ſhe perhappes, and (as he thought) did pretend againſt him: aud that was to take her priſoner, and to ſeize vppon the eſtate. But the firſt thing that he purpoſed was to bereaue her of the councell and aſsiſtance of the Grand Seneſchall, who was a perſonage of great wiſdome, and of a deepe reach and ſound iudgement, and therefore hee faining him ſelfe to be ſicke and euill at eaſe, did continue three or foure dayes priuately in his lodging without going to court the Queene, who lay in the tower Capouane. The Queene thinking that heThe Grand Seneſchall held priſoner by Alphonſus. had beene ſicke indeede, ſent her Seneſchall to Caſtell noue to viſite him on her behalfe, where he detained him and all his traine, and at the ſame inſtant taking his horſe, he went to the Capouane to haue ſeized vppon the perſon of the Queene: but this his counſell proued vaine and fruſtrate, by the intelligence which ſhe had receiued by one of the Seneſchall his ſeruaunts, who was eſcaped from the ſurprize of the Seneſchall. Hereuppon the Arragonois betooke him ſelfe to open force, and beſieged the Queene, battering the fortreſſe of Capouan with the Canon. TheQueene Ione beſieged in Naples by Alphonſus Queene finding her ſelfe thus hardly beſtead, had recourſe to Sforce, who lay encamped at that time for Lewes of Aniow, at the Monaſtery neare Mirabell. Sforce
               
(hauing had the better in a great conflict againſt the Spaniard, within Naples at Caſe
               Queene Ione deliuered out of Naples by Sforce. 
               noue neare to Formell, and about the tower Capouane, did deliuer the Queene thence in ſafety, and conuaied her with all her moueables to Auerſa. At the time of her retrait from Naples, there were more then fiue thouſand Neapolitanes both men and women of all ſorts, who mourning and lamenting at her misfortune, did accompany her a great way off, with great ſorrow and infinite lamentation. Within a while after Sforce began to treate with her, that Lewes (who was continually reſident at Rome) might returne to the Realme of Naples, whereunto ſhe condiſcended: and more then that, when he was come to Auerſa, ſhee receiued him with moſt gracious and kinde entertainement: and beſides, hauing aſſembled many great and noble perſonages ofAlphonſus diſinherited by Queene Ione. great wiſdome and iudgement, by their aduiſe and councell, ſhee ſolemnly depriued Alphonſus of the right of adoption, and from the ſucceſsion of the Crowne of Naples: pretending that he had worthely forfeited it by the vice of his foule ingratitude, and ſhee adopted Lewes the third to ſucceed her, as her ſonne in that her kingdome, vponLewes the 3. adopted by Queene Ione. the ſame conditions which ſhe had earſt propounded to the king of Arragon: giuing to vnderſtand by expreſſe letters vnto all the Potentates & Princes of Chriſtendome, both the order, tenour, and cauſes of the depriuation of the one, and the adoption of the other.
            About that time Alphonſus being aduertiſed, that Henry his brother was taken priſoner and ſpoiled of his Crowne, by Iohn King of Caſtill: he reſolued to take a iourneyAlphonſus returneth into Spaine. into Spaine for his deliueraunce, which hee did accordingly in the yeare one thouſand foure hundred twenty three, leauing Naples in the gard and cuſtody of his brother Peter. In that his voiage paſsing by Marſeilles, and finding it but ill guarded, heMarſeilles ſurpriſed by Alphonſus. ſurpriſed it by a ſodaine aſſault onely in hatred and deſpite of Lewes, and he vſed it as enemy. For hauing abandonned it to the auarice and inſolency of his ſouldiours, that which he was not able to cary away, he cauſed to be burnt and conſumed with the fire: onely the women were ſaued and preſerued from the violence and outrage of the ſouldiours, the King hauing cauſed them to retire into a Church, whileſt the towne was rifled and ſacked. Of the infinite treaſures and riches which were foundS. Lewes his body caried away from Marſeilies by Alphonſus. Deuotion without piety or religion▪
                within the city, he reſerued nothing to himſelfe (as the report is) but onely the body of Sainct Lewes late Archbiſhop of Tholouſe, the ſonne of Charles the ſecond king of Naples: the which he caried from thence, and cauſed it to be placed moſt religiouſly in a certaine ſpeciall place within the city of Valentia in Spaine, ſaying: that it was not a thing either decent or conuenient, in a towne which was burnt and deſtroied, to leaue ſo holy and precious a relique.
            
               Lewes lately made King was not idle in this meane while, but he did preſently put in execution the practiſes newly concluded on, betweene Pope Martin, the Queene of Naples, Philip Duke of Milan, and the Genowaies. For by their meanes was Naples ſodainely and in an inſtant beſieged and encloſed both by Sea, with theNaples beſieged by Philip Duke of Milan. Francis Sforce, the ſonne of Sforce Cottignole deceaſed. Naples recouered for Queene Ione. Grand Seneſ
                     •
                  hall of Naples ranſomed by Sforce. forces and fleete of the Duke of Milan, and by land with the armes of Frauncis Sforce, the ſonne of Sſorce Cottignole lately deceaſed: in ſo much that without any great violence or effuſion of bloud, it was recouered for the Queene in the yeare, one thouſand foure hundred twenty foure. Now Queene Ione being ſo happily reſtored and reinueſted in her eſtate, made her entry into Naples, hauing in her company the Graund Seneſchall (who was of late eſchaunged for twelue Catalans or Spaniſhe Nobles, by the liberality and curteſie of Sforce afore mentioned, who might haue hadde foure ſcore thouſand Crownes for their raunſome,) and Lewes alſo her adopted and elected ſonne, whom ſhee had created Duke of Calabria, being the title ordinarily giuen to the eldeſt ſonne of the Kings and Princes of Naples)

was with her at the ſame time of her returne to the Citie of Naples. Nowe albeit ſhe was not altogether free and exempted from troubles, but that the towne was ſometimes endommaged by the artillerie of Castell noue (which was ſtill at the deuotion of the Spaniard): neuertheleſſe ſhe liued ſufficiently well and happily in her realme, vntill the yeare a thouſand, foure hundred, thirtie two, at which time the Graund Seneſhall (who till that time had with moſt happie and proſperous fortune commaunded, and in a manner abſolutely ruled all the realme) was then ouertaken and enſnared by the Queene, as you ſhall perceiue by that which followeth. Within a while after he had ſolemnized the marriage of his ſonne with one of the daughters of Iames Caldore, euen when he ſawe him ſelfe (as a man may ſay) ſitting aloft vpon the wheele of Fortune: one Monday about midnight, being lodged within the tower Capouane, certaine perſons by the ſpeciall commaundement of the Queene, and ſome other of the Nobles confederated with her, went vnto his lodging, knocking and calling at his chamber doore, and willing him to ariſe ſpeedily, and to make haſt to come to the Queene: ſaying, that by reaſon of a ſudden accident which was befallenGrand Seneſhall of Naples ſlaine. her, ſhe was in great daunger and perill of death. The Seneſhall riſing ſuddenly to make him ſelfe readie, commaunded his page to open the doore. Thereupon they without being armed, entred the chamber and ſlue him out of hand: and hauing almoſt cut off one of his legges, they cauſed him to be caried all naked out of Capouane 
               without anie pompe at all, as the moſt vile and wretched creature liuing. A moſtSentence. The immoderate loue and fauor of womākind vain for any man to build his fortune on. Lewes the third Duke of Aniow and Calabria his death. miſerable and vnhappie example of the inconſtancie of Fortune, and may ſerue for a notable inſtruction and admonition to all ſuch perſons, who relying vpon the fickle loue and immoderate affections of woman kind, do found the greatneſſe of their fortune vpon their vaine and vnconſtant fauours.
            
            
               Lewes being ſent by Commiſſion of the Queene againſt Iohn Anthonie Vrſin Prince of Tarentum: (who taking part with Alphonſus, did trouble and moleſt Calabria, when he came to Coſſence fell ſicke of a feauer, and there dyed, in the yeare of our Lord a thouſand, foure hundred, thirtie fower, to the great griefe and ſorow of the whole kingdome: for that he was a Prince of ſingular curteſie and benignitie, and there was eſpeciall hope of his good cariage and behauiour. The Queene liuedIone 2. Queene of Naples death. not long after, but hauing raigned twentie yeares ſhe departed this life, hauing ordained by her laſt will and teſtament that Rene Duke of Barre, brother of the ſayd Lewes ſhould be her heire: (albeit that ſome doubt of this her laſt will, and ſay, itRene Duke of Barre ordained to be heire to Queene Ione. was falſified and counterfaited after her death. Thus the houſe and familie of Duras, which had bene ſo notable and famous by ſo manie deſcents, came nowe to haue an end, as it is likewiſe fatall to all other humane and earthly things.
            Duke Rene being called and ſent for by the principall perſons and chiefe Nobles of the realme, could not go to take the inueſtiture of the kingdome of Naples, by reaſonRene Duke of Barre priſoner in Burgundie. that he was for a long time held priſoner in Burgundie, where he had bene reſtrained of his libertie after the loſſe of the battell of Blainuille, in the yeare a thouſand, foure hundred, thirtie one, againſt the Earle of Vaudemont, and the Marſhall of Burgundie: and therefore he ſent thither Iſabell his wife, and his children: who being ayded and ſuccoured by Pope Eugenius with a power of three thouſand footemenEugenius Pope vnder the leading and conduct of the Patriarke of Aquileia, brought certaine places vnder her gouernement and obeiſſaunce. On the other ſide, the king Alphonſus (as if Fortune had meant and ſtriued to ballaunce both parties equally and alike)Alphonſus taken priſoner by the Duke of Millan. vnderſtanding of the death of the Queene, and hauing beſieged Gaietta, was vanquiſhed in a battell at ſea by Philip Duke of Millan and the Genowayes: and being there taken by his enemies, was ledde priſoner to Millan. But he found the Italian Duke

more gracious and friendly vnto him, then the Burgonian was to the Angeuin: for beſides the great reſpect, wherewith he was vſed by the Millanois, and the good entertainement which he receiued at his handes, they, oftentimes meeting and falling into familiar diſcourſes and ſeuerall deuiſes the one with the other, the manners, the ſpeeches, the faſhions and good behauiour of Alphonſus (for he was a moſt abſolute and accompliſhed Prince) did ſo exceedingly pleaſe and content the humour of this Duke, that (in regard of the inward and rare amitie which this familiaritie and acquaintance bred betweene them) it may well be ſayd: that his misfortune was the readie way to his good fortune, and did purchaſe him the realme which heAlphonſus ſet at libertie by the Duke of Millan. ſo earneſtly affected. For the Duke of Millan then growing ſuſpicious of the power and puiſſance of the French, for the loue of the Spaniard did renounce the friendſhip and alliance of Fraunce, and leagued him ſelfe with their enemie, to the recouerie and conqueſt of Naples: in ſuch ſort, that hauing ſuddenly graunted him his free libertie, Alphonſus was the firſt that ſet foote within the kingdome of Naples: by meanes whereof (as the prouerbe is) being firſt come, he was firſt ſerued, and his right preuailed by reaſon of the abſence of Rene, ſo that he inſinuated him ſelfe verieRene Duke of Barre ſet at libertie, and regaineth Naples and all her fortreſſes. Naples beſieged by Alphonſus. highly into the fauour and affections, both of the Princes, & Nobles, and of the people of the countrey. Neuertheles within a while after, Rene being alſo deliuered out of Burgundy, and being entred into Naples in the yeare of our Lord 1438. he regained all her caſtles and ſtrong holdes one peece after another, which till that time had bene in the cuſtodie and poſſeſſion of the Arragonian. But Alphonſus increaſing in ſtrength from day to day, came at length to beſiege Naples with fifteene thouſand men at land, and ten gallies, lying before the hauen or port of the citie: and he perſeuered ſo obſtinately in his ſiege, that there dayly paſſed many goodly exploites, and gloriousAnell a maſon betrayeth Naples. deedes of armes betweene the aſſaylants and the defendants: notwithſtanding both he and his troupes might haue dwelt long enough before the walles of Naples, if they had not bene holpen by the aduertiſements of a certaine Maſon named Anell: who being pricked on with the hope of gaine, did aduenture his life to augment the glory and good fortune of Alphonſus. For conueying him ſelfe cloſely and priuily foorth of the towne: he ſhewed him an auncient ceſterne, or water courſe, which couertly led vnder the ground into the towne, by the which he conueyed in two hundredNaples taken by Alphonſus. men hardie and reſolute, who iſſuing forth into the citie by a pit or hollow vault, did ſeize vpon a certaine turret: where maintaining the fight for a long ſeaſon (whileſt the Catalans in the meanetime, partly by eſcalado, and partly by breaking of the port S. Genare did make them ſelues way, and gayned the towne) by this meanes he became Lord of the Citie, hauing conſtrained Rene to retire him ſelfe into Caſtell noue.
            Thus Alphonſus in the yeare a thouſand, foure hundred, fortie two, and the one and twentieth after his firſt expedition, obtained the kingdome and Citie of Naples:
               Belliſarius. the which nine hundred & fiue yeares before was recouered from the Gothes, by thatRene enforced to forgoe Naples. princely chieftaine Belliſarius, by meanes of the ſame conduit or water courſe. There remained yet the three Caſtels or fortreſſes, namely the Capouane, the mountaine or Caſtell of Saint Hereme, and the Caſtell noue: all which, king Rene being not able to defend and ſuccour them, did followe the eſtate and condition of the reſidue of the towne, and became Arragonois, both them and all the realme: and the Prince of Aniow forced to forgoe the doubtfull and turbulent poſſeſſion of that kingdome, which he had held for the ſpace of ſixe yeares or thereabouts. Alphonſus after he hadAlphonſus king of Naples his death. in great reſt and ſecuritie quietly enioyed the Royall ſcepter for ſixteene yeares together, did then depart this life, leauing behind him one onely ſonne, illegitimate, named

               Ferdinand or Fernand, who being appointed by his father to haue the inheritance of the Crowne and kingdome of Naples: yet (being but meanely fauoured or beloued by the countrey) did not enioy it with like quietneſſe, nor with the publike tranquillitie: which was the occaſion, that hee vſed all meanes and poſſible diligence to ſecure and aſſure vnto him ſelfe a quiet and peaceable poſſeſſion of the kingdome.
            The firſt thing that he did, was to make Pope Pius the ſecond his friend andPope Pius 2. well-willer: who being a Siennois borne, was of late ſubſtituted into the place of Calixtus. This did he compaſſe and bring to paſſe, by the mediation and intreatieDutchy of Spoleta reſtored to the Church. Ferdinand crowned king of Naples by Pope Pius 2. of the Duke of Millan, and by the reſtitution of the Dutchie of Spoleta to the Church: the which, vpon the death of Calixtus, the Count Iames Picenin had vſurped vpon Peter Lewes Borgia his nephewe. The Pope, being wonne vnto him by this curteſie, did crowne Ferdinand king of Naples, Sicilie, and Ieruſalem: on this condition, that he ſhould reſtore to the obeiſſance of the Church of Rome, Beneuent and Terracine which his father had vſurped vppon the ſtate Eccleſiaſticall.Beneuent. Terracine. Moreouer, in the yeare next following, at the Councell which was called and kept at Mantua by the Pope, and with the aſſiſtance of the Duke of Millan,
               Councell of Mantua. for the taking of armes againſt the great Turke, after they had determined vppon matters concerning the publicke weale of Chriſtendome, it was alſo concluded and decreed by the Pope, that in any caſe Ferdinand ſhould not want ayde and ſuccours againſt the puiſſaunt preparations made for the warres by Duke Iohn, the ſonne of Rene, who was then at Genes. For you muſt vnderſtand, that the Genowayes beingIohn the ſonne of Rene, ayded by the Genowayes againſt Ferdinand king of Naples. then freed from the feare of their Banditi, or outlawes by the ayde of the French, were content (that they might be ridde of them) to ſet them on in the voyage and iourney of Naples: and they concluded to giue them ſuccours. For this cauſe they cauſed to arme and make readie tenne Galleaſſes, and three great ſhippes of burthen for the cariage of their traine and neceſſaries: all which they payed for three moneths before hand: and they gaue him alſo in readie money out of the banke of Saint George three ſcore thouſand crownes. Beſides theſe veſſelles, the Duke had of his fatherThe Banke of S. George at Genes. twelue other Galleaſſes at Marſeilles, with promiſe both from the French king and from him, that he ſhould want nothing. Wherefore all things being in a readineſſe, and hauing appointed Iohn Coſſe a Neapolitan for the Admirall of his Nauie, he tooke ſea the fourth day of October, in the yeare of our Lord a thouſand, foure hundred, fiftie and nine: and by the benefite of their ſayles and oares he arriued at Gatetta, purpoſing from thence to take his courſe for Calabria, where the Marqueſſe of Crotona had called him, and did expect him: but hearing by the way, that theMarqueſſe of Crotona. Marqueſſe was ouerthrowen, and taken priſoner by Ferdinand, he held his enterpriſe vtterly ouerthrowen likewiſe: becauſe that vpon hope of him onely he had vndertaken that iourney. But, as it is commonly and often ſeene, that things deſperate and paſt all hope do many times proue more fortunate then thoſe that are aduiſedly and conſiderately taken in hand, ſo it fell out with Duke Iohn at this time: for Marin de Marſan Duke of Seſſe, and Prince of Roſſan did reuiue both his courage andMarin de Marſan Duke of Seſſe. his hope. This Nobleman had his landes lying ouer againſt the towne of Baie, not farre from the ſea, where the French armie laye a floate: and hee ſent vnto them, offering both him ſelfe and his forces to aſſiſt them: and ſo was the firſt man that diſcouered him ſelfe to be the authour, and chiefe procurer of the reuolt and rebellion of the Neapolitanes againſt Ferdinand. For the newes of this reuolt being diſperſedRebellion of the Neapolitans againſt Ferdinand. throughout the realme, you would not imagine howe ſuddenly the inhabitaunts of the countrey were chaunged, and howe their affections enclined to the

fauour of the Angeuin. For both the Princes, the Barons, and the people did in a manner ſtriue and contend together, who ſhould be the firſt to kiſſe the handes ofPrinces and Nobles of Naples confederate with the Duke of Aniow. this newe Seigniour. Beſides the Prince of Tarentum (who was the chiefe man, though not yet openly declared the enemy of Ferdinand:) the Princes of Beſignan and Salerne: the Duke of Venuſe: Peter Iohn Paule Duke of Sora: the Count Cola de Campobaſſo: Anthonie Caldore, and almoſt all the Nobilitie of Apulia, together with all the townes and fortreſſes of the countrey, taking armes againſt Ferdinand, did ſtand wholy for the Angeuin. By meanes whereof his hoaſt being greatly increaſed, and Apulia being open vnto him, he marched on throughout the whole countrey, ſoliciting thoſe townes to his deuotion which as yet ſtoode in doubt and ſuſpence. Afterwardes being entred farther vp into that part of Apulia which isMarqueſſe de Eſte. plaine and champion, and was held for Ferdinand by the Marqueſſe de Eſte, and Don Alonſo a Spaniard: the ſayd Marqueſſe (being ſecretely wrought by his brother Borze Lord of Ferrara, who was a verie deuote and great fauourer of the French,
               Borze Lord of Ferrara. and did abound in the reaſons of his diſcontentment againſt Ferdinand) came to ſeeke the Duke of Aniow, hauing with him in his companie a traine of fiue or ſixe hundred good horſe, which made Alonſo to be mightily abaſhed. By the departure of the Marqueſſe, they of the plaine countrey being freed from the yoke, by his authoritie became all to ſtand for the Angeuin, and the townes likewiſe yeelded franckly vnto him. The Prince of Tarentum nowe perceiuing the good ſucceſſe and proſperitie that followed the Angeuin, beyond all credit and expectation, would no longer diſſemble his malicious and euill minde againſt Ferdinand, but made open warre againſt him with three thouſand horſe, vnder the charge and conduct of two Captaines, Vrſe Vrſin and Iulius de Aquauiue. Beſides all theſe great Princes andCount Iames Picenin General of the army for Duke Iohn againſt Ferdinand. men of marke aboue mentioned, the Duke had drawen into his pay, the Count Iames Picenin, one of the moſt famous and politicke Captaines in that age: who comming to his ſeruice accompanied with a good number of men, of his old bands of mercenarie ſouldiers, was made Generall of all the power and forces of the Duke. On the part of Ferdinand were the Duke of Dande, the Duke of Malfie, the CountiesPrinces and Nobles of Naples partaking with Ferdinād. 
               de Fondi, de Arriane, and Matalune: the Caraſſes, and the Diamedes, Gentlemen Neapolitans and ſome others in a verie ſmall and little number. Both the one part and the other hauing taken the field, and being both in a full reſolution, and readie appointed to trie their fortune by a ſet battell: they aſſigned the place of fight to be in the territorie of Sarnie. Each of them being come to the place appointed, and theirBattel of Sarni betweene Ferdinand and Duke Iohn. Victory of Iohn againſt Ferdinand. battels being marſhalled and ſet in order, they went together in moſt furious and cruel maner, and for a long time the conflict continued with great obſtinacie. In the end manie being ſlaine on both ſides, the honour of the day remained to the French, and Ferdinand being put to flight, with the loſſe of his campe, and all his baggage, was chaſed euen to the gates of Naples.
            
            The Biſhoppe of Rome vnderſtanding of this diſaſter and misfortune fallen toThe Pope and Duke of Millan aid Ferdinand. 
               Ferdinand, becauſe (for his parte) hee would not fayle in the capitulations of the league: and doubting leaſt (if the realme of Naples ſhould be ſubdued by conqueſt) the French would encroch vppon the libertie and dominion of the Italian Princes through the inſolencie and pride of his victorie, he aduertiſed the Duke of Millan, with all poſſible ſpeede of the ſtate of their affaires: and they two with oneFrederick Duke of Vrbin. Alexander Sforce. Battell of Saint Fabian. accorde and by common aduiſe did ſend Fredericke Duke of Vrbin and Alexander Sforce with a ſtrong and puiſſaunt armie to the ayde and ſuccour of the king of Naples. They being entred vppon the territorie of Abruzze, the Count Iames marched forward againſt them, and met with them neare to Saint Fabian, where

was fought betweene them a moſt fierce and blouddie battell: but once againe the Armie of the Arragonians being diſcomfited, the Angeuins obtayned a notableThe ſecond victorie of the French againſt Ferdinand. victorie, howbeit it coſt them full dearely. The report hereof being brought vnto Ferdinand, who was fled into Naples, beganne to make him muſe and imagine with him ſelfe what would followe, and he feared that ere long the towne would be beſieged. He left therefore the Queene to keepe Naples, and being not able of him ſelfe to make head againſt the armes both of his domeſticall and forraine foes, being ſpoyled of the moſt parte of his dominions: he put him ſelfe within Barie,
               Bary or Barlette. with a verie ſmall and weake companie. The Count Picenin being enformed of his flight, left a ſtrong garriſon in Abruzze, for feare leaſt ſome newe enemie onFerdinand beſieged within Barie, by the Count Picenin. that ſide, ſhould cut off the courſe of his attemptes: and with the reſt of his troupes he followed cloſe after the king euen to Barie. In the meane while Pope Pius and the Millanois made new prouiſions, and ſent them for the reliefe of Ferdinand: but the enemie hauing ſeized vpon all the paſſages, this leuie ſerued to no purpoſe, but onely for a vaine and fruitleſſe ſhewe.
            The Pope being in greater feare and perplexitie nowe then euer before, did perceiue well, that this matter would require forreine ſuccours, and that the valureConfederates of Ferdinand ſent to Scanderbeg for ſuccours in the behalfe of Ferdinand. and proweſſe of ſtraunge forces was to be vſed in this caſe. Whereupon all the confederates did thinke it beſt to ſend for Scanderbeg into Apulia, who being a Prince of great eſtimation and renowme in deedes of armes, was very ſeruiceable to the See of Rome: and withall was of late the moſt inward friend of Alphonſus, and no leſſe affectionate to Ferdinand. Beſides that, they conſidered that Scanderbeg comming from the Sea, they could not hinder nor deny his landing in Apulia, but that he might open the paſſages towards Italie if neede were, ſo as the army and forces of the league might haue free liberty alſo to come on that ſide.
            I cannot in this place but greatly wonder, and in ſome ſort alſo it doth not a litle grieue me, to ſee the ingratitude of writers to thoſe perſons, whoſe valour hath ſo well and excellently deſerued. For whereas diuerſe of all ſortes haue written very diligently, and recorded the ſumme of this warre betweene Ferdinand and the French: yet is there not any of them that hath ſpoken ſo much as one word of Scanderbeg, as though he had not beene (I may well ſpeake it) the principall and chiefe cauſe of the happy ſucceſſe of that warre: nay (if I may lawfully ſaie the truth) the true defendor of the Crowne of Ferdinand, and the deliuer of him out of the hands of his enemies. And hereof I neede giue you no other teſtimonie, then the liberall and bountifull recompence and reward giuen him by the King: for beſides that he acknowledged and held him for his father as long as he liued, he gaue him alſo in acknowledgement of his deſertes, and the rewardes of his vertue, the towne of Trana, and two other townes of as good reckoning in Aqulia, which the poſteritie of Scanderbeg did continually enioy: after that the affaires of Epire (vpon the death of Scanderbeg) fell to decay and ruine, and they do in part alſo enioy them at this preſent, as may well be ſeene euen to this day.
            The Ambaſſadours of the league were no ſooner arriued in Epire, bringing with them letters from the Pope, the king Ferdinand, and the Duke of Millan, but thatAmbaſſade frō the Pope, Ferdinand, & the Duke of Millan to Scanderbeg. 
               Scanderbeg was willing to giue them audience. Wherefore being brought vnto his preſence, they briefly recited vnto him, howe the king of Naples hauing loſt two great battels in the very heart of his realme, his Nobles and ſubiects, and the moſt part of his townes were reuolted from him: and himſelfe, being (as it were) baniſhed and exiled out of his countrey, was encloſed and ſhut vp with a tedious and troubleſome ſiege, in a towne ill fortified, ill prouided, and ſcarce defenſible, without the hope of

ſome preſent and ſpeedie ſuccours: wherefore if he had any remembrance and regard of the ſtrict friendſhip and amitie ſo faithfully held and obſerued betweene him and the king Alphonſus father of Ferdinand, that then it would pleaſe him ſpeedily and without delay to paſſe with his forces into Apulia, to deliuer & free him frō the yoke and ſeruitude of ſtrangers, and not him onely, but all Italie, and (it might be) the holy ſiege of the See of Rome: whereunto they did all of them intreat and require him moſt earneſtly.
            There needed no great perſwaſions to the king of Albany to draw him on in this voyage: for beſides that he was moſt deuoutly affected to the Church of Rome, the memory of his late and moſt inward amitie with king Alphonſus, did ſo farre preuaile with him, that ſetting aſide all the affaires of his owne kingdome, both publike and priuate, he franckly and voluntarily made him ſelfe a partie in the warre of Naples, and prouided preſently and out of hand for his embarkement and departure. But before that he left Epire, he found the way to aſſure himſelf of a truce with Mahomet: andTruce between Scanderbeg & Mahomet. yet him ſelfe was not ſeene to motion or moue the matter, as though it proceeded of his ſeeking. Whereupon hauing ſet the affaires of his realme in good order, he ordained the Queene to be Regent of the kingdome, to whom he adioyned for aſſiſtaunts, ſome of the moſt worthie and chiefe perſons of the prouince, to counſell and aduiſeGoic Streeſe ſent into Apulia by Scanderbeg. her in the gouernement of the Eſtate. Afterwardes he diſpatched away Goic his nephew, a Knight of great and ſufficient proweſſe, with a choiſe companie of fiue hundred horſe towards the realme of Naples, willing him there to attend his comming: and in the meane while to keepe the enemie buſied by dayly roades and inuaſions vpon them.
            Theſe things being thus accompliſhed, after that the publike proceſſions, vowes, and prayers were ended for their good ſucceſſe and victorie, and for the preſeruation of him ſelfe and his people, he cauſed his armie to ſet forward, part of them to the gulfe of Rizic, where the Italian gallies did attend them: and part of them to the port ofGulfe of Rizic. Duras, or Durachium, Acroliſſa. Raguſa, or Epidaure. 
               Duras, and another part to Acroliſſa or Media and the reſidue of his forces him ſelfe conducted to Aſcriuia, and from thence to Raguſa, where his owne veſſels were prepared to receiue him. But before I paſſe any further, I will deſcribe vnto you (as well as I can) the towne and eſtate of Raguſa.
            
            That which at this day men call Raguſa, was of old and in times paſt termed Epidaure,
               Deſcription of Raguſa. Liburnia. a citie (as ſome affirme) ſeated in Liburnia, vpon the Adriatique ſea, beautified with an excellent harbour, moſt fit and conuenient for ſhipping to ride and anker in, and defended with a great and ſtrong tower notably fortified and well furniſhed. The compaſſe thereof is more then a mile in circuit: her caſtell being inexpugnable, is on euery ſide enuironed with mountaines, and beſides excellently well fortified by art and handie worke of skilfull enginers. The towne was once abundantly ſtored with Churches and Temples, and richly beautified and adorned with goodly buildings, and with liuely ſprings and fountaines of water, which did continually flow into the towne by conduits & ceſterns. The citie was wont to vſe the Ariſtocratical forme of ciuill gouernement, by the greateſt and chiefeſt perſons of the Eſtate, and they do attribute the firſt originall and foundation of their citie to the Epidaurians of Peloponneſa. The territorie thereof is not very large, but full of woods, and hath two litle townes or hamlets belonging vnto it.
            But let vs go on with the voyage of Scanderbeg: At his comming to Raguſa, allScanderbeg receiued at Raguſa. the people in generall went foorth to meete him, with exceeding ioy and incomparable triumph: and conducting him into the towne, did receiue him with all the honor that might be imagined. The next day after that the diuine ſeruice was ended,

he went about the towne to take a view and ſuruey thereof: and the third day he viſited the hauen, the arſenall, the fortreſſe, and the rampiers. The day following was employed in diuerſe ſorts of ſhewes and pleaſant triumphs: and the fifth day he went to the Senate houſe, where were preſented vnto him many goodly and rich gifts: beſides that he was there receiued with an elegant Oration, containing a commendation of his great exploits and good deſerts: and pronounced with a ſingular good grace byDauid Chauncelor of Raguſa 
               Dauid the Chancelour of that Common wealth. This Oration was anſwered by Paul Angell Archbiſhop of Duraz: who (as another Achates) was alwayes a companionPaul Angell the Archbiſhop of Duraz. to the Prince of Epire, and was a partaker with him in all his trauels, perils, and councounſels. Theſe curteſies being paſt and ended both on the one part and the other, Scanderbeg made ſtay at Raguſa onely ſo long, till that his whole fleete was there aſſembled: during which time of his abode, there was not pretermitted any kinde of ſports and triumphs, at tilt, turney, barriers, and ſuch like. In all which exerciſes the Albanians did ſhew themſelues to be very expert, as beſeemed good and worthie ſouldiers, till ſuch time as they were commaunded to prepare themſelues to go to ſea, for that the time did now require their departure. All things being prepared in a readineſſe, the king thought it beſt to cauſe all his veſſels to come together to Raguſa, and that all his troupes both horſe and foote, ſhould draw thither, to the intent they might take the benefite of the firſt winde to ſayle from thence into Apulia. For this cauſe he diſpatched away ſundry meſſengers along the ſea ſide, to wil all the ſhips, gallies, foiſts, and brigandines which had bene ſent from Italie for the cariage and tranſportation of his armie, to repaire all together to Raguſa: beſides all which, as many veſſels of his owne as were found vppon the coaſts of Epire and Macedonie, did arriue thither in great numbers: inſomuch that both the towne was too litle for the entertainment of ſo much people, and the port was too ſtraight for ſo great a fleet. All of them ſhewed themſelues ſo forward and willing to paſſe the ſea, that they ſeemed not as men that had bene led and drawne to the warres, but as if they had bene inuited to enioy the prize of an aſſured and vndoubted victorie: there were very few men left in Epire or Macedon that were fit & able for the warres, but he had drawn them into that action. Yet is there great varietie & diuerſitie of opinions touching the certainty of the numbers that he tranſported to the realme of Naples: ſome affirme, that he had with him fiue thouſand foote, and fiue and twentie hundred horſe: others ſay, two thouſand foote, and three thouſand and fiue hundred horſe. Some name no certaine number at all (amongſt whom, the truth being ſo vncertaine, I meane to make one) and they ſay, that the multitude which embarked themſelues with him for Italie, was ſo great and incredible, that it ſeemed there were ſcant left behind any ſufficient or able men, either in Albanie, Sclauonie, or Macedonie, for the keeping of their houſes and priuate dwellings.
            Nowe to the intent his armie might be embarked and put aboord without diſorder and confuſion, Scanderbeg tooke the care of that matter to himſelf, and he appointed Guirize de Vladienne to be Comiſſarie of the victuals: who made prouiſion thereofGuirize de Vladienne. for fifteene dayes, (of the which ſtore they had for fiue dayes readie dreſſed.) Euery man being gotten on ſhip boord, he ſent certaine skiffes throughout all the fleete, to giue them aduertiſement, that the Patrons and two ſouldiers of each ſhip ſhould repaire vnto him vpon the ſhore to vnderſtand his will and pleaſure: who being come he demaunded of them, whether they had freſh water and bisket aboord for as many dayes as they had victuals: and anſwer being made, that they had prouiſion of all things for fifteene dayes: he then enioyned and gaue ſpeciall charge to the ſouldiers, that they ſhould hold them ſelues ſtill and quiet, and be in a readineſſe to helpe the

Pylots and Marriners if neede were, and that euery man ſhould attend his charge and office without any noiſe or altercation amongſt them. Himſelfe and Gine Muſache made the right wing with fiue Galleaſſes: Andrewe, Zacharie, and Moſes had the commaund and charge of the left wing, in which were the ſame number of the like veſſels both ſeruing for the ſafegard and defence of their ſhippes of charge. He ordainedScanderbeg embarketh him ſelfe for Italy. that euerie Galleaſſe ſhould haue one lanterne, and that thoſe of charge ſhould haue two: and that the Admirall or chiefe Galleaſſe ſhould haue three lights or lanternes. Theſe rules and orders being ſet downe and pronounced, the next day he gaue them the ſignall to weigh anker, and to make out of the hauen to ſeaward, committing himſelfe and his nauie to the guide and protection of the diuine power. Many of his veſſels were launched forth & put out to ſea from the gulfe of Rizic, from the port of Duraz, from Valona, and from the coaſt of Epyre and of Sclauony: and many of them alſo were gone before and had taken their courſe all alone. Aſſoone as the day began to breake, Scanderbeg being abord the Admirall, and hauing commanded a generall ſilence by ſound of trumpet, with a high voice began to pray in this manner.
            Lord Ieſus Chriſt Sonne of the euerliuing God, which ſitteſt at the right hande
                  Praier by Scanderbeg 
                        •
                     oing to the aide of the King of Naples. of the Father moſt high and omnipotent in the eternall glorie, who in the beginning diddeſt create all things of nothing, gouerning and guiding them according to thy good will & pleaſure: who from all eternitie haſt forechoſen the holy Chriſtian faith and by the effuſion of thy moſt precious bloud, and by the bloud of thy holy Martyrs and Apoſtles haſt laide the foundation of the ſame, and in moſt wonderful maner haſt cauſed it to be dilated and diſperſed throughout the vniuerſall world: hauing appointed the moſt bleſſed S. Peter to be the Vicar and the Prince of the Apoſtles, and haſt giuen to him and his ſucceſſors, the whole and full authoritie of binding and looſing both in heauen and in earth: and haſt willed and commaunded all men liuing, eſpecially the Chriſtian and elect people to be obedient to their admonitions and cōmandements, and to ſuſtaine, maintaine, and defend the Catholique faith and the Church of Rome euen to the death: Behold ô Lord, I a moſt humble and poore ſheepe, altogether vnworthy to be one of thy fold, haue with a free heart & willing taken vpon me the burthen of this iorney and expedition by their direction and commaundement, to the intent vnder the conduct & protection of thy mercy, I may maintaine, & with all my power defend the libertie of thy holy Church, thy Catholique faith, the citie of Rome, and the countrie of Italy againſt thoſe that haue inuaded it, and are their profeſſed enemies. Wherefore moſt mercifull God and almightie Father, who art both venerable and fearfull, I do inuocate thy diuine Maieſty, and do moſt humbly require thee to be fauourable to this my enterpriſe: reach out thy hand thy outſtretched arme, and ſend vnto me Michaell thy Archangell, thy holy meſſenger & miniſter: whoſe fauor may be with me, and may accompany me day & night (for I do gladly reuerence & honor him) who may giue vnto me & furniſh me with force, ſtrength & courage: that this voyage & paſſage may be happy and proſperous vnto me, and that I may attaine in health and ſafety with this my army to the country of Apulia, that the enemies being diſcomfited and put to flight, I may triumph in the ſpoyles, and prey of the enemies, and that hauing obtained the ſumme and ende of my deſires, I may returne into my countrie and to my owne home with ſafetie, health and victorie.
            
            This praier being ended, the Archbiſhop celebrated the Maſſe, after which, the trumpet gaue them warning to fall to their oares, and with a freſh gale of wind, they were ſoon off the coaſts & ſhore of Albany. But within a while after there aroſe a thickScanderbeg faileth towards Italy. & foggy cloud or miſt which did ſo couer them from the ſight ech of other, that they could ſcarcely diſcerne how to keepe their gallies from beating one againſt an other.

Neuertheleſſe holding on their courſe, they made ſaile till it drew towards night. By this time they beganne to diſcouer a little Iſle, and the Pylot demaunded of the King, whether he ſhould direct his courſe thither or not: for they might eaſily perceiue that there was a tempeſt comming, and the waues of the ſea beganne to ſwell, for it was in Autumne.) Scanderbeg hauing willed him to bend his courſe to the Iſle: the whole fleete did come to harbour within the port, where hauing caſt ankers, they rode there for eight dayes together, by reaſon of the outrage and ſwelling of the ſea, which being at length growen calme, and the winde ceaſed, early in the morning by the riſing of the Sunne, hauing heard diuine ſeruice, they put againe to ſea, and made ſaile all that day and the night following, ſo that the next morning by breake of day, they came within ſight of the coaſt of Apulia. Scanderbeg enquired what lande that was which appeared not farre off before them: it was tolde him, that it was the mount Saint Angell. God be thanked (ſaide Scanderbeg) bende yourOr mount Gargan. courſe thitherwardes: for I haue euer had a great deuotion to Saint Michaell. And preſently aſſoone as he had a ſight of the mountaine, he fell on both his knees and deſired of God, that this his firſt diſcouery of Apulia, might be to his glorie and to the benefite of him and his confederates. After this he commanded them to ply their tackling▪ and to hoyſe vp all their ſailes, which being filled with a merry gale of wind the armie in ſhort time arriued ſafely to the ſhore. Scanderbeg being gotten to ſhore together with the Archbiſhop, and a good number of ſouldiers, ſent abrode to ſee if they could haue any newes of the enemie. His currours being returned brought him word that they were not farre off: notwithſtanding he reſted himſelfe all at hisScanderbeg with his armie in Apulia. Or Barlet. eaſe, and hauing ſomewhat refreſhed him, he returned aborde his ſhippes, and from thence tooke his courſe directly to Bary, where he diſcharged his ſhips, and ſet all his troupes on land.
            Duke Iohn and the Count Pycenin being encamped before Bary, aſſoone as they ſaw ſo great a fleete, did preſently ſuſpect and imagine what they were: for there wasSiege of Bari raiſed by Scanderbeg. of late a certaine brute or rumour raiſed in the French hoaſt, that Ferdinand did looke for the King of Epyre to come to his ſuccour. Wherefore they truſſed vp their baggage in great haſte, and went to lodge about a thirtie miles from thence: at the diſcamping of the French, the Neapolitane King being at libertie, iſſued ioyfully out of the citie, and went to meete Scanderbeg. Then was the affection and mutuall gladneſſe of thoſe two Princes, to be ſeene and perceiued by the multitude of their embracements and kind greetings, intermingled with teares, and ſo did they makeScanderbeg receiued into Bari by Ferdinand. their entrie into Bary not without the infinite clamors and acclamations of the common ſort, in ſigne of the publique ioy & gladneſſe. Then might you haue ſeene all the towne as it were in a tumult, by meanes of the people running diſperſed in ſeuerall troups to meet the king of Albany: all the inhabitants in generall, of all ages & eſtates, and of ech ſex were aſſembled in great confuſion vpon the market place, & at the Pallace: day & night might you haue heard in the ſtreetes & in all places, perſons ſinging & triumphing for ioy of the comming of Scanderbeg: on the one ſide the inhabitants iſſued by multitudes out of the gates to ſee the ſhips and nauie of the Albanois, on the other ſide the Epyrots reſorted into the towne, and ranged vp and downe the fields & the villages, buſying & employing thēſelues in diuerſe matters. Some 
                  •
               ell to ſadling and bridling of their horſes, others to make ready their curaſſes & their armors, euery man employed himſelfe about ſome one thing or other, & all generally prepared thē
               ſelues to the warre, as if they had beene preſently to fight with the enemie. The next morning Scanderbeg taking with him a ſmall companie of his men, went forth to forage vpon the lands of ſuch as were rebels to Ferdinand, and being ſoone returned

well loaden with prey and pillage, he deuided it equally and in common to thoſe of the towne as well as to his owne ſouldiers. Afterwards a litle before the euening hauing aſſembled his companies, he thought good to encourage them and vſed theſe ſpeeches following.
            I remember (my companions and good friends) that I haue heard it reported of
                  Oration of Scanderbeg encouraging his ſouldiers againſt the Frenchmen. 
                  Beliſſarius that famous warriour, how in an expedition which he made againſt the Englishmen, with a puiſſant army by ſea: his firſt act was after, he had landed his men, to ſet 
                     •
                  ire on all his ſhippes, for feare leaſt his ſouldiers being caried away with the hope and commoditie of a ſafe paſſage backe againe, ſhould be alwaies deſirous to returne home to their owne countrie: and in ſtead of doing their beſt, and aduenturing their liues to get the victorie, they might happen by their default and negligence to be ouercome and vanquiſhed. This is nowe our caſe (my good ſouldiers) and our eſtate and condition is not much vnlike: we are now ouer the ſea, farre from our owne houſes, from our owne countrie, vppon the territories and dominions of our enemies, amongeſt ſtrangers, altogether deſtitute and voide of hope, and without any meanes to returne againe to our owne: yea our affaires are brought to that paſſe, that it is impoſſible for vs to reſolue, whether is better for vs to ſtande ſtill or to goe forwarde, conſidering that beſides our armes, our horſes, and our courages (wholly bent and addicted to deedes of armes) we haue nothing elſe left vs to relie and build vpon: for there is now no hope of life nor ſafety, if we get not ſome notable victorie vpon our enemies. But courage, (my maſters) let vs conſider, that this is the diuine will and pleaſure, that we ſhould maintaine the patrimony of Ieſus Chriſt, the houſe of God, and the ſeat of his Church: and doubt you not, but that he will ſend vs euen from heauen an eaſie and a ſpeedie victorie, vnder whoſe name and protection we being now to fight: ſoone ſhall we confound this our enemie, and then ſhall we returne into our countrie conquerours, ioyous, and triumphant. Hereof I make no doubt nor queſtion, when (firſt of all) I call to remembrance your ordinary and wonted valure, when I ſet before my eyes ſo many goodly victories which you haue gotten vppon your enemies: and then being thus confirmed through the confidence of your vertue and prowes, I haue cheerefully vndertaken this preſent voyage, as hauing learned by your armes to breake and diſcomfite greater armies, and farre better then this that is now oppoſed againſt vs. Much more reaſon haue you (my companions) not to eſteeme of theſe ſmall troupes, which (as you haue alreadie ſeene) at the onely brute and hearing of our names, and before that euer they had anie ſight of vs, did (as a man may ſay) betake themſelues to flight, and durſt not tarrie our landing, but remoued their ſiege, and are retyred from vs. It remaineth therefore that we purſue them whileſt they are in this feare and aſtoniſhment: but yet in this would I haue you to be aduiſed (my good friendes,) that if it happen this our enemie ſhould dare to abide vs, and to come to fight with vs (which I doe not beleeue) my counſell is, that at the firſt we onely holde him play by looſe and light skirmiſhes, and that we doe endeuour to wearie and ouercome him with the trauell and trouble of continuall onſets and often charges: in ſo doing eyther ſhall we put them to the ſworde, or get them aliue to be our priſoners. For the weight and heauineſſe of their owne armes doeth ſufficiently plague and afflicte them in the fight: and theſe barded horſes, are neyther ſo readie to purſue, not yet ſo nymble to flie from vs: but that we being lightly armed and mounted, haue great aduauntage againſt them, being able by courſing vppe and downe, both to annoy and to diſorder them with eaſe. Goe to then (my braue and couragious ſouldiers) let euerie man ſee that his horſe and armour be in a good readineſſe: for by the

aide and helpe of God▪ I am determined to morrowe to goe viſite the enemie.
            
            The Albanois (who deſired nothing more then to ſee the enemie) being more and more enflamed with theſe ſpeeches, the next morning by the breake of day preſented themſelues readie and reſolute to march againſt the enemie: and hauing ſerued God, they tooke the fielde with Enſignes diſplayed with a full intent to goe ſeeke out theScanderbeg his troupes in skirmiſh with the French. French: with whom when they came to encounter, they did not ioyne with them with the whole bodie of their forces in plaine and ſet battell, but they did onely taſte them with a light conflict: for that the intention of the Albanian Prince was not as yet to make a full tryall of his fortune, but onely to ſport a little with the enemie, and to proue what manner of ſouldiers they were, and how they could demeane themſelues with their armes on their backes. In this skirmiſh there lay dead vpon the place thirtie of the French partie, and twentie taken priſoners: of the Albanois not any one eyther ſlaine or taken, only foure of them were wounded, and they returned all of them with great ioy to Bari.
            
            The next day following was a Councell called of the Maſters of the Campe, and the other Chiefetaines of the armie, to the which the King Ferdinand ledde Scanderbeg: there was it propounded, that eyther they muſt aduenture the battell, or march into Abruzza, to open the paſſages for the troupes of the confederates,Ferdinand and Scanderbeg free the paſſages of Abruzza. and ſo being conioyned with them, to goe and encounter with the enemie. The concluſion was, that they ſhould take the way to Abruzza, and thereupon was order giuen to all the ſouldiers both thoſe of the King and the Albanois that they ſhould be in a readin eſſe, and that euerie man ſhould furniſh himſelfe with victuals readie dreſt for fiue dayes. This done, and the towne being aſſured with a good garriſon, the armie beganne to march, both the King and Scanderbeg being preſent: and they paſſed on cloſe and in good order, with great ſilence and ſecreſie, the darkenes of the night fauouring them, in ſuch ſort that they were not diſcryed by the French campe, which lay not far off: & ſo held on their courſe directly towards the country of Abruzza, where being arriued, and comming ſuddenly vpon thoſe that kept and garded the paſſages, they charged vpon them vnprouided ſo furiouſly both behinde and in flanke, and on all ſides, that hauing diſperſed and ſcattered them for the moſt part, orFerdinand and Scanderbeg. ioyne with the forces of the league. hauing taken or cut them in peeces: the wayes and paſſages were made open and free to the companies of the league, which were vnder the conduct and commaund of Frederick Duke of Vrbin and Alexander Sforce: who being vnited and incorporated one with the other army, they went and encamped nere to Vrſara a towne that ſtood for King Ferdinand.
            
            Now being ſo farre remoued from Bari, and conſidering that they had to deale with one the moſt ſubtle and politique warriour, and the moſt able and expert ſouldier liuing: namely Pycenin, who (as they thought) might eyther ſollicite that place to reuolt: or vpon the feare of their abſence, and by the trauerſes of vnconſtant fortune if they ſhould preſent thēſelues before the towne, they might happen with eaſe to cary and obtaine it: it was therefore thought conuenient to ſend thither ſome good and ſufficient Chiefetaine with good and ſtrong forces, both to ſecure the towne (if need were) and to preuent the enemy of any ſuch enterpriſe, and the ſame being once done and diſpatched, to returne againe, and to ioyne with them in one campe. This commiſſion was of ſufficient difficultie, and there was none that did enuie it vnto Scanderbeg: and therefore he offering himſelfe, and requeſting to haue the execution of that ſeruice, it was liberally and freely accorded vnto him. He had a good deuotion and great deſire to ſee the French once againe, and to ſpeake with Pycenin neerer and more at hande. Being arriued at Barie with his owne bandes, he found

all things there as he deſired, wherefore hauing taken order for all accidentes, he diſlodged thence as ſpeedily, and marched directly towardes the French campe. Immediatly vpon his approach, he ſent them a defiance, and challenged them to the battell: they who had vſed alwaies to vanquiſh and carrie away the victorie, made noFight betweene Scanderbeg & the French. long delay, but were as forwarde to meete him. Ech partie therefore tooke the fielde in good order and well reſolued: the Albanois had deuided his armie into three partes: Moſes of Dibria led one of his battallions, of the ſecond Guirize had the commaund, and the thirde he reſerued to himſelfe, hauing an intent therewithall to affront Pycenin. Thus all things being orderly diſpoſed for the fight: hee made towardes the enemie by three ſeuerall wayes at once. The whole day was ſpent almoſt in skirmiſhes and light conflictes: for the Albanois making ſometimes as though they fledde and feigned themſelues to be affraide: ſometimes by wheeling and caſting ſuddainely about, then againe by often and ſudden charge and retraites: courſing vppe and downe the breadth of the plaine, did ſo wearie and moleſt the French, that in the ende, the battell fell out as him ſelfe expected. Manie were ſlaine outright, and many of the Dukes ſide were taken priſoners, onely one of the Albanois was ſlaine, manie hurt and verie fewe taken. But the Count being quicke conceipted and politique, and wiſely foreſeeing that by this newe kinde of fighting: if Scanderbeg with his ſouldiers ſo well exerciſed by long practiſe, vſe, and diſcipline, did not put him to the worſt, yet he was like enough to giue him his handes full: he bethought him ſelfe therefore, that if he could get to ſpeake vnto him, he might peraduenture obtaine ſome ſtaie, and ſo cauſe himPolicie of Count Pycenin to ſurceaſe from fighting. For this cauſe he aduaunced him ſelfe alone at the head of his ſquadrons, and with a huge voyce called Scanderbeg by his name, inuiting and requeſting him to come to a parley with him. The Albanois being of a courteous and generous diſpoſition, and without anie apprehenſion of feare: knowing that it was the Countie, did not diſdaine to ſpeake with him, but put himſelfe likewiſe in the head of his troupes. The two Chiefetaines beeing thus ſeparated from their companies, made choice of a place equally diſtant from the two armies, and diſcouered rounde about on all ſides to be free from all ſuſpition of anie ambuſhmentes, and there both they mette to conferre and parley together. The Count greatly maruelling at the preſence of the King of Epyre, ſtoode ſtill without any word ſpoken attentiuely beholding him from the head to the foote. Scanderbeg was the firſt that diſmounted from his horſe, and approaching to the Count, he tooke him about the bodie (for he was a man of a verie litle ſtature) and lifted him vp aloft from the ground, and afterwards hauing kiſſed him (as his cuſtome was) he let him downe againe very eaſily. The Count to colour his ſubtiltie, feigned that he hadCount Pycenin his notable diſſimulation. great matters to entreat of with him, and which could not be expreſſed in a ſhort conference. For he promiſed ſo to contriue all things, that either the Frenchmen, leauing the quiet and peaceable poſſeſſion of the Realme of Naples to Ferdinand ſhould auoidePycenin his parley with Scanderbeg. out of Apulia, and ſo returne ouer the mountaines: or if not, that he would worke their confuſion. And ſo proceeding in a moſt friendly and louing diſcourſe: he ſaide, that he was fully aſſured, that if the Frenchmen (who were naturally proud and inſolent, and did beare a deadly and mortall hatred to the Italians) ſhould once get ſure footing in the Realme of Naples: they would not reſt contented with that portion, but they would aſpire to the Dominion of all Italy, the inhabitants whereof they reſpected not nor regarded no more then as ſlaues, and as brute beaſts & vnreaſonable creatures. All this and many things elſe, did he promiſe to doe, both for the benefit and greatneſſe of Ferdinand, as alſo for the reputation & immortall renowme

of Scanderbeg. And to this ende he requeſted him, that he would cauſe his people to ſound a retrait, as he was readie for his part to do the like: that the ſouldiers of both ſides might take breath, and might refreſh themſelues from their labours and trauels which they had endured all the day long: affirming that this was a vſe and cuſtome euer obſerued in warres amongeſt the Italians: and for that it was now growing towardes night, and the ſouldiers on both ſides being faint and wearie, he held it expedient, that the two armies ſhould retire into their tentes, and that euery man might betake himſelfe to his reſt. He alſo entreated him of all courteſie, that he would meete him the next morning with a ſmall company (to the intent Duke Iohn & the French men might doubt and ſuſpect nothing) in ſuch a place as he would aſſigne, that they might there conferre more at full vpon theſe matters. This fraudulent plot did Pycenin conuey with ſingular diſſimulation equall to his malice and deſpightfull humor.Count Pycenin his diſhoneſt practiſe againſt Scanderbeg. For his drift was to bring the Albanois within his daunger either aliue or dead (an act moſt diſhoneſt, and litle practiſed amongſt true Knights) or at the leaſt wiſe he thought by drawing out the parley at length to gaine time, and to bring it to paſſe, that the night ſhould ſeparate them: for he perceiued full well, that the Albanois had the aduantage of that dayes iourney. Scanderbeg giuing faith and credite to his ſpeeches, by reaſon he was a perſonage of great renowme and authoritie, did ſimply and plainely condiſcende to his requeſt, cauſing to ſound a retrait and to ceaſe the combat. In this meane time Moſes and Guirize (who in the late skirmiſh had taken priſoners foure ſquadrons of the enemies) did preſent them vnto their Generall: which Picenin ſeeing, he beganne to bluſh for ſhame, and being ſore troubled in his mind, he ſtood a while as if he had bene dombe: afterwards being come to himſelfe, he ſpake againe to the Prince of Albanie according to his wonted diſſembled manner to this effect.
            
               I perceiue (quoth he) moſt noble and generous Prince, and I cannot but be abaſhedSpeech of the Count Pycenin to Scanderbeg. at it, to ſee that thy Captaines and ſouldiers, doe ſhewe themſelues to haue but ſmall diſcipline, and to haue but litle regard and reſpect of thy commaund. For (as thou ſeeſt) after we had ſet downe an order and publiſhed it with one voice and conſent, that the ſouldiers of both the armies ſhould withdrawe themſelues from the battell: theſe men notwithſtanding haue aſſailed and forced theſe my ſquadrons, who were obedient to our edict, and they haue now brought them hither priſoners vnto thee to our great reproach and diſhonor, a thing in my iudgement vniuſt and iniurious, and contrarie to thy faith and reputation. Neuertheleſſe truſting in thy vertue and valure, for that I haue euer reputed thee to be a Prince of great magnanimitie and faithfull of thy word, I haue good hope that thou wilt obſerue the faith and promiſe which thou haſt giuen me, and wilt cauſe theſe ſouldiers to be ſet at libertie, as being vniuſtly taken and made priſoners. But the Count went not away without an aunſwere: for Scanderbeg replyed vnto him in this manner.
            
               Certainly Count Iames: I cannot chuſe but greatly maruell that thou being aAnſwere of Scanderbeg to Count Pycenin. man ſo famous and renowmed, wouldeſt either ſpeake or ſo much as thinke ſuch ſpeeches not onely vaine and friuolous, but of litle truth or appearance. For, to ſay that our Captains and men at armes haue taken or defeated thy ſquadrons when they were diſarmed, or after that publication of our edict and agreement: thou thy ſelfe haſt ſeene the contrarie, and thou maieſt not denie it, but that at the verie firſt that wee two met together in this place, my men had both foyled and taken thoſe priſoners before that euer there was any abſtinence of armes either concluded or ſignified throughout our armies: and therefore I know not how it ſhould be that this matter ſhould ſeeme ſo ſtrange and iniurious vnto thee: for if our troupes (as thy ſelfe haſt confeſſed) haue bene in fight all the day long: is it poſſible that our agreement

ſhould in ſo ſhort a ſpace be publiſhed and made knowen throughout all the quarters of our campe? and can it be that thy men ſeeing my forces ſtill in armes and in fight, could ſo ſimply layedowne their armes and giue ouer fighting? then muſt I needes thinke that whileſt thy ſouldiours would ſhew themſelues (as thou ſayeſt) preciſe obſeruers of thy commaundements: they are iuſtly and to their ſhame made priſoners vnto vs: or rather in deſpight of their willes being ouercome by right of armes, they haue loſt the victorie and haue deſerued this captiuitie. Moreouer how canneſt thou call or account my men either rebellious or careleſſe of diſcipline, with whom many times in fewer & leſſer numbers (be it ſpoken without boaſting) I haue broken and ouerthrowen ſo many puiſſant and mightie armies of the Barbarians? with whom I haue tamed, ſubdued, and made captiues ſo many proud and braue Chieftaines of the Turkes and Infidels? and if I ſhould ſpeake the truth of their obedience, and their order in militarie diſcipline: I dare auow that they feare and reuerence me more as their Leader and Generall, then they doe ſtand in feare of you being their enemies. And as concerning that requeſt of thine, that theſe thy ſquadrons (being by right of warre made my priſoners) ſhould be freely reſtored and redeliuered vnto thee: truly thy demaund ſhall not be in vaine: for thoſe whom the furie of the fight hath ſpared aliue, it is not my vſe nor cuſtome to depriue them either of life or libertie.
            
            Now the number of them which were ſo taken, were about 100, all which Scanderbeg deliuered with their armour and gaue them freely vnto Pycenin: who after that this parley was ended, betooke himſelfe to his campe, and the Albanois went towards Bari, from whence the next morning very early, being accompanied onely with ſeuen horſemen and no more, he went backe againe to meete with Pycenin according to the promiſe and agreement concluded betweene them the day before. As he was ryding on his way, there preſented himſelf vnto him one that came from the enemies campe, ſent (it may be) by Zachary Groppe, who (as ſome write) was then in the pay of the French: or elſe ſome one of them who had lately proued the bountie and courteſieZachary Groppe in paye with the French in Italie. of the Prince, holding it an vnworthy and diſhonorable part, that the Count againſt the lawes of armes and honorable warres, ſhould vſeſuch falſhood & diſloialty towardes Scanderbeg: but howſoeuer it was, ſeeing in ſo great want and obſcuritie of writers, we cannot learne nor yet coniecture any otherwiſe of the caſe: let it ſuffice that this ſouldier did diſcouer and make knowen vnto Scanderbeg this practiſe ofCount Picenin his practiſe diſcouered to Scanderbeg. the County: giuing him to vnderſtand, that the long parley of the day laſt paſt, was nothing but an illuſion both to draw his owne armie out of the danger of that daies iourney, as alſo to entrap him and to bring him within his danger: telling him alſo, that the place appointed for their meeting was full of ambuſhments purpoſely diſpoſed and prepared to that effect: and he willed him in any caſe not to paſſe any farther, for if he did, he ſhould be either ſlaine or taken. Scanderbeg to proue the truth of this matter, ſent forth certaine horſemen to diſcouer the countrie, and they found it accordingly as it had bene reported. The guile and fraud of the Count being reuealed and made manifeſt, the Prince of Epire began to reproach him in his abſence with the note of plaine treaſon and infidelitie: and he obiected vnto him a thouſand villanies,Scanderbeg challengeth Count Picenin to the battell. calling him periured and diſloiall: and he ſent vnto him preſently a defiance, willing him to prepare himſelfe to the battell againſt the next morning. But Picenin without returning any anſwer, about the firſt watch of the night following, truſſing vp his baggage together with Duke Iohn and his french forces, made a long march the ſame night and retired himſelfe at laſt to Nocera, doubting leaſt that Scanderbeg wouldPicenin & the French ſecretly diſlodge to Nocera. haue inuaded him before day: for he had heard that the Albanois did often and commonly vſe to take the aduantage of the night, for the execution of his moſt notable

and greateſt exploits. The day following early in the morning, Scanderbeg with his armie in good order and with full reſolution to fight, tooke the field: but there was none to be found that would come againſt him, by meanes whereof his expectation being fruſtrate, he was greatly diſcontented and aggrieued that he had loſt the oportunitie to reuenge himſelfe: and he referred it to ſome other time. He returned therforeScanderbeg ioyneth with Ferdinand. towardes Bari, where hauing taken order and ſeene all things ſafe and ſure, he tooke his way to Vrſara where Ferdinand with his Italian forces did then lye encamped.
            
               Vrſara is a litle towne in Apulia, which being ſeated vpon the deſcent of a mountaine,Deſcription of Vrſara. is eight miles diſtant from Nocera, foure from Troy, and ſixe from mount Segian: ſo that the two armies were not aboue eight miles aſunder. The towne of Segian
               Segian. Troie. Nocera. being betweene both of them, from whence Troie was two miles, and to Nocera ſixe: in ſuch ſort that the common opinion was, that he which could firſt ſeize vpon this hill of Segian, was moſt likely without all doubt to haue the honour of the battell, not onely for that the ſituation of this place would giue them ſome aduantage, but alſo becauſe it yeelded the oportunitie of a good and commodious retraite in caſe there ſhould be any neede to retire: as in battelles it falleth out often and vſually. Picenin who made account to be there firſt and to get the poſſeſſion of the place, thought it meete to encourage his people and to put them in hart by the rehearſall of their valiant acts, and he ſpake vnto them in this manner.
            
               There is no man (my good friends and companions) but knoweth the greatnesOration of Count Picenin to his ſouldiers. of your valour and prowes: and I hold it needleſſe to diſcourſe thereof at large. Leauing therefore to begin, with the recitall of your firſt deſerts, I will onely glaunce at ſome of your valiant and worthie exploites. Are not you the men that more then once haue broken and put to flight the armies of Ferdinand in open and ſet battell: and reducing them to the extreamitie of a ſhamefull ſiege, firſt within Naples, and afterwards within Bari? Are not you thoſe braue warriors which once or twice haue ſcattered and cut in pieces the forces of the Pope, and of the Duke of Milan, which came to the aide and ſuccour of the Catalan? what reſteth then (my good ſouldiers,) but that you purchaſe vnto your ſelues, the Empire not onely of Apulia and Calabria, but euen of all Italie? Who ſhall ſay you nay? who ſhall be able to oppoſe himſelfe againſt you? Shall this Ferdinand, whom you haue lately vanquiſhed and chaſed flying before the furie of your armes? Then turning his ſpeeches to the French forces:
            
            
               And you (ô valiant and thrice fortunate Frenchmen, the terror and feare of all Italie and of all the world:) where are now the Romanes, who once triumphed ouer the whole earth? ſo often ouercome and diſcomfited by your braue valour in plaine fight and ſet battell? where is Rome the capitall citie and Empreſſe of the world? hath ſhe not bene made the prey and ſubiect of your furie? All eſtates Chriſtian ſtand in doubt & feare of you: the Infidels the Mahumetans, and in briefe all the Barbarians, and all peoples and nations doe feare and reuerence you, flying at the onely bruite and report of your name. You are the true warriours; to you it is giuen by the Fates and diuine Deſtinies: to you valiancie hath the heauen promiſed the ſoueraigntie, not onely of Apulia and Sicilia, but euen of the whole world. Be you therefore conſtant, reſolute and courageous: be not affraid of theſe men whom I will ſhortly deliuer vnto you for your priſoners, and I will giue you the ſpoiles of their perſons, their armes and their horſes. As for Scanderbeg lately come from Albanie with his Epirots naked or halfe armed: they ought not to moue you, neither are you to make any reckoning of them: their faſhion is to runne and courſe vp and downe here and there, rather then with reſolution and conſtancie to enter the combat. They ſhall not encounter

here with Turkes and Aſians, who are people delicate and effeminate: but they ſhall meete with men ſtout and valiant, hardened and enured to the toyles and trauels of the warres, whoſe hearts are vnconquerable, and whoſe bodies be armed and mounted to the aduantage. This is the time (my friendes) that we muſt bring this warre to a glorious and happie end, that we may purchaſe vnto our ſelues the quiet and peaceable poſſeſſion of theſe goodly townes, this rich champion, and this frutefull countrie.
            
            There is no doubt but the Count Pycenin was a moſt worthie and vigilant Chieftaine, yet did he not riſe timely enough that day to preuent the induſtrie & diligence of Scanderbeg, who was alreadie ſeized and poſſeſſed of the mountaine when the other thought to haue gone and taken it. Whereupon growing very ſad and in a manner confounded, from that time forward he was out of all hope of victorie, and (as ſome ſay) he adiudged the fortune of the field vnto Scanderbeg. Notwithſtanding as that Pylot or Marriner is nothing worth, which is not able at all times, but onely in faire and calme weather, to guide and gouerne the ſhip, and to ſtand to the helme: ſo Pycenin, to ſhewe that he knewe how to vſe all fortunes both good and bad, put in execution and triall at this time all his skill and experience which he had gotten and learned by the continuall practiſe and exerciſe of armes, in ordering and diſpoſing his ſquadrons againſt the battell following according to a moſt exact and perfect order. And firſt of all he helde it not amiſſe once againe to encourage his companies,Count Picenin encourageth his ſouldiers. ſhewing them, that they had no reaſon to deſpaire of the victorie, the euents of warre being more vncertaine, then in any other humaine action whatſoeuer: and that only vertue and valure which was careleſſe and prodigall of life, was that which made men to be immortall. This did he ſpeake vnto his ſouldiers, becauſe he was reſolued, to aduenture the hazard of a generall battell with all his companies vnited and in one both Italians and Frenchmen.
            
            The two Generals both on the one ſide and the other, did not omit by all meanes and perſwaſions poſſible, to enflame and ſet on fire the hearts of their ſouldiers, in ſo much that ech of them ſpeaking vnto them with a loud & high voice did vrge them with theſe & the like conſiderations: That euerie man ſhould prepare himſelfe both with his armes and in courage to the laſt combat and tryall of their vertue and fortune: and that they ſhould now ſtriue to vanquiſh not for a day but for euer: that they ſhould ſee the next day before night, this quarrell decided and concluded betweene Duke Iohn and king Ferdinand, whether of them twaine ſhould be Maiſter of the fielde, and giue the law to the Neapolitanes: that the realme of Apulia and Calabria ſhould be the prize and reward of them that were victorious: that the perill was no leſſe then the recompence of them whom fortune had determined to frowne vppon and to diſfauour: for that neither the Albanois nor the French (if they ſhould happen to flie and to haue the worſt) had no place of refuge in a ſtrange and vnknown land. Thus thoſe two Noble and generous Princes, thoſe two excellent and famous chieftaines, and thoſe two armies of rare and vndoubted prowes, did prepare and make ready themſelues to the hazard and aduenture of the battell, and preferred themſelues ech in view and ſight of other, in hope either to augment and increaſe their forepaſſed honour and reputation, or elſe vtterly to make an end thereof, and to extinguiſh it for euer. Their mindes were diſtracted with doubtfull hope and feare, ſometimes regarding their owne troups, and ſometimes thoſe of the contrarie partie: and comming to conſider of their forces rather by the eye then by their reaſon: they did deuiſe vnto themſelues all at one inſtant, ſomtimes matter of ſorrow and griefe, and ſometimes of ioye and gladneſſe. That which of themſelues they did not remember: the

exhortations and briefe admoniſhments of their Generals did ſupply: a matter needfull amongeſt ſo many nations differing and diſagreeing in manners, in language, in lawes, armes, habit, and humours. Scanderbeg put his men in minde of their eighteene yeares warres, of his noble exploites and deedes of armes in Aſia, in Macedonie, in Thrace, in Epyre, of ſo many Chiefetaines and numbers of Turkes and circumciſed Miſcreants ſlaine by them, and of ſo many armies of the Mahometistes which they had ouercome and defeated: and if by chaunce he came to make mention of anie one of his combats, he forgot not the notable deſertes and particular commendations of ech man in ſeuerall. The Count Iames fell to recount likewiſe his famous actes, and the late battelles which he had foughten to his great honour and commendation both in the Marqueſdome of Ancona, in Apulia, in Naples, and in other parts of Italy.
            
            
               Scanderbeg deuiding his foote forces onely into two battallions, placed in the forefrontOrder of Scanderbeg his battels againſt Pycenin. his harguebuſſiers, and after them his croſſebowes, his archers, and the ſlinges, the reregard he enforced with his pikes, both Sclauonians and Albanians. He did not order his ſquadrons in groſſe, but parted them into ſeuerall bandes, each at large and a litle diſtant one from the other, to the intent that there might be ſome ſpace left betweene ech of them, by which the men at armes and barded horſes of the enemies being receiued in amongeſt them might paſſe & not trouble nor diſorder their rankes. This done, he placed the King in the left wing, being garded with his men at armes both Neapolitans and Italians: Moſes and Guirize did garde the right ſide, and with their light horſes being Dibrians and Macedonians, did fill vp the emptie and voide places betwene the ſeuerall ſquadrons of the vauntgarde, who were willed, that if they ſawe the men at armes of the French to charge vppon them with their barded horſes, that eyther they ſhould retyre themſelues behinde the rankes of the middle troupes, or elſe gallopping and courſing vppe and downe, ſometimes here, ſometimes there they ſhould ioyne themſelues to the wings either of the right hande or of the left, to giue waye vnto the footemen, and to abide the ſhocke of the barded horſes.
            The Count Iames in the meane ſpace arraunged his troupes in a maruellous goodOrder of the Count Picenin his battels againſt Scanderbeg. order of battell▪ firſt for the greater terrour to the enemie, he placed his artillerie mou
                  〈…〉
                vpon wheeles and cariages, in the head of his battelles: then followed his Harguebuſſiers and croſſe-bowes intermingled with pikes and corſelets: in the ſecond battalion were the companies of the Neapolitans and Apulians: who were ſeconded in manner of a reregard with the Genowais and Calabrians, flanking the two pointes of their battelles with the men at armes, on the right wing the French, and on the other the Italians.
            
            Now beganne the drummes and trumpets on the part of the Arragonois to ſummonBattell of Segian betweene Scanderbeg & Picenin. euerie man to do his deuoite: and the ſouldiers on that ſide raiſing a huge and horrible 
                  ••
               ye, went ſo furiouſly and vehemently to charge vppon the enemie, and with ſuch readineſſe and celeritie, that their vauntgarde after ſome fight was ouerthrowen and beaten backe in a manner before their peeces could haue the leiſure to playe vppon the Kings battalions: whereby you may iudge of what importanceSentence. Diligence in the warres of great importance. induſtrie and diligence are in the warres: oftentimes preuenting the counſelles and purpoſes of the enemie, and troubling and confounding their order and directions. For the horſes were ſo terrified with the noiſe of the ordinance, that they ouerthrew and diſordered their owne troupes, eſpecially in the left wing. Moſes and Guirize did ſoone augment and encreaſe the feare and terrour of this affraie: for they verie egerly charging and fiercely ſetting vppon that ſide, did diſ
                  •
               urniſh the maine battell

of their horſemen: and ſome of their owne horſes which were in the forefront of the battell neare the artillerie, ranne in amongſt their owne Harguebuſſiers and archers: where albeit they were grieuououſly wounded, yet did they cauſe a great confuſion and deſtruction of their owne people: inſomuch that on the right hand, the men at armes of Fraunce were compelled to turne their backes and to betake themſelues to flight.
            When the King Ferdinand perceiued the enemie to be in diſorder, he encreaſed their feare by preſſing in vpon them, ſo that the battalion of the Neapolitanes was left bare and naked of her flanckes. This was euen then when the infanterie on the one ſide and the other, being farre vnequall in hope and in puiſſance, came to affront ech other, and to ioyne together. The Albanois at the firſt onſet beganne of purpoſe to recuile and giue backe a litle from the battalion of the enemie: but anon after all of them at one inſtant both the wings and the ſquadrons, charging and preſſing vpon them moſt furiouſly did ſoone cauſe them to ſhake and to diſrancke themſelues, and thus preſſing ſtill forward, they marched on a while as if nothing had ſtoode againſt them, the hindmoſt ſtill thruſting and bearing forwarde the foremoſt, in ſuch ſort that they had quite diſplaced the battalion of the enemies, and made them to leaue and forſake their grounde: (a thing which gaue them ſo huge a terrour) that it was of great force and efficacie to breake them for altogether. The reregard of the Angeuin namely, the Calabrians and the Genowaies preſently beganne to yeelde and to giue ground alſo: and hauing their recourſe to the battell of the Neapolitanes, they did not onely not ſuſtaine and ſecond them, but rather on the contrarie fearing leaſt if they which fought manfully in the forefront, ſhould be ouerthrowen and diſcomfited, that then the enemie would breake in next vpon them: by litle and litle they beganne to recuile. Thus the Genowaies and the Calabrians beganne to make away, and turning their backes, one part of them retired to the ſecond battalion, and another part (as being forſaken on the one ſide, and excluded on the other) beganne to ſtrike in amongeſt their fellowes that denyed to receine and entertaine them: ſo that nowe you might haue ſeene as it were two conflicts at once mixed and intermingled together: the Neapolitanes being forced to defend themſelues both from theſe and from their enemies. Notwithſtanding they would not ſuffer them for all this to recuile within their ranckes (were they neuer ſo fierce and deſpitefull) but keeping cloſe together, and holding their rancks in good order on the open plaine, they repulſed theſe their troubleſome companions who were quite forlorne, both by their owne flight and alſo by their blowes: for feare leaſt being ſuffered to enter amongſt them, they ſhould cauſe their battalion alſo (which as yet was ſure and whole) to be diſordered and brought in diſairay. By meanes of this tumult and great trouble, the place where they fought ſo obſtinately in the head of the reregard, was ſo filled and peſtered with the dead bodies of thoſe which were then ſlaine and with weapons, that the paſſage there was almoſt more hard and difficult, then through the thickeſt of the enemies: but the pikemen were the firſt that made themſelues way, who paſſing ouer thoſe high heapes of the dead, and of their weapons which lay ſcattered about: and through the bloud of the ſlaughtered (which lay moſt horrible to looke vnto) followed cloſe after their enemies to the vttermoſt of their powers, ſo that their owne rancks beganne to growe into diſorder. The Harguebuſſiers and the croſſe bowes when they ſawe that their battell being gotten before them was (as it were) wandering, diſioyned and ſeparated from them, beganne to be greatly aſtoniſhed and abaſhed: Scanderbeg incontinently perceiued and manifeſtly ſawe the diſorder of the one

and the aſtoniſhments of the other: whereupon he cauſed the pikes to retire themſelues backe againe, and hauing beſtowed thoſe which were wounded in the rereward of the battell, he led forth the Harguebuſſiers and the Archers to the two points for the better ſtrengthening of the pikes and the middle battell. By this meanes the conflict beganne to be renued and to grow more cruell and deadly then before, and ſo continued the better parte of the day. Many there were that fell both on the one ſide and the other: but the victorie continuing ſtill variable and vncertaine, did ſway ſometimes to the one ſide and ſometimes to the other: for now were they buſied on all ſides, and euerie man had his handes full. Both ſides were equall or not much vnlike, in the qualitie of their weapons, in practiſe and experience militarie, in honour and reputation, and in the greatneſſe of hope and of the preſent daunger, but in number and multitude they were nothing equall: for therein the Albanois and Arragonois were ſuperiour and did exceede them, as alſo in courage and reſolution, and the rather for that they had put to flight both their light horſemen, and their men at armes: and hauing chaſed their firſt battell, hadde giuen the onſet vppon the ſecond. Moſes and Guirize hauing purſued and followed the chaſe after the enemies horſe that were fledde, were now retourned and in a readineſſe to charge in vpon the backe of this battalion. This laſt charge and onſet didVictorie of the Arragonois. cauſe their vtter ruine and ouerthrow: for many were encloſed, and murthered vppon the place, and many being ſcattered and diſperſed as they betooke themſelues to maine flight ouer the large and wide plaine: were forced by the horſmen to turne and returne here and there: ſo that being encloſed and (as it were) beſieged on all ſides: what with the bullettes and ſhot of the Harguebuſſiers, and what with the ſword both of horſe and foote that purſued them, many of them were ſhot and many of them were beaten downe and ſlaine: ſo that the ſlaughter on all partes was moſt extreame and pitifull.
            The number of thoſe which were counted ſlaine that day in the field, both of Neapolitans and of their confederates, was valued to be better then foure thouſand: of priſoners there were taken about a thouſand, beſides fiue and twentie enſignes and ſtandards. Of the victors there died nere a thouſand. The Count Picenin and Duke Iohn with a fewe horſemen in their companie being compelled to yeelde and giue place to their ill fortune, did ſaue themſelues after that the combat was paſt all hope, and they withdrew themſelues amongeſt the thickeſt of thoſe that fled, eſcaping by the goodneſſe and ſwiftneſſe of their horſes. The Counte before his departure had giuen all good and ſufficient proofe of his valour both before and during the whole time of the battell, and Scanderbeg himſelfe both by his owne confeſſion, and of all thoſe (who were skilfull and practiſed in armes) did yeeld him this praiſe and commendation,Count Picenin his praiſe and commendation that he ordered and martialled his battelles that day with ſingular skill and iudgement. For, firſt his artillerie was placed in the head and front of his battels in regard that the force and violence thereof was intollerable. After it, followed the companies of mercenarie men and ſtraungers arranged in verie good order: againſt whom he was in hope that the troups Albanois ſhould haue bene oppoſed. After thoſe ſtrange ſuccours ſucceeded the French battallion, to keepe the other that they ſhould not flie when they thought good, for that being mingled of ſo many ſorts of peoples (whom deſire of gaine, and not theregard of their faith and honour did draw thither) he thought by meanes of the French following at their backes, they would be enforced both to abide the ſhock and charge of the enemy and alſo hauing wearied and ſore trauelled them partly with their ſhot, and partly with the killing and wounding of them ſelues in the vauntgard: the violence and fury of the enemy would by this

meanes be much abated. And therefore had he placed immediately after them the French and the Neapolitanes, in whom conſiſted the ſtrength and ſinewes of their hope: to the intent that being in all things equall vnto the enemy, they might in this point haue the aduantage of them, when that they being freſhe, whole, and luſty, ſhould be oppoſed againſt the others already wearied and wounded, with their long fight againſt them of the vauntgard. As for the Genowaies and the Calabrians, he had ſeuered them a good ſpace from the reſt, as being a people in whom he had no truſt nor affiance whether they were either friendes or foes, and therefore had he reſerued them to the rereward.
            The Count Picenin after this daies ſeruice, being (as it were) the laſt proofe of his vertue, being eſcaped from the field, went vp and downe Italy ſecret and vnknowen as a fugitiue and vagabond in a very poore eſtate and diſguiſed habite, till ſuch timeFrancis Sforce duke of Millan as being allured with the flattering ſpeeches, and entiſing wordes of Francis Sforce, then Duke of Millan, who beguiled him vnder the colour and pretence of a fained mariage, and made him his ſonne in law, and then ſhortly after ſent him as a friend to King Ferdinand, by whom being receiued and entertained as an enemy, he wasCount Picenin his pitifull end. in the end put to a pittifull and cruell death. The Duke Iohn being hardly and nearly purſued by the horſemen of the King of Albany, by very good hap and ſingular Fortune recouered Troy, where he was receiued and drawen vp ouer the wals withDuke Iohn his retraite into France. a cord: and from thence flying away ſecretly by night towardes the ſea of Genes, by good chaunce he found there a Barke which caried him into France.
            
            The French campe being ſacked, and the ſouldiours enriched with the ſpoilesFerdinand returneth to Naples in triumph which they had gotten: the King entred into Naples with great pompe and triumph, and Scanderbeg with him, the priſoners being led on before them. Then in ſigne of gratulation and publicke ioy, all the temples were ſet open: ſolemne proceſsions were made, plaies and feaſts of all ſorts were publickly celebrated for three daies together. Theſe things thus accompliſhed, Ferdinand determined in the company of Scanderbeg to take armes for the recouery of all thoſe townes and places, which were latelyFerdinand recouereth all his kingdome. rebelled and reuolted to the Angeuins: and ſo well did he follow and diſpatch this voyage, that in a very ſhort ſpace, he pacified all the countrey, and reduced it to his obedience and deuotion, by the helpe and mediation of the King of Albany. For all of them were more willing to rely vpon his word, then vpon the faith of the king: fearing that by reaſon of their reuolt, and the breach of their faith to his Maieſty: he would haue dealt very hardly and iniuriouſly with them: but they were very well aſſured, that the Albanois ſhould be ſo reſpected by Ferdinand, that if he gaue them his faith and promiſe in the word of a King, that they ſhould haue no wrong nor damage, neither in their perſons nor poſſeſsions. Thus by the means and interceſsion of this Prince, did the King Ferdinand in few daies reconquer his whole eſtate, and the Neapolitanes continued vnder his obeiſance in reſt & quietnes, all former matters and offences being for euer forgiuen and forgotten.
            There remained yet one only difficulty to be remedied within Apulia, which Scanderbeg alſo accompliſhed and effected in good and friendly maner. Within the towneTrana. Friſian. of Trana, there was a certaine Sicilian named Friſian, a man notably fierce and warlike, who hauing bene ſent by Ferdinand (before the comming of the French into Apulia,) to be gouernour of the garriſon at Trana, had there ſettled and made him ſelfe very ſtrong: he ſeeing that the Realme was turned in a maner topſie turuy by the wars and tumults of the French, had ſeized vpon that towne to his owne vſe, and made him ſelfe abſolute Lord and Seigniour of the ſame, ſuppoſing that the King being in a manner ſpoiled of his realme, would neuer be able to recouer it againe. Dayly there

came vnto him in great abundance huge troupes of lewd and looſe fellowes, drawen thither by the deſire and couetouſneſſe of gaine: and with the ſweetneſſe which they purchaſed vpon the Prouince. The report hereof being come to the eares of Scanderbeg, he had ſome ſpeech with the king touching this matter, whereuppon being permittedScanderbeg goeth to talke with Fuſian. to depart from his campe with a ſmall troupe choſen forth amongeſt his owne men, he marched directly on towardes Fuſian, who being enformed that Scanderbeg came to ſeeke him, he went to meete him very well accompanied. Both the one and the other of them hauing ſingled themſelues from their company, and diſmounting from their horſes, cauſed their ſoldiers to retire on the one ſide and the other in equall and like diſtance, and ſo came to talke and conferre together all alone. Scanderbeg was the firſt that boorded him with theſe ſpeeches.
            
               Braue and worthy knight Fuſian: I doubt not but thou haſt already heard, how theSpeech of Scanderbeg to Fuſian. army of the French being ouerthrowen and diſcomfited, all things are now in quiet and peaceable eſtate, and euery man hath ſubmitted him ſelfe to the authority and gouernment of King Ferdinand: onely thy ſelfe (I know not vpon what humour) art alienated from his Maieſty: in ſuch ſort that in ſtead of being his friend, his ſeruaunt, and his lieutenaunt: it ſeemeth that thou doeſt reiect his commaund and authority, whereat I cannot but greatly maruell. Notwithſtanding (my friend Fuſian) if thou wilt doe me the honor to giue credit to my wordes, aſſure thy ſelfe it ſhall be for thy good, and thou ſhalt be in the good grace and fauour of the King, which if thou be wiſe, thou wilt not in any ſort refuſe nor deny: and I promiſe thee on my faith, that I will cauſe thee to finde ſuch honor and aduancement, as thy ſelfe ſhalt in reaſon demand, on condition that thou do reſigne and deliuer vp Trana, and the fortreſſe into his Maieſties hands. On the other ſide, if thou be otherwiſe minded: I denounce war againſt thee as againſt the Kings enemy, whoſe fury and indignation, I do not ſee how thou canſt poſsibly ſhunne and auoide.
            
            
               Fuſian being puffed vp with the fauour of the popular ſort, and with his own good fortune and proſperity, was become verie proud and arrogant, and therefore he made this anſwere to the Prince of Albany. That he meant not to leaue the poſſeſsion of theAnſwer of Fuſian to Scanderbeg. place vnto the King: except he were firſt ſatisfied and paied of all his wages and penſions from the time, the day, the houre, that he firſt came to the Kings ſeruice, euen to that preſent. And moreouer that he would haue the chiefe and principall place vnder the King, in the gouerment of his realme and kingome: With many other ſuch conditions which he did rather preſcribe, then ſeeme to requeſt of the King his Maieſty, being notably preiudiciall to the honour and dignity roiall, and derogating greatly from the reputation of Scanderbeg, vnto whom he durſt make thoſe inſolent demands. After which alſo, he powred forth many vile and contumelious ſpeeches, both againſt Ferdinand and the Queene. Scanderbeg could not any longer ſuffer this his inſolency, but choler and deſpite abounding in him, and his countenance beginningScanderbeg ſeizeth vpon the perſon of Fuſian, and taketh him priſoner. to change, he tooke him by the necke, and ſo ſeized vpon him. The Scanderbegians making haſt to approch to their maiſter, bound him faſt, and lifted him to horſebacke without any tumult or trouble: the traine and company of Fuſian not any way contradicting them, or oppoſing them ſelues againſt it. Fuſian ſeeing him ſelfe captiue and in perill to fall to the mercy of Ferdinand, began to make faire weather, and was ſoone contented vpon condition he might enioy his liberty, to reſigne and yeeld vp Trana into his handes, which being accepted, and faith giuen to that effect:Trana yeelded to Scanderbeg by Fuſian. 
               Scanderbeg entred freely with his company into the place to take poſſeſsion thereof: and hauing aſſured it with a good and ſufficient garriſon, he releaſed Fuſian to goe at his pleaſure: who when he was deliuered and courteouſlie licenced to

depart, embarked himſelfe, his traine, and all his baggage in a certaine veſſell, and ſo ſetting ſaile from the part of Trana, retired him ſelfe into Sicilia.
            
            
               Scanderbeg after this happy exploit atchieued, returned to King Ferdinand: after which both of them being very glad and ioyous to ſee all troubles and ſeditions appeaſed and ſuppreſſed within the Realme, and hauing prouided and taken good order for the ſurety and ſafety of all the towns and places of any importance, they returned backe againe to Naples the chiefe & capitall city of the kingdome, with new ioy and exceeding great triumph. And for the better encreaſing and honouring of the ſame, the Biſhop of Rome, the Duke of Millan, and almoſt all the Princes and Potentates of Italy, in ſigne of the ioy and great contentment which they conceiued for their goodScanderbeg honored with ambaſſades & preſents from the Pope and other Princes of Italy. and happy ſucceſſe, did viſite the King of Naples and Scanderbeg with moſt honourable Ambaſſades, and rich and ſumptuous preſents. But aboue all the reſt, did the Pope honor the Prince of Albany with excellent gifts and rewards: for he did not only gratifie him with gold, ſiluer, and other goods and temporall things, but he adorned him with moſt ample and large priuiledges, prerogatiues, and ſpirituall graces: making him alſo a faithfull and aſſured promiſe, that as ſoone as his holineſſe with the army of the Cruſado could poſsibly get into Epire, (which he purpoſed to doe very ſhortly, and to march in proper perſon againſt the Turkes:) he would then crowne him king of Epire, Macedonie, Thrace, and Romania, and would commit the army of the Chriſtians to his charge, and that he ſhould haue the commaund and gouernment of the ſame, as chiefe Generall of the warres againſt the Infidels.
            By this time was there a full and whole yeare paſt and fully complet, ſince the arriuall of the Albanois into Apulia: now was the warre ended and determined, Ferdinand reſtored and reeſtabliſhed in his kingdome, and all things ſettled within the prouince according to his owne deſire. Scanderbeg therefore hauing had long conference with the King touching many affaires of great waight and importaunce, was now willing to prepare for his departure, and to appoint a time for his iourney by ſea homewardes. Wherefore Ferdinand (before he would accord or agree to any thing) firſt cauſed all his Chiefetaines and the Captaines of his army to be aſſembled, and in their preſence made a long oration: wherein he gaue Scanderbeg great thanks and infinite praiſes and commendations, oftentimes repeating and calling him by the name of Father: and by which euer after as long as he liued he neuer ceaſed to honor him. Afterwards he commaunded generall proceſsions and publicke praiers to be ſaied from Church to Church, whereat the King himſelfe, his Court, and all the people were preſent, and did aſsiſt them in all humility and deuotion. Other like ſeruices and religious ceremonies were preſented and offered vp vnto God for their good and happy victory, as to the ſole and onely author and giuer of the ſame. After this he fell to triumphes, as turneies, iuſtes, and combattes, to publike and ſolemne huntings, to pleaſant ſpectacles and ſhewes of all faſhions: the which being ended and finiſhed, the King made a great and bountifull largeſſe amongſt the ſouldiers of Albany: but principally vnto their King for a perpetuall ſigne and memorie of their mutuallTownes in Apulia giuen to Scanderbeg by king Ferdinand Trana. Mount Gargā or Saint Angell. Sypont. Sainct Iohn de Ronde. good will and ſingular loue and amitie: for beſides the ineſtimable treaſures, horſes barded, proude and rich caparizons and ſuch like preſentes fit for Knights and men of armes, of ſingular priſe and eſtimation beſtowed vpon him: he gaue him alſo the citie of Trana and two other noble and ſtrong places in Apulia: one of the which was the mount Gargan, commonly called Saint Angell, where is ſeated the famous towne of Sypont, and the venerable church conſecrated to the honour of Saint Michaell vppon the ſea Adriaticke: the other was Saint Iohn de Ronde, all which places with their territories he graunted vnto Scanderbeg and his heires for euer: and he ratified and

confirmed his ſayed gift and graunt by good and authenticall writings and charters.
            To conclude, Scanderbeg hauing cauſed the moſt part of his armie to go to Trana,
               Scanderbeg taketh his farewell of king Ferdinand. where his ſhippes and gallies did then attend him, and hauing taken his leaue of king Ferdinand, not without many kinde farewels, teares, and tokens of ſorrow, with many friendly embracements and mutuall congratulations: he departed from him at the laſt, being accompanied and conueied on his way throughout Apulia, with many Princes and great Lordes of the countrey: the high waies alſo being filled with people who came ſcattered from all places, both out of the townes and countrey to ſee and to ſalute him. Thus being come at length to the Port, and going abord his veſſels, as it were in pompe and triumph: he found the windes fauourable, and ſeruing well for his paſſage. Wherefore leauing the coaſtes and banckes of Apulia, he croſſed the ſeas with a mery wind, and in few daies arriued ſafe and ſound with all his troups in his owne countrey of Epire: ſome of them landing at Duraz, and ſome at anotherScanderbeg returneth out of Apulia into Epire. Cape de lach. litle gulfe called by the inhabitants, Cape de lach: and from thence he went to Croie, where he found all things in good and proſperous eſtate. His comming was no ſooner ſpred and publiſhed throughout the Prouince, but that daily there arriued vnto him new ambaſſades of the Princes, Lords and eſtates his friends and allies in demonſtration of their ioy, and in congratulation of his good and happy returne. This was the end and iſſue of the warre of Naples, in the ſeuenteenth yeare of the raigne of Scanderbeg.
            
            The end of the tenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               MAhomet during the truce betweene him and Scanderbeg atchieueth many & great conqueſts: the war being renued betweene them, Mahomet ſendeth diuerſe of his chieftains with puiſſant armies ech after other againſt Scāderbeg, who remaineth victorious againſt all of them. The Sultan deſireth peace of Scanderbeg, which being accorded & concluded, is at length broken by the Infidels, who ſodenly ouerrun and ſpoile the borders of the Albanois. The Venetians hauing their dominions likewiſe inuaded by the Turkes, ſend Ambaſſadours vnto Scanderbeg, perſwading him to renue the warre, and to ioine with them againſt Mahomet. Scanderbeg inuadeth and preieth vpon the Turkish territories. Pope Pius the ſecond and the Princes of Chriſtendome, prepare a voiage or Croyzado againſt the Turkes, purpoſing to make Scanderbeg Generall of their forces. Mahomet deſireth to reconfirme the peace betweene him and Scanderbeg, who abſolutely refuſeth it. Seremet one of the Turke his Baſſaes, is ſent with an army againſt Scanderbeg, by whom he is diſcomfited. The Pope being come with the army of the Chriſtians to Ancona in Italie, and ready to take ſea, ſickneth and dieth: whereuppon the voiage of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes is broken off, to the great griefe of the Albanois. Ballaban Badera is ſent with an army againſt Scanderbeg, by whom he is diſcomfited in the battell of Valcala. Moſes and certaine nobles of Epire, being ouer rash in following the chaſe vppon the Turkes, are taken priſoners, whom Mahomet cauſeth afterwards to be executed with extreame torments. Ballaban is againe ſent againſt Scanderbeg, and is defeated in the battell of Oronichea. The third iourney of Ballaban againſt Scanderbeg, by whom he is againe ouerthrowen in the battell of Sfetigrade. Ballaban and Iagup are ſent with two ſeuerall armies at one time and by ſundry waies, to encloſe & oppreſſe Scanderbeg, who meeting firſt with Ballaban in the battell of Valcala, putteth him to flight, and moſt of his army to the ſword: and after encountreth with Iagup, who in the battell of Caſſar is ſlaine by Scanderbeg, and his forces likewiſe ſlaughtered. Scanderbeg inuadeth & ſpoileth the Turkish territories and ſo returneth to Croy triumphant and victorious.
            
            
               WHileſt that Scanderbeg was occupied in the warre of Naples, and that1460. The conqueſts of Mahomet during his truce with Scanderbeg.
                the truce continued ſtill in force betweene him and the Turkes, Mahomet had made great profite and benefite by reaſon of this aduantage, and had notably enlarged the bounds of his Empire, both in Aſia vpon the Infidels, and in Greece vppon the Chriſtians. For firſt of all

interpreting it to be a ſigne and token of good Fortune, and taking it for an aſſuraunce of victorie, in that he had put Vſuncaſſan to the retraite in the battell of Arſengua, as is before mentioned. He held on his courſe, and in an inſtant ſubduedSinope the tountrey of Mithridates▪ Trebiſond, or Tropez
                     •
                  nd, beſieged and won by Mahomet. 
               Sinope (the countrey where Mithridates was both borne and buried) and all the Prouince of Paphlagonia, and with the like courſe and ſucceſſe of victorie, hauing planted his Campe both by ſea and by land before the city of Trebiſonde, and hauing preſſed and forced it with extreame fury, in the end he obtained both the citie and all the royall treaſures and riches within it, taking priſoner alſo the Emperour of Trebizond (named Dauid and his two ſonnes) whom moſt cruelly he cauſed to be put to death. And after he had reduced theſe Realmes into ſeuerall Prouinces,Piramet king of Caramania. and added them to the reſt of his conqueſts, he bent his puiſſaunce againſt Piramet, King of Caramania whom he ouercame in battell, taking from him many townes and cities in Cilicia: and as touching Greece, before that time of theſe expeditions in Aſia, he entred with force of armes into Peloponneſa, commonly called Morea, andPeloponneſa, or Morea. depriued the Paleologues of the principality of that Prouince, by the diſſention of the two bretheren Thomas and Demetrius. This done, he being enformed that the Venetians had reſtored the wall of Hexamile (a worke and building of great antiquity)Hexamile. he laied waſte and deſolate the countrey of Coron and Modon, and by ſodaine irruptionModon, or Methone, a place frequented by pilgrims from Venice to Ieruſalem. ouerrunning it with foure ſcore thouſand horſe, after he had defeated the Venetians in a bloudy battell, and thruſt them out of all Morea, he appropriated the ſame vnto him ſelfe, and ouerthrew the wall before mentioned from the very foundation, laying it euen with the earth, whereas from time of antiquity it had encloſed the* Iſthmus or ſtraight of Corinth, which is a narrow ſpace of land running about fiue orIſthmus, a narrow ſpace of land lying betweene two ſeas. ſixe miles from the Mediterrane ſea, to the Arche Pelagus, or ſea of AEgeum. Hereby now you may gather and coniecture, that this fortunate Prince by this his vſurpation of all theſe countreis and eſtates, did not a litle encreaſe the greatneſſe of his forces and puiſſaunce. For the countrey of Peloponneſa, is the moſt principall and chiefeſt part of Greece, both for the nobility, and the puiſſaunce of thoſe nations and peoples, which did once inhabite it. And if we will but behold and contemplate onlie the ſite and ſituation thereof, it will ſoone make ſhew, that it deſerued the principality and Empire of all Greece, by reaſon that it hath many goodly gul
                  •
               es, many points and promontories, many great and proude cities, and magnificall Prouinces, as Achaia, Meſſenia, Laconia, or Lacedemon, Argolica, and Arcadia, which is ſeated (as it were) in the middeſt of the countrey.
            This Monarch, whoſe hopes did aime at nothing elſe, then the dominion and Empire of the vniuerſall world, being now puffed vp in pride, and growing inſolent by the happy ſucceſſe of thoſe his conqueſts: began to haue recourſe to his wonted and former attempts, which was, to inuade and ouerrunne Scanderbeg, thinking to haue oppreſſed and broken him to nothing. For it grieued him exceedingly, that this onely man ſhould extend the glory of his triumphes ſo neare vnto him, and ſhould (as it were) braue him euen vnder his noſe. Wherefore leuying an army of 20000. men,Sinam ſent againſt Scanderbeg with an armie of 20000. Turks. he committed the charge thereof to Sinam one of his Saniackes, whom de diſpatched away ſodainly and ſpeedily, to the intent he ſhould ſurprize and take Scanderbeg at an aduantage and vnprouided. But the Prince of Albany ſtanding alwaies vpon his gard, had after his returne to Croy, in very good time diſperſed abroad his eſpials, and renued his intelligencers neare about the Sultan: in ſuch ſort that he was aduertiſed of the intent and drift of the Sultan, ſo fitly and timely, that both he had the leiſure to leauy an army, and was the firſt that tooke the field. Notwithſtanding he kept himſelfe cloſe and in couert, attending the approach of the Saniacke: whereof as ſoone as he had

notice, he marched on againſt him all the whole night: in the darke whereof, and vnknown to his aduerſary with 8000▪ fighting men, both horſe and foote, he ſeizedScanderbeg marcheth with an armie of 8000. men againſt Sinam. vpon the mountaine of Mocrea, and there quietly expected the comming of Synam, for there lay his way, and that was the place by which he was of neceſsity to paſſe. There did hetake him ſo vnprouided, and ſet vpon him ſo ſodainly, that he eaſily defeated both him and all his army, and that with ſo notable a ſlaughter and butcherie,Victorie of Scanderbeg againſt Sinam and the Turkes at Mocrea. that more then two third parts of them lay dead vpon the place: all their enſignes and all their baggage became a prey vnto the Chriſtians, who enioyed it as the reward for their paines and trauell. Their Generall had much adoe to ſaue himſelfe from the fury and heat of the ſlaughter by the ſpeedineſſe of his flight: thoſe which yeelded them ſelues priſoners, and whoſe liues were ſaued, were redeemed for money, the which together with the other ſpoile, the Prince of Albany freely left vnto his ſouldiers.
            About the ſame time had the Ottoman Emperour ſent an other Turke one of hisAſſambeg with an armie of 30000. againſt Scanderbeg. Victorie of Scanderbeg againſt Aſſambeg at Ocrida. Chieftaines alſo, named Aſſambeg with another armie of 30000. men againſt Scanderbeg, who hauing gotten ſomewhat of this ſide of Ocrida, was made to yeeld ſo good an account of his voyage, that being vanquiſhed, or rather vtterly broken and wholy oppreſſed in one onely battell: his fortune was ſuch, that he had good experience aſwell of the curteſie & clemencie of his enemy, as of his martiall force and fury. For as this Turke was furiouſly and valiantly fighting in that battell, the gardes of his body being all ſlaine and his ſides left all open, his horſe ſore hurt, though not deadly,Aſſambeg wounded is in great extremitie after the loſſe of the battell of Ocrida. himſelf was alſo wounded in the right arme with an arrow. In this hard plight & difficultie of all things being both confounded and diſcouraged, aſwell by the remembrance of this freſh diſcomfiture, as by the griefe of his wound, and (which more troubled him) being ouertaken with the darknes of the night, & but badly accōpanied, for euery man, as the preſent danger aduiſed him, had withdrawen themſelues out of the way, & ſtanding more in feare of their enemies then of the diſcōmodities of their way in the darke of the night, did keepe themſelues cloſe and ſecret. In this anguiſh (I ſay) & griefe both of body and of minde, was Aſſambeg retired & reſted himſelfe vpon a little mountaine, or rather in a thicke wood not farre from the borders of the Chriſtians and about foure myles from their campe, in a countrey altogether vnknowen vnto him, and where he was wholy ignoraunt of all the wayes, pathes, and paſſages. How be it he ſtayd not there long ere he was diſcouered by the vigilancie of the ſouldiours of the Albanois: for that one of them, who had bene ſent before day to diſcouer, & to make ſearch ouer all the coaſt, hauing diligently ſurueyed all places, came ſpeedely vnto his Captaine, and acquainted him with the whole matter, onely in this one point was he deceaued, in that by reaſon of the ſhadow of the place & the thicknes ofAſſambeg hidden in a wood is diſcouered and founde by Scanderbeg. the wood, he thought the number of the enemies to be greater then they were in deed, and ſo had he aſſured it vnto his Generall. In ſo much that Scanderbeg him ſelfe mounting on horſebacke, did make haſt in great heate to ſeize vpon theſe relickes of his victory, being accompanied with all his cauallary. The Turkes diſcerning his cō
               ming a farre off, you need not doubt but it troubled them greatly, and they acquainted their Chiefetaine with the matter, who was more aggrieued then all of them. Immediatly they fell to conſultation, and reſolued vpon a courſe which perhaps was vnbeſeeming ſo great a chieftaine and braue ſouldiers, and yet was it both ſafe & neceſſary: and that was to march without armes, and without their horſes, and ſo to go & meet the conqueror. The captaine himſelf, who was the author of this counſell, led the way vnto his company, & was the formoſt that went againſt him, being all ouer deformed with bloud and filth. Not much vnlike to Marke Anthony, at ſuch time as he fled from the battell of Modena or Mutina, to Lepidus the Triumuir: when he came neare him

he tooke Scanderbeg his horſe by the reines of the bridle, and by three or foure good wordes, he ſaued the liues both of him ſelfe and his companie. For he found his enemie to be wonderfully paſſionated at his misfortune, vpon the ſpeech which he vſed vnto him.
            
               Whither goeſt thou (quoth he) ô Scanderbeg? what wouldeſt thou? It is not forSpeech of Aſſambeg to Scanderbeg. thine honour ſtill to vanquiſh and ouercome thine enemies. Suffer I pray thee, ſuffer thy ſelfe ſometimes to be ouercome: for being ſo vanquiſhed, thy victorie ſhall be greater then if thou wert victorious: and with more glorie and commendation ſhalt thou recken the triumphs of thy clemencie amongſt thy victories, then thoſe which thou haſt purchaſed vpon thine armed enemies.
            
            
               The Chriſtian Prince ſmiling, and turning about to his people: Nothing, ſaid he,Sentence. Anſwer of Scanderbeg to the ſpeech of Aſſambeg. is more ſubtile then aduerſe fortune, nothing is more ſharpe conceipted or politicke then neceſſitie: ô how wiſely and eloquently can we ſpeake when we are conquered, which being conquerours, we know not how to do? And then taking him by the hand, he ſayd vnto him: Aſſure thy ſelfe my friend, thou ſhalt haue neither harme nor iniurie, if I can helpe it. And hauing ſent him away, he commaunded, that his wound ſhould be well looked vnto, and that he ſhould want nothing: and afterwardsClemencie of Scanderbeg to Aſſambeg. Sentence. he cauſed certaine of his people to conduct him into ſome place of ſuretie. For what thing is there more honorable or commendable, then to know and to be willing to vſe mercy and pity to an enemie, who is conquered, miſerable, and afflicted? Scanderbeg marched on with his armie, courſing vp and downe on all ſides here and there, and finding the Prouince to be cleare of all ambuſhments of the enemies, he returned to his campe, and from thence neare to Croy, where he ſolemnized the reſt of his ioy and gladneſſe for the victorie.
            Within a few dayes after came Iuſſumbeg being ſent likewiſe againſt the Epirot,
               Iuſſumbeg ſent with an armie of 18000. Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. but he followed the ſame courſe and fortune that his companion had done, and he was ſo much the more likely to be beaten then the other, becauſe he came in a more weake and feeble eſtate to ſeeke out that aduerſary, who was newly victorious, and was as yet all embrued in the bloud of his enemies. For being entred into Scopia the chiefe city of Macedony with eighteene thouſand men: he preſumed and had determinedScopia in Macedonie. in his thoughts, that he would march euen into the heart and bowels of Epire, not conſidering with him ſelfe, nor looking into the late miſhap of Aſſambeg, ſuch was his raſhneſſe and temerity. His comming being reported to the king of Albanie, made him greatly to wonder, that theſe men could ſo ſtraungely and (as it were) ſo wilfully forget them ſelues: or rather at their immoderate deſire and vnſatiable thirſt which they had after his bloud and life. Then turning him to his ſouldiers thus he ſpake vnto them.
            
               Goe to my good friends and companions, you that are borne to trauels, or ratherSpeech of Scanderbeg to his ſoldiers, encouraging them againſt Iuſſumbeg. to continuall victories: let vs go on to meete with this new enemy, and with this new Captaine let vs not refuſe to doe him this honour, who at the firſt ſhocke (I dare aſſure you) will giue vs good matter of honor and glory.
            
            Euery man with loud clamours and acclamations did applaud his wordes, and ſo prepared them ſelues to follow their Chiefetaine: who drawing neare to Scopia, and hearing by his vauntcurrours, that the enemy had taken the field, gaue the ſignall vnto his ſouldiers to giue the onſet vpon them. The Barbarian (who was not preparedThe battell of Scopia between Scanderbeg & Iuſſumbeg. neither in courage nor reſolution to the combat) receiued him notwithſtanding, yet ſo as he ſeemed to doe it with the countenaunce of one that came rather to talke of the matter, then to fight. For he did not thinke that Scanderbeg would haue had either him ſo greatly in contempt and diſdaine: or that hardineſſe in him ſelfe, as

that he durſt (ſo farre off from his owne frontiers) come to hazard the fortune of a battell within the territories of his enemies: frō whence (if he ſhould be vanquiſhed) he could not haue eſcaped, & where he could not either repaire his forces: or (though he were victorious) be well aſſured, nor in ſafetie. This was the reaſon that the Painim, euen at the very beginning, looſing both ſtrength & courage, did find no courſe better nor more expedient, then to turne head and make haſt away: ſhewing the way vnto his people of a moſt ſhamefull and ignominious flight: who kept him companyVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Iuſſumbeg. in like maner, excepting ſome 300. or thereabouts, who preferring their honor before their liues, died valiantly with their armes in their hands. But they that fled found themſelues in worſe caſe by flying then they expected. For, whereas they ſuppoſed that they might haue fled with ſafetie, and ſhould not haue bene purſued by the enemie, by reaſon they were in their owne countrey, and, as it were, vpon their owne dunghill: therein they were greatly deceiued, and with thoſe their fellowes whichNumber of Turkes ſlaine at the battell of Scopia. were before ſlaine in the fight, they made vp the full number of 2000. at the leaſt. There were very few taken priſoners, by reaſon of the great difficulties and diſcommodities which hindred the ſafe conucying of them, as alſo becauſe of the length of their retrait which they were to make, for that the paiſants might haue aſſailed them on their way. Iuſſumbeg thought to haue rallied his troupes, and to haue layed ſome ambuſhment, or to haue dreſſed ſome deuiſe for the entrapping of the enemie: but his ſouldiers would not by any meanes hearken vnto him, but holding on their ſcattered courſe, they had a greater deſire to returne home (though it were with the diſpleaſure of their Prince) then not to returne home at all. And they excuſed themſelues vpon this their diſcomfiture and ouerthrowe giuen them by Scanderbeg, which they pretended to be a ſufficient reaſon and lawfull cauſe of their refuſall. But Scanderbeg for all this wanted not ſome one or other to be the ſucceſſour of ſo many and great dangers, neither was he at any time without enemies.
            Amongſt the eldeſt and moſt auncient Chieſtaines of Mahomet, there was one an Aſiatique named Carazabeg, a very graue and auncient perſonage, and of ſpeciall marke and reputation, by reaſon of many honorable places of charge, and diuerſeCarazabeg ſueth to Mahomet to be ſens againſt Scanderbeg. voyages wherein he had bene employed, and had acquitted himſelfe well and worthely. The Sultan alſo had him in great account, and hauing placed him in no ſmall authoritie, he retained him neare about his owne perſon, as of late alſo his father Amurath had done the like. This aged Sire, as if he had bene ſome young hotſpurre, found himſelfe pricked on with the ſpurres of his glorie (or rather misfortune) which ſeemed continually to lye in waite to ſeduce and entrap the greateſt and moſt notable perſons to the intent it might obſcure the brightneſſe of all their former renowme, and the merites of their forepaſſed triumphs, by the vnhappie ſucceſſe of this warre of Epire: for neither the late ignominie and opprobrious ſpectacle of Iuſſumbeg, nor the like miſhap which had euer attended vpon ſo many others beſides him, nor yet the fatal deſtiny of the Albanian felicitie, which had continued euen to that day, could not any thing diſſwade him, but that he was deſirous to proue his fortune againſt Scanderbeg: wherfore repairing to the preſence of the Sultan, he thus ſpake vnto him.
            Hitherto (moſt ſoueraigne Prince) and euen vnto this day, both vnder thy Maieſtie,Oration of Carazabeg, to Mahomat, deſiring to be employed againſt Scanderbeg. and vnder thy father of happie memorie, I haue heaped vp and obtained in a maner, ſo many triumphs by my merits, as yeares by my age and courſe of life. But now both the one and the other of them is grieuous and lothſome vnto me, and I take no pleaſure to remēber them, through an extreme deſpite which I haue conceiued, to ſee Scāderbeg obtain ſo many victories: to ſee the many ouerthrows & diſcōfitures which he hath giuen vs: & to ſee the pride and inſolency of the Albanians. I am reſolued (as

old and vnfit as I am for armes) to abandon all to the hazard and chance of fortune, and either to bring vnto thee, and to proſtrate before thy feete dead or aliue this wicked and vngratefull wretch, ſometimes the ſlaue of the houſe of Ottoman, & now the king of the vnhappie Epirots: to the intent he may be accomptant vnto thee for the ſlaughter of ſo many and ſo great armies, and for the death of ſo many of thy noble & worthie chieftaines: or elſe this head and this throate of mine ſhall more and more enoble the glory of his fame and reputation. Giue me leaue therefore (moſt worthie Emperour) preſently to leuie forces, and to muſter an armie to my owne liking: I my ſelfe will take vpon me the charge and managing of this matter, not as a commander, but as thy miniſter: and both in the chuſing, the arming and the trayning of the companies, I will not relye vpon any other perſon, but my ſelfe alone will looke to the handling and diſpatching of all things. For it is with a notable thiefe and a famous robber that we haue to do: and the warre which we make, is with ſuch a one, as is an arch maiſter in pollicies and ſleights of ſubtiltie: who is growen haughtie and inſolent with his many victories, and who is as it were fatted with the multitude of the ſpoyles which he hath gotten of vs.
            
            Whatſoeuer this Turke demaunded, was freely and fully accorded vnto him by the Ottoman, who referred all to his diſcretion, & added vnto his demand an ouerplusCarazabeg ſent with an armie of 40000. Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. often thouſand men: for him ſelfe had made choiſe onely of thirtie thouſand, with whom he thought to haue put this matter in execution, notwithſtanding that it was of ſo great importance. He ſent before him certaine ſpies, whom he willed to diſperſe them ſelues ouer the countrey, for to diſcouer and giue him ſome intelligence of the enemie. Scanderbeg on the other ſide wanted no good aduertiſements, both throughout the prouince of Epire, and in Macedonie, and alſo in the heart and moſt inward partes of the enemies countrey, by meanes whereof the iourney and comming on of Carazabeg was ſoone made knowen vnto him, in ſuch ſort that our men had both time and oportunitie to make readie their preparations. But when Scanderbeg heard this newes reported vnto him, the report is, that he vſed this ſpeech vnto ſome that were neare him:
            
               If this Chieftaine (quoth he) were not too farre ſtriken in yeares and ouer aged, ISpeeches of Scanderbeg touching Carazabeg. ſhould haue feared him alone, more then all his great puiſſaunce which he bringeth with him: (for both of them knew each other very inwardly, and they had bene companions in armes in a certaine voyage made into Aſia vnder Amurath) much better (ſayd he) and more wiſely ſhould Carazabeg haue done, if he had made ſpare and taken compaſſion of his old age, and eſpecially of his fortune which ſeemeth now to faint and to be ouer▪ wearied, and doth as it were, repent her ſelfe of the manifold victories and fauours which ſhe hath beſtowed vpon him. Wherfore though he be now fiftie yeares of age, yet being growen as it were, crazie and decrepit, I haue no reaſon to ſtand in awe of him, whom euen in the ſtrength and prime of his youth, my ſelfe being then but a child and in a manner a verie infant, I did ſo little feare, that I did euen deſpiſe and contemne him.
            
            Hauing thus ſpoken, he aſſembled his forces greater and more in number then thoſe which he had againſt Aſſambeg, by reaſon of the great fame and renow me of the Turkiſh Captaine. Then truſſing vp baggage, he tooke his way into Dybria: and from thence with two thouſand horſe he ranne vp euen to the confines of the Tryballians
               Ambuſcade layd by Scanderbeg againſt Carazabeg. (for in this place was the comming of the Turke expected.) And he layd them in an ambuſcado here and there throughout the mountaines, to the intent he might encloſe the enemy in the middeſt of his forces, and take them at an aduantage. The Barbarian likewiſe hauing cauſed the maine body of his armie to ſtay in a certaine

place within Macedonie commonly called Chieri) had ſent before 4000. horſemen,Chieri. who being diſcouered, were ſuddenly charged by the Albanois, the greater partTurkes to the number of 4000. of the armie of Carazabeg defeated by Scanderbeg. of them being diſcomfited and ſlaine, and the reſt being ſcattered and diſperſed in their flight, caried the newes of their misfortune to their Generall before that euer he came neare to the confines of Epire. He therfore being before ſufficiently weakned with age & ſicknes, began by the aſtoniſhment of this miſhap to grow more faint both in mind and in body: being not ſo much aggrieued at the loſſe of his men, as that his coming was diſcloſed and diſcouered to the Chriſtian. Many and diuerſe things did he caſt & deuiſe vpon in his mind, being in doubt what courſe to take, & whether it were beſt for him to hold on his iourney, or elſe to turne head towards Conſtantinople, & to deferre this expedition till the next ſpring: for the Autumne was now in a maner at an end. In the end, ſhame & feare of diſhonor did ſo farre preuaile with the old man, that he thought it not beſt to giue ouer the warre. Hauing therefore in two dayes ſpace, diſpatched almoſt all his iourney towardes his enemie, about the firſt watch of the night he came to a certaine plaine, which they of the countrey call Liuad, where heThe playne of Liuad. encamped his armie, and the ſame night he ſet all things in order & readineſſe againſt the time of the conflict: and the next morning he ſent an herauld vnto Scanderbeg to giue him the defiance, challenging him to the encounter in a ſet, open, and plaine battell, and not ſecretly and by ſtealth, after the maner of theeues and robbers. Scanderbeg terming him a Dotard, and an old Beldam, told him, he ſhould heare of him ere long: and without any pauſe, he went on roundly to giue the onſet vpon him, who was not yet readie to receiue him, but ſtood conſulting vpon his buſineſſe, as the manerCarazabeg charged by Scanderbeg within his campe. of old men is. Notwithſtanding he ſuſtained the brunt of that charge wel enough, by meanes of a great ſhowre of raine that fell at the very beginning of the onſet: the which did ſoone ſeparate them aſunder: ſo that there was nothing done worthie the remembring. For for three dayes together, there fell ſuch gr
                  •
               at ſtore and abundance of water, that if the Mahometan had not remoued his hoſt into a higher ground, and more mountainous, it is moſt certaine that the quarrell had bene determined by the deſtruction and loſſe of his ſouldiers in that deluge and abundance of waters. And yet, as carefull as he was to preuent the daunger, a great number of their horſes were drowned and loſt. The Infidell taking this to be prodigious, and as a preſageCarazabeg retireth ſecre
                     •
                  ly with his armi
                     •
                   out of Epyre. of his ill fortune, gaue ouer his enterpriſe, and (aſſoone as the time and tempeſtuouſneſſe of the weather would giue him leaue) he ſecretly withdrew his forces and diſlodged his army, & by long iourneys he bid Epire farewel, hauing an intent to returne againe the next ſpring, if ſo be the deſtinies would be anſwerable to the deſires of this credulous old man. At his returne towards Mahomet with thoſe forces which he had left, the report goeth, that at the firſt he found but bad entertainment, & was receiued with a frowning countenance: yet afterwards he was highly praiſed, and much madeAmbaſſadour ſent by Mahomet to Scanderbeg. of, becauſe he had ſo wel and carefully ſaued and preſerued his people. But now when the Ottoman ſaw that Scanderbeg was not to be forced by armes, he aduiſed and bethought him ſelfe howe he might ſurpriſe and ouerreach him by guile and ſubtil
                  •
               ies. He ſent vnto him therefore an Ambaſſade with preſents of great value, and with letters: the copie whereof is as followeth.
            
               
                  
                     Mahomet, Beg, Amira, Sultan of all parts of the world: Lord and Emperour of the Orient and the Occident, to Scanderbeg Prince of the Albanois and Epirots ſendeth health.
                  
                  I knowe not (my deare friend Scanderbeg) any amitie more cordiall and heartie,Letters of Mahomet to Scanderbeg. nor any familiaritie or friendſhip more faſt and ſure then that which proceedeth of

long and mutuall conuerſing together, and eſpecially when it beginneth in the greene and tender age of youthfull yeares, as did the old amitie betweene vs two: who in our firſt infancie, as it were, at ſuch time as thou wert hoſtage in the Court of Amurath my father, did for a long time liue together in ſingular, and almoſt incredible loue and concord. Wherefore (my good Scanderbeg) as often as I do call to minde both theſe and other matters wherwith our age at that time was delighted: & moreouer remembring all that which thou haſt heretofore done for the ſeruice of our Empire, for the houſe of the Ottomans, and for the glory & enlarging of our crowne and dignitie: my deſire and endeuor is to loue and to make much of thee with all poſſible and moſt ardent affection. And I proteſt before God, that nothing can happen vnto me more acceptable or more agreeable in this life, then to ſee thee neare about me, and for a time to enioy thy preſence. If our ſouldiers haue of late violently inuaded thy dominions, or entred vpon thy realme, committing there any exceſſe or outrage, yet ought not that to be any occaſion or impediment to hinder thee from comming vnto vs. For whatſoeuer hath been done in that caſe, was without our command or knowledge: and (as reaſon would) I haue and do take it in very ill part, neither doth it in any ſort diſpleaſe me that they haue bene chaſtiſed for their miſdeeds, and recompenced according to their deſerts. But omitting theſe matters, let vs returne to our ancient amitie and alliance, which doth eaſily perſwade and induce me to deſire that we may be reconciled, and that we may haue peace each with other for euer from hence forward: to the intent that by a ſacred and indiſſoluble league and confederacy, the friendly bond of our old and auncient acquaintance (which hath in a maner bene extinguiſhed by our long and continuall abſence each from other) may nowe againe be renued, increaſed, and ſtrongly confirmed betweene vs. The articles of our accord ſhall be theſe, if ſo be thou thinke it good, or that they ſeeme not iniurious vnto thee:Conditions of peace propoū
                        ded by Mahomet to Scanderbeg. for I know that it is not for him that deſireth and demaundeth peace to preſcribe and ſet downe the conditions of the peace. The firſt thing that we demand of thee, is that thou ſuffer our armie to haue free and ſafe paſſage throughout thy realme and dominions, to inuade, ouerrunne, and to make warre vpon the countrey and townes of the Venetians: that thou deliuer vs in hoſtage thy ſonne Iohn, whom we do promiſe and vowe continually to acknowledge and reſpect as one of our owne children: that the traffike and trade of marchandiſe may be free & open for all our ſubiects throughout all thy Seigniories, as in like caſe it ſhall be for thine ouer all parts of our Empire. Beſides alſo I do offer vnto thee full power and libertie in all ſecuritie, ſafely to come and to haue acceſſe vnto vs. In theſe caſes if thou wilt gratifie and yeeld vnto vs, we do faithfully promiſe thee in the word and faith of a king, that we will keepe and obſerue true and continuall peace and friendſhip with thee and thy people: and that no perſon what ſoeuer ſhall be more deare, nor more acceptable vnto vs then thy ſelfe: and we will to the vttermoſt of our power, defend thy countrey from being troubled or moleſted, either by our owne armes, or by any others whom ſoeuer. For other matters, we pray thee to giue full credit vnto that which Muſtapha our agent ſhall by word of mouth impart vnto thee.
                  
                     Dated in our Imperiall citie of Conſtantinople 
                        this ſecond of May, in the yeare of the generation of Ieſus 1461.
                     
                  
               
            
            Theſe letters of Mahomet being openly read in a full aſſembly and generall Counſell of all the Princes, Lords and Captaines of Epire: they did all with one voyce and full conſent agree and conclude, that they eſteemed it to be greatly to the honour and reputation of Scanderbeg, and of the Eſtate of Albanie, that ſo puiſſant, mightie and fortunate a Monarch as Mahomet, vnder whoſe yoke and ſubiection ſo many realmes and Empires, ſo many cities and nations had ſubmitted them ſelues, ſhould now offer

himſelfe as a petitioner for peace, and ſhould require his friendſhippe and amity. This was the occaſion, that all of them with one minde did ſet downe this for their concluſion, that reiecting all the other clauſes and motions propounded by the Ottoman, they would agree to make peace with him vppon this one condition onely, namely: That the mutuall traffique and trade of marchandiſe ſhould be free and open betweene them and their Dominions. This matter being thus agreed on, Scanderbeg returned letters vnto the Sultan, the tenor and contents whereof were in this manner.
            
               
                  
                     George Caſtriot, named Scanderbeg, Prince of the Epyrots and Albanois, and the Souldier of Ieſus Christ, to Mahomet ſoueraigne of the Turkes ſendeth health.
                  
                  Moſt noble and renowmed Prince, we haue receiued thy letters, & by the contentsLetters of Scanderbeg to Mahomet. thereof haue ſeene the greatneſſe of thy loue and ſingular affection, which thou doeſt proteſt to beare vnto me: and which (as thou ſaieſt) hath bene ratified by our olde and auncient nouriture and education, and is ſo bound and deepely rooted by long vſe and conuerſation, that being in a manner conuerted into a ſecond nature it ſhall flouriſh and endure betweene vs perpetually. Thou ſaieſt alſo, that whereas this our familiaritie is (as it were) laide a ſleepe and in a manner diſcontinued, by reaſon that we haue beene ſo farre and ſo long diſioyned and ſeuered each from other, thou haſt a great and earneſt deſire to reuiue and recontinue the ſame by ſome newe league of friendſhip and amitie: the conditions whereof thou doeſt propound to be theſe. Firſt that thy troupes may haue free and ſure paſſage through our countrie, to inuade and endamage the Venetians: to which thy demand, we cannot, nor may not conſent nor agree without the manifeſt breach of all right and equitie, and without great diſhonor to our royall eſtate and dignitie, for that the Venetians are our allyes and confederates. And as touching thy deſire to haue my ſonne for an hoſtage for the ſurer confirmation of the peace betweene vs, it might be peraduenture that I would gladly doe it, if the affection of a father did not diſſwade and detaine me from it. But he being my onely childe, and of a verie young and tender age, nowe that it behoueth him to be nouriſhed and trayned vp in our manners and cuſtomes, he cannot be taken from the embracements of his parents, without the great and ſingular preiudice both of himſelfe and me. As for that which thou requireſt of me concerning thy ſubiects and marchants, that they may haue free paſſage to come and go, to buy, ſell, and traffique their wares and marchandice throughout our Dominions: all my Captaines doe like and allow of the motion, and my ſelfe alſo, who doe deſire nothing more then that the traffique and trade of marchandice may haue his full and free courſe euerie where betweene vs. Moreouer thou doeſt inuite me with great ſhew of affection to come and viſite thee, and that I ſhould not doubt to doe it in all confidence and ſecuritie, to the intent that our mutuall ſight and conuerſation each with other, might ſatisfie the deſire of our ſo long continued abſence. I doe highly commend moſt worthy Prince, the bountie of thy minde, and the liberalitie of thy good nature and diſpoſition, in regard whereof, if my vrgent affayres, and the managing of this my eſtate would giue me leaue, or would affoord me any time of leaſure and oportunitie, I would be ſo bold and hardie as to embrace thy good aduiſe and counſell. But what ſhould I doe? I haue here my ſonne a very infant, a child of a moſt weake and tender age, and altogether vnfit and vnmeete for the rule and gouernement of this Realme, or the publique affaires of my eſtate. Moreouer, my people (as thou knoweſt) is a Nation altogether impatient of reſt and idleneſſe: they are a fierce and vntamed kind

of people: and my ſelfe doe finde it a matter of ſufficient trouble to rule and gouerne them in good order. Neuertheles aſſoone as I ſhall ſee a fit and conuenient time I will not faile to come vnto thee, and I will obey thy pleaſure in that behalfe.
                  
                     From our campe the 30. of May, 1461.
                     
                  
               
            
            Theſe letters being deliuered to the Turkiſh Monarch aſſoone as he had peruſed and read them, he preſently replied vnto them by other letters written to this effect.
            
               
                  
                     Mahomet Beg, Amira, Sultan, and Emperour of all partes of the world: to Scanderbeg Prince of the Albanois and Epyrots.
                  
                  Thou haſt written vnto me by Muſtapha our agent, that of thoſe conditions ofLetters of Mal
                           •
                        met to Scanderbeg. peace which we offered vnto thee, there is not any but one onely that liketh thee: namely, that our marchants may lawfully and freely tranſport and ſell their commodities: and vpon this condition onely thou doeſt make offer of peace vnto me, alleaging, that ſuch is the will and mind of thy Captaines. I am content to accept of it, and as touching thy other excuſes I do take them in good part. And therefore Scanderbeg I doe promiſe thee faithfully, that all that which thou for thy part doeſt demaund of me is very gratefull and pleaſing vnto me: and I doe willingly accorde to the mindes and good liking of thee & thine. I do here ſweare vnto thee by the great God whom I call to witneſſe, that I will obſerue this peace with thee, moſt ſacred, perpetuall and inuiolable during our liues, ſo that thy ſelfe doeſt not firſt infringe it, or giue occaſion to violate it. And to this end thou ſhalt receiue theſe preſent letters ſigned with our owne hande, and ſealed with our imperiall and ordinarie ſeale: in token and aſſurance of the ſtrength and confirmation of this our peace, that it ſhall be firme and permanent. For which cauſe alſo we deſire thee (if ſo thou pleaſe) to ſubſcribe theſe of ours likewiſe and to firme them with thy accuſtomed and vſuall ſeale, that we may haue ſome teſtimonie of thy intent and meaning. Moreouer we pray thee to take order throughout all thy Dominions that vppon the concluſion hereof, open proclamation may be made, and publique notice may be giuen by good ſolemne edicts to all thy ſubiectes of this peace and league concluded betweene vs: which we likewiſe for our partes will cauſe to be done throughout all parts of our Empire. And to the intent our loue and good will towardes thee may be the more apparant, I will that thou ſhouldeſt vnderſtande, that of our owne free and proper motion, and of our franke and pure liberalitie we doe graunt vnto thee, and are well content that thou ſhalt freely, lawfully, and entirely enioy, holde, and keepe all that which by force and ſtrong hande thou haſt taken and wonne from Amurath our late Father: and that thou ſhalt quietly poſſeſſe and retayne it, as if it had euer beene thy auncient inheritance, and deſcended vnto thee from thy aunceſtors, and we doe abſolutely renounce and releaſe vnto thee, all the right, prerogatiue and authoritie which we haue at any time heretofore had vnto the ſame: and we doe giue, graunt, and confirme the ſame vnto thee, proteſting that from hencefoorth we will approue and allow thee for the true and lawfull King of Epyre and of Albanie, and ſo will we alwayes repute and entitle thee. Neither will we at anie time hereafter moleſt and trouble thee with our forces, as I haue alreadie ſworne and proteſted: prouided that thou giue vs no iuſt cauſe or occaſion thereunto. Wherefore we doe expect that thou ſend vnto vs a copie of theſe preſents ſealed with thy Seale, by this our Ambaſſadour, vnto whom thou maieſt giue credence touching any thing which he ſhall declare vnto thee on our behalfe.
                  
                     Giuen in our Imperiall citie of Conſtantinople 
                        the two and twentieth day of Iune, and in the yeare of the generation of Ieſus 1461.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Fortie dayes were fully paſt and expired ſince that the Turkiſh Herauld made his firſt voyage to Scanderbeg about the treatie of this peace, at ſuch time as he returned now againe with this ſecond charge and commiſſion for the full ratifying & concluding of the ſame according to the mind and liking of the King of Albany, who hauing receiued it, cauſed the ſame to be read openly before all his Princes and Chiefetaines whom he had aſſembled to that intent and purpoſe. All of them were well contented and did allowe of the peace, as being for the honour and benefite of the whole Prouince: wherefore the matter being thoroughly concluded and paſt betweene the two Princes, the peace was ſolemnely and publique proclaimed in all the quartersPeace betwene Scanderbeg & Mahomet. and principall places of their Realmes and Dominions, to the great ioy and contentment of them all in generall: and it was faithfully kept and obſerued betweene their peoples and ſubiectes for the ſpace of two yeares or thereaboutes, till ſuch time as the Barbarians and Infidelles were the infringers and breakers of the ſame. The occaſion of the breach thereof I thinke needeleſſe to be deliuered, conſidering that the onely reaſon that led them to deſire this peace, was that they might with the more eaſe enlarge and amplifie their Empire, by the dammage and detryment of others, and that the Epyrots in the meane while might be lulled a ſleepe in ſecuritie. Nowe therefore they did ſhewe them ſelues to be the firſt breakers of the league, and they violated the fayth which had beene ſolemnely ſworne1463. The peace broken & violated by the Turkes who inuade Epyre. and vowed, inuading in hoſtile manner the landes and territories of the Albanois from whence they carried away an ineſtimable prey and bootie. Scanderbeg finding himſelfe highly aggrieued at the matter, complained thereof by many letters and ambaſſades ſent of purpoſe vnto the Sultan. But all the anſwere he had of him, was, that it was done vnknowen to him and without his conſent and priuitie. And he fed him with good words and faire promiſes, that he would take order to ſee it remedied, and feigning himſelfe to be diſpleaſed with thoſe that did it, he cauſed ſome part of the bootie to be reſtored.
            This happened about the ſame time, that the Infidels did likewiſe ouerunneVenetian Dominions inuaded by the Turkes. Gabriell Treuiſan Ambaſſador from the Venetians to Scanderbeg. and pill the Dominions of the Venetians, which was the occaſion, that the Senate of Venice (being in league and ioyned in a moſt ſtreight bonde of amitie with Scanderbeg) did ſend vnto him their ambaſſadour Gabriell Treuiſan to exhort and inſtantly to pray him to denounce open warre againſt Mahomet, and to renounce the peace and amitie made with the Infidell: which he might eaſily doe, and with a good conſcience, for that he had firſt broken and violated the couenantes of their compact and agreement, and had falſified his faith publiquely giuen for the obſeruation of the peace betweene them: he aduertiſed and warned him to open his eyes,Perſwaſions of Gabriell Treuiſan to Scanderbeg, to renue the warre againſt Mahomet. to awaken his ſpirits, and to preuent the perill which was now neere at hand & imminent ouer all Chriſtendome, inferring that though the miſchiefe were but now in breeding, yet it would not be long ere it would ſeize vpon all Europe, if it were not ſpeedily preuented. That he might clearely ſee and perceiue, howe this Traytour and periured wretch, had not for anie other cauſe made peace with him, but onely of a minde purpoſely bent and diſpoſed to periurie and infidelitie, and to the intent that after he had impoſed the yoake vpon other Chriſtian Princes and Eſtates his neighbours, and had by ſuch guilefull deuiſes augmented his force and puiſſance, and enlarged his Empire, that then he might all at leaſure, and with more 
                  •
               aſe bring him alſo to be at his diſcretion. That there could not be anie ſuch friendſhip or amitie betwene the Turkes and the Epyrots, for that they were euen by nature enemies ech to other. That he ſhould note and obſerue it well, how that the Infidell (after he had once aſſured himſelfe not to be troubled by the armes of the Albanois)

had ſuddenly bent and conuerted his forces▪ againſt the Raſcians and Triballians: and hauing brought them vnder his ſubiection, he went againſt the Thracians and the Illirians, and laſt of all hauing ſubuerted and aboliſhed the Empire of the Greekes, he adioyned the Empire of Trebiſond likewiſe to his owne crowne and Monarchy. Now therefore that he had ſurmounted and made a conqueſt of all others: and that fortune ſeemed to ſmile vpon him in all his actions, what other thing reſted there for him to enterpriſe, but to oppreſſe and ſwallowe vp him alſo, and ſo to ſurpriſe all of them one after another? That it behoued them therefore betimes to looke vnto it, and that ioyning their forces and meames all in one, it were farre better to haue him for their open and profeſſed enemie, then for their cruell and couetous Lorde and Maſter. That it were meere folly to thinke that the intent & meaning of the Turke was only to ſpoyle, waſte, and deſtroy the Prouinces and Dominions of the Chriſtians, and not to extirpate and aboliſh their religion: for the verie name and profeſſion of Chriſtianitie was ſo odious and hatefull to thoſe Miſcreants, as their whole drift and meaning is to roote out both the knowledge and the remembrance there of from the face of the earth. Wherefore the moſt ſafeſt, fitteſt, and ſhorteſt courſe for them was to get the ſtart of the Infidell, and in time to oppoſe themſelues againſt the miſchiefe, rather then to ſtay till they ſhould find themſelues oppreſſed by their enemies, and then to goe ſeeke a remedie for their woundes. That all the peoples and nations of Chriſtendome did call vpon him, entreat him and inuite him thereunto: that the moſt noble and famous Senate of Venice by name, did inſtantly pray and requeſt him to betake himſelfe to armes, offering to furniſh him with gold, ſiluer and men, and with all other things and prouiſions whatſoeuer that ſhould be needfull and neceſſarie for ſuch an expedition.
            
               Scanderbeg hauing heard theſe▪ reaſons and perſwaſions of the Venetian, albeit of himſelfe he was not vnreſolued in his owne opinion, yet becauſe he vſed not to determine vpon any matters of conſequence without the aduiſe of the people▪ he called a councell of all his Chieftaines and Colonels: where after long debating and diſcourſingAnſwere of the Albanois to the Ambaſſadour of the Venetians. vpon the matter, there was not ſo much as any one of them who had a deſire to renue the warre with the Mahometist, for that the Sultan himſelfe ſeemed to the vttermoſt of his power to ſhunne and auoide it, and was vnwilling to enter againe into armes: and the rather becauſe he had of late cauſed the moſt part of the bootie to be reſtored, which (as he proteſted) his ſouldiers onely in ſport and of a certaine militarie licentiouſneſſe had taken and caried away out of Epyre. Hereupon the Ambaſſadour hauing heard this anſwere and reſolution of the Albanois, departed from thence very ſad and ſorrowfull for this repulſe: and he tooke his way to the Archbiſhop of Duras, whom he knew to be in wonderfull good credite with the King of Albanie, and that all the people of Epyre had a maruellous good opinion of him, in ſo much as there was not any thing (were it neuer ſo hard and difficult, but if he pleaſed to vndertake it, he could perſwade them vnto it. The cauſe that made him to reſort vnto this perſonage, was to ſee if he could perſwade him to take the matter in hand, and to deale with the King and his Captaines to make open warre vpon the Ottoman. For he was as yet in ſome hope, that the caſe was not altogether▪ deſperate. This Prelate being moſt affectionate to the ſeruice of the common wealth of Venice,
               Paul Angell Arch biſhop of Duras, his diſcent & vertues in regard of the reuerence which he bare to that Senate was content to make a iourney to Scanderbeg. This Archbiſhop being an Epyrot borne, and in the citie of Driuaſta, was the ſonne of Andrew Angell (of whom we haue heretofore made ſome mention) he was a man of excellent conceipt and vnderſtanding, of incomparable▪ cloquence, perfectly well ſeene in al good letters both diuine and humaine, & not ably

learned in the languages both Greeke and Latin, and therewithall his grauitie & integritie of life was ſo ſingular, and ſo great was his zeale and feruentneſſe in the Chriſtian religion, that it purchaſed him high praiſe & commendation with all men. And Scanderbeg had him in great honor, reuerence and eſtimation in regard of his modeſtie, ſinceritie, and vncorrupt life: and the people of Albany did alwaies hearken vnto him and beleeue him, as if he had beene ſome diuine Oracle. Nowe this perſonage comming to ſee Scanderbeg, and hauing humbly beſought him, that he would aſſemble his Captaines and the ſeuerall companies of his ſouldiers, enforced himſelfe by his perſwaſions to induce them to reſume their armes, and to renue the warre againſt the Turkes, ſpeaking vnto them in this manner.
            The diuine Plato (moſt worthy Prince) did affirme thoſe cōmonweales, realmes, 
                  The oration of the Archbiſhop of Duras▪ to Scanderbeg and the Epirots perſwading them to renue their wars againſt the Turkes. and Empires to be moſt happie and fortunate, which were gouerned by men of wiſedome and vertue. The truth whereof we our ſelues doe ſee more cleere then the daylight to be now verified in the people and eſtate of Albanie, liuing vnder the rule and commaund of thy Maieſtie, a moſt ſage and vertuous Prince, and a peereleſſe and inuincible Chieftaine. Good reaſon therefore had the Kings and Potentates thy next neighbors to elect, chooſe and nominate thee alone for their worthy Chiefe and Generall, as being ſent from heauen to defend and protect their crownes and eſtates from the rage and fury of the Ottomans, and from the fierceneſſe of the Barbarians, as they haue bene hitherto moſt excellently well defended and preſerued vnder the protection of thy armes and the valure of thy ſouldiers. The which being well perceiued by Mahomet a moſt ſubtle and wilie Foxe (who lies continually in waite to entrap and beguile all Chriſtians, and is the moſt cruell and vehement perſecutor of the Chriſtian faith, farre exceeding all that euer liued) he hauing a greedie deſire to ſatisfie his brutiſh & extreame hatred conceiued againſt the name and profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, by his crafty & cunning diſſimulation (a thingifamiliar and vſuall to the houſe of Ottoman) hath gotten and procured thee to conclude a peace with him, condeſcending gladly vnto ſuch lawes and couenants as it pleaſed thee to preſcribe vnto him, onely becauſe he would not be moleſted and troubled by thy armes, of which he ſtood in doubt more then of any thing elſe whatſoeuer. But alas (moſt ſage and prudent Prince) who is there that cannot diſcerne and diſcouer, how this Barbarian by a barbarous kind of craft and deceipt, hath drawen thee to this treatie, and hath fradulently wonne thee to this peace, onely firſt of all to roote out the other Princes thy neighbours, that afterwardes he might come vpon thee alſo as he hath alreadie begunne, and partly put in practiſe? where are the Raſcian Princes? where are the Kings of the Illirians or Sclauonians? what is become of the Emperour of Trebyſond? See how this traytor euen now of late againſt his owne faith, and all couenantes and rights of the lawe of Nations, hath bent his forces againſt thee alſo, waſting and 
                     •
                  acking thy Prouince, and by daily inroades and continuall inuaſions doth trouble and vexe thy allyes and confederates. For who can expreſſe the immortall rancour of this tyrant againſt thee? doeſt thou thinke, that he will ſuffer the death of his father, ſuch huge ſlaughters of his armies, ſo manie murthers of his Captaines and Chiefetaines to remaine vnreuenged? Is it poſſible that thou canſt repoſe any truſt and confidence in the wordes of this infamous deceiuer? or canſt thou admit his excuſes? doeſt thou thinke that he will keepe his promiſe and faith with thee, who neuer yet had anie faith in him, nor euer to this day did keepe his fayth with anie man liuing? Good God, who can number the villanies and miſchiefes of this fellonous and cruell tyrant? and yet to let them paſſe in ſilence and vntouched, I holde it no leſſe then plaine impietie. For to inueigh againſt one that is notoriouſly wicked▪
                  
and to make them knowen vnto the worlde which are the authors of vice and wickedneſſe, is a thing not only delectable and delightfull, but it is greatly profitable and beneficiall: becauſe that men being terrified by their examples, may abſtaine from miſchiefe and vitious actions. And therefore as vertue ought not to be ſuffered to goe vnrewarded or to be without commendation, ſo ought vice likewiſe to be checked and reprehended. For by the one and the other of thoſe twaine, do we reape like frute and benefite both by the exalting of the good and the ſuppreſſing of the wicked. This then is a thing both iuſt and reaſonable, that they which are vicious and lewdly giuen ſhould heare their wickedneſſe openly reproued and condemned: and aboue all others this Turkiſh tyrant Mahomet, as being one that farre ſurpaſſeth and excelleth in all kindes of miſchiefe and villanies: whoſe life, manners, and deteſtable deedes, I hold it not amiſſe briefely to runne ouer, and to lay open, to the intent they may be the better knowen vnto thee, and that thou maieſt the ſooner ſhun and eſchew them. Firſt of all, to ſay nothing of his originall and ofſpring as that he is deſcended of the Scithians, iſſued out of a baſe village called Otmanach from whence proceeded the family of the Ottomans: this Mahomet being endowed with a notable vigour & dexteritie both of ſpirit and of bodie, but of a moſt peruerſe and miſcheeuous nature, is become the common enemie of mankind, a cruell bloudſucker, a chiefe ringleader to all vice, a Prince of all wickedneſſe, delighting in the death and deſtruction of men, the father of all miſchiefes, and an vnſatiable murtherer. And as his aunceſtors were of litle better diſpoſition, ſo hath he retayned this barbarous fierceneſſe and intemperance, perſeuering in the whole courſe of his life in one and the ſame peruerſeneſſe of a moſt crooked and diueliſh nature. From the very beginning of his youth, he hath euer had a ſingular delight in warres, murthers, rapines and diſſentions, and in theſe hath he alwayes bene trayned and exerciſed. A man of a moſt ſtout courage and audatious, and withall variable and vnconſtant, full of deceipt and double dealing, a deepe diſſembler in all his actions, greedy of other mens goods, burning in his owne luſtes and deſires, and continually couetous of things immoderate and vnpoſſible. Firſt of all there grew in him an vnmeaſurable deſire of money, and afterwardes of Empire and dominion: his ſoule being plentifully furniſhed with wicked and damnable artes, wanteth not corrupt and lewd luſtes, a moſt ſhameleſſe ribaud, a common adulterer, an inuenter of new vices which euen nature it ſelfe hath in horror and deteſtation. This is that ſame Mahomet, who of an ambitious humour ſtrangled his owne naturall brother, and with notable treachery and infidelitie murthered the Princes of Raſcia, and the King of Boſnia: and all thoſe which were of their bloud and linage, ſome of them he brought into miſerable bondage and ſeruitude, others he depriued of their ſight, and put out their eyes, or elſe mangled them in ſome part of their bodies. What ſhould I ſpeake of infinite others, vppon whom he hath practiſed all kindes of torments? and I doe verily beleeue that in the end, if he find none elſewhere vpon whom to execute his monſtrous crueltie, he will not ſpare to vſe it againſt him ſelfe, ſo infinitely is his nature enclined to fierceneſſe and inhumanitie, that the wrathfull and fierie rage of his minde can neuer be contented or ſatisfied. For towards God his ſoule is moſtimpure, towards men it is dangerous, and it neuer ceaſeth from plotting and contriuing how to worke the dammage and ruine of others. He maketh no account of the amitie or enmitie of any man, but only to ſerue his owne turne. He regardeth not to keepe a meane or meaſure in any thing, but committeth all kinde of villanies and cruelties againſt his friends and againſt his owne ſubiects. He ſpoyleth and robbeth the temples both in publique and in priuate, he profaneth all holy and ſacred things, he polluteth all things, he ſeizeth vpon euery thing, he maketh no difference

of honour and diſhonour, of ſhame and ſhamefaſtneſſe, of honeſtie and diſhoneſtie, of diuine things and of humaine things: but he mingleth & confoundeth them one with another. All thoſe to whom he euer gaue any faith or made any promiſe, hath he not contrary to his faith & his owne couenants, either ſubdued them or ſlaine them, or enthralled them? Is it therefore any noueltie moſt worthy Prince, if this perinted Mahomet do not keepe his word and promiſe with thee? eſpeciàlly ſeeing that he being defiled and polluted with all kind of vice, doth poſſeſſe impietie (as it were) by diſcent, and his periurie is hereditarie vnto him. Truſt not therefore to this tyrant, build not vpon his promiſes, but ſhake off his acquaintance and repute that peace for diſſolued and broken which he was not affraid firſt of all to infringe and violate, and let it not cauſe thee to refraine from inuading his dominions with ſworde and fire. Prouide I ſay, prouide for thy ſelfe and thy eſtate (moſt prudent Prince) for feare leaſt the Barbarian doe by his traines entrappe and oppreſſe all of vs. This falſe traitor who is ſo well beaten and practiſed in fraud and ſubtiltie, deuiſeth nor meditateth vpon nothing elſe, but only how he may deſtroy and extirpate the faith of Chriſt, for the which (as thou knoweſt) thou diddeſt once determine, yea thou diddeſt vowe by a ſolemne oath, that thou wouldeſt alwayes labour and trauell euen to the death: and I doe well remember, I haue oftentimes heard thee ſay, That onely for the defence and preſeruation thereof, thou diddeſt thinke thy ſelfe to be created and to be borne into this worlde. What reaſon then haſt thou, ô Scanderbeg, (pardon me I beſeech thee in ſpeaking it) to lay aſide thy armes? what, wilt thou nowe liue for thy ſelfe alone? doeſt thou thinke that thy eſtate will be little or nothing the worſe, in that thou being an olde ſouldier doeſt now ſit ſtill and doe nothing? is it not a ſhame that any man-ſhould ſee that ſame ancient liuelineſſe and quickneſſe of ſpirit in ſo excellent and worthie a Prince, now to waxe ruſtie through idleneſſe, and to vaniſh away to nothing? the ſtirring ſpirit of thy good friend Mahomet is not idle: he doeth not paſſe away the time in ſloth, nor ſitteth ſtill as thou doeſt. He accuſtometh himſelfe to waking and watching, he laboureth and beſtirreth himſelfe, and he haſteneth with all poſſible ſpeed and celeritie, to defile and prophane the Goſpell of the ſonne of God: to ouerwhelme the ſhip of bleſſed Saint Peter: to teare and rend in peeces the coate of Chriſt our ſauiour being without ſeame: following therein the ſteppes of his aunceſtors, and the traditions of his falſe Prophet, who ordained that the name of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be perſecuted as prophane and odious: and that the bloud of the innocent and faithfull Chriſtians ſhould be ſpilt by thoſe which were his followers: hence is it, that this bloudie hangman hath continually more then any other, purſued the faith and religion of the Chriſtians with a moſt mortall and deadly hatred: againſt whom if thou moſt worthie Prince, doeſt not diſplay thy armes: if thou doeſt not aduance thy forces: if thou doe not inuade and make warre vpon him, it is not to be doubted, but that all men generally will repute and hold thee for faint hearted, fearefull, and giuen ouer to ſloth and idlenes. Haſt thou not heard how all the Kings and Princes of the Catholike faith together with the ſoueraigne paſtor of the church haue conſpired againſt this bloudie tirant and are fully determined by God his aſſiſtance to purſue and perſecute him with all their power and puiſſance, and to expell him wholly out of Europe? Alreadie hath the holy father ſent forth his Bull, and publiſhed the ſame throughout all Chriſtendome, by vertue whereof all thoſe Kings and chriſtian Princes, are to haue full remiſſion of their ſinnes aſſoone as they ſhall come to accompanie the ſupreame Biſhop and ſhall march with him againſt this curſed enemie both of God and men. Wherefore the Venetians, both the Duke and the Senate alſo, who haue made incredible
            
               
               preparations both by ſea and land, and the Popes holineſſe likewiſe, and all the Chriſtians in generall do conuite thee, do call vpon thee, and they do nominate & appoint thee to be their chiefe & principall leader, as a Prince moſt worthy of this charge in ſo holy a warre & expedition. And aſſoone as his holineſſe ſhalbe arriued on this ſide the ſea, and ſhall haue made his entry within Duras, he is determined to crowne thee King of Epyre & of Albany. What doeſt thou then ô Scanderbeg moſt fortunate and happy Prince? wherefore doeſt thou temporize? either muſt thou from hencefoorth for euer giue ouer to beare armes and forgo the warres, & ſo quietly ſubmit thy necke vnto the yoke of the Infidell, or elſe thou muſt contend with this common enemie, and thou muſt not in any caſe yeelde vnto him either in patience or in vertue, with whom thou art to contend, for the totall ſumme of ſupreame power & ſoueraignitie. Stirre vp once againe the vigour of thy haughty courage & of thy puiſſant forces, call together thy Chieftaines, leauy men & ſouldiers from all parts, inuite the Princes thy neighbours & confederates, dreſſe in a readineſſe, and diſpoſe in order thy ſquadrons and thy legions: march on before the generall aſſembly of the faithfull, and the colledge of Chriſtians, conforme thy ſelfe to the will and counſell of the vniuerſall Biſhop, purchaſe thou pardon for thy owne offences, and for thy army likewiſe. Behold thy friends the Venetians haue ſent me hither to declare theſe things vnto thee, to ſummon and inuite thee, to exhort and perſwade thee; to the intent thou maieſt conioyne thy forces with their forces, thy enſignes with their enſignes, and thy troupes with their troupes. Thou knoweſt that the Venetians are moſt Chriſtian Princes, moſt bountifull, and moſt puiſſant both by ſea and by land: they doe promiſe and proffer vnto thee, golde, ſiluer, and men, in all plentifull manner. Goe to then Scanderbeg, now or neuer, ſhewe thy ſelfe truely to be Scanderbeg: thou who art the honour and the glorie of Princes: be thou the formoſt man with thy bands to warre vpon the miſcreants: inuade his land, giue him iuſt cauſe of feare and terror, euen to him I ſay, who hauing broken his couenants and falſified his faith, and violated the peace, did firſt prouoke thee to betake thy ſelfe to armes: for all lawes and all rights do openlySentence. permit and allow this for lawfull: That faith and promiſe is not to be obſerued towardes ſuch as haue firſt violated their faith and fidelitie. March on therefore, march on hardily before the Catholique armie, giue the firſt charge and attempt vpon thy enemie: denounce open and generall warre to the Barbarian: prepare the waye to the ſoueraigne Paſtour of Chriſtendome: for behold now Pope Pius, behold the Venetians, behold the French and the Almaines, the Spaniardes, the Flemmings, the Hungarians, the Bohemians, the Polonians, the Italians, and brieflie, all Chriſtian nations and peoples doe follow after thee, and they doe come to helpe and to ſecond thee: now therefore will not this Pagan, this Mahometist be euer able to reſiſt ſo many Kings, ſo many Princes, ſo many nations and warlike armies: he will ſoone betake himſelfe to flight, he will ſoone forſake and forgoe Europe: the pride and inſolencie of the Ottoman, his fraudulent and deceiptfull dealings, his ſecret traines and wicked deuiſes will now profit him litle or nothing: his wonted policies and ſleightes will not be able to helpe him. Neuertheleſſe it is needfull that thou be circumſpect and prouident, and thou muſt vſe ſingular prudence and wiſedome: for that aſſoone as this wily and craftie foxe ſhall perceiue theſe preparations to be made againſt him, he will ſpeedily ſend his Ambaſſadors vnto thee to flatter thee, to entiſe thee and to diſwade thee from taking armes againſt him: but harken not vnto him, alienat thy mind frō his wicked & peruerſe nature, ſtop thy eares againſt his flatteries & ſmooth perſwaſions: thou art ſufficiently acquainted with the inward affections of his hart: thou ſeeſt well enough what a maner of man he is: and there was neuer any

one in this world to whom the fraudes of the line and houſe of Ottoman were more perfectly and better known, then they are now diſcouered and layed open vnto thee.
            
            This oration being pronounced by the Archbiſhop of Duras with great vehemencie, Scanderbeg withdrewe himſelfe to counſell with his Chieftaines and ſouldiers, and the matter was long and doubtfully debated betweene them. There were two eſpeciall yet diuerſe and different opinions: the one which argued that the ſpirits and thoughts of the Albanians were now eſtranged from deeds of armes (as it is commonly ſeene, that the ſweetnes of gaine and interreſt doth corrupt and oaſtardize our ſpirits, and by litle and litle doth make them to degenerate into another nature)Sentence. they would in no caſe heare any ſpeech of renuing the warre with Mahomet, but they wiſhed that the couenants and conditions of the peace concluded betweene them ſhould be in all points obſerued and fulfilled: of the wdich (ſaied ſome of them) there doth proceed great benefit and commoditie: the people, the townes and cities, growing rich and welthy, and their profit was like daily to be augmented: beſides that, the Turkiſh monarch had reſtored in a maner all the pillage which had bene taken vpon the countrie of the Albanois. The other opinion was cleane contrarie: for they held that in any caſe it was needfull to haue recourſe to armes, and that they ought not to truſt to the wordes of the Sultan who neuer kept his promiſe with any, eſpecially with any that was a Chriſtian: and that ſo much the rather they ought to doe it for that he had firſt broken the peace, and had violated the ſumme of the capitulations paſt betweene them. Moreouer that there was litle or no faith to be giuen to the tirant, or to his promiſes, which tended to no other end then to draw them on by deceit and cunning, and to entertaine them with faire wordes now that he ſaw all the Chriſtians ioyned in league againſt him: and that ſhortly he was like to feele the weight and burthen of their fearefull and terrible forces to the ſingular dammage of the circumciſed: which was the onely cauſe that kept him in feare and awe, and that brought him to this point to promiſe wonders: that otherwiſe he would neuer haue ſuffered them to reſt in quiet nor would haue reſtored the bootie which had bene taken: that therefore it behooued them without delay, and with moſt cheerefull and reſolute mindes, to begin the warre againſt this common enemie of the Chriſtian faith, the preſeruation wherof was to be preſerred before their owne particular ſafety and cōmoditie: and ſo much the rather, for that the head of the church did mind to be there in perſon, and to come with all his forces of Chriſtendome in armes againſt the Mahometan. This latter opinion being held as the beſt and moſt ſound, and being alſo moſt agreeable to the mind and liking both of the King and the better part of his Captaines, was allowed and choſen as being for the good and benefit of them all: and it was fully concluded & agreed, that they ſhould renue the wars & take armes for the defence of the common weale of Chriſtendome. Beſides they held it requiſite, and an acte well beſeeming Chriſtians, to be obedient to the ſupreme Biſhop and the vicar of Chriſt, & to adhere cloſe to the congregation of the faithfull. Moreouer there was not any one of them but would haue made it ſcrupulous to reproue the perſwaſions of the Archbiſhop, whoſe counſels and admonitions they held it no leſſe needful to obſerue and obey, then as if they had bene the diuine precepts. For (as we haue alreadie ſaid) the grauitie, good life and worthie example of this perſonage had purchaſed him wonderfull authoritie amongſt them: inſomuch that all matters were managed by his counſell and ſage aduiſe: for that ordinarily being with the King in court, Scanderbeg would euer harken & giue eare vnto him, and had learned of him all the ancient hiſtories and worthy exploits both of the Greeks & Latines: and he was alſo maruellouſly well beloued of all the Chieftaines, Lordes and Princes of Albanie. The

warre therfore being generally concluded and agreed on, commiſſions were directedVVar renued by Scanderbeg againſt the Turkes. forth and commandements were giuen to diuerſe Captaines to muſter ſouldiers on all ſides, and to aſſemble and leauie an armie, and that aſſoone as it ſhould be in a readineſſe, they ſhould without all delay ſet forward againſt the enemie.
            Vpon the rumor and report of this newes, thoſe ſouldiers of Scanderbeg which lay in garriſon vpon the frontiers were the firſt that tooke the field, and they ouerranneEpirots inuade and ouerrunne the Turke his territories. and ranſacked the countrie of the Ottoman with great violence and terror to the inhabitants: and hauing farre and wide forraged and waſted all places, they retired with a notable prey and bootie, driuing away with them at the leaſt 60000. head of kine, and oxen, 80000. ſheepe, and 3000. mares with their coltes which were of the race and breed that the Ottoman had for his owne ſtore: and yet this was not all: for being entred verie farre into the prouince of the Barbarian, they put all to ſword and fire, and left not ſtanding vpon the ground either trees or any thing elſe bearing frute, but filled all parts with horrible feare and terror: the tidings whereof when it came to the eares of Mahomet, he was newly enflamed and incenſed againſt Scanderbeg beyond all credit and imagination: neuertheleſſe afterwards ſtroking his forhead with his hand, and ſuppreſſing his extreame griefe, the report is, that with a cheerefull and gladſome countenance, he vttered theſe wordes. What meaneſt thou Scanderbeg? what doeſt thou thinke to do vnto me, who am the great commaunder and ſupreme Prince both of the Orient and the Occident?
            Notwithſtanding hauing conceiued and imprinted a deepe reuenge in the inwardSpeech of Mahomet vpon the inuaſion of his territories by the Epirots. 
               thoughts of his heart, he then ſware and vowed the ruine and deſtruction of Scanderbeg. But by reaſon of the great report and bruite that ranne of the Chriſtian forces, and for that he had heard howe they were alreadie raiſed and on foote readie to march againſt him, he was greatly troubled and perplexed: and therefore he thought it beſt to haue recourſe to his wonted cunning and ſleights (familiar to the Ottomans) and he ſought by his traines and deuiſes, to reconcile himſelfe vnto him. Now was it commonly reported & it ran rife in euery mans mouth, that Pope Pius had aſſembledPope Pius and the Chriſtian princes prepare a iourney againſt the Turkes. from all parts of Chriſtendome great and huge forces, and that he would within fewe daies ſet forward againſt the Turke: and that the firſt thing which he meant to do after his arriual into Epire, & after he had celebrated a maſſe within Duras, was to honor the Archbiſhop of that place, with the hat and honour of a Cardinall, and to crowne Scanderbeg King of the Albanians & Epirots; whereupon the infidels alſo gaue it out openly amongſt themſelues: that if Scanderbeg did take the field as the generall and ſupreme commander in this enterprize, there was no doubt but the victorie would fall to the Chriſtians: and they were all of an opinion, that the Turkiſh forces would be hard beſted, & that they could not but be reduced to a moſt deſperat eſtate: ſo great an aſtoniſhment and horror had the verie name of Scanderbeg brought vpon them. And this was the principall and chiefeſt reaſon that made Mahomet to beate all his braines, and to ſet abroach all his plots and cunning deuiſes to allure Scanderbeg vnto him: to fall to a new compoſition with him for all matters, and to reconfirme and reaſſure by a ſolemne oth both on the one part and the other, the firſt couenants and conditions of the agreement paſt betweene them: he wrote vnto him therefore certaine letters in manner and forme following.
            
               
                  
                     Mahomet, Beg, Amira, Sultan, Emperour of the Orient and the Occident, to Scanderbeg King of the Albanois and Epirots.
                  
                  I haue alwaies heretofore admired the excellencie of thy faith and thy rare integritieLetters of Mahomet to Scanderbeg deſiring to renue the peace betwene them. and inſtice (moſt noble and princely Scanderbeg:) and therfore I cannot eaſily be

perſwaded, that ſo generous and magnanimous a Prince, ſhould ſo inconſiderately falſifie his faith and breake the peace eſtabliſhed betwene thee and me. For (as I am giuen to vnderſtand) thou haſt with great forces inuaded my lands and territories, and turning all things vpſide downe in moſt pitifull and foule diſorder, thou haſt gotten and carried away an ineſtimable booty & infinite goods from me & my ſubiects. Of the which exceſſe (as I am credibly informed and fully perſwaded) the Venetians haue bene the cauſe & motiue: by whoſe inſtigation & enticement, thou haſt bene pricked forward & incited againſt vs. By their practiſes & flatteries haſt thou bene drawen on to make warre vpon me, openly ſhewing thy ſelfe to be a breaker of thy promiſes, & the violatour of the rightes & the law of Nations. Wherefore I neither do, nor will attribute any or very litle fault & blame vnto thee, conſidering the cauſe of the ignominie rather then the ignominy it ſelfe: but I do impute the whole offence vnto them who haue bene alwaies my ſworn & profeſſed enemies. But what harme is this vnto me, ô Scanderbeg, who am the Lord & commaunder of ſo many peoples & Prouinces? doeſt thou thinke that thou haſt done me ſo great or notable a diſpleaſure, or that thou haſt wrought any great dammage to our crowne and dignitie, by waſting and ſpoyling of our fields ſo inſolently, and by the chaſing and dryuing away of our beaſts and cattell, after the guiſe and manner of theeues & freebooters rather then of true & worthie ſouldiers? And yet for my part I repute it no iniurie: nay I can be content that thou go forward in doing the like, and that thou doe continue and holde on ſtill thy courſes and inuaſions, if ſo be thou thinke it meete and conuenient. For I proteſt vnto thee I do more prize and ſet by thy friendſhip and amitie, then any thing whatſoeuer, which is moſt deere vnto me: becauſe, as thou knoweſt, I haue alwayes loued and highly affected thee: and as often as I recall to minde our tender age, and the yeares of our youth, wherein we were nouriſhed and brought vp together in the court of Amurath, I cannot chuſe, I aſſure thee, but acknowledge my ſelfe to be thy debtour in all poſſible meanes wherein I may any way pleaſure thee. Wherefore my good friend Scanderbeg I doe hartely pray thee, and earneſtly entreat thee, that we may renew our former couenants, and that we may once againe reconfirme the peace with a ſolemne and mutuall oath betweene vs: which courſe if we had heretofore taken, or had thought vpon it in our firſt treatie: I am ſure thou wouldeſt neuer haue ſuffered thy ſelfe to be ſeduced and lead away by the Venetians. This if thou wilt nowe doe at my requeſt, and wilt giue credit vnto me as I hope thou wilt: I ſweare and proteſt vnto thee, that both thou and thy poſteritie ſhalt raigne peaceably, quietly, and in good ſecuritie and aſſurance continually: otherwiſe beleeue me and be thou ſure thou wilt repent it ſpeedily: thou knoweſt the greatneſſe of my puiſſance, againſt the which I would wiſh thee to be well aduiſed, and to conſider throughly, whether thou be able to reſiſt or not: neither thy neighbours, nor thy friendes the Venetians canne protect and defend thee from the iuſt violence of my anger, wrath and furie. Doeſt not thou ſee the Greekes how they are all deſtroyed and conſumed away to nothing? The Emperour of Trebiſond whom we haue deſpoyled and depriued of his empire? The Princes of the Raſcians and Triballians how they are rooted out and ſubuerted? the Illyrians broken and waſted, and all the realmes of Aſia, with many other Princes tamed and ſubdued? Hearken therfore to our counſell ô Scanderbeg: be thou ſtable and conſtant in thy word and promiſe: ſo ſhalt thou be ſure to proſper, and it ſhall goe well with the: we haue committed the care of this buſines to Muſtapha to whom thou needeſt not doubt to giue aſſured faith and credit.
                  
                     Farewell 
                     from our imperiall city the ſeuenth of May in the yeare of the generation of Ieſus 1463.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Theſe letters being peruſed and read, Scanderbeg returned an aunſwer from hisAnſwere and reply of Scanderbeg to the laſt letters of Mahomet. campe by other letters in the fiue and twentieth of the ſame moneth: wherein after a ſummarie and briefe recollection of the principall points of the Ottoman letters, in the firſt place was contained: that the Sultan ought not to thinke it ſtrange, if the Albanois had ſought a iuſt reuenge of their wrongs vpon his countrey and ſubiects: ſeeing the lawes & rights of war were equall and indifferent for both of them: that there was no cauſe of maruell if the Albanois aſ well as his owne ſubiectes, had ſought by a certen military kind of licentiouſnes (as himſelfe did before excuſe them in that ſort) to reuenge an old in
                  •••
               y, & not to offer him any new wrong, but as good husbands had prouided for their owne eſtate, & had recompenced one dammage for another. That although his people were vehemently incenſed at the iniury offred them, yet he would neuertheles haue reſtrained them from ouerrunning & inuading his borders, if he for his part had ſhewed himſelfe willing either to make full reſtitution & recompence of that which had bene taken & deſtroyed: or elſe if he had chaſ
                  •••
               ed the licentiouſnes of his ſouldiers as he ought to haue done. And whereas in regard of the particular loue and good opinion which he had of him, he did impute the whole fault of the renuing of the warre to no other then to the Venetians, he did wrongfully ſlander them, for that there was not any likelihood or probability, that they ſhould go about to ſeduce him and to make them enemies: ſeeing that the Venetian common weale is of ſufficient puiſſance by themſelues alone whenſoeuer they ſee cauſe, not onely to compare and contend with him marmes, but alſo to ſurmount and excell him. And as touching the perſwaſions which he vſed vnto him, to leaue their friendſhippe, he had litle reaſon to perſwade him to that matter, ſeeing himſelfe knew very well, that the amitie betwene them was verie ancient and of long continuance: whereof it ſeemed he had ſmall or no regard, when notwithſtanding the ſame, he had not forborne to waſte and deſtroy their country & poſſeſſions in Morea, but had chaſed them in a manner cleane out of all, to the great preiudice and contempt of the accord and peace betwene them. As for thoſe vaine magnificall titles of Emperour of the Orient and Occident, in which he ſeemed ſo to glorie and boaſt himſelfe: herecounted vnto him infinite Prouinces and Realmes, who had ſcarce as yet heard of the bare name of Mahomet, & put the caſe (which God defend) that all were brought vnder the yoke of his ſubiection, and that his Dominions did extend euen to the maine Ocean: yet ought not he for all that to be ſo puffed vp in glorie, and to exalt himſelfe about others: but he was rather to looke into the reuolution and inconſtancie of worldly things: and to take an example by the Aſsirians who were once the Monarches of the whole world, and by the Medes, the Perſians, the Greekes, and laſt of all the Romanes, yea by Tamberlain himſelfe, who was euen of late yeares the proud and mightie King of the Tartarians, the ſcourge of the race of Ottoman, & the terror of nations: all which notwithſtanding were now conſumed and extinguiſhed by the extinguiſher of Kingdomes, Empires and Nations, euen the finger of the great God: That he therefore ought to acknowledge himſelfe to be but an earthly mortall creature, and the vaſſall and ſlaue of fortune: and that he was not to put his truſt & confidence in his innumerable legions & huge armies: the which oftentimes (as is to be ſeene by the teſtimony of many hiſtories) are confounded and ouerthrowen by thoſe which are much leſſer and farre inferior vnto them: and that therefore neither he, nor any other Chieftaine howe great and fortunate ſoeuer, could iuſtly merit any true praiſe or commendation: till ſuch time as he ſhould ſee himſelfe euen entred into his triumph. That in vaine he did ſolicit him to renue the friendſhip and alliance betweene them, ſo notably was his faith ſuſpected vnto him, & ſo odious was his acquaintance. Laſt of all hauing

threatned him with the generall league of Chriſtendome, and with the incomparable forces of Europe comming vpon him, he friendly and charitably aduiſed him to abiure the impure ſect of Mahomet, and to turne to the truth of the Goſpell of Chriſt, ſhewing him that that was the true and only meane (beſides the ſaluation of his ſoule) to retaine continually, and to make ſure his eſtate and Empire for euer to him and his poſterity, and to make the poſſeſſion thereof moſt quiet and peaceable: whereunto he counſelled him betimes to haue an eie and to doe that willingly, which ſhortly he ſhould be forced and compelled to do, by pure conſtraint and neceſſity.
            This then was the reply which the Prince of Epire, made to the importunate andLetters from Pope Pius the ſecond to Scanderbeg. fallacious letters of the great Turke: the which was no ſooner diſpatched, and ſent away, but that he receiued letters from the Pope, aduertiſing him that he would ſhortly remoue from the city of Rome, accompanied with infinite forces which had taken the Croyſado againſt the Ottoman, and that from thence paſſing to Ancona, and ſo embarking himſelf to the ſea, he ment to paſſe into Epire, where he was determined to make the Archbiſhop of Duraz, Paul Angell a Cardinall, and then to crowne Scanderbeg king of Epire and Albany, and to commit the abſolute authority of the Chriſtian army to his charge and conduct: to the intent that all their forces being vnited, he might purſue the war againſt the Infidell, which all the Chriſtians in common had vndertaken againſt him. And therefore he admoniſhed and ſollicited him to march on with his owne forces, and to denounce open war againſt the Painim. Theſe newes cauſed great ioy & gladnes both to the Princes and Chieftaines Albanois, & to the common ſort of ſouldiers: and thereupon did Scanderbeg with a ſtrong & puiſſant army, enterInuaſion by Scanderbeg vppon the Turke his dominions. into the enemies frontiers, marching a good way into their countrey, ouerrunning & ſpoiling all things both farre and wide: and he plagued them with all ſortes of miſeries and calamities, and whereſoeuer he came, he left nothing but a moſt hideous and horrible view of extreame deſolation, making the whole Prouince as a wild and ſolitary deſart: and in this manner, did he begin a generall and open warre againſt Mahomet. Scarcely were the letters of Scanderbeg come to Conſtantinople, when the fame and renow me of thoſe his blouddy exploits was brought to the eares of the Ottoman: who being both in an extreame feare and terrour, and enraged with wrath and fury againſt the king of Epire, preſently he diſpatched away one of his Baſſes named Seremet, with 14000. horſe, more to ſtay and hinder the violence of the roades and inuaſionsSeremet ſent with an army of 14000. Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. Oration of Mahomet to his chieftains animating thē to the war gainſt the Chriſtians. This is the leſſer Tartaria, called by the Barbarians Gazaria there is the noble city of Capha which Mahomet won from the Genowaies, and was once called Theodoſia. made by the Albanois, then for any great glory or honour which he expected by that voiage: and in the meane time, hauing cauſed his Chiefetaines and Colonelles to be called together before him, he thus began to ſpeake vnto them.
            
               You are not ignoraunt (my good friendes) how that at all times you haue beene partners with me of all my good fortunes, as well as my ſelfe haue borne a part with you, of your ſiniſter and aduerſe fortunes. Wherefore the ſafety and preſeruation of this our Empire, ought to concerne and import you no leſſe then me: you know all of you, how I haue alwaies honored & reſpected you, with what courteſie, loue, and beneuolence I haue euer vſed you, carying my ſelf amongſt you, not as your king and ſoueraigne, but rather as your ſouldier and companion. It hath bene granted vnto vs by the diuine clemency, and by meanes of your vertue and proweſſe, that all things haue ſucceeded according to our deſires: what ſhould I reckon vp Aſia which is now become ours through your victorious armes? the dominion of Thrace gotten out of the hands of the Chriſtians, the Raſcians, the Seruians, and the Bulgarians ſubdued, the region of Tauriqua * brought vnder our ſubiection, Negrepont poſſeſſed, the Princes of Sclauony expelled their eſtates, & the Hungarians extreamly weakned? what nations are there, be they neuer ſo inuincible, but they haue ſtood in fear of your name & valor

euen before they haue felt or perceiued the force of your ſtrength and power? and yet* Or the Iſle of Euboea in the ſea of AEgeum. now at this preſent, fie for ſhame, I ſee you all amazed & aſtoniſhed, and it ſeemeth that theſe new tumults haue terrified you: it ſeemeth that the new brauadoes, & vaine menaces of this petty gallant Scanderbeg, do make you to quake and tremble. What, ſhall the world find you now ſo faint hearted, ſo beſorted and ſenceleſſe, ſo deuoide of courage and magnanimity, that you will ſhew your ſelues like men that are mindfull rather of flight, then of your wonted and accuſtomed vertue? will you without fight, without reſiſtance, yeeld vnto theſe effeminat and idle Chriſtians thoſe goodly conqueſts which both your aunceſters and your ſelues haue gotten and purchaſed, with ſo many and ſo great labors and trauels, and with ſo many woundes and daungers? What, will you now without any expence and loſſe of bloud abandon and forſake Europe, which you haue with ſo great paine & deſire obtained, and will you ſo ſhamefully flie backe againe into Aſia? tell me (I pray you) ſhall you be more ſafe on the other ſide of the ſ
                     ••
                   then on this ſide? aſſure your ſelues they will not ceaſe to purſue you in all places: then what will you do? what hope haue you? what King or Prince will receiue vs, whom the whole world doth hold ſo hatefull and odious? Hearken to mee therefore (my good friends and companions) plucke vp your hearts, awaken your corages, reuiue and ſtrengthen your ſpirits, to the intent your enemies grow not too too audacious: hold your ſelues quiet, and let not your minds be troubled with any tumultuous counſels or imaginations, but do all of you with one mind & generall conſent (as your duty is) caſt the care of this matter ſo weighty and important vpon me: commit it into my hands, and refer it to my diſcretion. If you count it a glorious and honorable act to defend your owne liues, and the liues of your wiues and children: to maintaine ſo many ſcepters and Empires granted vnto you, euen by the diuine fauour: then doe you brauely betake you to your armes, & arme your ſelues againſt the Chriſtians: behaue your ſelues manfully in the fight againſt them, & let the world ſee the fircenes of your corages. Let it not trouble you though you heare that the princes of chriſtendome are combined in league againſt you, & that they are entred into a commō concord together to make war vpon vs. All this ought not to make you doubt of the victory: for you haue had triall enough of this kind of men, how nice, delicate & weake they are. They be all of them ſlothfull, fearfull, faint, ſecure and careles, idle, & addictedMahomet deſpiſeth & diſpraiſeth the chriſtiās. to all pleaſures and delights: they are all of them brought vp daintily: they lie vppon their beds of Downe and ſoft feathers: they are trained vp in luxuriouſnes and voluptuouſneſſe: they are braue men and valiant in the courts and pallaces of Princes, borne to nothing but to play the courtiers: they haue not any care to ſtudy or practiſe deedes of armes: they haue no deſire or delight to follow the wars, or to profeſſe the art and profeſsion military: their bodies are impatient of labor and trauell, and their mindes cannot away with the hazard of perils and dangers: their members are delicate & effeminate, not enured nor hardned to diſcipline, nor to endure heat and cold, hunger and trauell. In ſumme they are ignorant and careles of martial matters, and of the traine of armes, in compariſon of you (my dear companions) amongſt whom I ſee not any one that beareth the name of a ſouldier, but I account him a good and perfect captaine: for it is an vſuall thing with you to ſpend your life in continual ſeruices, and day & night are you accuſtomed to watch in armes, and to weary your ſelues in warlike exploits: there is nothing ſo hard, nothing ſo rough and difficult, but ſeemeth vnto you moſt pleaſant, acceptable, and eaſie: you are ſo acquainted daily & hourly with a million of perils, that you are growen into a contempt and careleſnes of all perils, and as you are free from the feare of dangers, ſo are you ignorant how to feare them: it is your faſhion to contemne and deſpiſe ſoft featherbeds, you vſe your hardened members, to a more

ſtrict and hard yoake of diſcipline both in war and in fight: you are contented with a litle, yea with nothing in a maner: you make your beds of the hard ground, & you do accuſtome your ſelues to all extremities: your vſe is ſo to march and to run on to the victory, as that you neuer dreame what you muſt endure and ſuffer, but only whither and whereabouts you are going: and you are altogether forgetfull both of death, of wounds, and of danger. Behold (my braue Captains) this is the true deuoir & duty, this is the true exerciſe, this is the true art and diſcipline of ſoueraine & excellent ſouldiers: theſe be they that do fight valiantly, theſe be they that doe vanquiſh their enemies eaſily, theſe be they that are euer ſure and certaine of the victory. Let come then theſe great Princes of the Chriſtiās, theſe magnificall bablers & great talkers, whoſe fierceneſſe is only in their glorious ſhew and oſtentation, who are meerly ignorant and vnskilfull of martiall matters. Shall ſuch perſons be able to aſtoniſh you? ſhall they make you to giue backe? call to remembrance your proſperous fortune, the which in all your warlike exploits hath euer followed and ſeconded you. Shall not the fortunate ſucceſſe of your affaires, make you to grow couragious, and to plucke vp your valiant hearts? Theſe tumultuous Chriſtians haue not yet forgotten, but they haue ſtill before their eies the freſh teſtimony of their lamentable misfortune, euen the ſcattered and diſperſed relickes of their calamity at Varna, and Baſill. And what do the Greekes? All theſe alterations, changes and emotions, what harme haue they done vs? ſaue only that they brought them ſelues to be bought and ſold for ſlaues and vaſſals vnto vs? Some of them haue come to deſtruction by the ignorance and vnskilfulneſſe of their Chieftains: others by the puſillanimity of their troupes & legions. Some of them haue bene ouerthrowen by the doubtfull chaunce and hazard of diuerſe battels, and other ſome by their owne ſeditious and inteſtine eiuill wars. Some of them haue bene ruinated by the groſſe credulity and the infidelity of their owne domeſticall friends, and other ſome in briefe haue found them ſelues moſt endammaged by the ouer careleſſe and diſſolute contempt of their enemies. What reaſon then haue you to feare their comming? If I ſhould ſpeake openly what I thinke, I am fully perſwaded that they will not come at all: they will keepe ſtill at home in their houſes, and they neede not greatly to be entreated to lay aſide (euen of themſelues) theſe their inſolent threats and menaces. Moreouer, I know well that they are diſtracted and troubled with priuate ſeditions and continuall partialities: euery man will be a commander: ech man ſeeketh to be the higheſt and chiefeſt: none of them will obey: none of them will be commanded: ſo ſtrange and diuers are their affections, and ſo greatly doe they differ betweene themſelues. There be amongſt them many Kings, many commaunders, and euery one of them is tranſported and caried away, according to his own appetite, and they do all follow their owne wils in their counſels and deliberations: the
                     •
                  e is none of them that ſeeketh the publicke good, nor the common profit & commodity. The Chriſtians doe diſſemble one with another notably, they are all of them exceedingly ambitious, and immoderatly couetous, & they do exerciſe immoderat hatreds & rancors ech againſt other. There is no conſent, no agrement, no regard of duty or obedience: in which neuertheleſſe conſiſteth all the ſtrength and vertue of Monarchies, and kingdomes, eſpecially in the time of war: and if theſe happen once to faile, the art and ſcience military muſt needs come to naught & be vtterly extinguiſhed. More then this, theſe holy, godly, and religious people, doe take a ſingular delight in mutuall murthers, poiſons, and maſſacres, & there is no other talke amongſt them, then of reuenge, of conſpiracies, and of ſecret trains and counterwaits. I ſee that all Chriſtendomr with their Pope (as they tearme him) haue conſpired againſt vs: I ſee that all their Kings and Potentates haue combined them ſelues together againſt our Empire and eſtate: they haue betaken

them to armes on all ſides, to depriue vs of Europe their auncient patrimony: ſo did Agamemnon in Homer, one day determine to ouerthrow the wals of Troy before ſun-ſet, but Iupiter turned his cies another way, and derided the vowes of that fooliſh Prince: the like (I doubt not) will happen to the fond preſumption of the Chriſtians, they haſten to purchaſe vnto themſelues ſome ſingular and glorious renowme vpon vs, albeit very difficult, but indeed they will enlarge and amplifie your triumphes and your Empire: I know it well, and I dare promiſe you as much vpon my honor. For (not to ſpeake of the commodities of places, of victuals, munitions, and ſuch like helpes: in which the ſtrength and ſuccour of the wars, doth conſiſt very much) and whereof the Chriſtians will haue great ſcarſity, and we ſhall haue plenty, I can aſſure you that the Empire and dominion of the whole world is promiſed vnto vs by the celeſtiall powers, as I haue learned by the courſe of the ſtars, and the ſcience of Aſtrology, by which I haue reaped wonderfull profit, and whoſoeuer hath the perfect knowledge thereof, cannot poſſibly erre nor be deceiued. For without all doubt, the whole frame of this world here below, is ruled and gouerned by the ſuperiour motions of the ſtarres and planets. Moreouer you ſhall not want ſtore of reſolute & obedient ſouldiers, you ſhall haue ready at hand diuerſe great and puiſſant armies, you ſhall haue infinit troups and bands of men, and you ſhall haue plenty of armes, horſes, engines: & in briefe, all kinds of neceſſary and needfull prouiſions, whereby the victory may be purchaſed & gotten with eaſe and facility. Only haue you a regard for your parts, that you be well aduiſed in all your councels, that you bring with you coragious hearts and ſtout ſtomackes, and that your hands be prompt and valorous. This is it (my good ſouldiers) that muſt purchaſe you, either aſſured liberty or perpetuall ſeruitude: this is that knot and band of the whole matter, this is it wherein conſiſteth the preſeruation of your countrey, of your Empire, of your children, of your goods, and poſſeſſions: to this doth the common perill, and the common ruine of your ſelues and all yours, both inuite you, admoniſh you, yea and conſtraine you: and all of you are equally & alike ſummoned thereunto, by the equall hazard and danger of this war. Hereunto alſo ought the variable euents and alteration of great things to ſpur and pricke you forward, the which in all humaine actions are oftentimes in great perill, and ſubiect to notable dangers, for default of prompt and ready deliberation, and for want of good and ſettled reſolution.
            
            This oration of the Turkiſh Emperor, was generally approued by all the aſsiſtants, and it wrought in them with ſuch efficacy, that all of them confirmed the deuotion of their fidelity and obeiſaunce, with a new and ſolemne oth, promiſing without any regard of perils, paines or trauell, to expoſe their liues and vttermoſt meanes for the Maieſty of the Ottoman name and Empire, and for the amplifying of his crowne and dignity. Thus did they ſhew them ſelues deuoide of all feare, of hazards and dangers, and they ſeemed to regard nothing elſe, but onely to conforme themſelues to the will and pleaſure of their Prince to the ſeruice of the weale publicke.
            Let vs leaue Mahomet for a while, beating his braine and bending all his thoughts and imaginations, to prouide fit and neceſſary preparation for the generall warre of the Chriſtians, and let vs returne to our religious Prince Scanderbeg, who being enriched with the ſpoiles of the Turkes, was now retired into his campe, where he was no ſooner arriued, but that it was told him, that Seremet did approach and was neare at hand, one of the braueſt Captaines that the Sultan had, and that with a ſtrong and mighty army, he was come vpon the confines of Thrace and Macedony: and Scanderbeg being no leſſe forward then he was alwaies wont, tooke the field three hours before day, being determined to fight with him if it were poſſible. The Mahometan was come only to aſſure and defend the frontiers, and to hinder the inroads & inuaſions of

the Albanois: he lodged part of his men within Ocrida, or Alchria, and part of them inAlchria, or Ocrida. the ſubburbs and thereabouts, where they had entrenched them ſelues very ſtrongly. Neare to the towne was a large and great lake abounding in fiſh of diuerſe kinds, outThe riuer of Drine, or Drinon. Ambuſhment by Scanderbeg againſt Seremet. Piec Manuell. Andrew Angell. of the which the riuer of Drine hath his ſource & beginning. Towards this place was the Albanois aduaunced within three miles of it or thereabouts, where he placed himſelfe in an ambuſh with ten thouſand men, and he ſent before him about 500. horſe, of the moſt reſolute & hardieſt ſouldiers, conducted by Peic Manuell, & Andrew Angell, brother to the Archbiſhop of Duraz, both of them worthy perſonages, and highly accounted of, both for their experience, and for the antiquity of their bloud and linage, and he gaue them inſtructions to skirmiſhe with the enemy, onely to draw and allure them forth to the fight. For Scanderbeg was aduertiſed, that there was one in the Barbarian army, who was the treaſurer or receiuer of the impoſts & tributes of the great Turke, a man that was very rich, and that tooke great delight in deedes of armes, who he thought would ſoone and eaſily be drawn out with the firſt to aduenture the fight. Now Scanderbeg had charged theſe two Captaines, that in caſe the Infidels did come forth to the skirmiſh, they ſhould make but could reſiſtance, but by litle and litle recuiling, they ſhould faine them ſelues to fly: to the intent that the others purſuing them, might approch to the place of the ambuſcado, where he meant to hold himſelfe ſtill & to attend them, and it fel out accordingly. For the Infidels being gotten very neare theVictory of Scanderbeg againſt Seremet neare Alchria. Number of Turkes ſlaine neare Alchria. place, ſaw themſelues ſodainly charged moſt brauely by the Epirots, on all ſides, both in front and in flanke, and behind at their backs, in ſuch ſort that being ſoone broken and ſcattered, there lay dead vpon the place more then 10000. There were alſo a great nū
               ber taken priſoners, amongſt whom was the treaſurer aboue mentioned, and the ſon of Seremet, with twelue others of eſpeciall reckoning and eſtimat, who being brought to Scanderbeg, paid a ranſome of 40000. crowns, & being ſet at liberty, they beſtowed many giftes and rich rewardes throughout the campe of the Albanois: eſpecially the treaſurer who made a larges of his impoſts of fiſh both freſh & ſalt amongſt the chriſtians: which came in a very good & conuenient time, as if God had ſent it of purpoſe. For it was then the vigill of the Aſſumption of the bleſſed Virgin the mother of our Sauiour, vppon which day, as men religiouſly diſpoſed, they did abſtaine from eating of any fleſhmeats. Thus making mery amongſt themſelues, they ſaid by way of mirth, that their prince was the Apoſtle of him who had fed the Iewes with fiue loaues andSaying of the ſouldiers Epirots of Scanderbeg. two fiſhes. This done, they returned victorious with great ioy into their Prouince, where they enioyed the fruite of their happy exploit, attending in great deuotion the troupes of the Croyſado, which they daily expected to paſſe ouer the ſeas into Epire.
            
            But Fortune, enuious and deſpitefull Fortune, which neuer ſuffereth men to enioy any long contentment, which lieth continually in wait, and watcheth for ſome occaſion, either to croſſe all our good and glorious enterpriſes, or elſe vtterly to ouerthrow and diſappoint them, did now turne all theſe Princely and honorable attemptes to nothing, and the preparations of this great and holy voiage vaniſhed away like ſmoke in the aire. For within few daies after, newes were brought to Scanderbeg, how that the Pope hauing already ſet forward on the way with a goodly army, of Almains, Hungarians,
               Death of Pope Pius the 2. 
               Spaniards, French, and Italians, & being accompanied with the Duke of Venice, immediatly vpon his entry into Ancona, was departed and gone to God, which was the occaſion that this noble aſſembly was diſſolued: and all thoſe which had diſpoſed themſelues to this holy voiage, were disbanded & diſperſed here and there on al parts,Voiage of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes broken. and were returned to their own houſes, as if they had bin come together, & had made that iourney only at the will and pleaſure of one mortall man, who was now laied in his Sepulchre, and not for the common cauſe of Chriſtendome, nor for the glorie

and ſeruice of the ſonne of God, whoſe venerable image and repreſentation, they caried not in their hearts and in their ſoules, but onely in their outward garments, and in their enſignes and ſtandards: ſuch and ſo great is the inconſtancy and vanity of mankinde. But I doubt I ſhould doe great wrong vnto this reuerent perſonage, if I ſhould let paſſe in vngratefull ſilence, theſe deſerued praiſes of his rare vertues and perfections.
            
               Pius called Aeneas Siluius the Poet, ſometimes chancellour to the Emperour Fredericke
               Pope Pius the ſecond his birth and commendation. the third, was a Sienois by birth, deſcended of the auncient family of the Picolhominins in Siena. He was a man of moſt rare vertues, and moſt renowmed for the holineſſe and integrity of his life: he was ſo addicted to the ſtudy of humaine letters, that it was hard to iudge whether were more excellent in him his knowledge or his eloquence: the which he emploied ſo happily in the councell of Mantua, that he moued and perſwaded all the nations and Princes of Europe to take armes againſt the miſcreants, excepting onely Lewes the eleuenth. The Frenchmen who at that time had an hard opinion of him, by reaſon that they tooke part with king Rene, of the houſe of Anoiw, whereas this Pope did mightely impugne his title, in fauour of the Arragonois in the warre of Naples, (as you haue ſeene in the booke laſt going before.) He was wonderfully zealous of religion, and of the glory of God, ſeeking nothing but the aduancement of the ſame, and the ſafety of the Chriſtian flocke: by reaſon whereof his end was greatly lamented ouer all Chriſtendome, but aboue all others, the ſubiects of Scanderbeg made great ſorrow and lamentation. For although they were yet fierce and glorious through their victory lately gotten againſt Seremet, yet vpon the hearing of this newes, they were as men amaſed and confounded, and as if they had bene ſtriken with thunder and lightning from Heauen, ſo infinitly did they grieue for that this enterprize and expedition againſt the Turkes was broken off, but Scanderbeg carying a courage, and a mind pliable to all the aſſaults and croſſes of Fortune, did not in any ſort bewray himſelfe to be grieued or diſcomforted, neither did he ſhew any alteration for this vnfortunate and vnhappy chaunce, but with a chearfull countenance, nothing chaunged nor troubled, he comforted his friends and familiars with theſe ſpeeches and perſwaſions.
            
               God the ſearcher of all ſecrets, who knoweth all things before they be done, toThe oration or ſpeech of Scanderbeg to his ſubiects comforting them after the breaking of the voiage intended by the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes. whom things paſt and to come are open and manifeſt, as well as things preſent, by whom all things are made and eſtabliſhed in equity and iudgement, and are perfectly guided and gouerned, whoſe diuine and incomprehenſible wiſedome, extendeth it ſelfe from the beginning to the ending, gratiouſly diſpoſing and ordering euery thing in particular: God I ſay, that auncient of daies and of all eternity, doth ſometimes make fruſtrate and diſappoint the wiſhes and deſires of mortall-men, and doth not ſuffer them alwaies to enioy them, according to their owne willes and contentment. For though in the eie of man the may ſeeme good and profitable, yet in the ſight and ſecret knowledge of his diuine Maieſty, he knoweth them to be otherwiſe: and there be many things which vnto vs appeare to be profitable and beneficiall, but his wiſedome foreſeeth that they will greatly preiudice vs. For example: there is no city ſo populous, there is no nation ſo puiſſant, but if they want enemies abroade, they are ſure to finde ſome euen at home amongſt them ſelues: and you ſhall neuer ſee any body ſo ſtrong and luſty, but if there be no externall cauſe to moleſt or grieue them, yet they will at one time or another be oppreſſed and ouerborne by their owne proper forces, by reaſon of ſome inward contrariety. If it had pleaſed God that the Romaines had not ruinated Carthage, which was emulous and enuious of their greatneſſe, and that they had not rooted out this their forraine enemy, but that they had ſtill had him

to haue kept them in feare and awe, they had not then bene conſumed by inteſtine ciuill warres within themſelues, they had not then turned their ſwordes againſt their owne throates, and their Empire peraduenture had bene ſtanding euen till this day. For the feare of a forreine and outward foe (which as ſome ſay, is a ſure gardian, and a moſt ſtreight and perfect bond of amitie and concorde) had preſeruedSentence. and ſtill mainteined them in ſafetie. The like may we ſay perhappes of the Chriſtians, and of the nations profeſsing the faith of Chriſt: for if we were exempted from an externall and forreine enemies, and had not an aduerſatie elſewhere to keepe vs in awe, conſidering our impietie and ambition, our rancours and diuiſions paſt all hope of reconciliation, and the bloudy ſtreames of troubles and tumults nouriſhed from time to time within the body of the common weale of Chriſtendome, do you not thinke that we ſhould finde a hundreth times more diſaduantage and miſchiefe by our owne enmities and diſſentions, then by the violence of our outward enemies? Aſſure your ſelues we had long ere this time bene conſumed and worne out by the furie and outrage of our owne proper armes. I conclude therefore, that it is not happened altogether for the worſt, that this voyage is diſcontinued and broken off: for it was greatly to be feared, that when we had once chaſed away this greeuous and bloudy enemie farre from vs, leaſt that then we would haue kindled ſome fire within out owne houſes, which ſhould haue proued more bloudy and fatall vnto vs. Howbeit it is not to be doubted, and we may hold it for a certain and infallible truth,Empire of the Turkes is not durable. that the Empire of the Ottoman cannot continue long but that it muſt needes decay and periſh, if at leaſt wiſe this may be called or termed an Empire, which is but a waſt and ſolitarie deſert of Barbariſme depriued of all light of true doctrine, being without lawes, without iudgements, without any good order and policie, and euen in thoſe parts, eſpecially where as once, the artes, & ſciences, the true and perfect diſcipline, the moſt famous Churches with many other ornamēts were moſt glorious & floriſhing: as we ſee it now come to paſſe in Aſia, and a great part of Europe ſubdued by the armes and violence of the Turkes. And albeit Daniell in his Prophecies diſtinguiſhing the fortune and vertue of euery Empire, hath deſcribed all of them: namely that in this old and declining age of the world, there ſhalbe more confuſions then haue bene in times paſt: and that God notwithſtanding (as long as mankinde ſhall endure vpon the face of the earth) will preſerue ſome Kingdomes and Empires: which as the end of the world doth more and more approch; ſo ſhall they grow more faint and feeble: and yet neuertheleſſe; that there ſhould ariſe a certaine Barbarous nation of a wonderfull puiſſance, named in the diuine Prophecies Gog and Magog: howbeit let vs not be troubled at the power and puiſſance of the Turkes, which by manifeſt and auncient teſtimonies is condemned and reiected of God, as being raiſed and encreaſed by deceiptfull and vnlawfull meanes, and plunged in all kindes of vices, filthineſſe, and wickedneſſe. And let vs not make any doubt of the promiſes and predictions left vnto vs by the voyce of the ſonne of God: but let vs fully aſſure our ſelues, that the dignitie of the Empire is not nor ſhall not fall into the handes of ſo Barbarous and execrable tyrannie, which vomiteth forth blaſphemies againſt Chriſt the Sauiour of theDignitie of the true Empire where it is to be ſoūd. world, and aboliſheth all honeſt and eiuill policies, but let vs rather aſſure our ſelues, that there onely and not elſewhere the ſacred maieſtie of the Empire both is and ſhalbe continued, where the true Religion is mainteined and obſerued, where the diuine lawes, and other ciuill lawes and good ordinaunces deriued out of them do rule and beare ſway, where the lawfull adminiſtration of iuſtice is vpheld in our ſtrength and vigour, where good men are rewarded, and offenders are puniſhed: laſt of all where the honeſt and godly aſſemblies and ſocieties of good men, are preſerued and

mainteined by the vſe of lawfull and iuſt armes, there onely and not elſewhere is the dignitie and maieſtie Imperiall howſoeuer that the greatneſſe thereof do appeare to be very little or ſmall in compariſon of that of the Mahometan. For (as hath bene ſayd) it will not be long ere the ſame wilbe ruinated and come to nothing, becauſe as wiſe men haue written,) things euill gotten, are ſoone waſted, and do ſpeedely periſh, and no man can long poſſeſſe or retaine the dominion, that is purchaſed by iniurious force and violence. Contrariwiſe, the Chriſtian Empire, & the Church of God founded and erected by the deuine oracle, ſhall endure for euer, & ſhall neuer haue an end. Wherefore let vs pray our good God, the king almightie and omnipotent (who knoweth better what is good and needfull for vs, then we know how or what to demaund at his hands) that it would pleaſe him to waſh away our ſinnes by his grace, and to defend his holy faith, and his choſen people from the rage and furie of the Infidels, the which this cruell tyrant doth continually perſecute, & by his brutiſh fierceneſſe doth endeuour to deſtroy and ſuppreſſe.
            
            Thus did Scanderbeg comfort and encourage his people, that they might not be diſmayed for the breaking vp and diſperſing of the Chriſtian armie. But leauing him for a while with theſe diſcourſes, we will now returne to ſpeake of Mahomet. After he vnderſtood of the ſlaughter and flight of the people of Seremet, the Painim Prince being incenſed with rage and furie, rather then diſcouraged with this misfortune, ſpeedily diſpatched away Ballaban Badera one of his Colonels with fifteene thouſandBallaban Badera ſent againſt Scāderbeg with an army of 18000. Turkes. horſe and three thouſand footemen. This Chieftaine was no leſſe prompt and hardy in executing any thing with his hand, then he was of an expert and aduiſed iudgement in the politicke handling of martiall affaires: for he was a man that had bene long practiſed in armes, and had giuen many proofes of his ſufficiencie and valour vnder Mahomet, eſpecially at the taking of Conſtantinople: where he was the firſtBallaban his birth and deſcription▪ Aga, the place of a Colonell amongeſt the Turkes. man that mounted vpon the wall, and entred into the Citie. For this cauſe the Sultan had exalted him to the eſtate of an Aga or Colonell: he was an Epirot, borne of a very baſe and obſcure race and kindred, & the ſubiect of Iohn Castriot the father of Scanderbeg: but in his younger yeares, being a verie lad, as he & other litle children were keeping of beaſts in the fields, he was taken and caried away by the infidels, who preſented him for a ſlaue vnto the Great Turke. Touching the ſtature of his bodie, he was not very tall, but of a middle ſize: but he was of a notable quicke and ready wit, his minde was extremely great and haughtie, beſides that he was very reſolute and couragious, fearing nothing. So as it may well be ſayd of him, as Homer wrote of Tydeus.
            
            
               A litle man of bodie, and but ſmall of ſtature,
               Yet great in deedes of armes, and a mightie warriour.
            
            He was very ſtrongly made in his limmes, actiue and valiant of his perſon, deſirous of battell, and hot and eager in fight. This man being come to Alchria, in the confines of Macedonie, after he had taken a view and muſter of his armie, ſent ſecretly (as ſome ſay) vnto Scanderbeg certaine preſents of great eſtimate, for a token of friendſhip and amitie: and to prouide (it may be) if by chaunce he ſhould happen to haue the worſt, and to fall into his handes, that he might not be vſed with extremitie. Howbeit it is moſt probable and likely, that he did it onely of a cautelous and ſuttle meaning, as afterwards▪ the euent and iſſue did make it manifeſt▪ For he employed all his forces, and ſet abroach all his ſleights and cunning deuiſes to worke the vtter confuſion and deſtruction of Scanderbeg. But the Chriſtian Prince, who was not vnacquainted with the Turkiſh wiles and ſuttleties, did reiect both his gifts and his acquaintance▪ and he ſent back vnto him, a mattock, a plowſhard, and a hedging bill, with ſuch like ruſtical

inſtruments, and he willed him to let alone the exerciſe of armes, as not being a profeſsionContumelie offred by Scanderbeg to Ballaban. for him to deale withall: but that it was fitteſt for him to returne to husbandrie according to the vſe of his predeceſſours, who were all of them peyſants and of abaſe and vile condition. Ballaban tooke this very impatiently and he conceaued by reaſon therof a more deadly hatred againſt Scanderbeg then euer, ſwearing and vowing that he would take ſome notable reuenge vpon him for this ignominie, if euer he could finde a fit time and oportunitie: he determined therefore ſecretly in the night time to ſurpriſe and aſſaile him. Whereupon in the darke of the night he began to ſet forward and to remoue his Campe. But (as the ſaying is) it is bad halting before a criple: for the Albanois being informed of his comming, & what way he tooke, went againſt him with all ſpeed, which cauſed Ballaban to hold bridle and to make a ſtand, and he pitched his tents about a two myles from the Campe of the Chriſtians. Scanderbeg had not with him in all his army aboue foure thouſand horſe, and fiue and twentie hundreth footemen, not for that he was not able to haue aſſembled greater forces if he had liked: but becauſe he had made choice at that time of his oldeſt and moſt expert ſouldiours, and the flower of all his men, in whoſe vertue and valiaunt proweſſe, he did repoſe his principall truſt and confidence: and he thought it better (as Fabius Maximus was wont to ſay) to bring all of them backe againe rich andSaying of Fabius Maximus vſed by Scanderbeg. Sayings of Scanderbeg. 
               wealthie, then to vſe the ſeruice of a great number of ſouldiours: and many times alſo he vſed theſe ſpeeches, that that Captaine which with ten or twelue thouſand men at the moſt knew not how to beate his enemie, would hardly be able to doe any honorable exploit with greater forces. For he affirmed that the multitude of troupes, and the exceſsiue numbers of ſouldiours had many times cauſed confuſion, and had bene the diſturbance, and an hinderance to the victorie. Now the Infidell as hath bene ſayd, had fiften thouſand horſe, and three hundred foote. The Scanderbegians were encamped at the one end of a pleaſaunt valley, which they of the countrey call Valcala, which being of a goodly breadth, it was more long thenThe valley of Valcala. large. The Barbarians had ſeized vppon the other end of the valley, neare to a mountaine which lay at the end of Valcala, the entry whereof was very ſtraight & narrow, and the enemy hauing both the mountaine and the paſſage in their power and puiſſance,Ambuſcado layd by Ballabā at the entry of Valcala. had laied there an ambuſcado, to the intent that the fight being begunne, and the Chriſtians hauing the better, if they did purſue the victory, and did enter within the ſtreight of that narrow paſſage to get to the ſacking of their Campe, they ſhould be encloſed in the middeſt of their enemies, lying there in the ambuſhment, and by that meanes ſhould be at their mercy and diſcretion. The king of Epire who was encamped at the other end of the valley, forſeeing well that this their neare neighbourhood to their enemies, could not be parted without talking nearer together, and for that his forces were the weakeſt, he iudged it needfull for him to ſeeke ſome aduantage againſt them, and therefore he vſed theſe ſpeeches vnto his ſouldiers.
            My good friends and companions, I ſee well that it behoueth vs this day aſmuchOration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiours before the battell of Valcala. 
               as euer, to make our enemies to feele who we are. Ballaban is come to ſeeke vs, and to make proofe whether Fortune will be more friendly vnto him, then ſhee hath beene to his predeceſſours: but before that he begin to march, I hold it beſt that we remoue our Campe to this mountaine which is at our backes. Notwithſtanding, this you muſt marke: that as ſoone as he ſeeth vs departing hence, he will imagine (becauſe we are ſo few, that we meane to flie:) and therefore it is to bethought, that he will immediatly charge vs with all poſsible violence at our backes, which if he doe, then do you receiue him valiantly: and after you haue a litle ſhifted your place and fained a retraite, ſodainely do you turne head, and with a round and braue charge, do you beare

in vpon them with all your ſtrength, and (as your cuſtome is) breake and diſorder them: in ſo doing I doubt not, but you ſhall haue them at your diſcretion. But take heede (my good ſouldiers) I pray you, and be you well aduiſed when you haue put them to flight, and that you haue them in chaſe, and do follow them in execution vppon them: takeheed, I ſay, that you enter not in any caſe within the mouth of the ſtraight of Valcala: but ſtopping your courſe paſſe no further forwardes. For within that paſſage I knowe there are certaine ſquadrons of the enemie layed to entrappe vs: I knowe it well, I am well acquainted both with the place, and the pollicies of the Barbarians: if you once enter in, you will neuer get out againe. Let it ſuffiſe you therefore (my friends) to purſue the victorie euen to the entrie of that place and no further.
            
            As ſoone as he had thus ſpoken, he eſpied Ballaban marching on directly towardesThe battell of Valcala betweene Ballaban and Scanderbeg. him: whereupon he ſent a certaine number of light horſemen to ſeize vppon that hill which he had choſen for the lodging of his armie: and immediatly he followed after them with the bodie of his troupes, making as though he meant to haue made a retrait: the which the Turkes perceauing and beleeuing verelie, that they had bene in a true and playne flight, they galloped after them without any good order, and with great furie they held on their courſe the length of all the valley. Then did the Epyrots begin to beare vppe cloſe together, and being nothing aſtoniſhed with the clamours or violent charge of the Turkes, they turned about, and with a hardie reſolution they receaued them to the ſhocke, and ſo ioyned with them in combat. Then began the fight to grow moſt ſharpe, cruell, and bloudy, and many fell both of the one ſide and the other, and the victorie reſted for a long time doubtfull and vncertaine. In fine the Albanois fought with ſuch a conſtant and ſettled reſolution and obſtinacie againſt the Infidelles, being out of orderVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Ballaban and the Turkes. and in ſome confuſion, that they got the aduantage, killing and beating them downe on all partes and draue them backe euen to the ſtreightes of Valcala, and there they tooke breath and made a ſtand, excepting eight onely of the Chriſtian armie (each of whom without all doubt, was worthie to haue had the abſolute commaunde of a good and great armie.) Theſe being tranſported with the furie of the fight, and the heate of armes, and forgetting the expreſſe commaundement of their Generall, but being ſpurred forward with an eager deſire of following the chaſe vpon the enemie, and with a mortall hatred againſt Ballaban, were drawen on into the ambuſcado of the Infidels, & did very vnaduiſedly entangle themſelues within theſe ſtreights, which by meanes of this vnhappie accident were, I dare ſay, as famous by the loſſeForkes of Candyum. See Lyuie. lib. 5 and calamitie of theſe braue Epyrotes, as the forkes of Candyum were in times paſt by the ignominie of the Romaines. Long did they maintaine the fight againſt the Infidelles there ambuſqued, and paſsing ſtill further and further within thoſe valleys▪ they came at laſt to the trenches of the Barbarians, where they were to yeeld a reckoning of their comming, and to pay the ſhot vnto their hoſtes. Neuertheleſſe continuing there alſo in a moſt cruell fight: they ſhewed them ſelues ſo valiaunt, and did ſo beſtirre themſelues by their valour and dexteritie, that in the end they gayned the toppe of a mountaine, which being poſſeſſed by the infanterie of the Turkes, they had thought to haue bene of their owne companie, and ſo they fell againe into a new and ſecond perill greater then the former. In the ende after infinite prooues of theirMoſes, Guirize, Muſache & other nobles of the Epyrots taken priſoners by the Turkes. wonderfull proweſſe and valour, being wearied with ſtriking and killing of their enemies, both men and horſes growing faint through the multitude of their wounds, they were taken aliue by the Ballabanians. The vertue, courage, and incomparable proweſſe of theſe braue warriours may not be let paſſe & omitted in ſilence, and yet if

I ſhould in this place ſet downe the ſingular perfectiōs wherin all of them were moſt accompliſhed, and the memorable actes atchieued by their vertue in the ſeruice of God, of the religion, and of their countrey, I ſhould make a long and exceeding great hiſtorie: and therefore I will onely and barely ſet downe their names vnto you. TheMoſes. Guirize de Vladienne. Muſache de Augeline. Gine Muſache Iohn Terlat. Nicholas Beriſee. George Chuque Gine Maneſſe. firſt that offereth him ſelfe to be remembred, was that great Moſes the Dibrian, of whom we haue ſo often made mention, the onely & chiefe man that was moſt deare and faithfull vnto Scanderbeg, and who was the Lieutenant of the armie. Next to him was Guirize de Vladienne, the neare kinſeman of Scanderbeg: after him followed Muſache de Angeline, nephew to Scanderbeg, and Gyne Muſache, Iohn Perlat, Nicholas Beriſe, George Chuque, and Gine Maneſſe. Theſe men by their miſerable and vnhappy fortune, made the eſtate of Albanie more to be deplored and lamented, then any one thing at any time before whatſoeuer. For as all of them were of ſingular accompt and eſtimation, both for their corporal ſtrength and vigour, for the magnanimitie of their courages, and for their excellent skill and knowledge in armes and the ſcience militarie: ſo were they no leſſe fearfull and terrible to the Mahometans. In ſo much that when their Monarke the Ottoman heard, that they were taken, & brought vnto him aliue, he conceiued ſuch an exceeding and extreme ioy thereby, that he cried out aloft, and with a lowd voyce vttered theſe words.
            Now do I know for a truth and certainty, now may I well & iuſtly ſay, that 
                  Scanderbeg
                  Speech of Mahomet, hearing of the taking of Moſes and other Epirots. is ouerthrowne, that his pride is fallen, that his forces are abated, that his audacitie and courage is cleane gone and loſt: ſeeing that Ballaban my ſonne, my child, the onely man amongſt my Captaines and Chieftaines that went before him, hath ſhewed him ſelfe the onely man of valour, the onely warriour, and he alone hath knowne how to ouercome him by whom ſo many braue men of ours haue bene ſurmounted and ouerthrowne, of which ſome haue bene made ſlaues, others haue bene murthered and put to the ſword.
            
            Thus after he had highly commended and exalted Ballaban, he ſent vnto him a great quantitie of gold and ſiluer and other giftes, with a commiſſion to reſtore his bands with newe ſupplies, and to purſue the warre againſt Scanderbeg. Who in thisAmbaſſade ſent by Scanderbeg to Mahomet for the raunſome of Moſes and his other Nobles. Crueltie moſt barbarous of Mahomet. meane while being in a maruellous diſtreſſe and care for the captiuitie of theſe Noble men, diſpatched away ſpeedily a notable Ambaſſade, with great preſents, and letters vnto the Sultan, praying him moſt effectually, to ranſome the priſoners according to the right of armes, or elſe to exchange them for other priſoners, of which he had a great number. But the felonious tyraunt, being caried away with rage and furie, made no account of this Ambaſſage: but after all kindes of ignominie and barbarous crueltie vſed and practiſed vpon them, he cauſed them to be flayed aliue by little and little for fifteene dayes together: during the which they yeelded vp theirDeath of Moſes and other priſoners by the tyrannie of Mahomet. conſtant and glorious ſoules vnto God, and did augment (as it is to be beleeued) the happie companie of the Martyrs in Paradiſe. The abhominable crueltie of this torment, made the ignominie of the Chriſtians more notable and notorious: and all the armie of the Albanians did infinitely bewayle and grieue at their miſerable ende: and the countrey of Albanie did feele much more griefe and ſorow through the want of their deare and beloued citizens, then they conceiued ioye for the victorie had againſt their enemies: neither was the ſorrowe and lamentation leſſe which was made generally and in publicke, then that which was ſeene particularly and in priuate. For many (as the report goeth) did chaunge their habit and their garments, and many alſo did let the haire of their heads and beards to growe at length, in token that they mourned, and grieuouſly lamented for this great and lamentable loſſe of theſe excellent and heroycall perſons. The king him ſelfe was no leſſe grieued in

hart, for their misfortune. Neuertheleſſe bearing a minde hardened againſt all the aſſaultes and encombraunces of fortune, he preſently inuaded and ouercame the enemies countrey, ſhewing him ſelfe more deſirous of reuenge then of bootie and pillage, and he turned all things vpſide downe not leauing any thing in whole and good eſtate which either the ſword or the fire could poſsibly waſt, deſtroy and conſume.
            Certaine dayes were ſpent in theſe courſes, and actes of hoſtility, during the which,Ballaban his ſecond iourney againſt Scanderbeg with 18000. Turks. 
               Ballaban by vertue of his commiſsion renued for the warre of Albanie, had made and finiſhed the encreaſe and ſupplie of his companies to the auncient number of fifteen thouſand men on horſe backe, and three thouſand footemen, which done he returned to Achaia vpon the frontiers of Macedonie, and there did he endeuour by his wonted ſleightes and his ordinarie diſguiſed ſhewes of cunning to reconcile him ſelfe vnto Scanderbeg with new preſentes and honeſt offers of ſeruice and amitie. In the ende ſeeing that he had but a cold ſuite, and that his guile and diſsimulation was too well knowen, as alſo that he had leſſe hope and power to attaine to the ende of his deſires by playne and open armes, he employed therefore all his wittes and deuiſes to more ſecret and cloſe attemptes, that by ſome more ſhort and more ready courſe he might ouer-reach and entrappe him.
            
               Scanderbeg being accompanied with 4000. horſe, and fiue and twentie hundreth footemen, he pitched his tents at Oronichea in the vpper Dibria, and vpon all parts andBallaban his exploit againſt Scanderbeg whom he thinketh to ſurpriſe in his Campe. paſſages of his Campe, he had placed very conueniently both ſentinels and ſcoutes. It happened by chaunce, that at one of thoſe paſſages, there were placed certaine ſouldiours Epyrotes in whom the king had great truſt and confidence, but he knew not that they were allyed and of kinne vnto Ballaban. Theſe being corrupted and wonne with great ſtore of money; the Turkiſhe Generall tooke his way in the dead ofSouldiours of Scanderbeg being of kinne to Ballaban corrupted by him to betray the armie of the Albanois. the night with all his armie, and an houre before day hauing paſſed beyond thoſe ſcouts, he began to approch very neare to the Campe of the Albanois, which he had ſurpriſed without all doubt and oppreſſed, had it not bene for the prompt vigilancie and watchfulneſſe of Scanderbeg him ſelfe, who hauing his eye open to all chaunces and inconueniences, did ordinarily and oftentimes go the rounde on horſebacke, viſiting & ſurueying all parts of his Campe, both the courts of garde & the other quarters, as God would at the very ſame time, he being thus buſily employed diſcerned a farre off, by the noiſe and neighing the horſes of the Infidels. Behold here the ſingularScanderbeg his vigilancie preuenteth Ballaban his trecherie and ſuttletie. benefit, and a worthy example of diligent & carefull obſeruation of martiall diſcipline, the king himſelfe gaue alarme to his people, and preſently diſpoſing and ordering them in array of battell (howbeit in tumultuous manner and according to the ſhortneſſe of the time, and as the diſcommoditie of the darke would giue him leaue,) in two or three wordes animated his ſouldiours, to do their deuoir vpon this ſodaine occaſion, and ſo marched on furiouſly againſt the Turke. Ballaban not looking to haue founde him in ſuch order and readineſſe breathed him ſelfe a while, and that heThe battell of Oronichea betweene Ballaban and Scanderbeg. might alſo better arraunge his men to the battell, whileſt Scanderbeg in the meane time laying hold vpon the preſent occaſion, with a ſtrong troupe of horſe the moſt reſolute of all his armie, and with a number of harquebuſsiers Italians, he conueyed him ſelfe cloſely all alongeſt the couert of the valley, and ſo got behinde all the backes of his enemies, and immediatly charging them with all his force vppon the tayle and rereward of their armie, he did ſo trouble and moleſt them, that being charged likewiſe in front by the reſidue of his troupes, they were conſtrained to fall to the fight on all ſides before that euer they could take any time to arraunge them ſelues in any good order. Neuertheleſſe the conflict was long and mortall betweene them, eſpecially on the part of the Epirots, both becauſe that many of them had not yet

put themſelues in rancke within their battell, as alſo by reaſon of the great number of their enemies: but in the ende finding the Infidels to be better furniſhed and armed with cordes and chaynes to binde the Chriſtians, then with hardie and obſtinate hearts to put them to vtterance: and perceiuing that they fought but faintly, they didVictorie of Scanderbeg the ſecond time againſt Ballaban and the Turkes. preſſe vppon them ſo violently, that being not able to endure them any longer, they made them to turne their backes and to betake themſelues to flight. Whereupon being cloſely purſued and liuely followed by the Chriſtians, they were handled ſo rudely that they were not able to recouer their trenches, but were enforced to abandon their campe to the pillage of their enemies. The maſſacre and the bootie alſo was ineſtimable. Ballaban himſelfe with a very ſmall traine, without enſignes, without baggage did carrie the newes of his owne diſcomfiture. Mahomet receiued him, but with ſoure lookes, and he was long in a doubt and perplexitie, whether he ſhould employ anie other Chieftaine in this warre, ſeeing that ſo ſmall a handfull of men (as he obiected vnto him) had had the power to ouercome him ſo ſhamefully.
            After diuerſe conſultations, he concluded in the ende once againe to employ him againſt the Albanois, and to ſend him backe into Epyre, many cauſes and conſiderations vrging him thereunto. Firſt of all, he knew him to be a mortall enemy to Scanderbeg: beſides he was an Epyrot borne, and he was very well practiſed and acquainted with all the places and paſſages of the countrie which were moſt fit and apt for ambuſcadoes. Beſides amongſt ſo many thouſands of excellent Knightes and men of command vnder the obeiſance of the Ottoman Empire, he knew not any one ſo worthie and ſufficient as him alone. Moreouer knowing the diſpoſition of all men, and how inſatiably couetous the minde of man is of honour and authoritie, he promiſed him the crowne of Epyre, in caſe he could find the meanes to make Scanderbeg away and to deſtroy him. Now Ballaban being a man of notable reſolution, and withall very deſirous to make his life glorious in the world, which otherwiſe was but ignoble and ſubiect to vncertaintie, he thought nothing impoſſible which might purchaſe him honour and eſtimation: and therfore albeit he had bene twice beaten by the Albanois, yet he accepted this commiſſion very willingly, and departed from Conſtantinople
               Ballaban his third iourney againſt Scanderbeg with 20000. Turkes with an army of 20000. fighting men, of which 17000. were horſemen, & the reſidue were footemen. Being arriued at Alchria, at the firſt he held on his wonted courſe, and ſent vnto the king of Epyre excellent good and ſwift horſes for a preſent, beſides certaine goodly robes of rich worke & embroderie, humbly entreating him not to diſdaine his ſeruice and amity, the proofe & triall whereof he promiſed & proteſted ſhould be alwaies in a readineſſe, & that he ſhould find him moſt faithfully affected vnto him during his life. All this did this craftie Foxe to the intent he might ſurpriſe him, if ſo be he found him any thing plyant and credulous to beleeue his faire & 
                  •
               ugred ſpeeches, but litle did he know whom he had to deale with all: for Scanderbeg being ſufficiently acquainted with his traiterous & fraudulent practiſes, did ſcorne & diſdaine his gifts and pretended courteſies: returning him in a mockerie certen counterpreſents vile and ruſticall, ſuch as he had before times ſent vnto him. Wherefore the Aga hauing all in vaine conſumed & ſpent three whole moneths in theſe bootles practiſes, determined at the laſt to hazard the fortune of a plaine and ſet battell, and in open fight to encounter with his enemie, who was as willing to accept of the cōbat. Wherefore after publique & deuout praiers made to God for the victory, and for the preſeruation of the eſtate of Albanie: and hauing procured & prepared all things requiſite for the iourney, he encouraged his people one while with ſhort ſpeeches, and effectuall orations, another while with giftes and rewardes, to ſome of them horſes, to others furniture of armes and weapons, to ſome of them rich apparell, and to

others he gaue money, with other cōmodities. This done, he drew forth his army intoThe battell of Sfetigrade betwene Ballaban & Scanderbeg. to the field, conſiſting of 8000. horſe, & 2500. foote, all of them choſen ſouldiers & reſolute, and he arranged them in order of battell vpon a faire plaine before Sfetigrade, where Ballaban was encamped. He deuided his army into foure parts or battels: Ouer the firſt cōmanded Goic Streeze his Nephew: the ſecond was lead by Tanuſee Ducagin: Muſache had the conduct of the third: and Scanderbeg himſelfe kept the fourth battallion for the guard of his owne bodie. The infanterie he had arranged and beſtowedOrder of Scanderbeg and Ballaban their armies at the battell of Sfetigrade. within the wings of the cauallarie, & he had appointed for the leading of them foure Chieftaines, gentlemen of good worth and experience: namely, Paul Maneſſey, Pei
                     •
                   Manuell, Demetrius Beriſſe, & Raian Chuque. The Generall Turke likewiſe did differ very litle from him in the ordering of his battallions. In this ſort the armies on both parts being diſpoſed ready to the combat, & being animated by their cōmanders, they went on cheerefully with high and mightie clamors, and affronting ech other with great hatred and courage, they fell brauely to the encounter, and the battels ioyned together with great fury. Many were ouerthrowen on both ſides, many were ſlaine and gaue vp the ghoſt, many were trampled and troden vnder the horſe feete, but the greateſt loſſe & ſlaughter fell to the Mahometiſtes. It was an horrour to heare the noyſe and clattering of their armours, the ſoundes of their weapons & ſtroaks reſounding in the aire, the pitifull voices, cries and gronings of thoſe that lay a dying. He that had ſeene how eger and ſharpe ſet the Chriſtians were, fleſhing themſelues in the ſlaughter and butcherie of the Infidels, would not haue taken them for men but for ſo manie Lyons chaffed and hunting after their prey. For bearing vp cloſe and ſtreight together, they did ſo rudely preſſe vppon their enemies, terrifying and fearing them with their incredible brauerie and couragiouſneſſe, that they enforced them to giue ground, themſelues not yeelding nor recuiling, ſo much as one foote backewardes, as men that were led on with diſpaire and reſolution, and whoſe eyes were cloſed vp againſt all perils whatſoeuer. Ballaban who had more then once made proofe of the rude entertainement of the Albanois, and knew well what belonged therunto, did continue the fight with ſingular prudence and dexteritie, laboring with great and exceeding care and trauell to preuent and eſchew all perils and inconueniences. For being guarded with a ſtrong troupe of horſe, he held firme in the forefront of the battell, comforting & cheering vp thoſe which were wearied, and ſtill ſupplying with freſh men the places of thoſe which were wounded: and thus being intentiue with a prouident eye and regard to all partes, he made no ſpare of his perſon in diſcharging the deuoire and dutie both of an excellent Captaine, and a moſt tall ſouldier. Scanderbeg likewiſe whereſoeuer he ſaw any of his ſquadrons to wauer, did readily ſuccour and relieue them, & did continually reſtore the fight: and if it happened at any time that his people did begin to grow weary, or to haue the worſt of the fight, the would ſpeedily make from one part to another, and he would on all ſides ſuſtaine the hazard of the battell, he would thruſt in amongſt the thickeſt of his enemies, & by his preſence would withſtand the fury & tempeſt of their attempts. So that on what ſide ſoeuer the Barbarians turned themſelues, ſtill did they meete & encounter with the fury of Scanderbeg, then the which nothing could preſent it ſelfe more terrible in their ſight, nothing could haue happened more to their diſcouragement: & wherſoeuer he became he ſtill drew after him an aſſured victorie, inſomuch, that both the enemy & the Albanois did openly confeſſe & affirme with one generall conſent & voice, that Scanderbeg was the beſt ſouldier & braueſt warrior in the world. As he was thus gotten in amongſt the thickeſt of the Infidels, doing wonderfull deeds of armes in killing al that came in his way, it happened that his horſe being mortally wounded did ſtumble at

a great trunke or roote of a tree couched cloſe by the ground, ſo that they fell bothScanderbeg in danger of his life. horſe and man together. Scanderbeg lying vnder his horſe was ſo ſore cruſhed with the fall, and ſo grieuouſly hurt in one of his ſhoulders, that he lay a while as one in a ſwound. The Turks thought verily he had bene dead, and therfore aduancing themſelues in a great troupe together, they came flocking about him, and beganne to light on foote, that they might haue cut off his head. But Scanderbeg his men at armes ruſhing in furiouſly, and breaking thorough the preſſe, did couer him with their bodies and their ſhields till ſuch time as being come againe to himſelfe, and hauing recouered his weapons, he was mounted againe vpon a freſh horſe. Therupon the vehemencie of the griefe paſt, and his ſpirits newly gathered, made him to enter againe into the middeſt of the battell with greater fury and fiercenes then before, inſomuch that making way on all ſides with the edge of his ſword amongſt the Infidels, he ſeemed not much vnlike to a raging tempeſt which falling in a field of corne, beateth it al down, and preſſeth it euen with the ground: ſo the King of Albany making a great ſlaughter and butchery amongſt the Turkes, encountred at length with one that was a man of principal account and chiefeſt regard in all their armie, whoſe name was Sulyman, and him did he ouerthrow dead vpon the place. This act gaue him the whole aduantage of the field, which till that time was vncertaine and equally ballanced betweene both parties. But euen at that inſtant ſo ſudden & ſtrange a feare did ſurpriſe the barbarians, that their force & courage began to faile them all at once: and they were not able any longer to endure the violence of the Chriſtians, who had vſually bene accuſtomed to beate & maſter them. Wherfore in this their generall aſtoniſhmēt, they were ſo liuely & roundly preſſed, and ſo hardly followed, that they were conſtrained to turne their backes, & to flie with might & maine for the ſafegard of their liues. But the flight was more pernicious vnto them then the fight: for all of them in a manner remained deadVictorie of Scanderbeg the third time againſt Ballaban and the Turkes. in the fields of Dibria, which ſeemed to be fattened with the bloud of the Infidels, by reaſon that the vanquiſhers did ſo egerly follow & purſue them, that they would neuer leaue nor giue ouer the chaſe as long as they foūd any one with his weapōs in his hand. I ſhould haue enough to doe, if I ſhould tell you how notable a bootie, & what great riches were found in the tents and campe of the Paynims; all which was liberally graunted to the ſouldiers, to comfort them for the hardneſſe and difficultie of their labours, and to aſſwage the griefe and ſorrow of their hearts conceiued for the loſſe of their fellowes and companions, of whom there were ſlaine in this battell to the number of three hundred, beſides infinite of them ſore wounded.
            
               Scanderbeg after this notable and famous iourney, found himſelfe ſo payned in his ſhoulder and in his arme, that he was compelled in a manner to keepe houſe for three whole monethes together. Ballaban who had ſaued himſelfe by the benefite of hisMahomet highly diſpleaſed with Ballaban for the loſſe of his armie. ſpurres, and had gotten within Alchria, departed from thence within a while after to Conſtantinople, where being come with a very ſmall traine, he had but bad welcome of his Prince, who entertained him with a very angry and frowning countenance. He reproched him continually with this foule and grieuous ouerthrow, and he demaunded of him the liues of ſo many braue ſouldiers, and the flower of ſo many gallant youthes which (as he ſaid) were betraied & wilfully lead to the butcherie, by his folly and raſhneſſe. But the wylie and cunning gallant, by a long and artificiall Oration found the meanes to appeaſe and mitigate the wrath and anger of the Sultan:
               
                  Speeches vſed by Ballaban to Mahomet in excuſe of his ouerthrow by Scanderbeg. calling the gods to witnes, & appealing to thoſe ſouldiers which were eſcaped from the ſlaughter, he referred himſelfe to their examination & teſtimonies whether that before he began the fight, he had not with ſingular prouidence & exact prudēce carefully foreſeene & regarded all matters: whether that the choiſe of the time & the place,

or the manner of the ordering of his battels were in any reſpect to be condemned: whether that eyther the ſouldiers or the Generall had fayled in their duetie, and in briefe, whether that he had omitted or neglected any thing, which might haue purchaſed or furthered his victorie. And caſting the whole fault of his defaſter and misfortune vppon the will and ineuitable pleaſure of the goddes, and the vncertainetie of fortune the perpetuall friende of inconſtancie which maketh deedes of armes doubtfull and ſubiect to dayly alteration, he would not in anie ſort ſeeme to acknowledge, that hee was inferiour to the King of Albanie in vertue or deſert. He did allowe and confeſſe him to be one of the moſt accompliſhed and moſt fortunate warriours in the whole worlde; but yet neuertheleſſe, that he was mortall, and not inuincible as was to be ſeene by Sebalias before at the ſiege of Belgrade, & by himſelfe alſo at the battell of Valcala, where he had taken and defeated diuerſe of his beſt and moſt valiant Knights and Chieftaines. And thus did he excuſe himſelfe as finely as he could. So well could he handle the matter by his ſmooth and fayre ſpeeches, that he made the Sultan to giue him the hearing of anie thing. Wherevppon he aduentured to propound vnto him a new and ſeeldome vſed courſe which he had conceiued in his minde, by meanes whereof he was in hope to obtaine an eaſie and aſſured victorie of the Prince of Albanie, which he vttered in this manner.
            
               May it pleaſe your excellent Maieſtie, quoth he, (moſt happie and mightie Monarch)Speech of Ballaban to Mahomet propounding a courſe for the deſtruction of Scanderbeg. to chooſe out and nominate two notable and ſufficient Chieftaines, who with two puiſſant armies by diuerſe and ſundrie wayes, and ſeuerally each from other, may with all diligence and ſecrecie make their entrie into Epyre, pretending that their iourney lyeth ſome other way. And let not any one of them come to fight with the enemie without the other: but ſtaying and expecting the comming of his companion, let them both together with a common aduiſe and mutuall counſell, ſuddenly turne bridle, and marching againſt him, both at one time, they may encloſe and entangle him in the middeſt betweene them, and ſo eaſily ouerthrow him. By this courſe and meanes both himſelfe and his people ſhall be ſoone ouercome and cut in peeces, and ſo ſhall we make a finall end of the warre and inſolencie of the Albanois.
               
            
            
               Mahomet tooke ſo great a liking of the reaſons and deuiſe of Ballaban, and the conceipt which he had propounded pleaſed him ſo well, that without any delay, he gaue him full power and authoritie to ordaine what he thought good for the proſecuting of this warre and for the bringing of it to an end. And that he ſhould make choiſe amongſt all his Captaines of ſuch a one whom himſelfe ſhould beſt like of, for his colleague and compartner in that iourney: as alſo that he ſhould take ſuch a number of men as he ſhould thinke needfull: and he vrged him to haſten this voyage intoSpeech of Mahomet to Ballaban, vrging him to the deſtruction of Scanderbeg. 
               
                  Epyre, and to follow it with all poſſible care, policie, and good counſell. He told him, that nothing could be more acceptable or welcome vnto him, then to heare that Scanderbeg with his forces were expelled and baniſhed out of Epyre. That he could not thinke, nor account himſelfe a Prince of any good fortune of happineſſe, as long as he ſhould ſee this his enemie to be aliue, by whom he had ſuffered ſo many outrages and diſcommodities. Ballaban being deſirous to repayre his honour, cauſed foorth with a wonderfull companie of ſouldiers to be leauied, with the which heIagup Arnauth ſent with an armie againſt Scanderbeg of ſixteene thouſand horſemen. made ſo puiſſant an armie, that it was ſufficient to haue made the Realme of Albanie to tremble for very feare: & he adioyned vnto him for his companion Iagup Arnauth (which is as much to ſay) as Iames the Albanois. For he alſo was borne in that countrie, and he was a Knight of great eſtimate and reckoning, and one that had wonne

great honour by deedes of armes. Theſe troupes being nowe aſſembled together, and parted betweene them, Ballaban directed his compartner to take his way all alongeſt the ſeacoaſtes, and ſo croſſing ouer Greece and Theſſaly to enter into Epyre: and he charged him expreſſely, that in any caſe he ſhould not diſcouer himſelfe, or make any attempt againſt the enemie, till ſuch time as he perceiued Ballaban himBallaban his fourth iourney againſt Scanderbeg with 28000. Turkes ſelfe with his people to be arriued, and to approch neere him. For he taking a ſhorter and neerer cut through Thrace and Macedonie, was the firſt of the two that came into Albanie, and was there a great deale ſooner then Iagup: the armie which Ballaban had with him onely, exceeded aboue foure and twentie thouſand horſemen, beſides foure thouſand that ſerued on foote.
            Let vs now turne our ſpeech to the Generall of the Chriſtians, and let vs ſee a litle with what diligence, and with what preparations, he prouided to feaſt theſe his gueſtes, who had bidden themſelues in ſo great a companie, without being inuited by him. For you muſt vnderſtand, that Arnauth who went the other way, had with him alſo ſixteene thouſand horſe at the leaſt. Ballaban had no ſooner taken the fielde, but that Scanderbeg had as ſpeedie intelligence of his comming both by letters written to him of purpoſe, as alſo by his eſpyals, of whom he kept a good number continually diſperſed in all parts of the Turke his country, and euen within the cabinet (if I may ſo ſpeake) of the tyrant: by occaſion whereof he cauſed a ſpeedy leauy to be made of eight thouſand horſe, and fourethouſand footmen, with as great ſilence and ſecrecie as was poſſible, & with them he held himſelfe in a readineſſe, being fully prepared both in courage and in armes to receiue the Barbarian. Who being at length arriued within the frontiers of Epyre, the Albanian Prince determined to go & viſite him, purpoſing to make an end of that matter, and to trie his fortune firſt with him, before that Arnauth ſhould be able to come and ioine with him, for feare leaſt being aſſayled all at one time with two ſo puiſſant enemies, he ſhould not be able to make head againſt them, and ſo might his enemies haue their deſire of him. And without all doubt I doe not thinke that it would haue fallen out any otherwiſe, if the plot laid by the Paynim had ſorted to his effect. But the diuine prouidence (which gouerneth and ruleth all things according to his owne will and pleaſure) had a ſpeciall care to the affaires of the Chriſtians and of Scanderbeg. And he would not permit that he which of ſo ardent a zeale, and ſo ſincere and entire an affection did daily expoſe and aduenture his life, and did inceſſantly labor & trauell for the preſeruation of the Catholike faith, ſhold ſo ignominiouſly & traiterouſly be ſurpriſed, vanquiſhed or oppreſſed. Ballaban therefore hauing paſſed ouer Thrace and Macedonie, was nowBallaban encamped at the plaine of Valcala. encamped in the plaine of Valcala: wherefore Scanderbeg hauing knowledge, by the fauour and benefite of the darke, he cauſed his troupes to march in great ſecrecie directly towardes him, and ſent before him three ſouldiers (ſuch as he thought moſt aduiſed and beſt accuſtomed to that office) to diſcouer and take a viewe of the enemies campe, and to obſerue their countenance, with an expreſſe commaundement that aſſoone as they had ſeene and conſidered all things, they ſhould not faile to returne vnto him preſently, and to make report vnto him what they had learned. One of theſe three ſouldiers (as ſome ſay) was of kinne to Ballaban, or at leaſtwiſe was before corrupted. And he had wonne his companions likewiſe promiſing them in the behalfe of Ballaban great ſummes of golde and ſiluer: the which we ſee doth daily worke miracles in the mindes of mortall men, eſpecially ſuch as are greedily ſetSentence. vpon the deſire of worldly riches. Theſe three then went on directly to the Mahometan,
               Treaſon of certaine ſouldiers ſeruing vnder Scanderbeg. and reuealed vnto him all the ſecret counſels and enterpriſes of Scanderbeg. The Prince of Epyre hauing his thoughtes continually vppon his ſcoutes did for

a while expect and looke for them: but ſeeing that they ſtayed ouer long and came not againe, he was in a doubt leaſt ſome miſaduenture had befallen them, and that they had beene intercepted by the enemie. Himſelfe therefore (as he was alwayes prompt and venturous in all militarie actions) would needs goe and ſee what ſhould be the cauſe of their ſtay, taking with him in his companie onely fiue ſouldiers and no more, to the intent he might take a view, and be informed of the eſtate of the enemie, and heare ſome newes alſo of his owne people. But Ballaban (who to his owne coſt was paſſing well acquainted and experienced with the cunning and politique draughts of his enemie) miſdoubting ſome ſuch matter, thought that he would beat him at his owne weapons, and therefore he vſed this counterpolicie in hope to ouerreach him. He made choiſe of certaine ſtout and very hardie men, all excellently well mounted on horſebacke, and with them did he beſet a certaine paſſage, by which heAmbuſhment dreſſed by Ballaban to ſurpriſe Scanderbeg. ſuſpected that Scanderbeg himſelfe would come to take a view of his campe, and the demeanour of his armie: and he was not any thing deceiued in his imagination. For behold Scanderbeg was now come to the place of this ambuſhment, but yet before he would proceede any further, he cauſed (according to his wonted cuſtome) one of his ſouldiers to goe before him, who ſoone diſcouered the daunger of the Turkes which lay there ambuſhed. The Infidels ſeeing themſelues bewrayed, iſſued out vpon him with great furie, and after ſome reſiſtance made, conſtrayned him to flie. In his flight he put himſelfe into a certaine wood or thicket, which came next to hand,Scanderbeg in great danger of his life, eſcapeth the ambuſhment of Ballaban. and which lay on the other ſide of the mountaine, which encloſeth the plaine of Valcala, where by ill happe he chaunced vpon a great tree, which being withered with age, was fallen downe and lay croſſe the path by which he was to paſſe. Scanderbeg ſetting ſpurres to his horſe made him to leape roundly ouer, the like did one of his ſouldiers which followed him: but his companions not being able to doe the like, and perceiuing that their laſt refuge, & their only hope to ſaue their liues conſiſted in their armes: couching thēſelues cloſe, they gaue in valiantly amongſt their enemies, & hauing both ſlain & hurt ſome of them, they yeelded vp their liues as became men of valure and reſolution. One of the Barbarians following hard after Scanderbeg, leapt likewiſe ouer the trunke of the tree, and gathered very cloſe and neere vppon him: Scanderbeg caſting his eye about, and ſeeing one onely to followe him, made backe directly towards him, and quickly ouerthrew him dead to the ground: the reſt being not willing to purſue him any farther, were content to let him goe and to depart quietly. After this faire and happy eſcape, Scanderbeg being returned to his campe neere Petralba about fifteene miles from the enemie, made readie his ſquadrons for to march againſt the Infidels. At that time more then euer did the Prince of Albanie employ all his ſenſes to encourage and animate his men with good words, and all other good meanes to doe their deuoire againſt their enemies. He offered them giftes and large rewards: he inuited and importuned them with prayers and earneſt intreaties both in generall and in particular to take ſuch things at his hande whereof they ſtood in any neede, were it either for themſelues or for their horſes. As the King was very bountifull to offer them freely of his owne, ſo aſſure your ſelues, that the ſouldiers ſhewed their wonderfull modeſty, and did (as it were) conted with him in gratitude and courteſie, not taking any thing but in ſuch meaſurable and modeſt manner, as might ſerue onely for the preſent neede and neceſſitie. Then the Albanois hauingScanderbeg marcheth againſt Ballaban. taken ſome repaſt, began to march towards the enemie, and trauelling on continually day and night, they tooke litle or no reſt, ſcarce ſo much as might ſuffiſe nature. They were not long therefore ere they had gotten to the valley, where the army of Ballaban lay encamped. Scanderbeg ſeizing vpon the toppe of the ſame valley, did

pitch his campe with moſt excellent aduantage, by reaſon that he enuironned the enemie who lay below him in the plaine: for he extended his companies throughout all the toppes of the mountains which encloſed the vally, occupying all the ſtreights and paſſages, in ſuch ſort that he had encloſed on all ſides, and (as it were) hedged in the Barbarians, whom he viſited alſo with often and daily skirmiſhes, ſometimes on the flanckes and ſides of their campe, ſometimes at their backes, becauſe he would hold them in doubt and ſuſpence of his intent and meaning.
            The next day following Scanderbeg called a councell of his nobles and Chieftains,Councel held by Scanderbeg for his proceedings againſt Ballaban. at the which were preſent Tanuſee Thopie, Zacharie Groppe and Peic Manuell his Lieutenants. Many of them were of this opinion: that the battell ſhould be deferred till ſuch time as the ſouldiers were very wel refreſhed of their long iorney and watching lately endured: and that Tanuſee ſhould haue ſome leiſure to take a taſte of the enemy, & to keepe him doing in the meane while. But Scanderbeg was of another mind, and he did not onely perſwade, but he did inſtantly vrge and preſſe them, that they ſhould not by their delaies and daliance bring his determinations and counſels into hazard and daunger, the ſuertie whereof conſiſted in nothing ſo much as in prompt and ſpeedie execution:: That Ballaban his armie might eaſily be broken and defeated,
                  Speech of Scanderbeg to his Captaines counſelling them preſently to ſet vpon Ballaban. whileſt that Iagup being ignorant of this attempt, did tarrie away and keepe himſelfe abſent, which (quoth he) being deferred by our prolonging of the time, we ſhall giue them ſpace and leiſure to ioyne together, and ſo ſhall we cauſe our enterprize (which of it ſelfe is without daunger) to come to a doubtfull and vncertaine iſſue. Wherefore it behooueth vs with all ſpeed to found to horſebacke, to bid the battell to our enemies, and not to loſe this aduantage which their error and ouerſight hath giuen vs now that their two Generalles are thus deuided, the one abſent, the other preſent. This opinion preuailed, and the aſſembly being diſſolued: behold now how Scanderbeg did prepare himſelfe to the combat. Of all his ſquadrons he made foureOrder of Scanderbeg his armie againſt Ballaban in the ſecond battell of Valcala. battels: the one he committed to Tanuſee, the ſecond to Zacharie Groppe, and of the third, Peic Manuell had the charge and conduct: the infanterie was mingled among the horſemen, and the Harguebuſſiers and Archers were mixed pell mell with the pikes and certaine horſemen, whom he ſent forth to skirmiſh with the enemie, and to begin the fight. The reſidue of the armie together with the ſquadron which he had for the gard of his perſon, he reſerued to be commaunded by himſelfe. Hauing thus diſpoſed and ordered his troupes: he thought it requiſite with ſome ſhort ſpeech to encourage his companies, which he did in this manner.
            The importunitie of the time (my companions) and your approued valour will
                  Oration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers encouraging them againſt Ballaban and the Turkes in the ſecond battell of Valcala. not ſuffer me at this time to make any long diſcourſe: you are ſufficiently well acquainted with this enemie who is but the ſcumme and offſcouring of thoſe troupes which your ſwordes haue left aliue, and they are but the reffuſe and reliques of thoſe battels which you lately gained. Theſe are not the martiall & generous Frenchmen: theſe are not the warlike & braue Italians whom you notwithſtanding haue beaten and defeated; but they are your ſlaues, their liues are at your mercie, and they are the ordinarie ſubiect of your glorie. See therefore that you beſtirre your ſelues valiantly, ſo as this iourney may ſhut vp and determine the courſe of twentie yeares triumphes and victories, which you haue moſt gloriouſly gotten againſt them. They are come hither by force and conſtraint: they are drawn hither by the blinded ambition of that infamous peiſant Ballaban, who being in diſgrace both with God and man, doeth deſperately ſeeke by ſome exploit againſt vs to recouer his reputation, & to reenter into the grace and fauour of his Mahomet. Now is the time my friends or neuer, wherein you are to hope for an honorable end of your weariſome trauels, and of ſheading of

your bloud: behold this is the laſt attempt of your aduerſarie: who being now deſtitute of Chieftaines that either dare, or are able from henceforth to hurt you, by reaſon that you haue either ſlaine them or diſcomforted them: he is now conſtrained to aid himſelf with them of your owne nation: but you need not to ſtand in doubt or feare, for ſuch people, traitours to God and their countrey, the worme of whoſe conſcience is euer gnawing and tormenting of their ſoules, cannot poſſibly be able to doe you any great harme: Go to then my good ſouldiers, let the noble and famous actes of your aunceſtors, and your owne honourable exploites ſharpen and ſet ſpurres to your courages: plucke vp your hearts, gather your ſtrength and forces vnto you: preſſe vpon your enemies, charge vpon them brauely, breake in valiantly amongeſt theſe baſe raſcals: trample theſe dogs and circumciſed curres vnder your 
                     •
                  eete, and march ouer their curſed carcaſſes like valiant ſouldiers, and inuincible conquerors.
            
            Hauing thus ſpoken, the alarme was ſounded, and they began to march all at once. The Barbarians who ſtood readie raunged in order of battell with enſignes diſplaied before their campe, did now expect and were determined to haue bene doing with their enemies: but Ballaban ſtaying for his companion did prolong the time of the fight, and ſounded the retrait, commaunding ſome to watch when Iagup would appeare in ſight. But Scanderbeg imagining that a minute of delay might worke his vtter diſaduantage, commaunded thoſe bands which were appointed to begin the skirmiſh, and were now placed for the battell, to iſſue foorth roundly vpon the Infidels; whileſt that he with the reſidue of his armie deſcending downe into the plaine, did draw on directly towards the enemies campe, with a full reſolution to force the enemie to fight, and to diſpatch the matter before the comming of Arnauth. Hereupon he preſented himſelfe before the campe of the Infidels with loud cries, reproches and ſcoffes vſed by his ſouldiers againſt them, challenging and prouoking them to theScanderbeg challengeth Ballaban to the battell. combat. For all this was the Painim firme in his determination, and he would not moue a foote: but refuſing to enter the liſtes, or to come to fight, he kept his: people within their trenches: and the more that our men did preſſe vpon them and importune them, being euen readie to giue the aſlault vnto his campe, the more did he recuile and make from them. Ballaban his ſouldiers conceiuing foule deſpite, and being vehemently incenſed for that they could not be ſuffered to iſſue out to encounter with their enemies, they cryed out and exclaimed againſt their Generall, they murmured and gnaſhed with their teeth for verie rage and anger: and if the holding of them backe by their Generall on the one ſide did animate and ſet them in a heat: no leſſe did the inſolencie and brauerie of the Epirots make them eger and ſharpe ſet, who were now vppon the point to force their rampiers: inſomuch that both on the one part and the other, their courages were terribly enflamed and incenſed ech againſt other. Ballaban neuertheleſſe ſtill ſtayed his ſouldiers and temporized to the vttermoſt of his power. In the end, when he ſaw that he could not repreſſe the heate andOrder of Ballaban his army in the ſecond battell of Valcala. furie of his Turkes: he diſpoſed his armie in order of battell, placing the Aſappy before the enſignes of the vauntgard: and next to them vpon the left wing he put the Olophanges or Alophages are mercenarie ſouldiers. 
               Olophanges, who were notable and warlike ſouldiers, oppoſing them againſt Tanuſee. Againſt Zacharie Groppe he ſet the Achanzes: and right oppoſite againſt Peic Manuell, he ordained the Ianiſſaries who were a verie ſtout and hardie kind of men, enured and accuſtomed to the trauell and toyle of armes. The right wing he himſelfe commaunded being defended with a ſtrong ſquadron which were for the gard of hisThe ſecond battell of Valcala betweene Ballaban and Scanderbeg. bodie, and with all the olde and moſt expert ſouldiers, vppon whom he builded his chiefeſt hope and confidence: placing him ſelfe directly againſt Scanderbeg. Then began a moſt fierce and cruell fight betweene the Albanois and the Mahometan. Horrible

was the ſlaughter on the one ſide and the other: and the two Generals in proper perſon, drew the eyes of all men towards them. There might you haue ſeene the infanterie and cauallarie of Albanie, the old bands of Croie, vſed and accuſtomed to maine battelles with the valiant and reſolute Dibrians: how they did make ſhew of their notable skill and practiſe in the Arte militarie: and how at the verie beginning of the fight, they did ſo trouble the vauntgard of the Infidels, that they made their Enſignes to giue ground, till ſuch time as the furie of the fight encreaſing, and the cry on both ſides growing to be redoubled, they did againe aduance themſelues more couragiouſly then at the firſt. Then did Scanderbeg giue a newe charge vppon them, preſſing them both before and behind, and enforcing himſelfe by all poſſible meanes to put them out of array, he cryed all aloft vnto his people, ſaying.
            How now (my friends) what did we make ſuch haſt hitherwardes, did we rid ſoSpeech of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers encouraging them in fight againſt Ballaban much way, and did we make ſo long and ſpeedie iourneyes to no ende and purpoſe? Shall we ſuffer our ſelues to be helde ſo ſhort by the ſame Chiefetaine, by the ſame troupes which we haue ſo many times diſcomfited, chaſed, and ouerrunne?
            All this notwithſtanding hauing more then once endeuored and ſtriued but all in vaine to breake and ſcatter them on that ſide, he made choiſe of certaine ſquadrons out of the right wing which he thought would haue leaſt to doe, and would rather ſtand idle then be employed in the fight, and cauſing them to wheele about and to conuey themſelues behinde the enemie at their backes, without being apperceiued either by the aduerſe party or by their owne companie, he did therewithall ſtrike in vppon the lefte wing of the enemie with ſuch furie and celeritie: that when as they thought to haue found and to haue receiued him vpon the flancke and ſide of their battallion, he was ſuddenly gotten behind them and charged them at their backs: in ſuch ſort that the Alchanzes & the Alophages found themſelues aſſailed & endammaged on all ſides both in front and in flancke, and in their rereward: ſo that the ſlaughter began now alſo to grow vpon the Aſappi who made litle and no reſiſtaunce. For the moſt part of them the night before had abſented themſelues from their enſignes, and were licentiouſly diſperſed all ouer the fieldes, and there lay ſome of them ſtill wallowing vpon the ground, ouercome with ſleepe and trauell, and the reſt which were then preſent in the battell being wearied with their late trauell and with ouerwatching (being a tender and ſoft kind of people, and ill able to endure the heate of the yeare and hard trauell) ſcarce could they abide their armes vpon their backes. For the ſunne being then at the higheſt, made them in that caſe, that partly with extreme heate, and partly with thirſt, their enemies found them as men halfe dead, and they fell into their hands by heapes to be taken or ſlaine at their pleaſures. Ballaban, who had oftentimes purchaſed great honour and commendation in the like battelles, in this iourney behaued himſelfe more nobly then in any other whatſoeuer. For partly by encouraging his men in the fight, and partly alſo by hazarding his perſon to all daungers: one while egging and preſſing them forward, another while blaming and rebuking thoſe that were backward, and ſometimes by recalling of ſuch as fled: he did for a long time maintaine the fight well and worthely: ſtill animating his ſouldiours, and renuing the conflict in many places where he ſaw his people to waxe faint and to giue ouer. At the laſt when he ſawe that the fortune of the field did enclineVictorie of Scanderbeg the fourth time againſt Ballaban and the Turkes. to the Epirots, and that he could no longer ſuſtaine their violence, he chaunged his reſolution, and ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, he turned his backe and withdrew himſelfe from the fight of the Chriſtians. After him their whole armie did the like: for perceiuing their rancks to be ſcattered & diſordered, euery man began to flie ſome here, ſome there, ouer the fieldes into the mountaines and through the woods

according as ech man his fortune good or bad did guide and direct him. Some fewe there were who following their Generall, eſcaped together with him, and got away from the ſwordes of their enemies, and from the ſlaughter of their fellowes. All the reſt of the Barbarians were either ſlaine or taken priſoners: and if it happened, that any were gotten free from the furie and confuſion of the chaſe, yet were they cut in peeces by thoſe that kept the toppes and paſſages of the mountaines: in ſo much, that of the whole hoaſt and armie of Ballaban, there were verie fewe left aliue. As for thoſe ſmall reliques which remained, they were not in any ſort purſued, becauſe there was a ſudden rumour and report, that there was a newe and freſh enemie comming againſt them.
            Scarce were the Chriſtians departed out of the valley of Valcala, and the ſouldiers had not yet made an ende of parting and deuiding the ſpoyles of their ſlayne enemies: but that there came a meſſenger from Mamiſa the Kings ſiſter, in poaſt haſte from Petrella (where this Ladie then lay with her guard and her houſholde) by whom ſhe aduertiſed Scanderbeg that Iagup Arnauth with ſixteene thouſand horſe was entred into Epyre by the way of Belgrade, where he waſted and deſtroyed all things: and that he was then encamped in the lower Tyranna, neere adioyning toIagup Arnauth encamped at Argilat in Epire. a riuer which the inhabitants name Argilat. This Turke was an Epyrot by birth, and his parents were both of them Chriſtians: himſelfe hauing beene taken and circumciſed by the Turkes did profeſſe their ſuperſtitions. He was a man of great hardineſſe and valure, and in times paſt both in Aſia and in Greece, had left many goodly and commendable teſtimonies of his prowes vnder Mahomet. His comming into Epyre was (as we haue ſaide) to encloſe the Prince of Albanie betweene his forces and the armie of his companion: for one of his owne ſouldiers hauing beene taken by the people of Mamiſa, and being examined vpon the cauſe and motiue to this voyage, had confeſſed the ſame and did iuſtifie the truth hereof vnto them. Preſently vpon this aduertiſement, Scanderbeg concluded to goe with his whole armie dirctly to Tiranna: which being now in a readineſſe to march, he thought it good before his departure, thus to encourage his ſouldiers.
            
               This day (my good ſouldiers and friendes) haue we obtained by the aſſiſtance ofOration of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers being redie to march againſt Iagup Arnauth. the diuine power, a moſt memorable victorie according to our hearts deſire, againſt our capitall and deadly enemie. Such was his raſhneſſe (vnhappie man) that he preſumed to encloſe vs in the middeſt betweene two puiſſant and mightie armies, and ſo moſt traiterouſly to haue deſtroyed and oppreſſed vs: and he was in good hope by this notable draught and plot which he had deuiſed to aboliſh and wipe away his owne ſhame and infamie, and the memorie of thoſe rude diſcomfitures which he had receiued at our handes. Now by the grace of God and your vertue, in ſtead of diminiſhing his ſhame and ignominie, he hath made it a great deale greater. Yet behold how euen now againe, before our hands be cleane, or that we haue made an ende of this laſt repaſte, and before that the cloth (as I may ſay) is taken away: ſee I pray you, how Iagup Arnauth a noble and bountifull banquettour is come to inuite vs to a new banquet, becauſe he would haue vs to make an end of our feaſt: and being loath that his gueſtes ſhould be defrauded of good and conuenient entertainment, he hath brought vs his armie alſo for a ſecond courſe: ſee I ſay (my deare frends) how before we are gotten out of this valley, and haue (as it were) waſhed our hands embrued with the bloud of our enemies: before we haue wiped the bloud off our ſwords, or haue ſheathed them in our ſcabbords: Iagup is likewiſe come vnto vs: he offreth vs good and friendly preſents, that is, his troupes and ſquadrons, that you may vſe and diſpoſe of them at your pleaſures, either to take a taſte of them, or elſe altogether

to deuoure and conſume them. Go we therfore (my good companions) go we to this mariage feaſt whereunto Iagup doth inuite vs and doth ſo earneſtly call vs: let vs eate our fill of his dainties, & when we ſhall haue gluttted our ſelues, let vs carry ſome part alſo away with vs. Let vs make all ſpeed and diligence to be gone from hence, let vs goe and meet with Iagup, whom (I dare aſſure you) we will quickely ouerthrow and bring to confuſion: for theſe are but a handfull of men in compariſon of thoſe that were with Ballaban: beſides, me thinkes I ſee that the warlike furie, and the martiall fierceneſſe of your courages doth yet continue burning and flaming within you.
            Scarcely had Scanderbeg ended his ſpeech, but he might ſee his ſouldiers wonderfully incenſed and inflamed: all of them with high cries and clamours entreated himScanderbeg marcheth againſt Iagup. to leade them preſently to this ſecond banquet: whereupon being full of hope and courage they remoued their campe, and with enſignes diſplaied tooke their way towards Tiranna there to affront and encounter with Iagup. Is it not a ſtraunge matter to ſee and conſider the maruellous audacitie, and the confident reſolution of this people, that being but newly gotten out of ſo great a daunger, and their woundes yet ſcarce ſtaunched, and the ſweat of their former toyle and labour yet ſcant wiped off their faces, yet you ſhould now ſee them thus prompt and forward to depart preſently and out of hand againſt a new enemie, and one that had ſo great a puiſſance & whole forces which were yet freſh, ſound and entire? But you may thinke that they were not a litle hardened and emboldened by the preſence and happie fortune of Scanderbeg, by his ſage experience and prudent conduct, and by the conſideration of his inuincible valour and prowes. In like manner, the daily exerciſe and continuall frequentation of deeds of armes by this nation did not a litle encreaſe that confidence in them: and beſides, what reaſon had they to ſtand in any feare of the Turkiſh power and puiſſance, which had bene the ordinarie and continuall ſubiect of their glory & reputation? Notwithſtanding, to ſpeake more like a Chriſtian, and to coniecture aright of this their wonderfull reſolution & hardines: I for my part do verily beleeue, (the iſſue and euent of matters doth argue no leſſe) and that this was a thing meerely diuine and miraculous. But to our hiſtorie.
            
               Arnauth being enformed that Scanderbeg did approch, truſſed vp baggage and diſlodged from thence: being not as yet acquainted nor knowing any thing of the miſfortune of his companion: and he retired himſelfe into one of the moſt recuiled angles and corners of Tiranna neare vnto a litle mountainet or hill vppon the whichIagup encamped at Caſſar. was a certaine ſmall village, of the inhabitaunts named Caſſar: which place he found to be of moſt ſafetie and ſecuritie to encampe in. Scanderbeg ſeized vppon that place from whence the other was lately departed. During all that day both the campes lay verie quiet. Howbeit, true it is, that the Albanois did paſſe the night following in great care and iealouzie for feare leaſt that Iagup and his armie ſhould diſcampe the ſame night, if by chaunce he ſhould haue any inckling of the defait of Ballaban. For this cauſe, all the waies and paſſages were ſeized vpon and beſet with armed men. The next morning aſſoone as the ſunne was riſen, and that the reflection of the ſunne beames did beate vpon the tents and eyes of the Barbarians: Scanderbeg being verie conſiderate, and hauing no doubt of the victorie, marched in order of battell directly towardes Iagup, cauſing the heades of certaine ſlaine Turkes to be caſt before the tentes of the Infidelles, and ſome of thoſe enſignes alſo to be diſplayed, which had bene purpoſely kept and reſerued after the defaite of Ballaban: and he ſhewed them alſo certaine captiues chained and tyed together. Arnauth being wounded with extreame griefe and ſorrow for this vnexpected miſhappe and miſfortune, preſently exclaimed and ſaied.
            
               
               Now (quoth he) do I acknowledge the miſfortune of the houſe of Ottoman, andSpeech of Iagup of the fortune of Scanderbeg. the good fortune of Scanderbeg.
               
            
            The King of Albanie ſent foorth 500 vauntcurrours to draw foorth Iagup to the combat: and he charged them not to ioyne in fight with the Infidell, but when they ſhould ſee them to breake out vpon them, that then they ſhould retire in good order:The battell of Caſſar betwene Scanderbeg & Iagup. and ſo it happened accordingly. Iagup had deuided his armie into three troupes or battallions, and he was quickly gotten out of his trenches to follow after the Albanian horſemen: vnto whom Scanderbeg calling and willing them to turne about, and to make head againſt the enemie: in an inſtant he ioyned himſelfe vnto them: and all of them together endured the ſhocke of the Paynim comming fiercely vpon them. Then there began a moſt ſharpe and cruell conflict: at the verie entrie whereof many a braue man loſt his life both on the one ſide and the other, and ech partie was ſo incenſed and egerly enflamed againſt other with ſuch rage and choller: that the battell continued doubtfull and bloudie for a long time: but the wonted ſtratageme, and accuſtomed policie of Scanderbeg did ſoone end and determine the combat: and the inequalitie of the parties came to be diſcerned by the ſpeedie ende and ſlaughter of the Generall Turke: vpon whom the Prince of Epire hauing had a continuall eye: and hauing by pure force made himſelfe way through the rancks of his enemies, he charged him with his launce, and at the verie firſt ſtroke ran him cleane through theIagup ſlain by Scanderbeg. throat. Their Chieftaine being layed on the ground, euerie man ſtriued who ſhould flie faſteſt: they that were beſt mounted were moſt happie in this daunger: euerie man forgot his brother, his friend and his companion, and happie was he that could make ſhift for himſelfe. The chaſe continued long, and it was verie mortall: infiniteVictorie of Scanderbeg againſt Iagup and the Turks. being put to the ſword in the middeſt of their flight: many alſo were taken priſoners: all which found like fortune and entertainment: for that the Chriſtians hauing yet freſh in memorie the late woundes and the barbarous and inhumaine vſage of their brethren and kinſmen murthered by Mahomet, the griefe and remembrance therof made them to execute all their priſoners with diuerſe and ſundry kinds of torments. And eſpecially thoſe Turkes who being eſcaped from the tumult and ſlaughter of the battell, did happen aliue into the hands of the peyſants: they found no better entertainement, but were put to all the tortures and torments that could be poſſibly deuiſed or imagined.
            It was neuer ſeene that of two armies at one and the ſame time, and in one and the ſame warre, that the King of Epire had put to the ſword ſo many miſcreants. Beſides by the miſhap of both their Generals (of whom the one was fled with the loſſe of his armie, and the other was ſlaine, and all his troupes likewiſe deſtroyed) it ſeemed
                  
                     •
                  umber of Turkes ſlaine and taken in the battelles of Valcala and Caſſar. that the miſfortune of Belgrade was now equally & ſufficiently recompenced. There were ſlaine of the Infidels foure and twentie thouſand: and ſixe thouſand taken priſoners with an incredible bootie of prey and pillage, eſpecially of golde and ſiluer. Beſides, there were about foure thouſand Chriſtians ſet free and deliuered from the ſeruitude of the Turkes, who being laborours and other inhabitaunts of the plaine countrey, had bene taken by the Infidels in many courſes and roades which they had made vpon the Prouince, which was ſome comfort for the dolorous loſſe receiued at the ſtreights of Valcala. In theſe two iourneies: (for you muſt not thinke they were gotten without bloud) there were miſſing, about 1000. Chriſtians: and the victors themſelues were ſo ſatiated and wearied with killing and ſlaughtering of the Turkes: that when it was reported vnto Scanderbeg the next morning how that Ballaban was fled and retyred with one onely companie of horſe, and without any Enſignes, and without any good order, and that if there were neuer ſo ſmall a troupe ſent

after him to follow him cloſe at the heeles, it would be an eaſie matter to take and oppreſſeSpeech of Scā
                  derbeg touching the flight of Ballaban. both him and all his company. Let them go (quoth he) and ſeeing we haue gotten the honor of the field, let there be ſome left to cary the newes of the ſlaughter and calamity of our enemies, and of our vertue and proweſſe.
            Theſe things being thus accompliſhed, the Marſhall of the Campe tooke his iourney towards Croy, who was receiued with the leſſe concourſe & preparation, becauſe there had not bin ſent any meſſenger before hand to giue any notice of his comming: but the ioy and gladneſſe was ſo vnmeaſurable, that they knew not almoſt how to expreſſe it: and to ſay the truth, it cannot be declared in what eſtate the whole city ſtood, neither in what extreame feare they had alwaies continued through their vncertaine expectation of the ſucceſſe and euent of the fight: nor how exceedingly they reioyced and triumphed on all parts, when they heard the newes and report of the victory. For in all that time after the firſt tidings was brought thē, how that Scanderbeg was goneCroi
                     •
                  s their eſtate, & demea nour, before and after the victory of Scanderbeg. againſt the enemy, there was not any one of the great men of the towne, that from morning to night would be abſent from the Pallace, or from the magiſtrates: neither would the people forgoe the market place: their wiues which had litle or none other buſineſſe, would ſeldome be from the Churches, or from their praiers and deuotion. The towne being in this great feare & ſuſpence, did at the firſt receiue this doubtfull and vncertaine newes, namely: that two horſemen Dibrians (who were returned from the battell to the Campe vpon the confines of Epire) had reported: that the enemy was defeated. This report was entertained at the firſt more with their eares, then with anie beliefe of their mindes, as a thing too ſtrange, and ſo much deſired, that it was thought too good to be true, beſides the haſtineſſe and celerity of the report did make it of the leſſe credit, becauſe it was ſpoken two daies before the fight fell out. After this Tanuſe ſent letters from the Campe, ſignifying the comming of thoſe two Dibrian horſemen: thoſe letters being caried through the market place of Croy to the pallace, did cauſe ſo great a concourſe of people to aſſemble at the gate of the pallace, that the bearer could not paſſe through them, but he was pulled and drawen with great violence by ſome that were inquiſitiue after newes: & they cried out aloft that the letters ſhould be read openly in the market place, before they ſhould be caried to the Magiſtrate. After that they had been read in the Pallace, according as the diuerſity of mens humors did cary them, ſo did they thinke and imagine of the truth of the matter: ſome were fully ſatiſfied, and reioyced at the newes: others beleeued neuer a word, till ſuch time as they had heard either the meſſengers themſelues to ſpeak it, who were ſent from the Marſhall, or elſe the letters read vnto them. After all this the report went, that the Marſhall himſelfe was comming thither in perſon: at which time all ſorts of perſons, and of all ages, ranne haſtily forth to meete him, and they went out in ſuch continuall flockes and troupes, that they reached about halfe a league without the gates, euery one ſtriuing to be the firſt, that ſhould with their eies and with their eares, ſwallow vp the exceeding greatneſſe of this expected ioy. Tanuſe was the man whom they went thus to meete withall, who being enuironned on all ſides with this rude and confuſed multitude, arriued at laſt in the market place, of the city: where ſome enquiring of him ſelfe, others of them that followed him, how all matters ſtood, and what good newes they had brought: when they heard for certaine, that both the armies of the enemy were diſcomfited: that one of the Generals was ſlaine: that the Albanian Legions were ſafe and 
                  •
               ound, and that their Prince and his Captaines were in good health: euery man reioyced at the newes, and made others likewiſe partakers of their ioy. When Tanuſe was come with much adoe to the Pallace, yet for all this would not the common people be drawen to depart, & to retire themſelues: but that they did in a maner

thruſt themſelues amongſt the Magiſtrats. At length, the letters being read in the Senate, then did Tanuſe recount more at large the proceedings and iſſue of the whole voyage, whereat there was a moſt wonderfull applauſe and acclamation of all the Senate: and they were not in any ſort able to moderate the extremity of their ioy. After this, ſome viſited the temples to yeelde thankes and praiſes vnto God: others made haſt to repaire to their owne houſes, to the intent they might communicat and impart theſe happy tidings to their wiues and children. The Magiſtrats by a ſolemne edict, commaunded publicke praiers and proceſſions for three daies together, for the victory and health of Scanderbeg and his army: the like decree was made by the Queene and her counſell, which was very deuoutly obſerued and kept. During all which time, you might haue ſeene the Churches filled & frequented, both with men and women all alike: and the auncient Matrones and Ladies being richly and ſumptuouſly apparelled, with their litle children, did humbly and chearfully performe their vowes and publicke thankes vnto the deuine Maieſty, as if the enemy had bene vtterly deſtroyed and conſumed, and as if the warre had bene fully determined and ended, and that all feare and ſuſpition had bene quite gone and exiled: and more then that, this victory did ſo ſettle and eſtabliſh the eſtate of the towne, as if they had gotten an aſſured reſt and tranquillity for euer.
            Theſe things being thus accompliſhed and ended, with no ſmall religion and deuotion: Scanderbeg (becauſe he would the more terrifie the enemy) entred vpon his territories, and paſſing on a good way into the country, filled all places with fire andInuaſion by Scanderbeg into the Turkiſh territories. ſword, with bloud and terror: beſides that, he caried away an incredible booty without any reſiſtaunce made againſt him: and ſo retyring with exceeding ioy into his owne Prouince, and hauing left (according to his wonted cuſtome) a ſtrong garriſon vpon his frontiers, he returned with great triumph and generall reioycings to Croy hisScanderbeg his returne and triumph at Croy after his victory. chiefe city, where hauing for certaine daies (together with his citizens) celebrated the ſolemnity and common ioy of this glorious victory: he diſpatched away letters and meſſengers to the moſt part of the Kings and Princes of Chriſtendome, with magnificent giftes of diuerſe ſortes, choſen out of the ſpoiles, that had bene taken vppon his enemies, as excellent good horſes, ſlaues, armours, and rich furnitures and capariſons for horſes, with ſuch like rare and goodly preſents. After all which, he brake vp his Campe, and diſmiſſed all his companies: ſo that this yeare was no leſſe famous and memorable, then full of ioy and gladneſſe to the Epirots.
            
            The end of the eleuenth booke.
         
         
            
            THE TVVELFTH BOOKE OF THE FAMOVS ACTES OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
            
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               MAhomet enraged for the diſcomfiture of Ballaban and Iagup, prepareth to come into Epire in proper perſon: and Scanderbeg prouideth to receiue him. Mahomet conſpireth the death of Scanderbeg by treaſon: which is diſcouered, & the traitors executed. Croy is beſieged by Ballaban, Mahomet him ſelfe comming to the ſiege, and being out of hope to cary the towne by force, returneth towards Conſtantinople, and leaueth Ballaban to continue the ſiege of Croy. Mahomet in his returne ſurprizeth Chidna by treaſon, & infidelity, putting the inhabitants to the ſword. Scanderbeg maketh a iourney to Rome, to get aide of the Pope and the Chriſtians for the reliefe of Croy, but returneth with ſmall comfort: he is ſuccoured by the Venetians. Ionima the brother of Ballaban, with his ſonne Heder, comming to the aide of Ballaban, are ſurprized by Scanderbeg, and both of them taken priſoners. Scanderbeg inuadeth the Campe of the Infidels: a ſallie is made by the Croians vpon the Turkes, wherein Ballaban is ſlaine. The Turkes breake vp their ſiege before Croy: and depart out of Epire. Chidna is recouered, and Epire cleanſed of the Infidels. Mahomet maketh a ſecond iourney into Epire: buildeth Valure, and beſiegeth firſt Duraz, and after Croy: but he raiſeth his ſiege from both of them. Chiurill a towne newly builded, and vnfinished by Scanderbeg, is razed by Mahomet, who returneth to Conſtantinople. Alibeg and Aliazbeg are ſent with an army to ſafegard the Turkish frontiers. Scanderbeg preparing to recouer Valures from the Turkes, ſickeneth: he diſpoſeth and ordereth his affaires. Ahamat with an army of fifteene thouſand Turkes, inuading and ſpoiling the Venetian territories flieth out of Epire, and is defeated by the Epirots. Scanderbeg dieth and is buried, his dead body is honoured and reuerenced by the Turks. Certaine memorable acts done by Scanderbeg in his lifetime.
            
            
               THe haught exploit, and the mortall accident happened to the armies of Ballaban and Iagup, being publiſhed and ſpred abroad ouer all places: the fame thereof (like a flying Poſt) came with wonderfull ſpeede to the eares of the Ottoman, whoſe heart was repleniſhed, and well neare ouercome with extremity of griefe and incomparable aſtoniſhment. Wherefore being afraied leaſt that Fortune would now proue a ſtepdame vnto him, & croſſe him in his attempts, and that (after ſo many proſperities and continuall fauours, ſhee would now in the end reuolt and fall away from him, and retiring vnto his fierceſt

enemy, would entertaine him for her fauorit, and oppoſe her ſelfe againſt him, he beganCouncell called by Mahomet to conſult for the oppreſſing of Scanderbeg. to grow into a moſt ſtrange paſsion: afflicting and tormenting his mind with extreame care and melancholy. And being thus perplexed, irreſolute & diſtracted within him ſelfe, he cauſed all his chieftaines and councellours to be called and aſſembled together, to the intent he might conſult with them, and deuiſe vpon ſome remedy againſt this miſchiefe. Now when they were all of them gathered together and ſet in councell, the tyrant giuing the bridle to his paſsion and choller, did breake forth into moſt bitter inuectiues and iniurious reproachfull tearmes againſt Scanderbeg, and he vſed this or the like ſpeeche vnto them.
            
               You are not ignorant (my good friendes) how that I neuer made any ſpare of myOration of Mahomet to his chieftains purpoſing a iourney againſt Scanderbeg in proper perſon. trauell and paines, nor of any hazardes or daungers, but that I haue bene alwaies prodigall of my proper life and ſafety, for the increaſe of the faith of our chiefe Prophet: for the augmentation of the name and Empire of the houſe of Ottoman: for the ſurety and ſafety of you and your families: and to make this eſtate of ours peaceable, quiet, and floriſhing. In all our actions and expeditions wherein we our ſelues haue beene preſent, and which haue bene vndertaken by vs in proper perſon, we haue found Fortune friendly and fauorable vnto vs: and yet at this time I know not what to ſay, of this petty Prouince of Epire, and of this petty Prince Scanderbeg; as often as I conſider the infamous death of ſo many excellent chieftaines and generals of our hoaſts, and the totall diſcomfiture or ſhamefull captiuity of ſo many flouriſhing armies: nor can I tell what to make of it, vnleſſe it be that the Demon or Angell of this Apoſtata, and rebellious renegado doe fight for him, and do ſurmount the Demon of all thoſe who are oppoſed againſt him. We may ſee then that this buſineſſe doth require the rigour of a more furious and violent hand, and of ſome Chieftaine who is more happy and fortunate in his enterpriſes. I am determined (my good friends) and in my opinion it is the beſt and moſt conuenient courſe, that we take this warre into our owne hands, and that we make a iourney into Epire in our proper perſon, with more puiſſant and ſolemne preparations then Amurath our father did at his going againſt the Albanois. Then ſhall that fugitiue and traitour Scanderbeg well perceiue, euen with the loſſe of his hatefull head, that it is nothing to haue a Baſſa, a Saniacke, or an Aga to beard him: but that it is another manner of matter, to be inuaded with the preſence and maieſty of a moſt mighty, puiſſant, and fortunate Monarch, that ſhall employ his whole power, and bend the fury of all his forces againſt him. And although the glorious memory of our deceaſed father, did not cary away the entire honour of this voyage, but did yeelde vp his ghoſt in the perſuite thereof, yet ought not the honour and praiſe of that iourney, be attributed to the vertue or proweſſe of that ſlaue, or his Chriſtians: but rather to the imbecillity of his age, and the infirmity of his decaying yeares, as ſhortly alſo we ſhall ſee the like to befall and betide euen to Scanderbeg him ſelfe, who is now vpon the declining of his age, and will euen in a moment finde his fortune to waxe old and faint: and that ſame viuacity and liuelines of his ſpirit, and the vigorous diſpoſition of his lims and members will faile and forſake him: ſo as in the end he will ſinke vnder the burden of his affaires. For the nature and property of Fortune, is to delight in the flouriſhing time of youth, and ſhee ſeeketh out and deſireth to be reſident with thoſe, whoſe minds are tranſported with ſwelling ambition, & withSentence. ſtirring thoughts: and as the heat of bloud waxeth coole, & as this vigour of the mind groweth to be weakned: ſo doth fortune likewiſe wax cold, & doth vſe to diſcontinue her fauors: and therfore I make no doubt, but that in an inſtant, I ſhal vtterly confound this vnhappy Chriſtian, together with his people and poſterity: who being become more arrogant by the happy ſucceſſe of ſo many good encounters, doth daily moleſt

my ſubiects, ouerrunning and deſtroying all my Prouince of Macedonie. And if it happen that he fall into my ſnares, and that I can get him within my reach, I will execute vpon his wretched body, (being the ſubiect of all vice & wickedneſſe) all kindes and examples of extreame crueltie: becauſe, beſides the diſpeaſure done me in the death of my father, this Hydra, this monſter of all miſchiefes, hath infinitly prouoked againſt him my iuſt wrath and indignation. But fooliſh man as he is, let him take his pleaſure for a time, let him hold on his courſe yet a while, let him glory in his goodly realme, and in his ambitious pouerty, whileſt the deſtinies do permit and ſuffer him: it ſhall not be long, ere I will ſwallow him vp in endleſſe ruine and perdition. This therefore is my aduiſe, that we goe right on to Croy, the capitall and chiefe city of that Prouince, with ſo great forces and puiſſance, that it ſhall not be able to hold out againſt vs. For when Croy is ouercome and conquered, all the other places and ſtrong holds of the countrey will be ſoone reduced to the ſame eſtate and condition.
            
            This matter being propounded by Mahomet, and approued by the generall conſent and voices of his Viſits and Captaines: infinite commiſsions were granted forth, and publike proclamation was made throughout all the territories and dominionsMahomet leauteth a mightie army againſt Scanderbeg. vnder the Turke his obeyſaunce: that all men which were apt to beare armes, ſhould repaire to the Commiſsioners, and cauſe their names to be enrolled: inſomuch that innumerable forces were leauied, and in the meane time, prouiſion was made of munitions, inſtruments, engines, and other neceſſaries for the Campe, all which being in a readineſſe, the Turkiſh Monarch with a moſt proud and glorious traine, tooke his way towards Epire.
            
            Vpon theſe troubles and tumults approaching, Scanderbeg wanted not his intelligencers, and ordinary ſpies, but that they gaue him ſure and ſpeedy aduertiſements of all things, which was the occaſion that he aſſembled all his friendes and nobles, and amongſt others, Paul Angell Archbiſhop of Duraz, vnto whom he imparted his moſtIoſaphat Barbare, ſome ſaie he was the Admirall or Proueditore of the Venetians. ſecret counſels: and to them he adioyned alſo Ioſaphat Barbare the Venetian Ambaſſadour, a worthy perſonage of great iudgement and experience, and ſingularly zealous of the Chriſtian religion, who together with the Archbiſhop, was ſeldome or neuer from the ſide of the Prince of Albanie. By the generall aduiſe and conſent of this aſſembly, it was ordained, that all the townes, places, and fortreſſes of the realme, ſhould be diligently furniſhed and prouided with victuals, and other neceſſary prouiſions, and fortified with good and faithfull garriſons: eſpecially Croy, the principall bulwarke, and ſtay of all the eſtate of Albany, and whereuppon all the reſt depended. He prouided therefore, and ſtuffed it with good ſtore of ſouldiers, part of them Albanois, and part Italians, all of them of approued loyalty and reſolution: and he madeBalthaſar Perduce, gouernour of Croy. choiſe of an Italian Gentleman to be gouernour of the towne, one Balthaſar Perduce, a man highly eſteemed for his prudence, iudgement, and reſolution.
            But before I paſſe any further, it ſhalbe requiſit, that I recount vnto you one plot or deuiſe forged and framed in the ſhop or ſtore-houſe of the Ottomans trecherie and infidelitie, the inuention and practiſe whereof as it was ſuttle and deuiliſh, ſo was itConſpiracie & traiterous plot of Mahomet to contriue the death of Scanderbeg. miraculouſly diſcouered and auoyded: by the knowledge whereof you may eaſily coniecture, how greatly they redoubted and ſtood in awe of Scanderbeg, whom they could not ſuffer and endure, no more then a thorne ſticking in their foote. The Turkiſh Monarch perceauing that the Prince of Epyre was now growen to that height of honour, that his name began to be fearefull and terrible vnto all the Mahometiſtes, was in great feare leaſt that by reaſon of this exceeding fame and renowme of the Epyrots, his owne people and ſubiectes ſhould take an occaſion to grow mutinous & to raiſe ſome ſedition; and ſo taking armes againſt him, ſhould either ſeeke to murther

ther him and to cut his throat, or elſe might chaſe and expell him out of his 
                  •
               eate an
                  •
                throne Imperiall, and beſtow the ſame vpon the king of Albanie: for he was not ignoraunt that his notable crueltie had made him moſt hatefull and odious vnto al men, whereas this is not the meane to reigne long and happily, but clemencie and i
                     •
                  
                  ſticeSentence. are the firme pillers of each eſtate and Empire: for this cauſe did he imagine an
                  •
                determine to ſurpriſe Scanderbeg by deceipt and trecherie, whom he ſaw he was no
                  •
                able to deſtroy by force and violence: he procured therefore and prouided him ſelfe o
                  •
                
               two men practiſed and expert in moſt languages, (as it is commonly ſeene that Princes and great perſonages doe neuer want miniſters to execute their diſſolute and vnlawfullSentence. paſsions,) and hauing corrupted them with great giftes and bountifull rewardes, and aſſuring them that he would continually and dayly heape vpon them greater and better benefites, he perſwaded and inſtructed them to fayne and diſſemble them ſelues to be fugitiues from the countrey and dominions of the Turke, and that for the zeale of Religion, they were come to offer their ſeruice vnto Scanderbeg and to pray him to haue pitie and compaſsion of their eſtate, and that they might be receiued and admitted to the holy Sacrament of Baptiſme as good Chriſtians, the which after they had perſwaded him according to their deſires, that then they ſhould finde the meanes to worke his death, either by poyſon or otherwiſe. Theſe wicked wretches had no ſooner preſented them ſelues to the preſence of Scanderbeg, but that both of them were baptiſed and (as the common report is) were enrolled and admitted to be of the garde, and to wait vpon him for the ordinarie ſafegarde of his perſon. Within a while after, it pleaſed God (who had this Prince in his eſpeciall protectiō) to reueale their pernitious attempt & conſpiracie, ſuch was his good pleaſure that this good Prince and faithfull ſeruitour of Chriſt, ſhould not dye ſo miſerable and vnhappy a death: for the parties them ſelues were made the bewrayers and diſcouerers ofConſpiracie againſt Scanderbeg wonderfully detected. their owne deuiliſh intent and practiſe. For ſo it happened that a iarre and contention fell betweene them (and it may be it was in their cuppes, and in a dronken humour) but their choler and furie grew ſo outrageous and immoderat, that each vpbrayding other with iniurious and groſſe wordes, they fell in the end to accuſe and detect one an other: openly obiecting, that they were purpoſely ſent by Mahomet to empoyſon Scanderbeg: wherepon being apprehended, and put to the tortures, they preſently confeſſed the whole order of the matter, by meanes whereof, being deliuered to the executioner, they were both hanged according to their deſertes.
            Let vs now returne to the courſe of our diſcourſe: The places and fortreſſes of Epire being carefully furniſhed and prouided with neceſſaries in ſuch ſort as we haue ſhewed; it was not long, but that often letters and meſſengers did arriue from all partes, giuing the allarme and making report, that Mahomet with two hundreth thouſand men, would be ſhortly before Croy, and that his light horſemen and vauntcurrours were euen at hand: who accordingly did make their preſent entry into Albany, and for two daies were ſeene to courſe vp and downe the countrey, and to put all to ſword and fire: and the night following, about two houres after euening, they preſented themſelues before the towne, enuironning it on all ſides round about. Ballaban Badera
               Ballaban beſiegeth Croy with an army of 80000. men. had the conduct and commaund of theſe troupes, amounting to the number of foure ſcore thouſand horſe, all picked and choiſe men. This enemy hauing entrenched and fortified his Campe, did daily skirmiſhe with the Croians, who made many and often ſallies out vpon the Turkes: the euent and ſucceſſe whereof, was very variable and diuerſe. During theſe doings betweene the forces of Ballaban, and the beſieged, the Sultan being accompanied with the groſſe, or body of his maine army, arriued before Croy: and before that he attempted any thing againſt the towne (according to

the vſe and cuſtome of warre) he cauſed the ſame to be ſummoned vppon certaineMahomet commeth to the ſiege of Croy & ſummoneth the towne. offers and conditions. The defendants gaue him ſuch aunſwer as men reſolute are wont to make, namely, that they would ſooner be torne in pieces then to commit any acte that ſhould ſound to their reproch, or that might violate and chaunge their faith giuen to God and to their Prince: or that ſhould blemiſh the honour and reputation which they had gotten in his ſeruice: and with their muſquets, harguebuſſe, & other ſhot they made ſigne vnto them that they would not haue them to approch neare the towne: and immediatly iſſuing out with great furie vpon the Infidels, they came to handyſtrokes with them, not without a notable ſlaughter of the Turks, and afterwardSally by the Croians vppon the Turkes. returned ioyfully into the towne carying with them in ſigne of victorie many of the heads of theſe enemies. Mahomet being incenſed with this brauado, cauſed his Canons to be planted, and to play againſt the walles. For he had brought thither aboundance of metals to caſt artillery of all ſizes: and he had prouided him ſelfe of expert and skilfull workemen, in the making of all kindes of warlike engines, wherewith he determined to thunder againſt Croy, and meant to make them ſing another ſong. But Scanderbeg with his troupes ſometimes here ſometimes there, by the mountaine and other places, out of the reach and acceſſe of the enemy, did daily vexe and trouble the army of the Infidels, not ſuffering them to haue any ſpace or time to breath or to reſt themſelues, but was continually at their backes on all ſides, giuing them a thouſand alarums and inuaſions day and night, without any intermiſsion, one while vpon their foragers, and another while vppon their Campe. And like as a mighty riuer Iwelling and raging with continuall raine, doth role and tumble downe moſt impetuouſly from the tops of the mountaines, carying and drawing along with it, whatſoeuer it encountreth, and turning all things vpſide downe which it findeth in the way: in like maner Scanderbeg ruſhing with extreame fury & violence vpon the Turkiſh hoaſt, now of one ſide then of another, he did commit notable ſlaughters of the infidelles, beating them downe on all handes, and afflicting them with all kindes of miſchieues and diſcommodities, which was an occaſion, that the Ottoman thought it high time to looke to his affaires, both in regard of the calamity of his people, which ſeemed likely to encreaſe dayly more and more, as alſo in reſpect of his owne perſon, which might be in euident and apparant daunger, by reaſon that he had no hope nor likelihood, to get any profit or honour by this voyage, (for that Croy was ſo far from being forceable, that it could not conueniently be made aſſaultable:) and therefore he determined not to make any longer abode before the towne, but to retire backe againe, to Conſtantinople. Notwithſtanding for that he could not do it with any honeſtie,Ballaban left to continue the ſiege before Croy, with a huge armie. nor without great blemiſh of his honour and reputation, if at the leaſt wiſe he left not behinde him ſome ſhew or token of ſome worthy exploit in this voyage, he determined that Ballaban ſhould continue and hold on the ſiege with a ſtrong and mightie armie ouer which he made him Generall: he appointed therefore vnto him a power of eighteen thouſand horſe, and fiue thouſand foote, and beſides he adioyned vnto him eight Saniackes of great account and eſtimate, giuing vnto each of them a regiment of ſeuen thouſand good and tall ſouldiours: all which neuertheleſſe were commanded to take and acknowledge him for their chief, & to be at his commandement. Theſe things thus concluded and accompliſhed, Mahomet with ſhame enoughMahomet his departure from the ſiege of Croy. Chaonia. Chidna. after his ſhort ſtay, truſsing vp his baggage in the night time leſt Croy, and with long iourneys tooke his way home to Conſtantinople.
            
            In his paſſage through the countrey, he ſurpriſed certaine people of Chaonia, and certaine places called Chidna in this manner. He ſuborned two ſouldiours Albanians, promiſing to make them great men, and to aduaunce them to high honour,

whom he ſent with inſtructions to lye, and to tell them of Chidna, that they wereStratageme of Mahomet to ſurpriſe Chidna. come from Croy purpoſly to aduertiſe their friends, & to wiſh them to looke vnto thē ſelues, for feare leaſt being ignorant of the lamentable and deſperate eſtate of the prouince, they might peraduenture be the cauſe of their owne ruine and deſtruction if they would carie themſelues with too much obſtinacie towardes the Turkiſh Monarch: for that Scanderbeg (as they made them beleeue) durſt not abide the face of the Ottoman, nor the furie of his armes which were ſo terrible, that they made him to play leaſt in ſight, and that it was verely thought, that he had abandoned & forſaken Epyre, for which cauſe, Croy alſo ſeeing it ſelfe without hope of ſuccours, was now vpon termes to yeeld vpon compoſition to Ballaban, who preſſed it very hard with a wōderfull ſtreight ſiege, that Mahomet for his part was now diſloged from Croy with part of his armie to reduce all the prouince vnder his obeiſſance, and that there was ſcant any place or fortreſſe of account, but that they were at his deuotion, that therefore they ſhould looke to them ſelues, and that they ſhould do well to imitate their example, chuſing rather to take the benefit of his clemencie, & ſingular loue towards them which yeelded them ſelues voluntarily, then to taſt the extreme rigour of the warre, and the miſerie of bondage and ſeruitude reſerued for thoſe perſons which ſhould be founde rebellious and obſtinat: ſo well did theſe traiterous wretches play their parts; & ſo vehemently did their perſwaſiōs worke with thoſe poore people being too too credulous, that (as it is ordinarily ſeene, that the vulgar ſort do follow thatSentence. ſide which they thinke to haue the beſt fortune,) ſo theſe vnhappy folkes at the firſtCrueltie and infidelitie of Mahomet vſed to the inhabitants of Chidna. ſummons made by the Sultan, vpon his fayre and ſmooth promiſes of entire and free libertie of conſcience, and of their goodes, fraunchiſes, and immunities, did ſimply yeeld them ſelues, by the enticements of theſe falſe Synons, to the faith and fidelitie of the Turke, which they found to be ſuch, as is vſuall with one that maketh publique profeſsion of periurie, impietie, and diſloyaltie: for which moſt monſtrous and inhumane crueltie he cauſed eight thouſand of them to be put to the ſword, beſides women and children. Thus did this hatefull tyrant vpon pure rage and deſpight ſhead the bloud of innocents, becauſe he could not execute the venome of his malice and hatredSentence. 
               againſt Scanderbeg, who ſtood ſo ſurely vpon his garde. Vndoubtedly the wrath and diſpleaſure of Princes is heauie and horrible, and (as the ſaying is) it is not light as feathers, but weightie as lead. Thus went Mahomet out of Epyre bathed in the bloud of innocents, and hauing left Ballaban behind him with innumerable troupes, he had giuen him ſtreight charge to continue the ſiege of Croy, euen to the laſt point of extremitie, and till ſuch time as the inhabitants being worne out with the length of time, and being conſumed and weakened with famine and calamities, ſhould be enforced to yeeld them ſelues vnto him, euen with halters about their neckes.
            All this while was Scanderbeg very ſad & penſiue to ſee ſo many enemies within the hart of his Realme, but that which greeued him moſt was, that ſuch a villain as Ballaban (whoſe parents and predeceſſours, had euer bene but as baſe varlets, and ſeruile drudges to the houſe and familie of the Caſtriots, and to whom he had giuen ſo many ouerthrowes and diſgraces) ſhould yet for all this be ſtill oppoſed and make war againſt him, and that he ſhould dare to compare with him, and to braue him. For this cauſe he had an extreme deſire by all meanes poſsible to entrappe him, and if he could by any deuiſe in the world, to worke his confuſion, but he wanted meanes and abilitie, to compaſſe ſo high and difficult an enterpriſe, eſpecially ſince the loſſe of Chidna, whereof he made great reckoning, by reaſon of the good number of braue ſouldiours, which he had in that place. Wherefore by the counſell and aduiſe of his friends and Captaines, he determined to ſollicite, and preſſe both by letters and ambaſſades,

all the Princes, great Lords, and peoples his next neighbours, by the ſpurres of commonPerſwaſions vſed by Scanderbeg ſeeking aide of his neighbours for the reliefe of Croy. neceſsitie to embrace at this time eſpecially the defence of Albanie, and the repulſe of the Infidell from the ſiege of Croy: accordingly with great promptnes & celeritie, he put the matter in execution by men of a ſharpe and quicke conceipt: ſhewing them firſt of all with what rage and brutiſhneſſe the tyrant Mahomet had conſpired to aboliſh the name of Chriſt, and the profeſſours of his holy Religion, that his anceſtours hauing layd Aſia waſt & deſolate, and paſsing into Europe had by deceipt and other deteſtable meanes, deſtroyed and rooted out infinite Kinges & Potentats of Chriſtēdome, & that this helhound following the tract & ſteps of his anceſtours hauing ſubdued & cōquered the Greeks, the Tryballians, & the Sclauonians, & repulſed & weakened the Hungarians, did now diſplay all his forces & powred forth the venom of his malice and furie vpon him & his people, as being the laſt Relickes of Chriſtendome, which he had of late made ſhew of vpō the Chaonians his ſubiects, in putting to the ſword, contrary to his faith, & oth 8000. men, who if they had bene now liuing, he ſhould not neede to implore or deſire the aide & ſuccours of his neighbours & cō
                  federats to driue Ballabā
                   frō the ſiege of Croy, & to cut in peeces both him & all his forces, that they ſhould call to remembrāce, how in the former wars which he had moſt happely atchieued, he neuer had any recourſe to thē nor required their aide, but onely with his own men had continually (by the power & bleſsing of God) made reſiſtance againſt the cōmon enemy, & had gottē the victory alwayes againſt the Inſidels, with great expence of the bloud of his Albanians, euen in a maner, to the laſt drop thereof▪ by the long continuance of which wars his beſt and moſt valiant ſouldiours were either dead, or ſlaine in fight, or taken priſoners, or elſe maimed, ſo that by the multitude of battels, and continuall ſeruices of ſo many yeares warres, his countrey was altogether drawen dry of able and ſufficient forces to make reſiſtance againſt the Infidels.
            
            Theſe reaſons did eaſily perſwade the mindes of his confederates and induce them to encline vnto his demaunde, but (as it is commonly ſeene that the face and countenaunceSentence. Princes of Epyre confederates of Scanderbeg promiſe to ayde him for the reliefe of Croy. of a man carieth with it the chiefeſt power and vertue to perſwade men.) So Scanderbeg went vnto ſome of them, himſelfe in proper perſon, which was the occaſion, that all of them promiſed and ſwore vnto him by a new league and allyaunce, that they would not make ſpare of their liues, nor of their beſt meanes to ſuccour him againſt his enemyes, and from thence-forward, they began to put to their helping handes, labouring in the matter tooth and nayle, and with greater courage and fotwardneſſe then they had done at any time before. Neuertheleſſe the Prince of Albany, conſidering with himſelf that thoſe Turkes which lay encamped & in leager before Croy were for the moſt part good and hardy ſouldiours, men of courage, and warlike, beſides that being maiſters of the mountaine of Cruyna, which they had excellentlyOr Crayna. well fortified & rampierd, his forces would hardly ſuffice to remoue them frō thence,Voyage of Scā
                  derbeg into Italy to get aide againſt the Turkes. he hauing communicated his counſell and conceipt with the Archbiſhop of Duraz, and the Ambaſſadours of Venice and no other, left Tanuſee Lieutenant Generall in his army, and departed ſecretly out of Albanie in a diſguiſed habite towardes Italie to his holyneſſe, there to obtaine ſome further ſuccours of the Chriſtians.
            You muſt giue me leaue vppon this voyage of the Epyrote Prince, ſomewhatExclamatiō of the authour vpon the indignitie offered to Scanderbeg, in his voyage into Italy. to wander from the courſe of my hiſtorie. Is it not a pitifull thing, and a matter full of commiſeration, that a Prince of ſo great merit, vowed and dedicated to the ſeruice of God, and the Chriſtian common-wealth, whoſe victories had ſounded ouer the whole earth, who of late refuſed the peace, and ſcorned euen the ſhorteſt truce with this great Monarch the Turke, who at the ſollicitation & vrgent perſwaſions of the Pope, of the kings & great Princes of Europe, did not long ſince with a mighty army

paſſe the ſea into Italie, for the ſeruice of the Italians, now, as a poore fugitiue and exile ſhould be conſtrained in his aged yeares to abandon his countrey, couered and filled with Infidelles, his capitall and chief towne ſtreightly beſieged, and him ſelfe in a ſtraunge countrey to begge for ayde, and to ſeeke the fauour and ſupport of others? O the inconſtancie of this worldes glory! ô the incertaintie of humane fortunes! ô the mockerie of fortunes flatteries! where are your eyes, ô you Chriſtians? where are your harts? what was your deuoir and dutie? and what ought you to haue done in this caſe? ſeeing God preſented vnto you ſo noble, ſo faithfull, ſo zealous a Chieftaine. Was it not your dutie at the leaſt, to haue giuē ſome time of truce to your wicked rancours and curſed deuiſions? to haue followed this braue champion, and vnder the happy fortune of his inuincible vertue, to haue ioyned your armes to his armes, and your forces to his forces, that you might haue chaſed and expelled out of Europe the curſed ſect of Mahomet, and the bloudy wolfe which deuoureth the holy flocke of Chriſt? did it ſtand with your honour, or with your Religion to hold off from ſuccoring thoſe prouinces, and to ſuffer ſo worthy and incomparable a Chieftaine, ſo Religious and deuout a Prince, to come and ſeeke vnto you within your owne doores and houſes: but ſeeing ſuch was his miſhap, and your harts ſo impaſsionat, let vs ſee what was the ſucceſſe and iſſue of this his voyage.
            The king of Albanie being come to Rome, had gratious entertainement of theScanderbeg at Rome with the Pope. ſoueraigne Biſhop, and of the holy Senat in regard of the glory of his name, and the great and excellent maieſtie of his preſence, and being brought into the Conſiſtorie or Conclaue before the Pope and his Cardinals, he pronounced an eloquent and vehement oration: wherein he began firſt with the exaltation of the holy ſiege Apoſtolicke,Oration of Scanderbeg to Pope Paule the 2. of the Cardinals at Rome. and his owne ſingular deuotion and ſeruice, which he had euer borne to the ſame, which wrought in him an incredible contentment, in that he was ſo happy as to come and to kiſſe the feete of his holyneſſe, whom he reputed and reuerenced as the light and ſingular ornament of the Church of God, being diuinely choſen for the ſucceſſour of the bleſſed Saint Peter the firſt Vicar of Chriſt, and of ſo many holy and Religious Paſtours and excellent fathers: who being repleniſhed with all vertues and knowledge, adorned with ſimplicitie, and puritie of life, had crected and raiſed the faith of Chriſt, & had beautified the world with miracles & examples of perfection: your merites (quoth he) moſt holy Father, are in all points correſpondent to thoſe of your predeceſſours in all rare & diuine qualities, ſo that it is no maruell, if euery man haue conceaued a ſingular hope of your worthineſſe, the which if you do not excell and exceede, yet do you at the leaſt in all reſpectes equall, well deſeruing the publick opinion conceaued of you, not onely for freeing and deliuering your holy flocke from the bloudy iawes and throat of thoſe hungry wolues the Mahometiſtes, but alſo for ſpreading and enlarging the faith and Religion of Ieſus Chriſt, euen to the extremeſt and fartheſt partes of the world. Good God that my toung and eloquence were able to recount your vertues, which do exceede farre beyond all prayſes and commendations: but if I were able to do it, yet the infinit tumultes and perils, wherein, by a certaine fatall and ineuitable deſtinie, both I and my people are plunged and drowned more then any other nation in Chriſtendome, doe not permit nor ſuffer me, to enioy the ſweet pleaſure and benefite of your perfections: the iuſt griefe of my oppreſſed eſtate doth withdraw me: the Turkiſh Prince will not ſuffer me, who following the tract of his aunceſtours, doth euery day inuade your flocke, and doth diſmember and perſecute it, & being not ſatisfied with ſo many murthers, with ſo many rapines, and burnings, which he hath committed in Aſia, and in Europe, & wherewith he hath polluted euen the whole earth, doeth now ſtriue with all his ſtrength and

puiſſance to deſtroy and ſuppreſſe me and my people with our poore little Realme, as being left vnto him, for the laſt ſubiect of his cruelty. The lōg cōtinuance of the wars and the multitude of the battels, which we haue had, hath worne out, eaten vp, & conſumed all our forces, & we are now at the laſt caſt, in ſo much that there is not left in our whole body any part whole and ſounde, which may receaue any more wounds, neither haue we any bloud left vs, which we may ſhed or beſtow for the cōmō weale of Chriſtēdome. Wherfore (moſt reuerēt father of all Princes Chriſtiā, & the brightneſſe & glory of the Church of God,) if your holineſſe and clemencie do not ſpeedely and readily helpe to withſtand and preuent this miſchief, the eſtate and welfare of Albany is for euer gone and loſt. This is the cauſe (moſt reuerend Father) that hath brought me hither: this is it that hath cauſed me to haue recourſe vnto you, I haue left a great fire kindled and flaming in my houſe, the enemy is euen at my doores, who hath not onely deſtroyed and layd deſolate, and waſted my prouince, but hath murthered and captiuated my people, he holdeth Croy the key and bulwarke of my Realme ſtreightly beſieged, & is reſolued not to depart frō thēce, till he haue brought and made it to be Turkiſh, and I doubt me, he will go neare to do it, if we be not ſuccoured by your greatneſſe and authoritie: whileſt it is time therefore thinke vppon me (moſt worthy Prelates and Fathers) prouide for me betimes I beſeech you, it ſtandeth you vppon to repreſſe his violence, and to bridle his rage which is growen ſo ſtrong and mightie, that it threatneth and menaceth with all extremities not onely the eſtate of Chriſtendome, and the Church of God, but euen the ground and foundation of our Religion alſo. He hath already inflicted vpon the Chriſtian people all the examples & acts of inhumanitie which can be poſsibly inuented, in ſuch ſort that it would be no leſſe difficult and troubleſome for me to tell them, then it would be reprochfull for you to heare them. You ſee moſt holy Paſtour, you ſee moſt reuerēd Fathers, not only the doubt, but euen the certaintie of a moſt horrible ruine and calamitie? you ſee (moſt Religious Prelates) how this ambitious Prince hath already ſeized vpon two Chriſtian Empires: the moſt part of Aſia is in ſlauery & thraldome vnder him: all the Greekes are in a manner deſtroyed, the Tryballians, the Raſcians, and the Thracians are brought vnder his ſubiection, Sclauonie is ſubdued by his forces, Morea is in ſeruitude, and almoſt all Macedonie and Epyre, is burned, ſacked, and made deſert by his furie and outrage: you ſee the reliques of ſo many Princes, of ſo many Chieftaines of Macedonie and of all Greece: you haue heard (moſt ſoueraigne Prelate & you moſt reuerend Fathers) how many warres, how many trauels and tedious exploits & toyles my aunceſtours haue had againſt this periured & faithleſſe nation, & how my ſelfe after them, haue not had one day, not one minute of reſt & quietnes, but without ceaſing for more thē theſe 20. yeres, I haue had moſt ſharp & bloudy conflicts againſt this prophane people, & eſpecially againſt this fierce beaſt Mahomet, who hath now afflicted my eſtate with ſo many ruines, & miſchieues, that I haue no other way but to giue place vnto him, I haue euē till this day reſiſted & oppoſed my ſelfe againſt him, & I haue almoſt continually, by the diuine bounty, gone away with the victory, but now at this time (moſt holy Father) being wearied with ſo many trauels & diſcōmodities both paſt & preſent: being waſted & conſumed with ſo many battels: hauing loſt ſo many excellent Captaines, and ſo many of my ſouldiers & ſubiectes being ſlaine and deſtroyed, we haue no part of our auncient fortune now left vs, but our generous harts, and deuout ſoules: whereas this Barbarous Scithian (it may be our ſinnes haue bene the cauſe there of) hath encreaſed his forces and hath amplified his Empire beyond all diſcourſe of humane reaſon: humbly therfore (moſt holy father) I do proſtrat my ſelfe, here before your holines, I do inuocate & call vpon your ſacred name, & I do

implore your aide & ſuccours, moſt worthy Prelats. Cōſult, I beſeech you, make prouiſiō, & take ſuch order, that I may haue ſome meanes to reſiſt againſt ſo many tempeſts, & ſtormes of the war, & that I may with the leſſe perill of my life, & preiudice of my affaires, be able to beare & ſuſtaine the brunt thereof, & if the priuate miſerie of your ſoldier do nothing moue you, if the afflictiō of your chāpion̄ do not paſsionate you, at leaſt-wiſe let the cōmon neceſsitie, the imminent perill of your flock, & the future deſolation of the eſtate of Chriſtēdome ſtir you vp & perſwade you: is there any ſeruitude more greeuous, thē the Turkiſh bondage? what accidēt can happē more bitter to godly & Chriſtiā ſoules, thē to ſee their infants now vnited vnto Chriſt by holy baptiſme, & redeemed by the pretious bloud of the ſon of God, to the eternall cōmunion & ſocietie of the faithfull, afterwards againe to be cut away and ſeparated from him, & to be nuſled in the execrable blaſphemies of Mahomet: to be made open, profeſſed, & cruell enemies of Chriſt and his Church, to make warre againſt heauen, and to periſh in eternall death and damnation? Is there any thing more hard, and lamentable, then to ſee our owne children, iſſued from our owne bowels to become our enemies, and to ſee them made the onely meanes and miniſters to cut our throats, and to worke our ruine and deſtruction? it cannot be but this ſeruitude and bondage of Chriſtian ſoules is an euill much more greeuous and intollerable, then death it ſelfe.
            
            This Oration of the King of Epyre, was harkened vnto with no leſſe attentiueneſſe, then accepted with the allowaunce, and good liking of the whole Conſiſtorie, and euery man ſayd openly, that it was moſt requiſite and neceſſarie to ſuccour, with all ſpeede and diligence, their Chriſtian brethren, and not to ſuffer ſo noble a prouince and ſo vertuous a people to be deuoured and ſwallowed vp by ſo cruell and bloudthirſty an enemie. But all theſe ſmooth ſpeeches, fayre wordes and goodly promiſes, whereof they gaue him plenty, proued in the end nothing elſe then court fauours, & vaniſhed into ſmoake: what the cauſe thereof ſhould be I know not, but ſo it happened, that at his departure from thence (which was ſoone after) he had litle andScanderbeg ill ſuccoured by the Chriſtians. very ſmall ſuccour of Pope Paul the ſecond, who (though he were a Venetian borne) yet was but badly affectioned towards his owne countrey: to the which Scanderbeg was a moſt inward and faithfull friend, ouer and beſides the ſtrict and ancient knot of friendſhip and confederacy, which had beene preſerued and nouriſhed with great deuotion betweene him and that common-wealth. Three thouſand Crownes were deliueredDemetrius Franke treaſurer to Scanderbeg. into the hands of Demetrius Franke: who being one of the chiefe and principall citizens of Driuaſta, and coſin to the Archbiſhop of Duraz, was treaſurer to Scanderbeg: and this was all the aide that he found or had from them: yet did not this any thing trouble the Prince of Epire, neither was he diſcontented at this ſory and ſimpleReturne of Scanderbeg from Rome to Epyre. entertainement: but praiſing God for all, he tooke his leaue of the Pope, and returned into his owne countrey. He was once in the minde to haue gone as farre as Venice: but taking aduiſe vpon the matter, and not finding it expedient, by reaſon of the piteous eſtate wherein he had left his kingdome and countrey of Epire: he contented himſelfe to ſend thither his Secretary, to let the Senate of that city vnderſtand, the hard ſucceſſe of his voyage to Rome, and to animate & perſwade them to miniſterſome aideAide giuen by the Venetians and others to Scanderbeg for the reliefe of Croy againſt the Turkes. Lech and Nicholas Ducagin. & ſuccours vnto him: the which he obtained as you ſhall heare. Scanderbeg being vpō the way of his return towards Epire, went firſt to Scutary, where Ioſaphat Barbare had great command and authority, (of whom we haue ſpoken heretofore) and there hauing made a notable leauy of the ſubiects of the Venetians, he adioyned them to his owne forces. In like maner Lech Ducagin, and Nicholas his brother, being brauelie mounted, came vnto him with 400. valiaunt horſemen, and as many footmen, all of them moſt expert and skilfull ſouldiers. To theſe did adioyne them ſelues a hundreth

men at armes armed all in white, and 500. footemen Italians, being in the pay and entertainment of the Seigniorie of Venice within Scutarie: beſides 1000. good horſe, & three thouſand footmen gathered out from amongſt the Scutarians, the Driuaſtines, the Antiuarians, the Liſſians, and the Dirrachians: in ſo much that thoſe aides being vnited and incorporated all in one, did make vp the full & complet number of 13400. choſen men. For you are to note that the Princes & peoples of Epyre, Macedony, Sclauony and Dalmatia, which were leagued and allyed together, did not faile to ſend ech of them certaine forces, all which made their rende vous at a place appointed, and were at the command and diſpoſition of Scanderbeg, who deuided them into two troupes: one part whereof he committed to the conduct and leading of Lech Ducagin aboue named, being a knight of no leſſe policie then hardineſſe in the warres: and Nicholas
               Nicholas Moneta gouernor of Scutarie. 
               Moneta borne in Scutarie, the Vaiuoda, or gouernor of that citie, being a Gentleman of great eſtimate and valure, had the guiding of the other part of thoſe forces. Now it was ſet downe and appointed, that theſe troupes being diſlodged from Liſſa, and hauing cut ouer the plaine countrie or fieldes of Pharſalia, and the foreſt of Ionimes,
               Foreſt of Ionimes. ſhould make their approach, and charge vppon the enemie on that ſide. And that the King of Epyre being accompanied with his owne bandes both horſe and foote, ſhould make towardes the mountaine of Cruyna, there to aſſaile and ſet vpon Ballaban on the otherſide, who had encloſed & fortified himſelfe exceeding ſtrongly and conueniently vpon that mountaine. But before I will leade our Chriſtians any further into the countrie, I holde it not amiſſe to figure and deſcribe vnto you the ſite of the place where the Mahometan had entrenched him ſelfe, to the intent the matter may be the better repreſented to your ſight, and made more plaine and apparant vnto you.
            I told you long ſithence, that Croy is in Epyre, in the fields of Emathia or Pharſalia,
               The ſituation of Croy. ſeated vpon the high creſt or ridge of a mountaine: which in the circuit and compaſſe thereof is on all parts enuironed with many ſteepe downefals, excepting in one only place where it is very hardly to be approached, and is deuided and cut off from the mount Cruyna, which being very nigh, & continuing on euen cloſe to the towne, doth ſeeme much higher then the ſame, and to haue the commaund thereof. This mountaine runneth a long by the ſide of the Caſtle of Croy, where hanging ouer it with a deepe cliffe, after a ſmall deſcent it doth deuide it ſelfe into diuerſe hils or litle mounts. In this place had Ballaban placed his campe, and hauing drawen thither the maſſe or maine ſtrength of his armie, he had gotten the poſſeſſion of the mountaine of Cruyna, the which hauing fortified and garded with a great and ſtrong garriſon, he did preſſe the towne with a hard and grieuous ſiege.
            But leauing him there encamped, let vs returne to our troupes. Their plot being laide as is before mentioned, and their bandes being deuided, Scanderbeg with his forces went firſt on to viſite the enemie: and being come to the ſaide mountaine, he receiued aduertiſement, that Ionyme the brother of Ballaban was marching on towardesIonime brother to Ballaban cō
                  ming with a ſupply of Turks to his brother is ſurpriſed by Scanderbeg. his brother with a good number of Turkes: and the report went that he was alreadie paſt the mountaine of Bulgarie. Immediatly vppon theſe newes Scanderbeg with ſingular promptneſſe and reſolution, tooke with him the choiſe and flower of his army: and (hauing cauſed the reſidue to keepe themſelues ſtill and quiet) he roade all that night with extreame ſpeede and diligence to meete with Ionyme, whom hauing ſurpriſed on a ſudden and vnprouided, he ſoone broke and diſperſed, taking himIonyme and his ſonne Heder taken priſoners aliue with Heder his ſonne likewiſe, and the ſame night with no leſſe ſpeede then he went forwarde, he returned to his companie with the victorie. The next morning he brought foorth and preſented to the ſight of Ballaban, his brother and his

Nephew bound and tyed together. And thereupon giuing a braue charge vpon the garriſon of the Turkes which lay vppon the mount Cruyna, he chaſed them fromScanderbeg chaſeth the Turkes from the mount Cruyna. thence, and being ſeized of the place, he tooke vp his lodging vppon the toppe of the mountaine, giuing preſent order that his confederates ſhould haue notice thereof out of hande. Nowe Ballaban (who promiſed him ſelfe ſome intelligence within Croy) was wonderfully abaſhed to ſee the Chriſtians ſo ſuddainely to come ſo neere him, and to be in a manner ouer his head, and where they might commaunde him. Wherefore hauing newly encouraged and reaſſured part of his people who were ſomewhat troubled with the alarme: and letting them to vnderſtande, that the towne was ſurely their owne, if they would make any haſte to enter it, and ſo prouide for their owne ſafetie, whereas otherwiſe if they fayled in the enterpriſe, it was not for them to ſtaie there any longer before Croie: knowing well that they ſhould but looſe their labour, that the daungers would be very great to continue there at the ſiege, and that it could not but coſt them deare, now that he ſaw his brother defeated and the enemie ſo forwarde which could not but be an occaſion of great inconuenienceBallaban ſolliciteth the Croians to yeeld vnto him. vnto them. Thus being accompanied with a good troupe, he preſented himſelfe before the walles, and went on euen almoſt to the port of the citie, perſwading and ſolliciting them within, to render themſelues vnto him: and there did he continue for a while attending the iſſue of that which he expected. The Croians being incenſedSallie by the Croians vpon Ballaban. with his preſumption made a braue ſallie out vpon him, & falling into skirmiſh with the Turkes, they enforced them to the retreate, and made their Chieftaine to know the vanitie of his practiſes. Herewithall Ballaban being enraged and euen madde for anger, and making head a freſh againſt the Croyans, thought by pure force to haue driuen them into the towne. But the citizens beginning to retyre in very good order, without the loſſe of anie one of their companie: it happened that one George Alexie an Epyrot borne, and a good harguebuſſier diſcharging a bullet vpon Ballaban
               George Alexie. hit him quite thorough the throate, giuing him a mortall and deadly wound. Yet did not Ballaban fall preſently, but when he found himſelfe ſhotte, he kept himſelfeDeath of Ballaban ſlain with a ſhot before Croy. ſure within his ſaddle, and ſetting ſpurres to his horſe, h
                  •
               ranne with great ſpeed and a ſwift pace euen to his tents, where he was no ſooner arriued, but he tumbled from his horſe, and fell rudely to the ground, embrewing his countrie ſoyle with his owne bloud, the deſtruction whereof hee had ſo bloudilie deſired. The fall and death of the Generall put the whole campe of the Infidelles in extreame feare and terrour: in ſo much, that the night following, the Barbarians in great ſilenceSiege of Croy raiſed. and ſecrecie abandoned the ſiege of Croie, and retyring themſelues about eight long myles off, they encamped and fortified them ſelues verie diligently at Tyranna. The next morning vppon breake of day, Scanderbeg comming to take a viewe of the enemies tentes, found them voide and emptie of men, but fully furniſhed with baggage and prouiſions, ſo that there was no want of any thing, eyther of corne or other victuals: all which he cauſed to be remoued and carried thence into Croie, the ſame being in a manner ſufficient to victuall it for one whole yeare. After this himſelfe entred with great triumph into the citie, where he was receiued with great honour and ioy by the inhabitants, whom he highly commended (and that worthily) for their fidelitie and good perſeuerance, adding therewithall many gifts and rewards in recompence of their deſerts.Meſſengers from the armie of the Turkes to Scanderbeg deſiring leaue to depart out of Epyre.
            
            Whileſt theſe offices of ciuill courteſies paſſed betwene Scanderbeg & his citizens, there came from the campe of the Barbarians lying at Tyranna, two horſmen, ſeeming to be perſons of good account and reckoning, who preſenting themſelues before Scanderbeg in the name of the Chieftains & Commanders of their armie, praied him

to grant them that fauour which he had neuer refuſed to men of their qualitie, namely that leauing their baggage, horſes, and armour, they might be ſuffered to depart with their liues onely. For they were ſore affraid, leaſt that the paſſages being foreſtalled and laide for them, ſhould haue beene ſhut vp and fortified to encloſe and famiſh them within the countrie. Hereupon the King cauſed his Princes, Nobles, and Captaines ſpeedily to be aſſembled, that he might deliberate and determine vppon ſome aunſwere to be giuen to the Turkes, and might heare the aduiſe of euerie man in particular: and he tooke order in the meane while, that thoſe two horſemen ſhouldCouncell called by Scanderbeg to conſult vpon the meſſage & demaund of the Turkes. be conducted into a tent, and thereto be well and gratiouſly entertayned. Ioſaphat Barbare was the firſt whoſe opinion was demaunded in this matter, but he excuſed himſelfe, ſaying: That the Seigniorie of Venice had ſent him thither to be reſident neere about the perſon of the Prince, onely to doe what it ſhould pleaſe him to commaund him: and therefore for his part he referred himſelfe for this matter to his owne good will and pleaſure. Lech Ducagin ſpake more liberally, and as he was a man of a fierce and forwarde diſpoſition prompt of hande, and quicke of inuention: ſo in one worde did he acquaint them with his minde, ſaying: Embetha: which in the Albanian language ſignifieth, to horſebacke: for he ſawe no reaſon why anie grace or mercie ſhould be ſhewed to this people, who were deuoide of all pittie, and were ſo mightily giuen to bloud-thirſtineſſe and crueltie, but that all of them ought rather to paſſe vnder the edge of the ſworde. Of the ſame opinion were the moſt part of the aſſembly, eſpecially Paul Angell the Archbiſhoppe, who propounded and ſet before his eyes the example of Iulius Caeſar, who in times paſt hauing in thoſe very marches broken and defeated the Pompeyans, did purſue them euen to the laſt extreamitie: that he alſo ought not to forſake his owne good fortune, which oftentimesSentence. when ſhe ſeeth her ſelfe not to be liuely and roundly followed, turneth her ſelfe with a contrarie byas, to fauour thoſe vppon whom ſhe before frowned. And many other reaſons did he alleage to that effect. 
               Scanderbeg replyed vnto them in this manner.
            I knowe right well (moſt worthie and valiant Epyrots, and my fellowe ſouldiers)Oration of Scanderbeg diſſwading his ſouldiers from purſuing the Turkes after the reliefe of Croy. 
               and I haue alreadie had good experience of your ſingular valure, your notable reſolution and the greatneſſe of your courage, whereby you haue alwayes terrified and diſcomfited your enemies: and I doe not thinke but that euen now alſo you haue both the courage and the power to breake & to trample vnder your feete the reliques and remainders of theſe amazed Infidels. Neuertheleſſe (gentle warriours) it behoueth vs often to bethinke our ſelues, and to call to minde that ſage ſentence of the wiſe man. That it is the part and propertie of fooles to wiſh for a tempeſt in fayreSentence. and calme weather: but it is the guiſe and faſhion of them that are wiſe, to ſeeke by all meanes, howe to remedie and auoide it, when the time and neceſſitie doe preſſe them to it. It hath pleaſed our good God, without bloud, without fight, without murther, to ſende vs the victorie euen from heauen: the citie is deliuered, the ſiege is rayſed, Ballaban our capitall and mortall aduerſarie, is nowe laide dead vppon the ground, his armie is fledde, we our ſelues are in reſt and quiet, and all thinges doe ſeeme to ſmyle and fawne vpon vs: wherefore then ſhould we ſeeke to haue warte? wherefore ſhould we deſire our owne torment? why ſhould we tempt fortune that is ſo blinde and variable? you are not ignorant (my good friendes) that any fault or errour committed in the warre is irreparable and vnpoſſible to beSentence. amended. In other buſineſſes and affaies, if a man be forgetfull of anything, it may be amended and corrected: but the ouerſightes of martiall matters, and of battels are paſt all hope of recouerie or amends. This is the reaſon why thoſe auncients

and thrice renowmed Captaines, did not ſo much eſteeme and ſet by thoſe armies which were great and populous, as thoſe which were well gouerned with good order and diſcipline. For the ſucceſſe of battels is doubtfull, the iſſue of warres is vncertaine, and doth not depend of our hande and induſtrie, but of the power and diſpoſition of fortune. An enemie is alwayes to be redoubted, neuer to be deſpiſed, neuer to be diſeſteemed: and more then that, when the warre is ended, when the victorie is obtained, yet is there no leſſe diligence euen then to be vſed, then was at the verie firſt beginning of the ſame: and we muſt not any time raſhly and vnaduiſedly come to the fight or combat with our enemie. Wherefore if we ſhould deſire to aduenture the chaunce of warre, and to trie the fortune of the fielde with this enemie which is now before vs, we ſhall endaunger and put in hazarde (which God defend) our owne ſafetie and our eſtate, which now (God be thanked) are in good caſe and ſecuritie. Refraine therefore this ardent and burning feruentneſſe of your courages: let the victorie which we haue alreadie gotten ſuffice and content vs: we haue had manie and great triumphes vppon our enemies, and you ought to holde your ſelues ſatisfied with ſo many murthers, with ſo many ouerthrowes giuen them, and with the manifolde fauours of fortune, which hath hitherto ſo gratiouſly fawned vpon you. Moreouer you ſee that the troupes of the Barbarians are exceſſiue, and in a manner innumerable, they are not of the baſer and raſcall ſort of people collected and gathered at aduentures: but they are the flower and ſtrength of all the Turkiſh forces, choſen men, ſtout, expert, ready prouided & prepared to fight, armed with neceſſitie (which of all weapons is the moſt extreame and daungerous) and they deſire not, nor ſeeke after any thing elſe but battell: eyther to reuenge the death of their Generall, or to carrie home vnto their Soueraigne the report of ſome notable and worthie exploit. This their offer of rendering themſelues is but coulorable and feigned; beleeue me, it is but diſſimulation, and they doe make a ſemblance onely of feare and terrour: I am well acquainted with their cunning draughts and diſguiſements, I know that this is nothing but one of their ſubtill ſleights and guilefull policies, wherein theſe men more then in any thing elſe, doe make ſingular profeſſion. Aſſure your ſelues, they deſire nothing ſo much as to come to fight with you, and to be reuenged: wherefore if we be wiſe, let vs keepe our ſelues from them, let vs not trouble them. But let it be that they doe not intende anie malice nor anie deceipt againſt vs: yet they are enraged, they are deſperate, their ſhame and ignominie doth preſſe them on againſt vs, being affraide of all thinges, they feare nothing. Nothing is ſo perillous as to ſet vppon men whoſe ſafetie conſiſteth in being deſperate and without hope of ſafetie. He commonly fighteth and combattethSentence. outragiouſly, who hath no comfort left him, who relyeth not vppon hope of anie thing. And what if we doe put them all to the ſworde? what if we make them to betake themſelues to flight? yet cannot this be done without your dammage, without your loſſe, without your bloud, without the expence and coſt of many of your liues: how then can ſuch a victorie be otherwiſe to me then ruefull and lamentable? Wherefore (my louing and good ſouldiers) if you will beleeue me, if you will be counſelled and aduiſed by me: be you aſſured we will haue them all at our mercie without fight, without vſing ſwords or weapon againſt them. For they are in great want of all thinges eſpecially of bread, which fayling and being not to be gotten, an armie is eaſily vanquiſhed without fighting. Let vs ſhut vppe all the wayes and paſſages, ſo that no ſuccours nor victuall may not by any meanes come vnto them: let vs newly fortifie and ſtuffe our towne with a good and ſtrong garriſon, and let vs furniſh it with all ſortes of munitions, for the prouiſion of many

yeares: ſo ſhall we ſee that theſe our enemies being ſhut vp and beſieged within our confines ſhall all periſh and die miſerably of pure famine and hunger. And we ſhall ſee them vtterly ouerthrowen and deſtroyed, without ſword, without armes, and without bloudſhed.
            
            Some there were who ſhewed themſelues well pleaſed with this oration, and did allow of Scanderbeg his perſwaſions, but others would not be ſatisfied therewith, eſpecially the common ſort of ſouldiers, who being growen more fierce and audacious againſt the enemy, beganne to make a great noiſe not without ſome tumult andSouldiers of Scanderbeg murmure againſt him, & will not be diſſwaded from following the Turkes. vproare enclyning to a mutinie on all parts within the campe of the Chriſtians: crying out aloft with a loud voice, that they ought to march on directly and preſently, and to go ſeeke out the Turkes who were alreadie vanquiſhed and diſcomfited. That it was not expedient in this matter to yeelde vnto the motion of Scanderbeg, who ſhewed himſelfe to be growen fearefull and faint-hearted: conſidering that of a moſt fierce and furious combatant, and who had neuer refuſed any occaſion of fighting in open and plaine battell, he was now become a fearefull temporizer, and would ſeeme to diſſwade them from armes who were borne and bredde to followe armes, and whoſe onely deſire was to be doing with their enemies: that nowe the Generall did faile and was wanting to the ſouldiers, and not the ſouldiers to their Generall. Thus the heate and vehemencie of the Epyrots was ſcarce repreſſed and withh
                  •
               lde by the Captaines and maſters of the campe, till ſuch time as it was generally concluded and agreed, that aſſoone as Croy was prouided and fortified with all neceſſaries, they ſhould haue free libertie to purſue the Infidels, and to force their campe. Wherefore Scanderbeg calling vnto him the two Turkiſh meſſengers gaue them this aunſwere: That they ſhould goe and tell their companions, that as they came into thatAnſwere of Scanderbeg to the two meſſengers ſent from the Turkes. countrie without his commaundement, ſo ſhould they not for his part be commaunded to returne from thence. Now in this meane time, the King of Epyre had ſent and diſpatched away certaine forces to gaine and ſhut vp the paſſages from the Barbarians, whileſt that the reſidue of the Chriſtian troupes by the order and direction of their Captaines did goe to the riuer of Iſme, where certaine veſſels lay at an ancker charged and loaden with corne, meale, ſalt-meates, and biſcuit, and did vnlade all, bringing it on lande, in ſuch ſort, that in three dayes Croie was well and ſufficiently reuictualled for ſixe yeares ſpace at the leaſt. Whileſt euerie man was thus buſied and intentiuely occupyed in this worke, and that euerie one did ſet forward and haſten this prouiſion to the vttermoſt of his power: beholde newes were brought vnto Scanderbeg, that the verie ſame night about the ſecond watch, when that men are in their ſoundeſt and deepeſt ſleepe, hunger and neceſſitie (which worketh maſteries beyonde all impoſſibilitie) had preſſed the Turkes to diſlodge ſecretly from Tyranna, and with the hazard of their liues to make way for themſelues by force, and to open the paſſages which were defended againſt them by the Scanderbegians. Howbeit they could not doe it ſo cloſely, but that thoſe ſouldiers which had the guarde and cuſtodie of the paſſages, and the inhabitants of the country ioyned together with them, did maintaine a long and obſtinate conflict with the Infidels, who with the ſlaughter of a great number of their companions, and the loſſe of the moſt part of their baggage, did at length by their ſwordes make way through the middeſt, and in deſpight of their enemies. When Scanderbeg his armie heard thereof, it cannot be expreſſed how extremely they were aggrieued and diſpleaſed at the matter: for their murmuring and muttering againſt Scanderbeg did ſufficiently teſtifie the greatneſſe of their diſcontentment, imputing the whole blame thereof to him, as if this euaſion and eſcape of the enemie, had beene by his default

only. But he pacified and appeaſed them both with his bountifull gifts, and with gratious ſpeeches: and more then that, to content them the better, he cauſed them immediatly to take armes, and to march with Enſignes diſplayed into the fielde, where he gaue them the ſpoyles of thoſe other Turkes and Infidels which were found in garriſon within Chaonia & other places of Epyre: not ſuffering any one of them to eſcape but that they were either ſlaine or taken, being ſpoyled and ſtripped out of all. Thus hauing purged and clenſed the Prouince of this vermine, and hauing ſettled all things in good and peaceable order, euery man returned to his owne quarter loaden with the ſpoyles of the Barbarians, and with many commendations, preſentes, and great thankes giuen them by the King of Albanie.
            
            The affaires of Epyre thus ſtanding in ſufficient good and flouriſhing eſtate, we will now leaue them for a while, and turne our diſcourſe to the Turkiſh Monarch to ſhew vnto you the griefe and diſpleaſure which he conceiued in his haughtie and great ſtomacke, aſwell for the death of Ballaban, and the diſhonourable and ſhamefull flight of his armie: as alſo for that the ſiege of Croie was raiſed to the great glorie and aduantage of the Chriſtians. For he did ſo vnmeaſurably afflict and paſſionate himſelfe with the conceipt hereof, that he could not take any reſt, nor eate, nor drinke: but that ſtill day & night his ſpirit & thoughts were troubled, beating his braine, & deuiſingMahomet purpoſeth a ſecond iourney into Epyre againſt Scanderbeg. with himſelfe, how he might deface and aboliſh the blot of this ſhame and ignominy, and take ſome notable reuenge vppon Scanderbeg. In the ende his deliberation was, once againe to returne himſelfe in proper perſon, and with more puiſſant forces into Epyre, that by his preſence he might giue the more grace & maieſtie to the enterpriſe. Hereof Scanderbeg being ſpeedily infourmed, made no delay to prepare for the receiuingScanderbeg maketh preparations againſt the comming of Mahomet. of him with all the beſt meanes and preparations that he could poſſibly make: he gaue the Princes, Seigniors and peoples his confederates to vnderſtand of the purpoſe and intent of the Turke, willing them to be in a readineſſe againſt ſuch time as he ſhould ſend vnto them: and he made good prouiſion of all kinde of munition, victuals, and all other neceſſaries in all his ſtrong holdes and fortreſſes: in ſuch ſort, that they needed not to be affraide of any thing that the Turke could attempt againſt them.
            The yeare being paſt and ſpent in theſe preparations on both partes, now beganne the ſpring to come on, which being a time wherein all things beginne to budde, and grow pleaſant to the eye, and moſt fit and conuenient for warlike voyages and expeditions, Mahomet had deferred his iourney to that ſeaſon, and accordingly aſſooneSecond iourney of Mahomet into Epyre. as he ſaw the time to ſerue, he tooke his iourney with infinite troupes, engines, and inſtruments for aſſault of all ſortes, and with an incredible number of expert workemen and artificers for this end and purpoſe which I will ſhew you. Being come to a certaine large and wide plaine commonly called Saura, he determined there to abidePlaine of Saura. and ſoiourne for a while, and he encampèd his armie neere to the riuer of Scombin, within the ſigniorie or principalitie of Aryamnites Comynat father in lawe to Scanderbeg
               The riuer of Scombyn. During the time of his abode in that place, the Sultan did employ not onely his artificers and workemen, but a great part alſo of his ſouldiers about the repayring or reedefying of the towne of Valmes (which at this preſent the Albanois do account and call a citie) and in times paſt was ruinated and laide euen with the ground by the Gallo-Grecians and other ſtrange Nations. It is ſeated in an anglet or litle corner ofValmes a city in Epyre new built by Mahomet. 
               Epyre neere vnto the peoples of the Iates, Brateſcoſages, Cherabes▪ Buſerſeches, and Sopotanies. Hauing fully ended and perfected that worke with incredible diligence, and hauing furniſhed and fortified it with able men, victuals, and ſuch like neceſſaries for the ſure keeping and defence thereof againſt his enemies: he ſpeedily diſlodged from

thence, and marched on with his armie towards the citie of Duras, with a determinationThe citie of Duras beſieged by Mahomet. to carrie that towne at the firſt aſſault: ſuppoſing that it had beene vnprouided both of men of warre and of victuals. But he found himſelfe deceiued in his hope by the vigilancie and prouidence of the Venetians and of Scanderbeg, who had wiſely foreſeene and preuented that tempeſt, by meanes whereof it was well and ſufficiently furniſhed and defended both by ſea and by lande, in ſuch ſort, that it ſcorned all the power and aſſayes of the Infidell, who ſaw himſelfe moſt rudely and brauely repulſed from thence with the notable ſlaughter and loſſe of many of his people. But for the better contentment of the reader, by the varietie of this diſcourſe, you muſt giue me leaue a litle to wander and digreſſe from my matter, and to honour this towne with her due prayſes and commendations.
            
               Dirrachium, by the Italians called Duraz, was in times of antiquitie named Epydamnum:
               The citie of Dyrrachium or Duraz aunciently called Epidamnum her originall and foundation▪
                it is a towne ſituated within Epire, and builded of old (as it is thought) by one Epidamnus of whom alſo it had her firſt name: and this mans nephew or grandchilde by his daughter, being named Dyrrachus did adde vnto the towne the port or hauen calling it Dyrrachium. But there he others of another opinion, who hold that Dirrachium (being atowne ſeated vpon the ſea coaſtes of Albanie, is the capitall and chiefe citie of thoſe peoples which are called the Taulantians, Pyrreans, and Pratinians, and it lyeth betweene Liſſa and Apollonia: and they ſay that the Romanes finding it to be called Epidamnum by reaſon of the vnluckie ſound and ſenſe of that name which they held to be ominous and vnhappie, did chaunge the ſame into the name of Dyrrachium, taking this terme for the Cherroneſe or demy Iſle whereon it was ſeated, or rather reedified (as ſome doe affirme) by the Corcirians or the inhabitants ofCorcyre or Corfu. 
               Corfu. For if we will giue credit vnto the common report, and to thoſe authors that are moſt ancient: it hath bene numbred amongeſt the moſt auncient cities: and there are yet extant to be ſeene many great and goodly praiſes and commendations of this place. For as Lucan ſaith:
            
               This towne is not a worke as others are
               Of auncient ſtructure built of lime and ſtone,
               No worke of man, nor ſuch as time or warre,
               Can eaſily bring to alteration.
               Great is their power and they can do much,
               Yet greater is the ſtrength of Duraz towne,
               Her fortreſſe is ſo strong, her ſeate is ſuch,
               That mynes nor engines cannot beate her downe.
               Nature it ſelfe hath fortified her ſeate,
               Hauing encloſed it on euery ſide,
               VVith cliffes that breake the billowes as they beate,
               And with a gulfe that is both deepe and wide:
               Nought but one mountaine from an Iſle her ſaues,
               Rockes are her rampier threatning ships to dash,
               And Cliffes her walles on which the foming waues,
               In ſtormes doe beate and her ſtrong buildings wash.
            
            For this citie is enuironed with the ſea on all ſides but one, where the rocks beingDeſcription of the citie of Duras in Epyre. deuided and cut a ſunder ech from other, doe ioyne it to the firme lande. On the one ſide it hath a goodly hauen or harbour, wherein ſhippes may ſafely lye and anckor: on the other ſide it hath large and pleaſant fields and paſtures, abounding in fertilitie and plentie of all good commodities: and within the walles, he goodly temples and

ſumptuous churches do make the citie much more ſtately and venerable: beſides that it is adorned with the ſtatues and proud monuments of ſundrie Kings and Emperours: eſpecially that of Adryan: or rather his monſtrous Coloſſus or image ofColoſſus. copper, which is erected in a place verie high and emminent neare to the gate Caballyn towardes the North. Beſides there is to be ſeene his Amphy-theater made byAmplry-theater a place made with ſeats and ſcaffolds for the beholding of ſhewes, games, playes, and triumphes. wonderfull art and induſtrie. The walles of the citie are paſſing ſtrong, flanked with their towers, bulwarkes and other excellent workes wherewith they are beautified and adorned. Beſides this citie is very famous for the commoditie of the rare ſaltpits which it hath, and for the great aboundance of all kindes of marchandiſe which are brought vnto it. To be briefe, this is that famous citie of Duras which enioyed the preſence, and with ſingular entertainement receiued the Romaine Senate, and was no leſſe famous then vnfortunate through the ciuill warres and notable ſlaughters and bloudſhed of the Romaines. But what the eſtate of it may be at this inſtant, ſince it is become Turke, and that it is reduced vnder the ſeruitude of ſo fierce and barbarous a nation who are mortall enemies to all good order and ciuilitie, I had rather leaue it to you to imagine it, then to ſpeake what I thinke of it. But to our matter.
            After that the Sultan had bene ſo rudely entertained before Duraz, and that his bloudie actions and attempts proued vaine and to none effect: he conceiued an opinion that Scanderbeg had put himſelfe within the towne for the defence thereof; becauſeThe departure of Mahomet from the ſiege of Duras. a great number of his people were knowen and diſcerned to be within it. This was the occaſion that he diſlodged ſpeedily from thence, and made directly towards Croy, pitching his tents before the towne in hope to aſtoniſh and appall them by the ſuddenneſſe of his comming. For experience hauing taught him, that the endeuours and aſſayes both of his predeceſſours and of himſelfe had profited him litle or nothing:Croy beſieged the ſecond time by Mahomet. he was not of the minde that he could carrie the towne by this courſe, but his determination was to bring them to reaſon by a long and obſtinate ſiege, if Scanderbeg would permit him. Wherefore neglecting and leauing all other counſelles, he ſummoned the Croians to yeelde themſelues vnto him, making them great offers of riches and ineſtimable honours, if they would deliuer the towne into his handes. But he had no better aunſwer nowe then he had the yeare before: for they gaue him good ſtore of cannon and musket ſhot for his good-morrow: and more then that, they iſſued foorth to viſit him nearer home, with a furious and ſtout ſalley made vpon the infidels, carying away with honour and glorie many of their heads, for an argument and proofe of their good deuoire and worthie demeanour. On the other ſide, Scanderbeg according to his wonted and accuſtomed manner, keeping continually vppon the skirtes of this fearefull and huge armie, and being attended with his ordinarie forces, did vnceſſantly importune and endaunger the enemie by his often inuaſions made vppon their campe both by daye and by night: and the ſlaughters and butcheries which he committed vpon them were notable and wonderfull, inſomuch that Mahomet perceiuing the ſmall profit which he was like to purchaſe by this enterpriſe, was glad to leaue the purſuite thereof, and to reſerue himſelfe to ſome other exploit which might be more for his honour and aduantage. Wherefore raiſing his campe from before Croie, he bent his courſe towardes a certaineSiege of Croi
                     •
                   raiſed by Mahomet. place lying on the coaſt of the Adriatique ſea, or gulfe of Venice not farre from Duras: now called the head of Redoni, where Scanderbeg had begunne of late to build a towne which he called Chiurill. The Barbarian finding it without inhabitantsThe towne of Chiuril begun to be builded by Scanderbeg raſed by Mahomet. and vnfiniſhed did raze it from the verie foundation. From thence he went forwarde purpoſing to deſtroy certaine peoples ſubiect to Scanderbeg: but the armie of the Chriſtians did followe him ſo cloſe at the heeles, coaſting him continually

whereſoeuer he went: and ſometimes by day, ſometimes by night would he charge and ſet vpon him, one while in the taile, another while in the flanck, and many times in the front and head of his armie: that he tooke from him all occaſions and meanes to profit himſelfe in that countrey: yea the inhabitants themſelues dwelling in the forreſtes and mountaines did ſo annoy and moleſt him, afflicting him with infinite miſchieues, ſlaughters and diſcommodities: that being in vtter diſpaire of doing any good vpon the Prouince, he returned backe againe to Constantinople more confounded and full of deſpight and griefe then he was at his comming foorth.
            Neuertheleſſe the Ottoman was no ſooner remooued out of Epire: but becauſe heAlybeg and Aiasbeg ſent with an armie of 28000. Turkes to ſafegard their frontiers from the Albanois. would keepe the Chriſtians ſtill in breath, he ſent two of his chiefe Captaines, men of great renowme and reckoning Alibeg & Aiasbeg with an armie of 28000. Turks: willing them onely to looke to the ſafetie and defence of his owne frontiers, and not to ſtirre or to offer any warlike violence vpon the country of the Chriſtians. Aſſoone as they were come and had ſetled themſelues vppon their borders: they fell to their wonted cunning and practiſes, ſending vnto Scanderbeg ſecretly and vnder hand certaine preſents of great value and eſtimate, in hope to draw him to haue ſome amity and friendſhip with them, and to make him ſecure and negligent. The King of Albanie though he were an olde Courtier, and had bene well acquainted with theſe kindes of dealings, ſo as he could not be ouerreached nor deceiued by their ſottiſh deuiſes, yet he was content to accept of their preſents: and he ſent vnto them backe againe others of no leſſe value, in counter chaunge of thoſe which they had giuen him. And this was all that was done betweene them, becauſe he was too cleare ſighted, and too circumſpect for them to go beyond him. For notwithſtanding theſe priuate courteſies and kindneſſes paſt betweene him and them, Scanderbeg was minded to keepe them doing, and therefore cauſed a generall muſter and leauie of men to be made throughout all his dominions, purpoſing to get againe from the Turkes the towne of Valmes, which had bene lately built and edified by Mahomet. But (ſuch1467. was the will and pleaſure of the cruell deſtinies) that being detained with a grieuous maladie, he was conſtrained to deſiſt from his attempt. For after he had reuiſited all partes and quarters of his realme, and had cauſed a generall enrollment to be made of all ſuch able men, as were fit to doe him ſeruice and to beare armes for the ſafetie and defence of his eſtate: he came to the citie of Liſſa (which being vnder the ſiegniorie and gouernment of the Venetians, he had euer loued and moſt dearely affected) where being determined to haue called a councell and aſſembly of all the Princes and Lordes of the league, he was ſuddenly taken with a ſtrong and violent feauer: and theScanderbeg ſickeneth. force of this diſeaſe encreaſing euerie day more then other, he imagined that his laſt end began now to approach, wherefore being in doubt leaſt that death which is ineuitable, ſhould take him away before he had diſpoſed and ſet in order his affaires, he prayed the ſaied Princes and Lordes his confederates to enter into his bed-chamber together with the Ambaſſadours of the Siegniorie of Venice, and his chiefe Captaines and officers of his campe: vnto whom he framed his ſpeech in this manner.
            The ſoueraigne and chiefeſt vertue, and the true and moſt perfect religion (moſt
                  Speech and laſt words of Scanderbeg to his Princes & nobles before his death. worthie Princes and you my beloued companions) in my opinion is this. Firſt to reuerence, to ſerue, and to adore God moſt high and omnipotent, in iuſtice, ſanctitie and pietie: and next, not onely to loue deerely, and to haue a continuall care and regard of the good and benefit of our countrie: but if neede be, to ſpend euen our liues, and to ſhed our beſt bloud for the preſeruation and ſafetie of the ſame: for to all ſuch as behaue themſelues in that ſort, by the opinion of them that are wiſe, there is a ſpeciall and peculiar place reſerued aloft in the higheſt heauens. For my part, with what

ſingular deſire and affection I haue alwaies ſought and embraced theſe things, how all my thoughts haue continually bene bent and emploied vpon them, and how I haue endeuored al my forces, and to the vttermoſt of my power to attaine vnto them. Firſt God himſelfe can witnes it with me, and next, all of you my good friends can well teſtifie. The three and twentieth yeare is now paſt and expired ſince that I eſcaped out of the impure handes of wicked Amurath King of the Turkes, and that I fledde into this realme beeing the auncient patrimonie and inheritaunce of my aunceſtours: euer ſince that time haue I helde and endured the warres againſt a moſt periured and faithleſſe nation, and againſt the rage and furie of the Ottomans for the particular ſafetie and defence of our crowne and kingdome, and for the dignitie of the publike eſtate and weale of Chriſtendome: in all which time (by the grace and fauour of the diuine clemencie) we haue had moſt happie and fortunate ſucceſſe, according to our hearts deſire: and you neuer yet ſaw me returne either vanquiſhed or repulſed in true and ſet battell. But (if I may ſpeake it lawfully) I had alwaies the aduantage vpon the enemie: and I doe not remember that I was euer hurt or wounded but only once: when being ſhot with an arrow in my right foote, by a Turke, yet did I preſently kill him euen in the head and front of the enemie, and threw downe his bloudie head at your feete. But now (according to the ordinarie courſe of humane things) in the three ſcore and third yeare of my age, olde age being growen vpon me, ſeized with a grieuous ſickneſſe, and deſtitute of all my wonted ſtrength and corporall forces, Beholde my good friends, behold my deare companions, how I now beginne to waxe feeble, and by litle and litle I goe the way of all fleſh. I perceiue (my friends,) I ſee well; that it is the will and pleaſure of the diuine prouidence (by the which I confeſſe and doe acknowledge, that all things are ſubſiſting and haue their being, and whereby all things are guided and gouerned) that it behooueth me now to lay aſide this mortall and fraile burthen of my bodie, to goe to another and better place, and that I muſt exchaunge the breuitie and miſeries of this life for the felicitie of true and euerlaſting ioyes: and I proteſt vnto you before God, that the thought hereof, or rather this neceſſitie which is layed vpon me, doth not in any ſort trouble nor grieue me. I do not repine againſt that law which the deſtinies did impoſe vpon vs at the time of our natiuitie: for we ought not to be aggrieued or to find fault with that which we ſuffer according to lawe and iuſtice: with this condition were we borne, that we ſhould be ſubiect to this neceſſitie of our mortalitie. And I know well, that whatſoeuer is of neceſſitie cannot be accounted miſerable to any man particularly. It behooueth vs in the end to yeeld earth to earth, and to be obedient to nature: and it is required of vs as our due, that we reſigne vp this our ſoule being eternall and immortall: and this ſpirit of ours which is heauenly and celeſtiall, to him which hath onely lent it vs for a time. Neuertheleſſe (my deare friends and companions) I do not receiue and embrace this fatall lot of my death and departure with ſuch courage and cheerefulneſſe: becauſe I am willing to be freed from the perilles and dangers, or becauſe I would eſchew and ſhunne the trauels and labours, or becauſe I would withdraw my ſelfe from thoſe miſchieues and inconueniences, wherein euen till this time I haue conſumed all my beſt yeares, and haue ended my dayes for the ſeruice of God and the religion of Chriſt: for I am readie and could finde in my heart to expoſe and aduenture my life continually for the ſame, to the like or greater hazardes: but I ſee I ſee well, that this is Gods good will and pleaſure: I perceiue it is my good God that calleth me (to whom we muſt be obedient) and I muſt now retire my ſelfe out of this earthly and filthie dungeon, and from this miſerable and wretched priſon. I haue followed nature long enough, I haue liued long enough, I haue finiſhed the courſe, and

I haue run the race, which it pleaſed God to appoint for me. But yet before my ſoule depart from my bodie, and before I doe leaue you, one thing there is of which I hold it expedient now to admoniſh and aduertiſe you, as I haue alwayes vſed in caſes of importance, when I was able in former times, and in the better yeares of my age. And that is, That as heretofore during my life time, euen till now, you haue endured all trauels and labours euen to the laſt gaſpe, for the ſafetie and dignitie of the Chriſtian religion and the Catholique faith, by meanes whereof you haue made all the Princes of Chriſtendome to fauour, honour, and admire you: euen ſo hereafter when I am dead and gone, let that be the onely and the whole deſire of your hearts, let that be the onely thing that you ſhall ſet before your eyes. All things (I can aſſure you) will fall out eaſie and happily vnto you, as long as you continue ſtedfaſt in concord and vnitie (by which ſmall things and contemptible do grow great and inuincible) and as long as you entertaine mutuall loue and fidelitie: and that you doe make litle account of all other things in compariſon of the common profit and general good of all of you. For there is no Empire ſo puiſſant & ſo well grounded, which falleth not to preſent ruineSentence. and declineth not to deſtruction, where mutual enmities & diſſentions are ſuffered to haue an entrie, and where priuate profit and particular commoditie is preferred before the publique and common good. But if you ſhall ioyne together as brethren and friendes, and ſhall liue one with another in perfect loue and amitie: no attempts nor practiſes of your enemies whatſoeuer ſhall be able to grieue or hurt you. Your Scepters and your crownes ſhall be durable and permanent, and you ſhall maintaine your peoples, your Prouinces, your wiues, your children, and your riches in quietneſſe, and in perpetuall felicitie. You ſhall not neede to feare the furie of the Ottoman, nor the rage of the Barbarians: their fraudes, ſubtilties, traines, and cunning ſleights, ſhall not be able to harme you nor to preuaile againſt you. Doubt you not but the tirant doth ſeeke to diſioyne you, and to diſunite your forces, he doth lay many plots and deuiſes, he is verie watchfull and vigilant, he doth ſpare no paines nor labour to deuide and ſeperate you: which if he can once bring to paſſe, and doe ſee you neuer ſo litle at variance, he will oppreſſe you one after another, and in the end he will vtterly deſtroy and conſume all of you. Moreouer (my good friendes and confederates) there is Iohn my ſonne, whom with all poſſible care, affection and diligence (as hartely as a father can doe) I do recommend vnto you. I doe commit, I do giue and dedicate him to your faith and fidelitie, and to your ſingular vertue. His tender yeares and the infirmitie of his age which is yet (as it were) ſtuttering and ſtammering, do make him vnfit either to foreſee or to repulſe the imminent calamitie: he is not able to preſerue himſelfe from being torne-in pieces and deuoured by thoſe fierce & enraged Tigers: to keepe himſelfe from being oppreſſed by that periured & common enemy Mahomet, who is of him and his kingdome ſo greedie and deſirous, that he ceaſeth not to watch continually, how he may ſwallow vp both in his bloudy & cruell throt. And (alas) he will worke it, he will effect it, he will oppreſſe him poore wretch: if your armes, if your valour do not protect and preſerue him. For aſſoone as he ſhall perceiue that I am dead, the cruell tirant will not make any ſtay at all, but he will come flying as a ſauage and wilde beaſt, to the intent he may reuenge ſo many loſſes, ſo many outrages and calamities which he hath ſuffred and endured by the father, vpon the poore and vnhappie infant: and to the intent he may execute vpon him (ſilly wretch) all kindes of cruelties, and whatſoeuer his barbarous and felonous heart can put in practiſe. Let me therefore (my louing friends and good companions) entreate you, to embrace his eſtate and his affaires with like loue, fidelitie and promptnes of affection, as I haue embraced your commoditie and your glorie, all the dayes of my

life, if you liſt to acknowledge the truth of that which I now ſpeake. For you know I haue not liued to my ſelfe alone, but for all you and your children: I haue ſo laboured & toyled my ſelfe, that day nor night I haue not ſpared any paines or trauels for your ſakes. In the whole courſe of my life, I haue not enioyed any time or ſpace of reſt or leaſure, I neuer had any place certaine, I neuer kept any houres nor time limitted to eate and drinke, or to ſleepe in: the nights and the dayes haue bene to me all one and alike: I tooke no leſſe care for the proſperitie of your eſtates then of mine owne: and God is my witneſſe, (for now that I am fallen into ſpeech of that matter, I will freely diſcouer my thoughts vnto you) I neuer dreamed nor meant any fraud or deceipt againſt you, but I did alwaies repute you, not as ſouldiers, as ſeruants, or as ſubiectes, but I haue euer helde and loued you as my brethren and companions. Not any one of you (as farre as I remember) was euer wronged or outraged by me in word or in deed. In all cares and ſeruices of the field, in all duties either of ſcouts, watches, or ſentinels, I was neuer inferior to any of you: but I haue ſtill borne my ſelfe as one of the moſt ſimple and meaneſt of my ſouldiers: hauing alwaies had a deſire to be followed and imitated in my deedes and actions, and not in my wordes or ſpeeches: and that my ſouldiers ſhould learne by me, not onely good order and diſcipline, but the example and imitation thereof alſo. I neuer refuſed any labour, hazard or perill: I neuer made excuſes by any ſhewes of vnwillingnes or diſſimulation: whenſoeuer the onſet was to be giuen vpon the enemie (be it ſpoken without enuie) I was one of the foremoſt in going againſt them, and one of the laſt in returning from the combat. The ſpoiles and bootie gotten vpon our enemies, I alwaies ſhared and deuided amongſt you, and neuer reſerued any part or portion thereof to my ſelfe. In briefe, euen my realme, my goods, my fortune, and all that I had, I held in common with you. Nothing was proper or peculiar to my ſelfe, I held: nothing deuided or in ſeuerall. And now (my companions, my friendes) behold I die, I leaue you, and I muſt goe hence. Wherefore I pray and requeſt all of you, I require and adiure you: that the faith, affection, and loue which was neuer wanting on my part towards you: the ſame you would beſtow and employ towards Iohn my ſonne, whom as the liuely image and reſemblance of the father, I offer and dedicate vnto you, as Vicar and Lieutenant for me and in my ſtead.
            
            Hauing ended this ſpeech, he cauſed likewiſe the young Prince his ſonne to be ſent for: to whom being come, he vſed ſome ſpeeches in the preſence of the Queene his mother, exhorting him ſweetly and louingly in this manner.
            
               My ſonne: Iohn my ſonne: thou ſeeſt that I now die, and that I leaue thee but aSpeeches and laſt wordes of Scanderbeg to his ſonne before his death. child, an infant, young and tender: behold I leaue thee a Realme and Kingdome, if thou be good and vertuous, ſtable and firme: if thou be otherwiſe, moſt weake and feeble. Studie therefore (my ſonne) and ſtriue to preferre goodnes and vertue, before all other goods whatſoeuer. For thereby thou ſhalt both maintaine & make thy eſtate not onely peaceable and quiet, but thou ſhalt encreaſe it daily, and make it more glorious: but for as much (my ſonne) as thy age is yet weake, vnapt, and vnable to ſway the Scepter and Crowne of this thy kingdome, for that thou haſt on all partes great and mightie enemies, moſt fierce and ſauage beaſtes, which will ſeeke to diſmember and to deuour thee. There is Mahomet that wicked tyraunt and common enemy of Chriſtians, who (if thou ſhouldeſt ſo young and weake of yeares take vpon thee the managing and gouernment of thy Realme) would preſently oppreſſe, and vtterly ſubuert thee: for this cauſe (ſweete heart) aſſoone as thou haſt cloſed and couered thy fathers eyes, and haſt yeelded this mybodie to the ſepulture, get thee preſently from hence, and taking thy mother with thee: paſſe the ſeas into Apulia, and make no

delay, but haſten to thy owne townes and Lordſhips, and ſee that thou continue and abide there, till ſuch time as thou be growen to mans eſtate, and that thou be capable and ſufficient for the affaires and gouernement of thy kingdome. When thou art come to be of yeares, make thy repaire to the noble Senate and Seigniorie of Venice, who will reeſtabliſh thee in the ſeate and throne of thy aunceſtors. For that now I leaue and commit thee to their gouernment, fidelitie, and tutorſhip to the intent they may vndertake the garde and cuſtodie of thy kingdome, and may defend it from the enemie, and may keepe it to thy vſe and benefite. For ſo are the conuentions and articles of agreement betwene the Venetians and me, that they ſhall preſerue thy eſtate from thy enemies, and reſerue it for thee: and that when thou ſhalt be able to vndertake the charge thereof, they ſhall reinueſt thee in the poſſeſſion of the ſame. I haue no doubt of their diligence in thy affaires conſidering that they only amongſt all the Princes of Chriſtendome (be it ſpoken without offence) are not inferiour to any in grauitie, prudence, and worthy exploits: beſides that for the excellencie of their faith and bountie they do merit and deſerue to be beloned and reuerenced aboue all others. Of the which I haue had good triall and experience more then any others, during the whole time of my raigne and life, in all ſorts of actions, and by the proofe of many matters: and they haue beene continually leagued and confederated with me in ſtrict friendſhip and amitie, and I haue alwaies found them in ſtead of kind and louing parents vnto me. Them therefore (my ſonne) doe I leaue to be as Parents, as Princes, as Tutors vnto thee: depart not from their inſtructions, precepts, and counſels. The Venetians only are the moſt iuſt, the moſt religious, the moſt conſtant tutors and defenders of the Chriſtians faith, the protectors of Orphans and widdowes, and of all weake, miſerable, and afflicted perſons: and therewithall, they haue ſhewed themſelues ſo good and aſſured friendes vnto me, that all my life long I haue had their Seigniorie in no leſſe regard and recommendation then mine owne kingdome and Dominions. And they againe haue had ſuch confidence in me, and haue ſo affected me, that they haue put the whole right and full diſpoſition of their townes and territories into my hands, and haue referred the gouernment of them to my diſcretion: and (I praiſe God) I haue maintained them in good and happie eſtate, and haue kept them to their good liking and contentment, as long as I had the charge and commaund of them. Wherefore (my good ſonne) thou maieſt liue ſafe and ſecure vnder the ſhadow and ſupport of their puiſſance, and when thou ſhalt be of age, fayle not to reſort vnto them, with a good courage and confidence. For they will gladly and willingly repoſſeſſe thee of thy crowne and dignitie, they will friendly and louingly reſtore thy Realme and ſtrong holdes vnto thee, and if thou be ſage, wiſe, and vertuous, they will continually maintaine and defende thee againſt all the violence, armes, and forces of any enemies: they will keepe thy eſtate whole & entire for thee, as moſt puiſſant, moſt ſage, and moſt inuincible Princes both by ſea and lande, and ſuch as neuer abandoned their faithfull friends and allies, nor neuer abuſed or deceiued any perſon that put their truſt and affiance in them. And whenſoeuer (my ſonne the ioy of my heart) thou ſhalt returne and be ſeated in thy roiall throne, and that it ſhall pleaſe God to giue thee the quiet and peaceable poſſeſſion thereof, and that thou ſhalt haue taken vpon thee the gouernement and managing of thy eſtate: principally and aboue all things ſee that thou doe adminiſter and yeeld iuſtice to all men indifferently,Precepts of Scanderbeg to his ſonne for the inſtitution of a Prince. for of all vertues ſhe is the moſt noble and moſt excellent: keepe and obſerue equity without any acceptance or difference of the faces of poore or rich, of the weake or mightie: vſe temperance and moderation in all thy actions, ſtrengthen thy realme with friendſhip and amitie of good men: for neither are great treaſures, nor ſtrong

armies, the garriſon or fortreſſe of eſtates and Empires: but true and faithfull friends, which are not to be gotten with ſiluer and golde, but are purchaſed with good offices of courteſie, kindneſſe, and fidelitie. And therefore that diuine ſpeech of king Philip
                  Saying of Philip of Macedon to his ſonne Alexander. reprehending the great Alexander his ſonne, is yet extant in record: what motion (quoth he) hath induced thee my ſonne, to this vaine hope, to thinke or ſurmiſe that they will continue faithfull and truſtie vnto thee, whom thou haſt purchaſed for money to be thy friends? It is loue, that muſt yeeld true and vnfeigned friendſhip. For as this earth on which we liue, doth deſire aboue all things the preſence and comfort of the ſunne, which we ſee in the heauens: ſo the life of man cannot be without friendſhippe and amitie. Thou therefore my ſonne ſhalt ſoone get and purchaſe all theſe things, if thou beleeue and follow my counſell: thou ſhalt draw vnto thee, thou ſhalt binde vnto thee all the world by thy benefits, if thou obſerue my precepts and commaundements.Commendation of humanitie, courteſie, and beneficence. For courteſie, beneficence, and bountie, are the only vertues, acceptable to God, pleaſing to men, ſure and ſecure in all places, exempted from all perils, and they doe engender and ſtirre vp in the ſpirits and minds of men a wonderfull and admirable loue and liking of them, eaſily ſurmounting & exceeding all other vertues, and excelling farre beyond them: they onely (by the teſtimonie and conſent of the ſage and wiſe) are the moſt neceſſarie vertues for all kinds, eſtates, and degrees of men: but eſpecially for Princes and great perſonages: for they be the vertues which haue the commaund and poſſeſſion of the affections and humors of euery man, and they onely haue the diſpoſing of the hearts of all men. Moreouer my ſonne, in aduerſitie, and in things that are high and difficult, I would aduertiſe thee to be magnanimous and valiant: in proſperitie remember that thou moderate and temper thy good fortune with vertue. Flie ſloth and idleneſſe, the nurſe of effeminacie: for from thence proceede all miſchiefes, and it is the roote of all vices. Suffer not thy ſouldiers to lie idle, or to be ſlouthfull, but exerciſe them in continuall trauell, watchings, and daily labours. Howbeit vſe them not as vaſſals and ſeruants, but as thy fellowes and companions. In the campe and in the field demeane thy ſelfe not onely as a Captaine, but as a ſouldier alſo: aboue all things abhorre delicacie, and flie luxuriouſneſſe and incontinencie: for by theſe, the moſt ſtout and ſtrongeſt men haue growen faint and effeminate. Too much ſeueritie and crueltie auoide equally and alike, for they are proper to fierce and ſauage beaſts: be patient of labour without wearineſſe: and let not any perils make thee learefull or timorous: the varietie and change of thy affaires, doe thou moderate with prudence and magnanimitie, the croſſe accidents of contrarie fortune ſee that thou endure and beare them with that wiſedome and diſcretion, that (diſſembling and concealing thy griefe) thy enemie haue no cauſe to glorie or triumph ouer thee, nor to inſult at thy calamitie. For what can be more vnfitting and vnbeſeeming the conſtancie of a braue Chieftaine, and Generall of an armie, then that his countenance ſhould diſcouer the paſſion of his heart? Be not forgetfull but beare it alwaies in mind, that thou foreſee and eſchew the traines and ſnares of the Barbarians, whereof the Turkes make an ordinarie and principall profeſſion: ſhunne the periurie, the cautels, and guilefull ſleights of this faithleſſe Nation; diſdaine their amitie, and let the friendſhippe and ſocietie of this diſloyall tyrant be abhominable vnto thee: neglect and contemne his giftes and preſents, his flatteries, and his promiſes, for feare leaſt in drawing and alluring thee to truſt him, he doe oppreſſe thee vnawares, and caſt thee downe headlong into perpetuall and endleſſe miſchieues. And for this cauſe be thou ſure to be alwaies prouided of good Councellors, ſuch as are well knowen vnto thee: faithfull, and louing. Theſe are the precepts (my ſonne, the light of my life,) theſe are the enſignments and inſtructions, which I heard and learned of my father, a

maſter of no ſmall experience, and my delight was to meditate vpon them continually: by them was I inſtructed and taught, by them did I faſhion and frame my life; and my whole age: and to be ſhort by them haue I reaped no ſmall fruite and benefite, wherefore I doe now exhort thee, I doe admoniſh, and (if thou canſt endure to be entreated by thy father) then I thy father do pray and requeſt thee, yea euen from the very bowels and entrailes of my heart, I doe againe and againe pray and double pray thee, that thou wouldeſt teach thy ſelfe theſe things which I haue taught thee, that thou wouldeſt carefully and diligently embrace, retaine, and digeſt them in thy memorie.
            
            Whileſt Scanderbeg was thus ſpeaking and perſwading with his ſonne, thereInuaſion by the Turkes vpon the Venetian territories. ſprang vp a ſtrange rumor throughout all the towne, and a ſudden brute and tumult aroſe, by reaſon of a meſſage brought from the fieldes, that the Turkes were neere at hand, and that they had ouerrunne and burned the countrie neere adioyning. At the report of theſe newes, Scanderbeg although he kept his bed in great extreamitie, yet could he not repreſſe nor refraine that auncient and inuincible courage, nor that liuely and martiall ſpirit which was wont to dwell and be reſident in his noble hart. ForCourage of Scanderbeg in uincible euen at point of death. raiſing himſelfe vp in his bed, aſwell as his fainting and feeble limmes would giue him leaue, he called for his armour and commanded his horſe to be made readie. So liuely and flouriſhing was his ſpirit ſtill remayning ſound and diſpoſed within his ſtomach abounding in courage and vigour. But when his members being now deſtitute of ſtrength and growing weake, did beginne to yeeld and ſinke downe againe into the bed: then falling and bearing himſelfe forward vpon his couch with his face turned towards his Captaines, he thus ſpake vnto them.
            Foorth foorth (my companions) iſſue out vpon thoſe traitors, and Infidels: goe
                  Speech of Scanderbeg to his Captaines vpon an alarme giuen by the enemie. you before, I will follow after you immediatly.
            
            Herewithall a troupe of horſe making out of the towne, went to ſeeke out the enemie not ceaſing till they had found them, who hauing newly ſacked the territorie of the Scutarians were encamped vpon the brooke Clyre neere to the citie of Scutarie. For Ahamat (the Generall of thoſe troupes) was come thither with fifteene thouſandAhamat with 15000. Turks flie vpon the conceipt of Scanderbeg his preſence. horſe purpoſely to waſt and ſpoyle the country about Scutarie. Now aſſoone as the Barbarians did diſcouer the Chriſtians comming towardes them, imagining that it was Scanderbeg, they tooke ſuddenly the alarme, and being in great feare and tumult, they left the better part of their bootie and fled away in the night time ouer the mountaines, which by reaſon of their roughneſſe were in a manner vnpaſſable. For it was in Ianuarie at which time the Snow and the Iſe did couer all places with their whiteneſſe. Theſe Infidels thus retyring themſelues by the toppes and craggie paſſages of the mountaines, and holding no certaine way nor path, did finde themſelues ſo hardly preſſed and rudely entreated by the Lords and inhabitants of thoſe quarters, that they compelled them to yeeld a good account of their iourney, and of the hauocke and ſpoyle which they had made vpon the countrie. For many of them being taken priſoners, and a great number ſlaine, they loſt almoſt all their prey and bootie.
            The ſame night that the Turkes did flie away ſo haſtily from the Chriſtians no man following nor purſuing them: Scanderbeg after the confeſſion of his ſinnes with great penitencie, hauing receiued the Sacraments with good deuotion, according to the rites of the holy Church, and recommending himſelfe and his ſoule without ceaſingThe death of Scanderbeg. to God his creator, he gaue vp the ghoaſt, and exchanged this life, for the happie ioyes of that which is eternall. The time of his departure wherein he left this world, was the 17. of Ianuarie in the yeare of grace 1460. and (as the report goeth) in

the three ſcore and third yere of his age, and of his raign the foure and twentieth. The beginning of his raigne and the time wherein he recouered the crowne of Epyre was the eight and twentieth of Nouember in the yeare of our Lord, 1443.
            
               Lech Ducagin (of whom we haue often made mention) perceiuing by the exclamations and lamentable voices euery where giuen out that he was dead: he made haſt to the place, and in the open view and hearing of all men with a ſad and ſorrowfull countenance, and a voice full of confuſion, pulling himſelfe by the beard, and the haires of his head, he brake out into theſe ſpeeches.
            
               Haſten you, haſten you hither (quoth he) you Princes and Lords of Albany, thisSpeech of Lech Ducagin bewayling the death of Scanderbeg. day are the gates and rampiers of Epyre and Macedonie broken open: this day are our fortreſſes and walles fallen to the ground: this is the day wherein our ſtrength and forces beginne to faile vs: this is the day wherein our Crownes and Scepters are ouerthrowen: and from henceforth all our helpe, all our hope with his good Prince is quite gone and extinquiſhed.
            
            His bodie was interred at Liſſa in the Cathedrall Church of S. Nicholas. His funerals according to the cuſtome of his aunceſtors were celebrated with great pompe,Scanderbeg buried at Liſſa. and with the incomparable ſorrow and mourning both of his Captaines and ſouldiers, as alſo of all the Princes and Lords his confederates. It is a thing incredible to report the exceeding teares and lamentations made both by the Prouince of Albany and the countries neere adioyning, and in diuerſe other places of Chriſtendome. His bodie being there entombed, did reſt in peace, till the cōming of Mahomet into Epyre to the ſiege of Scutarie which was about foure yeares after. At which time the Turkes hauing gotten the towne of Liſſa, did with a vehement and earneſt deſire ſearch out the bodie of SCanderbeg: and hauing found it, they drew it foorth of the ſupulture,The bodie of Scanderbeg taken out of his ſepulture and highly honored and admired by the Turkes. and (it may be ſome diuine diſpenſation working that motion in them) they tooke a ſingular pleaſure and contentment to ſee it, to reuerence it, and in a manner to adore it being now dead and diſſolued, which being a liue they ſo greatly redoubted and ſtood in feare of, that the onely brute and ſound of his name did make them to flie away confounded and aſtoniſhed. They ranne thither from all partes, flocking together in troupes and companies with ſo greedie and vehement a deſire and longing to ſee his bones, that happie was he which might come to touch them, or but to haue a ſight of them onely: but much more glad and ioyfull was he that could get or cary away any peece of his bodie were it neuer ſo litle: and thoſe that had any part thereof, cauſed the ſame moſt religiouſly to be ſet and curiouſly enchaſed, ſome in ſiluer, ſome in golde, bearing it about them vpon ſome part of their bodies as a thing moſt holy, diuine and fatall: and they did with ſingular reuerence and deuotion obſerue and keepe it very carefully: being fully perſwaded, that all ſuch as did beare thoſe reliques about them, ſhould enioy the like fortune, felicitie and priuiledge during their liues which Scanderbeg (by the gift and grace of God) onely and alone within the memorie of man, had vſed and enioyed all his life time.
            It may be, that the Turkes were induced to be of this minde, and were drawen toCertaine priuate acts and exploits done by Scanderbeg moſt rare and memorable. this perſwaſion, by reaſon of many ſtrange and wonderfull reportes, that went of the rare ſtrength and corporall force and vigour of this worthie perſonage, amongſt many notable examples, making ſhew thereof one was, vppon a ſauage and wilde Bull whoſe extreame fierceneſſe, and huge greatneſſe made him fearefull to all the inhabitants dwelling in the lands and countrie of Mamiſa ſiſter to Scanderbeg, where this furious beaſt did a thouſand outrages and dammages and committed many moſtScanderbeg killeth a wilde Bull in Epyre. pitifull and cruell murthers: inſomuch that Scanderbeg comming where he haunted and ſetting vpon him on horſebacke, with one onely blow of his Cimitarie, he cut

his necke cleane from his ſhoulders. The like exploit was that which he did vpon aScanderbeg killeth a wilde Bore in Apulia monſtrous Boare in Apulia, which had made many of the Courtiers of King Ferdinand to beare his markes: neuertheleſſe Scanderbeg being one day on hunting with the King, in the open and plaine field encountered with this beaſt, where aſſayling him in the ſame ſort as he had done the former, he ſoone parted the head from the bodie. This alſo is reported of Scanderbeg, that after the death of Ballaban, and the diſcamping of his armie from the ſiege of Croy: Ionima and Heder the brother and Nephew of Ballaban being brought before him ſtreight tyed and bound together, theIonima and Heder ſlaine by Scanderbeg & cut in twaine with one blow. ſight and preſence of thoſe two (putting him in remembrance of Ballaban, and the crueltie which by his meanes was executed vpon the perſons of Moſes and his companions) did cauſe him to enter into ſo great a vehemencie of wrath and choller againſt them: that not ſtaying for any other to lay hand vpon them, he deuided them in two pieces, and with one only blow parted both their bodies a ſunder in the midſt. This Cimitary was made at Damaſco in Siria, it was of a moſt perfect goodneſſe and excellent temper: and many times he would beare two of them in one ſcabbard both of the which ſometimes he ſhould breake in one onely battell. This weapon was generally reputed ſo rare and excellent, that Mahomet on a time hauing heard thereof,Mahomet demandeth Scanderbeg his ſword in gift. that it would cut helmets, head peeces, and powdrons cleane a ſunder: one day when they were in truce together he ſent vnto him, demaunding this ſworde to be giuen him; which being graunted, and proofe being made thereof in the preſence of the Sultan by many of the ſtrongeſt & ableſt men of his Court, and ſuch as were thought to haue the beſt arme: but perceiuing none of theſe wonders and miracles that had bene reported of it, he ſent it backe againe vnto Scanderbeg in great ſcorne and diſdaine,Speach or meſſage of Mahomet vnto Scanderbeg, returning his ſword againe vnto him. with this meſſage, That he would not be beholding vnto him for ſuch a thing as he could get for his money, and which ſhould be of much greater and better perfection: and that he did not giue any credite to any of thoſe reports that had bene giuen out touching the excellencie of that ſword. But Scanderbeg in the ſight and preſence of the meſſenger, hauing made ſtrange and admirable prooues with this ſame Cimitarie willed him to tell his Lord and Maſter what he had ſeene, and withall to 
                  Anſwere of Scanderbeg to the meſſage of Mahomet. let him know, That it was not the vertue & goodneſſe of the ſword which wrought ſuch rare and extraordinarie effectes: but that it was the ſtrength and force of his arme, which he reſerued againſt his enemies.
            
            But to make an ende of this worke, I could here adde many reportes of like qualitie, which are written of the force and wonderfull diſpoſition of the bodie of Scanderbeg, exceeding perhaps the common courſe and law of nature, and which would hardly be credited or beleeued: but I will let them paſſe and not ſpeake of them. Howbeit that we might with as good reaſon and aſwell enlarge our conſciences, and giue credite vnto them, as to thoſe which are reported of elder times, and which antiquitie hath commended vnto vs: the which neuertheleſſe euen at this day we doe celebrate and greatly ſet by; as the labours of Hercules, the aduentures of Iaſon, of Perſeus, of Caſtor, of Pollux, of Bellerophon, of Hector, of Achilles, with infinite other moſt famous and heroicall perſonages, whoſe glorie is not bounded nor confined within any ſtraighter limits, then the large and ſpacious circuit and compaſſe of the wide worlde: and yet notwithſtanding we haue no other proofe of their exploites, nor any certaintie of the actes aſcribed to thoſe auncient Princes, but onely the bare preſcription of the time and the tradition of our forefathers, which haue admitted them for true beyond time out of memorie. But the truth of theſe wonderfull matters reported of Scanderbeg doth carie greater ſhew of likelihood and probabilitie: for (to omit thoſe two thundering tempeſts of warre Hunyades and his ſonne Mathias Coruinus
               
King of Hungarie, who liued in the time of Scanderbeg, and of whom are reported as great and ſtrange matters) we may ſee in Scanderbeg a pure worke of the finger of God, and the euident aſſiſtance of his diuine hand and power, for the ſuccor and reliefe of his Church and choſen people: in that it pleaſed him to raiſe vpper his worthie and Chriſtian Prince, and to endow him with ſo many ſpeciall prerogatiues as another Dauid againſt theſe two Goliaths, Amurath and Mahomet, the moſt cruell and bloudie perſecutors of the houſe and Church of God that euer liued. So did God in times paſt prouide the Iſraelites of a Ioſua againſt the Hethites and Cana
                     •
                  nites, and of a Gedeon againſt the Medianites and Amalechites: and of a Samſon againſt the Philiſtines, and of a Martell, a Pypin, a Charlemaine againſt the Sarracens. So will God ſtill doe the like, and he will prouide our France of another Pucell, he will neuer faile to raiſe vp ſome one or other for the defence and deliuerie of his people from their enemies: if that we with true contrition and heartie repentance for our ſinnes and enormities, with a loathing and deteſtation of our abhominable Sects and Schiſmes, of our partialities and deuiſions, of our ambition and mortall hatreds and mutuall enmities, will beate downe that partition wall which hath ſeparated and diſioyned vs from his grace: and if we will humble our ſelues vnder his hand, and if in faith, zeale, and hope we will implore his gratious fauour, to protect and aſſiſt vs.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE PRINCIPALL AND moſt memorable matters contayned in this Hiſtorie.
            
               A
               
                  ARmath a Turke vvith Barach promiſeth Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg. 292. he is ſlaine by Scanderbeg. 300
               Actes and exploites done by Scanderbeg priuately moſt rare and memorable. 496
               Adrian Emperour of Rome his Coloſſus or ſtatue, and his Amphi-theater at Duras in Epire. 488
               Ahamat and the Turkes flie vpon the conceipt of Scanderbeg his preſence. 495
               Ahemaz a Turke. 338. his combat vvith Zacharie Groppe. 339. he is ſlame by Groppe. 340
               Aidin brother of Gnee Muſache. 58
               Airadin agent for Amurath with Scanderbeg. 81
               Albanians their originall. 44
               Albericke de Barbian Generall of the Pope his forces, ouerthroweth Lewes the firſt Duke of Aniow in battell. 393
               Alcanzi Turkiſh aduenturers and vauntcurrors vvithout pay. 138. 207
               Alchria, once named Pharſalia in Macedome. 36
               Alexander the 5. made Pope. 399
               Alexander Sforce aideth Ferdinand King of Naples against the Duke of Aniow. 405
               Alphonſus King of Naples, ſendeth ſuccours to Scanderbeg. 280. his bountifull preſentes to Scanderbeg. 249. his death. 381. his praiſes & commendations. 382. he is adopted by Queene Ione of Naples, & receiued into that city. 400 he beſiegeth the Queene in Naples, vvho diſinheriteth him. 401. he returneth into Spaine and looſeth the kingdome of Naples. ibid. he is taken priſoner by the Duke of Milan. 402. he is deliuered. 403. he beſiegth and recouereth Naples. ibid. he dieth. ibidem.
               Alybeg and Aiasbeg ſent vvith an armie to defend the Turkiſh frontiers. 489
               Ambaſſade of Scanderbeg to the Deſpot of Miſia praying paſſage for his armie againſt the Turkes. 73. to Alphonſus King of Naples. 378. 309. 344. to diuerſe Chriſtian Princes. 377. to Ferdinand King of Naples. 382. to Mahomet for the redemption of Moſes and other his Nobles. 455.
               Ambaſſade from Amurath to the Sfetigradians. 150. to Vranocontes to corrupt him to betray Croy. 231. to Scanderdeg to conclude a peace vvith him. 236
               Ambaſſade from Mahomet to Scanderbeg with offers of peace. 259. 431. from the Venetians to Scanderbeg. 127. 435. 437. from the Princes of Epire to Scanderbeg, offering him their aide againſt Amurath 154. from Alphonſus to Scanderbeg. 280. 281. 311. from diuerſe Princes to comfort Scanderbeg for his misfortune at Belgrade. 311. from Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia to Mahomet. 386. from the Pope and Ferdinand and the Duke of Milan to Scanderbeg. 406
               Ambition of Debreas. 267. of the Turkiſh Chieftaines. ibid. of the Greekes. 324
               Ambuſcado by Scanderbeg againſt Haly Baſſa. 56. againſt the Turkes beſieging Sfetigrade. 143. againſt the Turkes vvithin Sfetigrade. 196. againſt the Turkes his victuallers at the ſiege of Croy. 226. againſt Iſaac Baſſa. 363. 365. againſt Carazabeg. 430. againſt Seremet. 449
               Ambuſcado by Ballaban againſt the Epirots at Valcala. 453. againſt Scanderbeg to entrappe him. 462
               Ameſa ſonne of Repoſius Nephew to Scanderbeg reuolteth with him from Amurath. 18. he is baptiſed 35. he is made ioint gouernour of Baleze vvith Marin Span. 107. he attempteth the ſurpriſing of Driuaſta. 108. he ſpoileth their territories. 112. he is reproued by Scanderbeg. 114. he rebelleth againſt Scanderbeg. 349. he goeth to Mahomet and carieth his vvife & children vvith him. 350. he is created a Saniacke, and ſent to accompanie Iſaac Baſſa vvith an army againſt Scanderbeg. 354. he is proclaimed King of Epire by Iſaac Baſſa and the Turkiſh armie. 361. he is taken priſoner by the Epirots. 371. he is brought to Scanderbeg. 372. he is ſent to Naples to be kept in priſon. 377. he is brought backe againe into Epire, and is reconciled to his Vncle. 382. he faineth flight to Conſtantinople for the deliuering of his vvife and children: and is there priſoned by Mahomet. 384
               Ameſa a Turke ſent vvith an armie by Mahomet againſt Scanderbeg. 264. he is ſurpriſed and ouerthrowen. ibid. he is taken priſoner by Ameſa the Nephew of Scanderbeg. 265. he is ranſommed. 267. he commendeth Scanderbeg to the Turkes. 267
               Amurath the ſecond King of Turkes vſurpeth the kingdome of Epire. 12. he practiſeth the

death of Scanderbeg. 15. he marcheth againſt Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie. 73. he profeſſeth a religious life. 87. he commeth in perſon to the ſiege of Sfetigrade. 147. he endeuoreth to corrupt the Sfetigradians. 179. he departeth out of Epire to Andrinople 189. he returneth into Epire to the ſiege of Croy. 209. he ſickneth vpon griefe and melancholie. 240. he dieth. 245. his manifold exploits and famous acts. ibidem. he is buried at Burſa. 246. his age at the time of his death. ibidem. his death is deplored and lamented by his ſubiects. 251
               Amurath Baſſa a Greeke, deſcended of the Emperors of Conſtantinople ſlaine in the battell of Euphrates by Vſuncaſſan King of Perſia. 387.
               Andrew Angell Generall of the Driuaſtines againſt Ameſa. 110
               Andrew Angell brother to Paul Angell. 449
               Andrew Thopie, father of Comine & Muſache Thopie. 45
               Andrewe Humoi. 102. priſoner to Scanderbeg. 107
               Andrew ſecond ſonne of Carolobert king of Hungarie maried to Ione the first Queene of Naples. 389. he is murthered. ibid.
               Andrinople the chiefe ſeate of the great Turke in the daies of Amurath. 7
               Anell a maſon betraieth Naples to Alphonſus. 403
               Angelina daughter of Iohn Caſtriot and Voiſaua: ſiſter to Scanderbeg 3. mother to Muſache de Angeline. 271
               Antibara a towne in Epire. 113
               Antonie de Bouchardes. 318
               Antonie de Dieds. 319
               Antonie Caraffa, ambaſſadour for Queene Ione of Naples to the Pope. 400
               Ariamnites Theopie, tributarie to Amurath reuolteth to Scanderbeg. 45. his praiſe and vertues. ibid. and 257. his diſcent. 271
               Armes of Scanderbeg his family. 42
               Armie leauied by the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes. 63
               Armie leauied by Scanderbeg for the aide of Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie againſt the Turkes. 70
               Armie leauied by Pope Pius the ſecond, and the Princes of Chriſtendome againſt the Turkes. 442. it is diſſolued and broken. 449
               Argilat a place in Epire. 466
               Aſſambeg ſent by Mahomet with an army againſt Scanderbeg, is ouerthrowen and hurt in battell: and is afterwardes in great extreamitie. 427. he yeeldeth himſelfe to Scanderbeg, and is freely deliuered. 428
               Auarice of Chriſtians. 73
               Auarice naturally in the Turkes. 92
               Auarice of the Greekes in Conſtantinople. 319
               Auarice and treacherie of a Chriſtian Cannonier. 321
               Auarice of the Greekes. 322
               Aueniades certaine towers in Conſtantinople. 319
               Auignion in France purchaſed to the ſee of Rome by Pope Clement. 370
               Aide vide Succours. 
               Anſweres of Scanderbeg to Amurath diſſembling with him vpon the death of his father. 13 to the ambaſſadors of the Princes of Epyre. 154. to his Nobles diſſwading him from the combat with Ferybaſſa. 174. to a Turke demaunding truce at Belgrade. 202. to the Sfetigradians offering conditions of ſurrender. 202. to Iſup his ambaſſade. 239. to the Ambaſſadours of Mahomet. 259. to his Chiefetaines perſwading him to graunt truce to the Belgradians. 287. to the ambaſſadors of Alphonſus. 311. to the ambaſſadors of other Princes. ibidem. to his ſouldiers being inquiſitiue of his proceedings againſt the Turkes. 357. to Meiſſeit Saniacke refuſing to haue truce with Mahomet. 376. to the meſſage of Hamur. 380. 381. to the ſpeech of Ameſa. 383. to Count Pycenin. 414. to Aſſambeg. 428. to the laſt letters of Mahomet. 444. to the two meſſengers of the Turkiſh armie. 485. to the meſſage of Mahomet. 497
               Anſwere of the Daynians to Scanderbeg. 106
               Anſwere of Paul Manaſſey to Caraguſa. 121
               Anſwere of the Sfetigradians to the enticements of Amurath. 179
               Anſwers of Ameſa to Marin Span. 109. 110. to Iſaac Baſſa queſtioning with him vpon the retrait of Scanderbeg. 360
               Anſwers of Amurath to the reaſons and aduiſe of his Councellors. 179. to the ſpeeches of his ſonne Mahomet. 186
               Anſweres of Peter Perlat to the Heralds of Amurath. 148. to the ambaſſador of Amurath. 150
               Anſweres of Vranocontes to Scanderbeg. 153. to the oration of Scanderbeg in the name of all the Epirots. 262
               Anſwere of Alphonſus king of Naples to the letters of Scanderbeg. 280
               Anſwere of the Turkes within Sfetigrade ſummoned by Scanderbeg. 195
               Anſwere of the citizens of Belgrade to their gouernour. 283. 286.
               Anſwere of Mahomet to his Captaines perſwading him to holde on his ſiege before Conſtantinople. 326
               Anſwere of Fuſian to Scanderbeg. 422
               
                  Anſwere of the Epyrots to Gabriell Treuiſan ambaſſador from the Venetians. 436
               Anſwere or Oration of the Turkiſh ambaſſadour to Vranocontes. 232
            
            
               B
               Baiazeth the firſt King of Turkes taken priſoner by Tamberlaine the Scithian. 2
               Baiazeth the ſecond Emperour of Turkes deſtroieth the Darniſſes in Turkey for their villanies. 5. his act vpon the riuer of Danow in Hungarie. 291
               Baldus of Peruſa a famous Lawyer. 388
               Baleſia a towne in Epyre. 47. reedefied and fortified by Scanderbeg. 107. razed by the Scutarians. 118
               Ballaban Badera ſent againſt Scanderbeg: his birth and deſcription, he is made Aga or Colonell. 452. he is reproched by Scanderbeg. 453. he is ouerthrowen by Scanderbeg. 454. he is rewarded by Mahomet for the taking of Moſes and other Nobles of Epyre. 455. his ſecond iourney againſt Scanderbeg. 456. his third iourney againſt Scanderbeg. 457. he is in diſgrace with Mahomet. 459. his fourth iorney againſt Scanderbeg. 461. he beſiegeth Croy. 474. He is ſlaine. 482
               Balthazar Perduce Gouernor of Croy. 473
               Baltogle Admirall to Mahomet at the ſiege of Conſtantinople in diſgrace for the loſſe of the battell at ſea. 321
               Banke of Saint▪ George at Genes. 404
               Baptiſta Fellizan a Genoway. 320
               Barie or Barletta a citie in Apulia, beſieged by Count Pycenin and Iohn Duke of Aniow. 406
               Barach a Turk
                     ••
                   and Acmah his companion promiſe Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg. 291. 
                     •
                  e is ſlaine by Scanderbeg. 299
               Battatinea a Tower in Conſtantinople. 316
               Battels at ſea betweene the Turkes and Chriſtians at Conſtantinople. 320. betweene Philippe Duke of Milan and Alphonſus king of Arragon. 402
               Battell of Moraua betweene Huniades and the Turkes. 17
               Battell of Belgrade in Hungarie betweene Huniades and Mahomet. 354
               Battell of Varna betweene Vladiſlaus King of Hungarie, and Amurath king of Turkes. 73
               Battell of Euphrates betweene the Perſians and the Turkes. 387
               Battell of Arſengua betweene Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia and Mahomet Emperor of Turkes. 387
               Battell of Roque Siech betwene Lewes the ſecond Duke of Aniow, and Ladiſlaus of Duras king of Naples. 396
               Battell of Farney betwene Iohn Duke of Aniow and Ferdinand king of Naples. 405
               Battell of S. Fabian betwene the armie of Ferdinand and the Duke of Aniow. 405
               Battels fought by Scanderbeg. 
               Battell againſt Haly baſſa. 58
               Battell of Mocrea against Feriſee. 88
               Battell againſt Muſtapha. 92
               Battell of Drinon againſt the Venetians. 102
               Battell of S. Segian againſt Count Pycenin. 418
               Battell of Oronichea againſt Muſtapha. 123
               Battell againſt Feribaſſa. 171
               Battell of Modriſſa againſt Ameſa a Turke. 264
               Battell of Pologue againſt Debreas. 270
               Battell of Belgrade in Bulgarie againſt Sebalias. 298
               Battell of Oronichea againſt Moſes. 341. 342
               Battell of Pharſalia againſt Iſaac Baſſa and Ameſa his Nephew. 369
               Battell againſt Synam. 427
               Battell of Alchria against Aſſambeg. 427
               Battell of Scopia againſt Iuſſumbeg. 428
               Battell of Alchria againſt Seremet. 449
               Battell of Valcala againſt Ballaban. 454
               Battell of Sfetigrade against Ballaban. 458
               Battell of Oronichea againſt Ballaban. 456
               Battell of Valcala the ſecond againſt Ballaban. 464
               Battell of Caſſar againſt Iagup. 468
               Beglerbey a chiefe officer vnder the great Turk, one of Europe, another of Aſia. 140
               Belgrade in Hungarie once called Alba Greca, or Taururum. 353. beſieged by Mahomet. 354
               Belgrade in Bulgarie beſieged by Scanderbeg. 283. battered. 285. relieued, repaired and victualed by Sebalias. 303
               Belgradians giue hoſtages to the Turkes in garriſon at Belgrade for aſſurance of their faith. 284. they demaund truce of Scanderbeg. 285. they repaire the breach of their walles contrarie to promiſe. 293. they ſacke the campe of Scanderbeg. 297
               Belliſarius taketh Naples. 403
               Biſhops of Varadia and Strigonium by their folly hinder the victorie of the Chriſtians in the battell of Varna. 73. they are drowned. 75
               Bodie of S. Lewes of France caried away from Marſeilles by Alphonſus. 401
               Bodie of Scanderbeg adored and reuerenced by the Turkes after his death. 496
               Boniface the ninth made Pope. 395
               Boniface or Port Siracuſan a caſtle in Corſica beſieged by Alphonſus king of Arragon. 399
               
                  Boſa the mother of Lech or Luke Zacharie putteth her ſelfe and her eſtate in the protection of the Venetians. 94
               Braccio Fort Bracci
                     •
                   of Peruſa vvarreth vpon Pope Martin the fifth, ouerthroweth Sforce in battell, and is retayned in pay with Queene Ione of Naples. 399
               Brethren of Scanderdeg poyſoned by Amurath. 13.
               Burſa or Pruſa in Bithinia the place of Amurath his ſepulchre. 246
               Buſegiarpeni a countrie in Epire neere Scutarie. 128.
            
            
               C
               Calegarie a place in Conſtantinople. 316
               Calepin brother to Mahomet or one in his ſteed ſtrangled. 253
               Calybaſſa a Turke Councellor to Mahomet, & friend to the Chriſtians. 316. he councelleth Mahomet to leaue the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 325. he aduertiſeth the Emperour of Conſtantinople of the councell of the Turkes. 326. he is betraied by Chirlucke, and put to death by Mahomet. 332
               Calixtus the fourth, ſee Pope. 
               Campobaſſo a Neapolitan countie, ioyneth with Iohn Duke of Aniow againſt Ferdinand. 405
               Campe of the Turkes before Croy victualed out of Macedonie. 226. and by the Venetians. 227
               Campupeſcupi a place in Epire vvhere Scanderbeg had rich ſaltpits. 
                     •
                  1
               Canuazado by Scanderbeg to the Turkiſh camp. 165. 221. 228. 241.
               Carambey and Scanderbeg ſent vvith an armie of Turkes againſt the Hungarians. 17
               Caraguſa a Turke ſlaine by Paul Manaſſey in combat. 122
               Carazebeg ſueth to be ſent againſt Scanderbeg. 429. he is ſent againſt him. 430. he challengeth Scanderbeg to a ſet battell, vvho ſetteth vpon him in his campe, and he retireth to Conſtantinople. 431
               Carolobert King of Hungarie ſonne of Charles Martell. 388
               Caſſar a village in Epire. 467
               Cathaguſina daughter of the Deſpot of Miſia maried to Amurath. 71
               Cauſe of the vvarre betwene Scanderbeg and the Venetians. 95
               Cauſe and ground of the treaſon cauſing the loſſe of Sfetigrade. 180
               Cauſes of the conqueſts of the Turkes vpon the Chriſtians. 248
               Cauſe of the Schiſme in the church of Rome betweene Pope Vrban and Pope Clement. 391
               Cauſes of the trecherie of the Deſpot of Seruia. 71.
               Ceremonie of the Turkes in their circumciſion. 5
               Charles Thopie first founder of Croy. 31
               Charles the ſecond king of Naples, Nephew to the French king S. Lewes, his marriage and iſſue. 388
               Charles Martell king of Hungarie. 388
               Charles the firſt Duke of Duras ouercome in battell by Lewes king of Hungarie, is beheaded. 389
               Charles the ſecond Duke of Duras, caried away into Hungarie by king Lewes. 389. in
                     •
                  eſted vvith the crowne of Naples by Pope Vrban. 392. he conquereth Naples, and is crowned king of Naples. 393. he is choſen and crowned king of Hungarie. 394. he is ſlaine at Buda. ibidem. his iſſue. ibidem.
               Chaonia a countrie in Epire. 475
               Chidna a place in Epire ſurpriſed by Mahomet, the manner of it. 475
               Chieri a place in Macedonie. 431
               Chios an Iſland in the mediterran ſea. 319
               Chirluc a Greeke of Canstantinople. 319. his infidelitie & notable treacherie. 332. his death and execution. 333
               Chiurill a towne in Epire begunne to be builded by Scanderbeg, and razed by Mahomet. 488
               Chriſoceras a Promontorie by Conſtantinople. 315
               Chriſtian Princes their careleſſeneſſe of the loſſe and daunger of Conſtantinople. 314
               Chriſtians their voiage againſt the Turkes broken. 449
               Chriſtians their delaies and ſecuritie. 291
               Chriſtians, ſubiects of the great Turke their miſerable eſtate. 217
               Chriſtians ſlaine at Belgrade, buried. 307
               Cimerians a people of Epire. 45
               Clement the ſeuenth made Antipope. 391
               Clemencie and rare humanitie of Scanderbeg. 348. and towards Aſſambeg. 428
               Colchina a citie of the Venetians in Dalmatia vpon the ſea or gulfe of Venice. 263
               Colla Humo
                     •
                  . 102
               Combat betweene Scanderbeg and a Scithian. 8. betwene him and two Perſians. 9. betweene Paul Manaſſey and Caraguſa. 120. betwene Scanderbeg and Feribaſſa. 174. of Acmath and Barach vvith Scanderbeg. 299. betwene Zacharie Groppe and Ahemaz. 339
               Compariſon of Scanderbeg and Huniades. 75
               Complaints of the Turkes of Macedonie to Amurath against Scanderbeg. 77. of the Deſpot of Seruia againſt Scanderbeg. 78. of A
                  
                     •
                  eſa to his ſouldiers. 119. by Amurath at his

death. 243
               Conditions of peace offered by the Venetians to Scanderbeg. 127. by Mahomet to Scanderbeg. 432. by Amurath to Scanderbeg. 81
               Conditions of compoſition offered by Amurath to the Sfetigradians. 148. by the Turkes within Sfetigrade to Scanderbeg. 202. by Amurath to Vranocontes and the Croians. 210
               Confederacie betweene Scanderbeg and the Princes of Epire againſt the Turkes. 51
               Confederacie and leauie of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes. 63
               Confederates of Ferdinand ſend to Scanderbeg for ſuccours in his behalfe. 406
               Confederates of Scanderbeg promiſe him aide for the reliefe of Croy. 477
               Conference betweene the Gouernour of Belgrade and the citizens vpon the ſuſpition conceiued of their faith. 283. betweene Hamur and Scanderbeg. 380
               Conflict betweene Ameſa and the Driuaſtines. 112. betweene the Turkes and the Epyrots. 146. betweene Scanderbeg and the French in Apulia. 413. betweene the forces of Carazabeg and Scanderbeg. 431
               Conqueſts gotten of late daies by the Turks vpon Chriſtendome. 248
               Conqueſts of Mahomet during his truce vvith Scanderbeg. 425
               Conſtancie of the Dainians. 127
               Conſtantin Paleologus Emperor of Conſtantinople. 314. he craueth aide of Chriſtian Princes againſt the Turkes. ibidem. his ouerſight. 329. he is ſmothered & troden to death by his ſubiects flying from the Turkes. 330. he is the last Emperour of Conſtantinople. 333
               Conſtantine the Great the ſonne of Helen, first Emperour of Conſtantinople. 332. ill aduiſed to tranſlate the Empire from Rome thither. 336
               Conſtantine a name fatall to Conſtantinople. 333
               Conſtantinopolitans their wretched couetouſnes. 319. 322. 325. their miſerable eſtate. 323. their deuotion. ibid.
               Conſtantinople beſieged by the Turkes. 323. the deſcription of it. 314. it is battered. 316. 322. ill furniſhed with prouiſions. 317. the manner of the defence thereof by the Chriſtians. 318. it is aſſaulted. 322▪ 327. it is loſt by the couetouſneſſe of the Greekes. 225. it is taken by the Turkes. 330. the ſacke thereof with all horrible crueltie. 331
               Conſpiracie by Mahomet againſt Scanderbeg. 291. 473.
               Conſpiracie againſt Scanderbeg ſtraungely detected▪ 474
               Conſultation by Amurath for the vvarre againſt Scanderbeg. 39. 130. 138. for his proceedings againſt Sfetigrade. 178. for his proceedings againſt Croy. 235
               Conſultations of Mahomet for his proceedings in the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 225. for the warre of Epire. 375. 472
               Conſultation of the Gouernour of Belgrade with the citizens. 286
               Conſultation of Iſaac Baſſa for his proceedings againſt Scanderbeg. 360. 367
               Conſultations of Scanderbeg for aide to be giuen to Vladiſlaus againſt the Turkes. 66. for his proceedings againſt Sfetigrade. 196. for the reſiſting of Iſaac Baſſa his inuaſion▪ 355. for his proceedings againſt Ballaban. 463. for the anſwering of the meſſage and demaund of the Turkes. 483
               Contaren a Venetian gentleman. 319. twice ranſommed by the Turkes. 333
               Continencie of Scanderbeg. 349
               Contumely offered by Scanderbeg to Ballaban. 453
               Corfu or Corcira an Iſle vpon the coaſt of Epire. 45. 478.
               Corſica an Iſland in the mediterrane ſea, aſſailed by Alphonſus king of Arragon. 399
               Courage of Scanderbeg inuincible euen at point of death. 495
               Courteſie and magnanimitie of Scanderbeg to the Venetian captiues. 107
               Councell of Mantua, called by Pope Pius the ſecond, for the taking of armes againſt the Turkes. 404
               Cowardice of Antonie de Dieds. 319. of Iohn Iuſtinian. 329. of the Greekes at Conſtantinople. 323.
               Couetouſneſſe ſee Auarice. 
               Craina or Cruina a mountaine ouer Croy. 243
               Croy the chiefe citie of Epire reſigned to Scanderbeg by the Gouernour. 20. the foundation thereof. 31. the ſtrong ſituation thereof. 136. 481. repayred and fortified. 206. beſieged by Amurath. 208. battered. 211. 222. aſſaulted. 216. 220. 224. 234. mined by the Turkes. 227. repaired and new fortified. 255. it was beſieged by Mahomet. 475. 488. by Ballaban. 474
               Croians their notable courage. 210. their reſolution. 212. their demeanor before and after the victories of Scanderbeg againſt Ballaban and lagup. 469
               Crueltie of Mahomet moſt extreame. 253. 232. 455. 476.
               Crueltie of the Turkes moſt Barbarous vpon the dead bodies of the Chriſtians. 301
            
            
               
               D
               Daina a citie in Epire. 46. beſieged by Scanderbeg. 95
               Dainians their conſtancie. 127
               Dalmatia or Sclauony vpon the ſea, a countrey bordering vpon Epire vnder the Venetians. 207.
               Damalique a Promontorie neere Conſtantinople. 315
               Daniel Iurich Vaiuoda or Gouernour of Scutarie for the Venetians, and Generall of their armie againſt Scanderbeg. 98
               Darniſſes a kind of Prieſts amongst the Turkes. 5.
               Daughter of the Deſpot of Seruia maried to Amurath. 71
               Daughter of Sponderbeg Prince of Penderacia maried to Amurath. 253
               Daughter of Ariamnit maried to Scanderbeg. 257
               Daughter of Iohn Commenes Emperour of Trebyzond maried to Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia. 386
               Dauid Emperour of Trebizond and his two ſons put to death by Mahomet. 426
               Dauid Chauncellour of Raguſa. 408
               Debreas ſent with an armie by Mahomet againſt Scanderbeg. 267. his ambition. ibidem. he is ſlaine by Scanderbeg. 273 his horſe and armor giuen to Moſes. ibid.
               Demetrius Beriſſey. 304
               Demetrius franke treaſurer to Scanderbeg. 480
               Deuotion without pietie or religion. 401
               Deſpina daughter of the Emperour of Trebizond and the wife of Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia. 386
               Deſcription of Scanderbeg his perſon. 72. of Dibria. 180. of the ſoyle and territorie about Croy. 208. of the Deſpot of Miſia. 71. of Driuaſta. 113. of Mahomet his perſon. 255. of the countrie about Petralba. 263. of the countrie about Pologue. 269. of Conſtantinople. 314. of the gulfe of Helleſpont. 315. of Ameſa his perſon and qualities. 351. of Raguſa. 407. of Vrſara in Apulia. 416. of Ballaban his perſon. 452. of the citie of Duraz. 487. of Croy. 481
               Despot of Miſia or Seruia reſtored to his eſtate, and expelled againe by Amurath. 16. he is ayded by Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie. 17. he hindereth Scanderbeg marching to the aide of Vladiſlaus and partaketh with the Turkes againſt the Chriſtians. 71. his irreligion. ibid. his countrie is ſpoiled by Scanderbeg. 76
               Dibria a towne and countrie in Epire receiueth Scanderbeg and reuolteth with him. 19
               Dibrians their diſcipline and readines in vvarres 57. their notable ſuperſtition. 181. they yeeld Sfetigrade to Amurath. 185. they are pardoned by Scanderbeg. 187
               Diſcorde betweene the Genowaies and Venetians at the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 321
               Diſcourſe of the Author vpon celeſtiall ſignes & prognoſtications of future accidents. 364
               Diſgrace offered to Pope Vrban to M. Nicholas of Naples. 391
               Diſcipline of the Dibrians. 57. by Scanderbeg obſerued in his campe. 349. the originall of it. 356
               Diſſimulation of Amurath with Scanderbeg. 13. of Moſes to Scanderbeg. 279. of Mahomet vvith the Chriſtians at Conſtantinople. 322. of Picenin to deceiue Scanderbeg. 413
               Dominicke of Nouara. 320
               Don Garzia a Spaniard ambaſſador for Alphonſus king of Arragon to the Pope. 400
               Doniqua the wife of Scanderbeg. 257
               Drynon a riuer in Epire. 46. the ſource and head thereof neere Alchria. 449
               Driuaſta a citie in Epyre. 47. the deſcription of it. 113
               Duras or Durachium or Epydamnum a citie of Epire ſubiect to the Venetians. 45. beſiegned by Mahomet. 487. her originall and foundation, and the deſcription of it. ibid.
               Dyrrachians the inhabitants of Duras, they aide Scanderbeg with victuals. 222
               Dukes of Seſſe, of Sora, of Venuſe in the kingdom of Naples rebell againſt Ferdinand 404. 405
               Duke of Milan and the Genowaies take Alphonſus priſoner. 402
               Duke of Milan and the Pope aide Ferdinand againſt the Duke of Aniow. 405
               Duke of Vrbin Fredericke aideth Ferdinand againſt the Duke of Aniow. ibid.
               Dutchie of Spoleta reſtored to the Church of Rome by Ferdinand. 404
               Dukes of Dande & of Malſie, partake with Ferdinand againſt Iohn Duke of Aniow. 405
               Duke of Emathia, ſee Vranocontes. 
            
            
               E
               Emanuell Gregare. 324
               Emperors of the Turkes their manner of ſucceeding to the crowne. 252
               Emperour of Greece, ſee Conſtantine. 
               Emperour of Trebizond conquered and put to death by Mahomet. 426
               Empire of Trebizond conquered by Mahomet. ibidem.
               Encouragement of Moſes to his ſouldiers in the

battell of Drynon, againſt the Venetians. 104
               Encoragemēt of Scāderbeg to Paul Manaſſey ammating him to the cōbat with Caraguza. 121
               Encouragement of Scanderbeg to the Croyans againſt the inuaſion threatned by Amurath. 136
               Encouragement of Fery-Baſſa to his ſouldiers in the battell againſt Scanderbeg. 172
               Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers for a new aſſault to Sfetigrade. 203
               Encoragemēt of Vranocontes to the Croyans their walles being battered by the Turkes. 212
               Encouragement of Amurath & Mahomet to the Turkes, being to aſſault Croy. 213
               Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his ſoldiers not to feare the tempeſt. 269
               Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers to giue the charge vpon Debreas. 273
               Encoragement of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiers againſt Sebalias. 298
               Encouragement of Ameſa to the Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. 369. 370
               Encouragement of Moſes to his ſouldiers at the battell of Pharſalia. ibidem
               Encouragement of Picenyn to his ſouldiers. 416
               Encouragement of Scanderbeg in the battell againſt Ballaban. 465
               Enmitie betweene Pope Vrban and maiſter Nicholas of Naples. 391. betweene Charles king of Naples & Pope Vrban. 394. between Sforce and the grand Seneſchall. 399
               Enuie of the Turkes againſt Scanderbeg. 14. 267
               Eugenius Pope aideth Rene Duke of Barre againſt Alphonſus. 402
               Exclamation of the authour vpon the miſerable eſtate of the Chriſtians vnder the Turkes. 218. 223. againſt the inuention of ordinance. 255. vppon the indignitie offered to Scanderbeg in his voyage into Italie. 477
               Exhortation of the author to all Chriſtians. 333
            
            
               F
               Falcon a towne in Epyre vnder the dominion of Stephen Cernouitche. 77
               Farrafin a tower in Conſtantinople. 319
               Ferdinand, baſtard ſon to Alphonſus king of Naples ſucceeded in that kingdome. 387. and is crowned. 404. he flieth to Bary or Barlette, and is beſieged by Count Picenyn. 406. he is reſcued by Scanderbeg. 410. he ouercometh Picenyn & the Duke of Aniow in battell. 419. he recouereth his kingdome. 421. he giueth certaine townes in Apulia to Scanderbeg. 423
               Feri-Baſſa ſent againſt Scanderbeg by Amurath. 86. he is ſent to renue the aſſault of Sfetigrade. 157. he is appointed vvith an armie to reſtraine Scanderbeg from hindering the aſſault of Sfetigrade. 168. his prayſes and commendations. ibid. he chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat. 172. and is by him ſ
                     〈…〉
                  . 174
               Flambur a Turkiſh regiment. 139
               Flectanella. 320
               Foreſt of Ionimes. 481
               Fortreſſe builded at Modriſſa by Scanderbeg. 259. finiſhed and furniſhed. 260
               Francis Sforce, ſonne of Sforce Cotignolle aideth Ione ſecond Queene of Naples, in the recouerie of her kingdome. 401. his liberalitie to the graund Seneſchall. ibid. he is Duke of Millan and deceiueth Count Picenyn. 42
               Frontier vvarre betweene the Turkes in Sfetigrade and the garriſon of the Albanois. 193
               Frier Iohn Capiſtran. 71
               Fuſian a Sicilian gouernour of Trana in Apulia for Ferdinand, vſurpeth it to himſelfe. 421. he is taken priſoner by Scanderbeg & yeeldeth vp Trana. 422. he is releaſed and departeth into Sicilia. 423
            
            
               G
               Gabriell Treuiſan, gouernour of the Ʋenetian foyſts. 319. he is ſent Ambaſſadour from the Venetians to perſuade Scanderbeg to open war vvith Mahomet. 435
               Gampſa Sultan of the Tartarians. 386
               Gentill Bellin a painter of Venice. 255
               George Alexie an Epirot killeth Ballaban. 482
               George Caſtriot the yongeſt ſon of Iohn Caſtriot. 3. deliuered in hoſtage to the great Turke. 4. by the Turkes circumciſed or named Scanderbeg. 5
               George Cernouitche, nephew to Scanderbeg. 47
               George Chuque taken priſoner by the Turkes & put to death by Mahomet. 455
               George Deſpot of Miſia. See Deſpot. 
               George and Goic Streezes, Nephewes to Scanderbeg by his ſiſter Iella, do come to his aide. 25
               George Thopie, brother to Tanuſee, his misfortune. 298
               Gilbert Ortafane, a Knight of Naples, ſent by Alphonſus to the aide of Scanderbeg. 280
               Goic Streeze ſent by Scanderbeg into Apulia. 407
               Goleme Ariamnite, the aunceſter of Moſes. 271
               Gouernour of Stelluſa, named Deſdrot, by the Turkes of his own garriſon deliuered priſoner to Scanderbeg. 30. is executed. 33
               Greekes their negligence in furniſhing, fortifying and defending of Conſtantinople. 324
               Grudge and hatred between Iuſtinian and Chirluc, and betweene the Greekes and the Latins. 324
               Gulfe of Ambracia in Epyre. 45
               Gulfe of Cape de Lach in Epyre. 424
               
                  Gulfe of Helleſpont deſcribed. 315
               Gulfe of Rizic or Catarra. 47. 407
               Guirize d'Vladienne. 408
               Gyne Muſache husband to Vraica, the ſiſter of Scanderbeg commeth to his aide. 25
               Gyne Muſache, Gyne Manaſſe, and Guirize d'Vladienne taken priſoners by the Turkes, & put to death by Mahomet. 455
            
            
               H
               Haly-Baſſa vvith an armie of 40000. Turkes ſent againſt Scanderbeg. 52. he is appointed gouernour of Mahomet the ſonne of Amurath. 87
               Hamur ſent vvith an armie to defend the Turkiſh frontiers. 377. conferring vvith Scanderbeg, he perſuadeth him to peace. 380
               Hebdomi a Promontorie neare Conſtātinople. 315
               Heder the ſonne of Ionime and nephew to Ballaban together vvith his father taken priſoners by Scanderbeg and ſlaine. 481
               Helena Queene of Miſia and Eſclauonie. 113
               Helena mother to Conſtantin the great. 333
               Helena mother to Conſtantin Paleologus. 333
               Hemas a mountaine by Varna neare to Thrace. 72
               Hexamile a vvall made by the Greekes at the entrie into Morea, throwen downe by Amurath. 246. reedified by the Venetians and ouerthrowen by Mahomet. 426
               Hippodrome a tower in Conſtantinople. 315
               Hystorie how it ſhould be vvritten. 254
               Horatius Cocles his ſtrange proweſſe. 215
               Hozes a kinde of Prieſts among the Turkes. 5
               Huniades, ſee Iohn. 
            
            
               I
               Iagub Arnauth ſent with an armie againſt Scanderbeg. 460. he is ſlaine by Scanderbeg. 468
               Iames Coque a Venetian, vvith others drowned. 321
               Iames of Narbone, Count of March marieth Ione the ſecōd Queene of Naples. 397. his folly and ouerſight. 398. he is taken priſoner and againe reſtored to libertie. 399. he forſaketh Naples, returneth into France, and becometh an hermite. ibidem
               Ianiſſaries footemen of the garde of the great Turkes perſon. 140. their cuſtome to ſacke the houſes both of Chriſtiās & Iewes at the death of their Prince. 251
               Iella daughter to Iohn Caſtriot and Ʋoiſaue, ſiſter to Scanderbeg. 3
               Ierom Mind. 319. beheaded. 333
               Impatiencie of Amurath, enraged for his ill ſucceſſe at the ſiege of Croy. 235
               Impietie of the Deſpot of Seruia. 71. of Mahomet. 253. of the Greekes. 322
               Incontinencie of ſouldiers. 249
               Induſtrie and carefulneſſe of Scanderbeg. 205. of Mahomet at the ſiege of Croy. 212. of Iohn Iuſtinian at the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 329
               Infidelitie of Amurath againſt the Greekes and others. 55
               Infidelitie and auarice of ſome Chriſtians vvho holpe to tranſport the arme of Amurath ouer Helleſpont againſt the Chriſtians. 73
               Infidelitie and periurie of Mahomet. 322. 333
               Infidelitie and trecherie of Chirluc. 332
               Inuaſion. Vide Roades. 
               Iohn Boccace. 393
               Iohn Carracciola paramour to Ione Queene of Naples is made graund Seneſchall. 399. he is taken priſoner by Alphonſus. 400. and raunſomed by Francis Sforce. 401. he is ſlaine by the practiſe of Queene Ione. 402
               Iohn Caſtriot father to Scanderbeg, his iſſue. 3. being inuaded by Amurath the great Turke, making peace with him, he deliuereth all his ſonnes in hoſtage. 4. he dieth. 12
               Iohn Caſtriot ſonne to Scanderbeg. 496
               Iohn Cernouitche, nephew to Scanderbeg. 47
               Iohn Comenes Emperour of Trebyzond in league vvith Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia againſt Mahomet. 386
               Iohn Coſſe a Neapolitaine Admirall, to Iohn Duke of Aniow. 401
               Iohn Duke of Aniow, ſon to Rene Duke of Barre, aided by the Genoways againſt Ferdinand, king of Naples. 404. he is ouercome in the field by Ferdinand and Scanderbeg. 420. he returneth into France. 421
               Iohn Duke of Calabria. 388
               Iohn Huniades Lieutenant Generall of the Hungarians at the battell of Moraua. 17. he is Deſpot of Tranſiluania, and father to Matthias Coruinus king of Hungary. 53. Lieutenant Generall at the battell of Varna. 73. after the loſſe of the field he flyeth and is impriſoned by the Deſpot of Seruia. 75
               Iohn Iuſtinian a Genoway, Lieutenant Generall for the Emperour vvithin Conſtantinople. 318. he is highly commended by Mahomet. 324. his induſtrie and vertue. 329. being vvounded, he fainteth and forſaketh his charge. ibidem. his death. 331
               Iohn le Graund, a Germaine. 319. 321
               Iohn Maria of Vincētia, ſlaue to Muſtapha. 254
               Iohn of Sclauonie his honorable death & end. 330
               Iohn Perlat taken priſoner by the Turkes & by Mahomet put to death. 455
               Ione or Iane the firſt, Queene of Naphes maryed Andrew the yonger ſon to the king of Hungarie

389. ſhe procureth his death and taketh a ſecond husband. ibidem. her third and fourth mariage. 390. ſhe is enemy to Pope Vrban, who depriueth her of her kingdome. 392. ſhe flyeth vvith Pope Clement to Auignon. ibid. ſhe adopteth Lewes. the firſt Duke of Aniow for her heire and ſo returneth to Naples. 392. ſhe is put to death by Charles Duke of Duraz. 393
               Ione the ſecond Queene of Naples, ſiſter to Ladiſlaus and daughter to Charles the ſecond of Duraz. 396. her familiaritie vvith Pandolphel Alop. 397. ſhe marieth Iames Count of March. ibid. ſhe entertaineth Iohn Caraecciolle for her minion, and is by the Pope depriued of her kingdome. 399. ſhe diſinheriteth Alphonſus, adopteth Lewes the third of Aniow, and is reſtored to her kingdome. ibidem. ſhe cauſeth the grand Seneſchall, her minion to be ſlaine. 402. making her will and ordaining Rene Duke of Barre to be her heire, ſhe dyeth. ibidem.
               Ioſaphat Barbare Ambaſſadour for the Venetians to Scanderbeg, and one of his counſell. 473
               Iſaac Baſſa of Romania ſent vvith an armie againſt Scanderbeg. 354
               Iſidore Rutheniam Cardinall, the Popes Legat at Conſtantinople, priſoner to the Turks, ranſomed. 333
               Iſland of Liſſa, in the Adriaticke ſea, vppon the coaſt of Epyre. 47
               Iſthmus, or ſtreight of Corinth, what it is. 426
               Iſup ſent Ambaſſadour to Scanderbeg. 235
               Iulian Cardinall of S. Angell cauſeth the king of Hungary to breake his faith and league vvith the Turkes. 63. his miſerable end. 75
               Iulius Caeſar of Capua taketh Sforce Cotignolle priſoner. 397. he intendeth the death of the Coūt of March, is bewrayeth by Queene Ione, and executed. 398
               Iuſſumbeg ſent againſt Scanderbeg. 428
            
            
               L
               Ladiſlaus ſon to Charles of Duraz, king of Naples is crowned king of Naples by Pope Boniface. 399. he is made king of Hungary. ibid. he taketh Rome by force. ibid. he vvarreth vpon the Florentines and is poiſoned. 396
               Lech or Luke Duſman. 47. he aideth the Venetians againſt Scanderbeg. 96
               Lech or Luke Zacharie, Lord of Dayna in Epire. 46. he is murthered by Lech Ducagin. 93
               Legion vvhat it is. 359
               Leon the ſage his table of the Emperours of Conſtantinople. 336
               Leonard Longaske. 319
               Leonidas his valour. 215
               Letters from Francis Albert Cardinall to Vladiſlaus king of Hungarie. 63
               Letters of Ʋladiſlaus to Scanderbeg. ibidem. of Scanderbeg in anſwer to Vladiſlaus. 69. of Amurath to Scanderbeg. 79. of Scanderbeg to Amurath. 84. of Amurath to Muſtapha. 116. of Mahomet to the Gouernour of Sfetigrade to practiſe the reuolt of Moſes from Scanderbeg. 276. of Scanderbeg to Alphonſus king of Naples. 279. of Mahomet to Scanderbeg. 431. 434. 442. of Scanderbeg to Mahomet. 433. of Pope Pius the ſecond to Scanderbeg. 445
               Lewes Duke of Duraz the 3. ſonne of Charles the ſecond king of Hungary. 339
               Lewes king of Hungary ſonne of Carolobert. 388. he warreth vpon Ione Queene of Naples. 389. He ſendeth Charles of Duraz vvith an army againſt her. 393. he cauſeth her to be put to death. ibidem. he dieth. 394
               Lewes Prince of Tarent, ſonne of Philip huſband or paramour to Ione, the firſt Queene of Naples. 389
               Lewes the firſt Duke of Aniow, ſecond ſonne to Iohn king of France, adopted by Queene Ione. 392. he inuadeth the kingdome of Naples and is ouerthrowen in battell. 393. he is ſore hurt and dieth. ibidem
               Lewes the ſecond Duke of Aniow, crowned king of Naples by Pope Clement, and entreth Naples. 395. He is confirmed in the kingdome by Pope Alexander the fift. ibidem. he is ouercome in battell by Ladiſlaus, and returneth into Fraunce. 396
               Lewes the third Duke of Aniow, adopted by Queene Ione, whom he reſtoreth to her kingdome of Naples. 401. he dieth. 402
               Liberalitie of Chriſtian Princes, ſending great giftes and preſentes to Scanderbeg, vppon the death of Amurath. 248
               Liberalitie of Ameſa the nephew of Scanderbeg. 266
               Liberalitie of Francis Sforce. 401
               Laſſa or Alexia, a citie of Epyre, ſubiect to the Venetians. 44. 359
               Lyuad a plaine in Macedonie. 431
               Magnanimitie of the Epirotes in the dayes of Scanderbeg. 239
               Mahomet brought vp vnder the gouernement of Haly-Baſſa. 87. he is at the ſiege of Sfetigrade vvith Amurath. 186. and at the ſiege of Croy. 209. his mortall hatred to the Chriſtians. 213. he voweth the deſtruction of Scanderbeg,

215. he is named Emperour of the Turkes. 251. his crueltie, impietie, Atheiſme, tyrannie and notable vices. 224. his deſcription. 255. his voyage to Conſtantinople. 313. he violateth the peace ſworne to the Emperour of Conſtantinople. ibibem. his periurie to the Peratines. 333. he is ouerthrowen by Humades in a battell before Belgrade in Hungarie and wounded, vvith a great ſlaughter of the Turkes. 353. he ſeeketh truce vvith Scanderbeg. 375. in two battels he is ouercome by Vſuncaſſan, but in the third ouerthroweth him. 387. his conqueſtes in the Eaſt during his truce vvith Scanderbeg. 425. 426. he ſendeth Ballaban to begin the ſiege of Croy, and after followeth in perſon. 475. he maketh a ſecond iourney into Epire. 486. he returneth to Conſtantinople and craueth Scanderbeg his ſword in gift. 497
               Maloncre or Demire king of Perſia, ſonne to Gampſa Sultan of the Perſians ſlaine in battell by Vſuncaſſan. 386
               Mamiza daughter to Iohn Castriot and Voiſaue. 3. by her brother Scanderbeg giuen in mariage to Muſache Thopie. 25. ſhe celebrateth the obſequtes of her husband. 305. her perfections and prayſes. 309
               Mara daughter to Iohn Caſtriot and Voiſaue. 3. ſiſter to Scanderbeg & maried to Stephen Cernouitche. 25
               Margaret the vvife of Charles king of Naples, ſiſter to Queene Ione flieth vvith her children to Gaietta. 394
               Margaret the ſiſter of Sforce Cotignolle, her hardineſſe and generoſitie. 397
               Marin Span & Ameſa gouernors of Baleza. 107
               Marquiſe of Crotona ouerthrowen & taken priſoner by Ferdinand. 404
               Marquiſe d'Eſt. 405
               Mary daughter to Stephē king of Hungary maried to Charles the ſecond, king of Naples, her iſſue. 388
               Mary ſiſter to Ione Queene of Naples, vvife to Robert Earle of Arthois, her familiaritie vvith Iohn Boccace. 393. ſhe is put to death by Charles of Duraz. ibidem
               Maurice Cataneo a Genoway. 318
               Meſſeit a Saniack taken priſoner. 371. he is raunſomed. 377
               Meſſenger of Amurath reiected by the Croyans. 211.
               Meſſenger of Perlat to Moſes. 276. from Hamur to Scanderbeg. 379. from the Turkiſh armie to Scanderbeg. 482
               Metopick a Promontory neare Conſtantinople. 315
               Miliander a place in Conſtantinople. 318
               Miſia, Vide Seruia. 
               Modon or Methone in Greece ſpoiled by Mahomet. 426
               Monticlea. 221
               Morea, Vide Peloponeſus. 
               Mocrea vvonne by Scanderbeg. 42
               Morſena his prophecie of Conſtantinople. 338
               Moſes Baſſa, the murtherer of Turſines, murthered by the mother of the infant. 253
               Moſes Goleme of Dibria aideth Scanderbeg, in his reuolt. 24. he is left to continue the ſiege of Sfetigrade. 33. he goeth diſguiſed as aſpie into the Turkes Campe. 164. he is vvounded. 198. his immoderate furie in the heate of fight. 271. his originall and diſcent. ibidē. his hardie act in the battell of Pologue. 271. 272. his valour & vertue rewarded by Scanderbeg. 273. he reuolteth from Scanderbeg. 278. 302. his goods & liuings are confiſcate. 305. he cometh to Andrinople and is honorably entertained. 310. he is ſent with an armie againſt Scanderbeg. 312. 337. he chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat, yet refuſeth him. 344. being ouerthrowen he is in diſgrace vvith Mahomet, and in danger of his life. 345. 346. he returneth into Epire, ſubmiteth himſelfe to Scanderbeg, is pardoned & reſtored to his goodes, liuings, and dignities. 347. 348. he is taken priſoner by the Turkes and put to death by Mahomet. 455
               Mount Gargan in Apulia or mount Saint Angell. 410
               Mountaine of Mocrea. 264
               Mountaine of Modriſſa. 258. 264
               Muſache de Angeline nephew of Scanderbeg ſon of Vladienne Goleme and nephew to Scanderbeg, by his ſiſter Angeline. 271. he is vvounded. 299. he is taken priſoner by the Turkes and put to death by Mahomet. 455
               Muſache de Thopy, the ſonne of Mamiza Scanderbegs ſiſter. 25. he is ſurpriſed by the Turkes before Belgrade vvhere he maketh a moſt glorious end. 295. 296. his vertues and prayſes. 309
               Muſtapha ſent againſt Scanderbeg by Amurath. 89. he is ſent the ſecond time. 94. he is taken priſoner by the Albanois. 125. he is raunſomed. 127
               Mynes diſcouered by a deuiſe. 230
               Mynes of the Turkes againſt Conſtantinople diſappointed by countermynes. 321
            
            
               N
               Naples kingdome an example of fortunes inconſtancy. 387. conquered by Lewes king of Hungarie, reſtored to Queene Ione. 389. beſieged by Philip Duke of Millan and others, and vvon

for Queene Ione. 401. recouered by Rene Duke of Barre beſieged & vvon by Alphonſus. 403. taken by Belliſarius from the Gothes. ibidem
               Neapolitanes their humour and diſpoſition. 387. their rebellion againſt Ferdinand, and confederacie vvith Iohn Duke of Aniow. 404. 405. they are reconciled to Ferdinand, and pardoned by meanes of Scanderbeg. 421
               Natolia or Aſia Minor, named Turkie. 6
               Negligence and ſecuritie of the Turkiſh armie. 163. 366. 367
               Neophite a monke at Conſtantinople. 324
               Nicholas. Berize. 304. takē priſoner by the Turks or put to death by Mahomet. 455
               Nicholas Ducagin, the ſonne of Paule. 46. his valour and proweſſe. 89
               Nicholas de Gullelle. 319
               Nicholas Moneta, gouernour of Scutarie. 481
               Nicholas of Naples at enmitie vvith Pope Vrban the ſixt, and the cauſe thereof. 391
               Number of Turkes ſlaine in the battell againſt Haly Baſſa. 60. in the battell againſt Fery-Baſſa. 175. at the ſiege of Sfetigrade vnder Amurath. 189. at the ſiege of Belgrade in Macedonie. 304. at Belgrade in Hungarie. 353. in the battell of Pharſalia. 301
               Number of Chriſtians ſlaine at the ſiege of Sfetigrade vnder Scanderbeg. 204. at the battell of Belgrade. 301
               Number of Chriſtians priſoners at the taking of Conſtantinople. 332
               Number of ſouldiers in garriſon at Conſtantinople. 314
               Number of Scanderbegs armie againſt Amurath at the ſiege of Sfetigrade. 133. at the ſiege of Croy. 208
               Number of Amuraths army brought to the ſiege of Sfetigrade. 140. to the ſiege of Croy. 207
            
            
               O
               Oration of Ameſe to Mahomet. 351
               Oration of Amurath to his counſellers for vvarre to be made againſt Scanderbeg. 130. to his Chieftains before Croy, reproching their faintneſſe and cowardiſe. 223
               Oration of Andrew Angell, to the Driuaſtines. 111
               Oration of Carazabeg to Mahomet. 429
               Oration of a common ſouldier in Sfetigrade. 31
               Oration of Daniell Iurich, Generall of the Venetian armie againſt Scanderbeg. 98
               Oration of Debreas, encouraging his ſouldiers againſt Scanderbeg. 270
               Oration of the Emperour of Conſtantinople. 327
               Oration of the gouernour of Belgrade to his people. 284
               Oration of Iſup to Scanderbeg, perſuading him to peace vvith Amurath. 236
               Oration of Mahomet to his Chrieftaines againſt the Chriſtiās. 445. purpoſing a iourney againſt Scanderbeg in proper perſon. 472
               Oration of Paule Angell Archbiſhop of Duraz to Scanderbeg, incenſing the Epirots againſt Mahomet. 437
               Oration of Paule Ducagin touching the ſending of ſuccours to Vladiſlaus king of Hungary. 67
               Oration of Perlat to the Dybrians vvithin Sfetigrade, diſſuading them from yeelding to Amurath. 183
               Oration of Scanderbeg to the Citizens of Sfetigrade. 137. to Pope Paule the ſecond and his Cardinals at Rome. 478. to the Princes of Epyre, aſſembled in Parliament at Liſſa, 47. to his ſubiects, to comfort them after that the voyage of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes was broken. 450. to the Venetian Ambaſſadours vpon the concluſion of peace betweene them. 128
               Oration of Zagan counſelling Mahomet to continue the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 326
                Orations of Scanderbeg to his ſouldiours.

                     1 At his going to recouer the fortreſſes of Epyre againſt the Turkes. 25
                     2 After the recouery of the fortreſſes of Epyre. 34
                     3 Marching against Haly Baſſa. 54
                     4 After the battell vvith Haly Baſſa inuiting them to the ſacke and ſpoile of the Turkiſhe territories. 60
                     5 Conſulting to aſſay Muſtapha. 91
                     6 Before the battell betweene him and the Venetians. 99
                     7 Before the battell of Oronichea againſt Mustapha. 122
                     8 Being to giue a canuazado to the Turkiſhe Campe. 165
                     9 Perſuading thē to proceede in their Conqueſts againſt the Turkes. 260
                     10 Before the battell againſt Debreas. 270
                     11 Marching to the ſiege of Belgrade. 281
                     12 Before the battell of Oronichea againſt Moſes. 341
                     13 Being to marche againſt Iſaac Baſſa. 355
                     14 Encouraging them againſt the French in Apulia. 411
                     15 Before the battell of Valcala. 453. 24
                     16 Before the ſecond battell of Valcala. 463
                     17 Being ready to marche againſt Iagup. 466
                     18 Diſſuading them from purſuing the Turkes after the reliefe of Croy. 483
                  
               
               Order obſerued by the Turkes in the deuiſion of their armies. 139
               Ordinaunce caſt for the battery of Croy. 211. the authours exclamation againſt the inuention thereof. 255
               
                  Originall and antiquitie of the townes in Epyre. 30. of the Turkes. 55. of the city of Duras. 487
               Oronichea, a place in the vpper Dibria. III. 358
               Ottoman the ſurname of the great Turke. 4
            
            
               P
               Paleologus brethren Thomas and Demetrius, Lords of Peloponneſus, but depriued therof by Mahomet. 426
               Pandolphel Alop a Neapolitane Count, the paramour of Ione Queene of Naples beheaded. 397.
               Parliament of all the Lordes and Princes of Epire to conſult with Scanderbeg for the warre againſt the Turkes. 44. 45
               Parthinia now called Praeſe, a towne in Epyre, her originall. 208. was ruinated by Iulius Caeſar. ibidem.
               Paſſages of Abruzza freed by Ferdinand and Scanderbeg. 412
               Paul Angell Archbiſhop of Duras, a neere friend to Scanderbeg. 408. his diſcent & vertues. 436 he commeth as Ambaſſadour from the Venetians to Scanderbeg. 437. he is one of Scanderbegs chiefeſt Councellors. 473
               Paul Ducagin his religiouſneſſe, 46. his praiſes and commendations. 69
               Paul Manaſſey. 120. rewarded by Scanderbeg. for killing of Caraguſa. 122. aſſayled by the Turkes. 124
               Paul Troylus Bouchardes. 318
               Payſants of Albany ſurpriſed by the Turkes. 362
               Peace betwene Amurath and the Hungarians. 40. betwene Mahomet and Scanderbeg. 435. violated. ibidem. betwene Scanderbeg and the Venetians. 127. 128
               Peloponneſus or Morea a countrie in Greece, the commendation thereof. 426. vide Morea. 
               Peneropole or Perſair a towne in Thrace. 69
               Pera or Galata, a citie neere to Conſtantinople. 315, voluntarily yeelded to Mahomet. 333
               Periurie, ſee Infidelitie and crueltie. 
               Peter Duſmam Lord of the Peonians, Pelagonians and Sardicians people of Epire. 47
               Peter Lewes Borgias nephew to Pope Eugenius, is a competitor with Ferdinand for the kingdome of Naples. 388
               Peter Perlat goueruour of Sfetigrade. 137. his prouidence and prudence. 149. his good deſerts for the defence of Sfetigrade. 188. he is rewarded by Scanderbeg and made an Abbot. ibidem.
               Peter Span or Spaniard and his ſonnes. 47. he aydeth the Venetians againſt Scanderdeg. 96
               Petralba a towne in Epire and the deſcription thereof. 29. yeelded to Scanderbeg. 30
               Petrella beſieged by Scanderbeg, and yeelded by the Turkes. 28. the ſituation thereof. ibid.
               Phare a tower and lanterne at the entrie into the hauen of Conſtantinople. 315
               Philip Prince of Tarentum, the fourth ſonne of Charles the ſecond king of Hungarie. 389
               Picenin Generall of an armie for Duke Iohn of Aniow againſt Ferdinand. 405. he moueth parlie with Scanderbeg. 413. his diſhoneſt practiſe againſt Scanderbeg. 414. which diſcouered he is challenged by Scanderbeg. 415. he diſlodgeth ſecretly. ibid. his praiſe and commendation. 420. his pitifull death and end. 421
               Piec Manuell. 146. 363. 449. he is Lieutenant to Scanderbeg in the battell of Valcala. 463
               Plombine in Thuſcan beſieged by Alphonſus. 344
               Poaſt ſent by Sebalias to certifie the Belgradians of ſuccours. 292
               Poaſts of Turkie what their order is. ibid.
               Policie of Count Picenin. 413. of Ione the ſecond Queene of Naples. 398. of Perlat within Sfetigrade. 151
               Policie and prudence of Amurath before Sfetigrade. 158
               Policie of Scanderbeg in cauſing counterfeit letters to be written to the gouernor of Croy for the deliuerie of the towne to him. 18. in marching with his armie. 163. in giuing a canuazado to the Turkiſh armie before Croy. 221. in a ſet battell to aime at the death of the enemies Generall. 272
               Policie vſed by the Turkes to oppreſſe the Chriſtians. 232. vſed by the Turkes vvithin Sfetigrade. 201
               Pologue, a countrie in Epire or a part of Macedonie and Bulgarie. 3. the deſcription thereof. 268. 269.
               Pope Calixtus the fourth, claimeth the kingdome of Naples by eſcheate. 388
               Pope Pius the ſecond perſwadeth the Chriſtians to make a voiage againſt the Turkes. 442. his birth, death, and commendation. 449. 450
               Port S. Roman at Conſtantinople. 316
               Port imperiall at Conſtantinople. 319
               Poyſoning and a ſtrange kind thereof. 396
               Praier of Scanderbeg going to the aide of Ferdinand. 409
               Precepts of Scanderbeg for his ſonne, comprehending the inſtitution of a Prince. 493
               Prieſts, their diuerſe orders and eſtates in the Turkiſh religion. 5
               Princes of Tarent, Beſeignan and Salerne with others rebell against Ferdinand. 405
               Princes and Nobles of Naples partakers with Ferdinand. ibidem.
               Priſoners Chriſtians taken at Belgrade. 301. put to extreame torments. 310. beheaded by

Mahomet. 321
               Priſoners Turkes feaſted by Scanderbeg. 264
               Priſoners Venetians freely ſet at libertie by Scanderbeg. 107
               Prognoſtications foreſhewing the future greatnes of Scanderbeg. 3. foreſhewing the great ſlaughter in the battell betwene Scanderbeg and Iſaac Baſſa. 363
               Propheſies foreſhewing the ruine of Conſtantinople. 336
               Prouerbe. 399. 340
               Prouerbe vſed by Scanderbeg. 190
               Prouerbe of Princes children. 252
               Prouidence and care of Scanderbeg to preuent ſurpriſes. 236. 456
               Prouidence of Ameſa in the warres. 361
               Puniſhment inflicted vpon ſpies. 149
               Pyramet king of Caramania ouercome by Mahomet. 426
            
            
               Q
               Quarrell betwene two priuate ſouldiers for their bootie. 373
               Queſtion betweene Muſache and a Turke his priſoner, decided by Scanderbeg. 274
            
            
               R
               Raguſa the deſcription thereof. 407
               Rebellion of Ameſa againſt Scanderbeg. 349. of Moſes Goleme againſt Scanderbeg. 302. of the Neapolitans againſt Ferdinand. 404
               Redd plaine in Epire. 236
               Redona a countrie in Epire. 349
               Rene Duke of Barre, brother to Lewes the third of Aniow ordained heire to the kingdome of Naples by Queene Ione, & is priſoner in Burgundie. 402. being deliuered he gaineth Naples, which he looſeth againe, and is forced to for ſake the kingdome. 403
               Repoſius ſonne of Iohn Caſtriot. 3. by the Turks named Caraguſa and poiſoned. 18
               Retraite of Scanderbeg from the armie of Iſaac Baſſa and Ameſa. 358
               Reuenues of Scanderbeg. 51
               Rewardes giuen by Scanderbeg to Perlat. 188. alſo to the citizens, ſouldiers, and inhabitants of Croy. 247
               Road into the Turkiſh frontiers by Scanderbeg. 36. 442. 445. 470. into the dominions of Scanderbeg by the Turkes. 435. into the Venetian territories by the Turkes. 435. 495
               Robert king of Naples, ſonne to Charles the ſecond, his wiſedome. 388. his will and death. 389
               Roiſlaue the wife of Muſache Goleme, and the mother of Goleme Ariamnite, the aunceſter of Moſes. 271
               Riuer of Aoe, or Aeas, or Vauiſa in Epire. 45
               Riuer of Cydrus and Barbiza. 315
               Riuer of Iſme. 222
               Riuer of Mathia. 366
               Riuer of Scombine in Epire. 486
            
            
               S
               Saying of Scanderbeg. 453. touching the often remouing of an armie. 42. touching ſurpriſes by enemies. 163. touching the cutting off the Generall of an armie in battell. 272. touching the obſtinacie of Moſes in the battel of Oronichea 343. touching incontinencie of ſouldiers. 349
               Saying of Amurath touching Scanderbeg. 214
               Saying of Hanniball touching Fabius Maximus and Varro. 355
               Saying of Mahomet touching the marriage of Scanderbeg. 258
               Saying of the Epirots to Scanderbeg. 449
               Saying of Fabius Maximus. 453
               Saying of Philip of Macedon to his ſonne Alexander. 494
               Saint Nicholas de la Pierre a mountaine in Epire 51
               Saint Angellor mount Gargan a towne in Apulia giuen to Scanderbeg by Ferdinand. 423
               Saint Iohn de Ronde a towne in Apulia giuen to Scanderbeg by Ferdinand. ibid.
               Sallie made by the Driuaſtines vpon Ameſa. 112
               Sallie by the Sfetigradians vpon the Turkes. 159
               Sallie by the Croians vpon the Turkes. 224. 228. 275
               Sallie by the Belgradians vpon Tanuſee. 305
               Saniacque a Turkiſh Colonell of horſemen. 139
               Saura a plaine in Epire. 486
               Scanderbeg his diſpoſition and education vnder Amurath, his firſt ſeruices and preferment. 6. he is made a Saniacque. ibid. he is made Generall of an armie in Aſia. 7. he is enuied, ſlandered, and ſuſpected in the court of Amurath. 14 he is ſent againſt the Deſpot of Seruia, & conquereth his countrie. ibid. He is ſent against the Hungarians with Carambeg. 47. he reuolteth from the Turkes. ibidem. he is choſen Generall of the warres againſt the Turkes by the Princes of Epire. 50. he is choſen king of Epire. 51. he is made free of the citie of Venice, and Lieutenant generall of the Venetian territories in Epire. 130. he is perſwaded to mariage by his Nobles. 192. he offendeth in ouermuch courteſie. 202. he goeth diſguiſed as a ſpie into the Turkes campe before Croy. 164. and a
                     •
                   a ſpie vnto Sfetigrade. 205. he is in hazard of his life. 214. 459. 462. he is maried. 257. he goeth on progreſſe with his Queene. 258. his prouident order for the ſudden arming of his

ſubiects, & the ſpeedie raiſing of an armie. 268 he vſeth the aide of Italians in his warres. 278 his ſtrange qualitie in the heate of fight and in his anger. 296. his retrait at the battell of Belgrade. 300. he is felled vpon his horſe crouper 343. he is receaued at Raguſa. 407. he embarketh himſelfe for Italie to the aide of Ferdinand. 409. he is honored with ambaſſades & preſents from the Pope and all the Princes of Italie. 423. he reſtoreth Ferdinand to his kingdome. 421. he hath certaine townes in Apulia giuen him by Ferdinand. 423. he returneth out of Apulia into Epire. 424. he cōmeth to Rome to the Pope to craue aide againſt the Turkes. 478. he is ill ſuccoured by the Chriſtians. 480. he ſickneth and maketh his laſt will & teſtament. 489. he dieth. 495. he is buried at Liſſa 496. his bodie is taken out of his ſepulchre & highly reuerenced by the Turkes. ibid. his priuate acts and exploites moſt rare and memorable. ibid.
               Sclauonie. 43. deuided from Epire by the riuer Drinon. 47
               Sclauonian tongue verie ample. 185
               Scopia a chiefe towne in Macedony. 269. 428
               Schiſme in the Church of Rome the motiue and occaſion thereof. 390
               Scouts of Scanderbeg ſurpriſed by the Turkes. 295
               Scouts of the Turks ſurpriſed by the Epirots. 362
               Scouts placed by Scanderbeg to obſerue the paſſing of the Turkiſh armie. 363
               Scutarie or Scodra a citie of Epire ſubiect to the Venetians. 47. beſieged by the Turkes. 218
               Scutarians their exploit againſt Baleza. 117
               Sea of Propontide. 315
               Sea of Boſphore or Thrace. ibid.
               Sebalias Lenreneſe ſent by Amurath to begin the ſiege of Croy. 207. to diuert Scanderbeg from troubling the Turkiſh campe. 224. to raiſe the ſiege of Belgrade. 291. he ſurpriſeth the armie of Scanderbeg before Belgrade. 294. his ouerſight. 297 he is put to the retyre in the battel of Belgrade. 300. his returne to Andrinople and his triumph. 310
               Securitie, vide negligence. 
               Secrecie of the Ottomans in cōcealing their councels. 132
               Selit a mountaine in Epire. 51
               Seraill a place where the great Turke vſeth to keepe his Concubines. 254
               Seremet ſent againſt Scanderbeg. 214. 445. his ſonne is taken priſoner in the battell of Alchria. 449. he is put to flight by Scanderbeg. ibid.
               Seruia alias Boſnia or Raſcia, or Miſia called by the Turkes Segoria. 14. reſtored to the Deſpot by Amurath vpon peace made betweene him and the Hungarians. 40
               Sfetigrade beſieged by Scanderbeg and deſcribed 30. it is yeelded to Moſes. 51. fortified by Moſes. 137. beſieged by the Turkes. 141. the naturall ſtrength and ſituation of it. 160. battered. 154. 160. Aſſaulted. 155. 167. 169. yeelded to Amurath. 185. fortified by Amurath. 187. beſieged by Scanderbeg. 194. the ſuburbs thereof aſſaulted & burnt by Scanderbeg. 195 aſſaulted by the Epirots. ibid. 197. 200. 203
               Sforce Cottignole Lieutenant of the Popes forces 395. 396. he is made priſoner. 397. he is deliuered. 398. he is ſent to the aide of the Pope by Queene Ione of Naples, & is ouerthrowen by Braccio, the Queene depriueth him of all authoritie. 399. he is reconciled to the Queene 400. he deliuereth her from the ſiege of Alphonſus, and getteth a victorie of the Spaniards in Naples, and dieth. 401
               Sibilla Erithrea. 336
               Siege of Dayna giuen ouer by Scanderbeg. 129
               Siege of Sfetigrade giuen ouer by Scanderbeg. 204
               Siege of Scutarie by the Turkes. 218
               Siege of Croy giuen ouer by Mahomet. 246. 475 488. and giuen ouer by the Turkes after the death of Ballaban. 482
               Siege of Belgrade raiſed by Sebalias. 297
               Siege of Conſtantinople the manner of it. 316
               Siege of Barie or Barlet in Apulia raiſed by Scanderbeg. 410
               Siege of Duras giuen ouer by Mahomet. 488
               Simeon Volcathagne. 102. priſoner to Scanderbeg. 107
               Simeon de Nemague king of the Miſians and Sclauonians. 113
               Skirmiſh betweene the Turkes and Epirots. 143. betwene the Turkes garriſon within Sfetigrade, and the garriſon of the Epirots in Dibria. 193. betwene the French and the Epirots in Apulia. 412
               Souldiers of ſeuerall Nations ſerue vnder Scanderbeg. 194
               Souldiers of Scanderbeg terrified at a tempeſt. 269
               Souldiers of diuerſe Nations Chriſtians ſerue vnder Mahomet at the ſiege of Conſtantinople. 313
               Souldiers of Scanderbeg the kinſemen of Ballaban corrupted by him to betray Scanderbeg. 456
               Souldiers of Scanderbeg murmure againſt him about purſuing of the Turkes after the ſiege of Croy. 485
               
                  Spachi, or Sulaſtari, or Vlufagi, Turkiſh horſemen guarding the pauilion of the great Turke. 140
               Spaniardes their intollerable pride and enuie. 400
               Speeches of Scanderbeg to his ſubiects excepting againſt the making of peace with Amurath and the Turkes. 82. to certaine of his ſouldiers touching the ſecuritie of the Turkiſhe armie. 163. to the Dibrians. 187
               Speeches alſo of Scanderbeg to his Nobles concerning the eſtate of the married life. 192. to Moſes reprehending his ouer much hardineſſe. 271. to Muſache and a Turke deciding a controuerſie betweene them. 274. to his Nobles vpon the reuolt of Moſes. 307 to his Nobles touching the rebellion of Ameſa. 350
               Speeches moreouer of Scanderbeg to two ſouldiers quarrelling together. 373. to Fuſian. 422. to his ſouldiers encouraging them againſt Iuſſumbeg. 428. to his Nobles touching Carazabeg. 430. to his Chiefetaines aduiſing them to giue an onſet vppon Ballaban. 463. to his neighbours and allies ſeeking their aide for the reliefe of Croy. 477. to the Epirots touching the flight of Ballaban. 469. to his Princes and Nobles vpon his death bedde. 489. to his ſonne vppon his death bedd. 492. to his Chiefetaines vppon his death bed, vppon an alarme giuen by the Turkes. 495
               Speeches of Amurath to the Turkes vppon the receipt of Scanderbeg his letters, 86. to his ſouldiers reproaching them for flying from Scanderbeg. 159
               Speeches alſo of Amurath to his ſouldiers encouraging them to a newe aſſault of Sfetigrade. 168. to the Turkes concerning Scanderbeg. 230. to his ſonne Mahomet vpon his death bed. 234
               Speeches of the Turkiſh Chiefetaines and Councellours to Feribaſſa, diſſwading him from the combat with Scanderbeg. 173. to Amurath perſwading him to renue the aſſault of Croy. 219. to Mahomet calling for an aſſault to be giuen against Constantinople. 326
               Speeches of Mahomet to Amurath, perſwading him to violate his faith with the Sfetigradians. 186. to his Courtiers animating him againſt Scanderbeg. 275. to his Baſſaes perſwading him not to leaue his voiage to Conſtantinople for Belgrade. 290. betwene him and Moſes. 312
               Speeches alſo of Mahomet to the Turkes in commendation of Iohn Iuſtinian. 324. to himſelfe vppon the inuaſion of his territories by the Epyrots. 442. to himſelfe vpon the hearing of the taking of Moſes and other Nobles of Epire. 455
               Speeches of Mahomet to Ballaban vrging him to the deſtrustion of Scanderbeg. 460. to Scanderbeg by a meſſenger, by whom he returned his ſword vnto him. 497
               Speeches of the Nobles of Epire to Scanderbeg, diſſwading him from the combat vvith Feribaſſa. 173. perſwading him to marriage. 192. perſwading him to graunt truce to the Belgradians. 286
               Speeches of Moſes to the Turkiſh meſſenger. 278. to Scanderbeg in diſſembling with him. 279. to his friendes perſwading them to reuolt with him from Scanderbeg. 303. to the Turkes his ſouldiers, after his ouerthrow by Scanderbeg. 345
               Speeches of Ameſa to the Epirots vppon the rebuke giuen him by his Ʋncle. 114. to Scanderbeg vpon his deliuerie out of priſon. 383
               Speeches of Vranocontes gouernour of the citie of Croy, to the Ambaſſadour of Amurath. 232. 234
               Speeches of Vranocontes and Tanuſee, touching the oration of Scanderbeg to them and the citizens of Croy. 357
               Speech of Ariamnites offering him ſelfe tributary to Scanderbeg. 51
               Speeche vſed by a payſaunt vnto Scanderbeg. 91
               Speech of Marin Span to Ameſa, nephew to Scā
                  derbeg. 108
               Speech of a Turke, called Caraguſa to Paule Manaſſey. 121
               Speech of Paule Manaſſey to the Turkes flying from the battell. 125
               Speech of a Turke of Sfetigrade deſiring a parley and truce. 201
               Speeches of the Chriſtians ſubiectes of the great Turke, to the Chriſtians their enemies at the ſiege of Scutarie. 218
               Speech of the Gouernour of Belgrade to the citizens. 283
               Speech of Sebalias deryding and reproaching the Chriſtians. 298
               Speech of the ſouldiers of Scanderbeg deſiring that their fellowes ſlaine at Belgrade might be buried. 308
               Speeches of Demetrius and others to Scanderbeg comforting him after his great misfortunes. 306
               
                  Speeches of the Ambaſſadours of diuerſe Princes to Scanderbeg touching his loſſe at Belgrade. 311.
               Speeches of Ahemaz to Moſes deſiring leaue to fight a combat. 338
               Speeches betwene Ahemaz and Zachary Groppe 339
               Speech of maiſter Nicholas of Naples touching the diſgrace offered vnto him by the Pope. 391
               Speech of Ladiſlaus King of Naples of the battell betwene him and Lewes the ſecond of Aniow. 396
               Speech of Count Picenin vſed vnto Scanderbeg. 414.
               Speech of Aſſambeg a Chiefetame of the Turkes to Scanderbeg. 428
               Speechs vſed by Ballaban to Mahomet excuſing his ouerthrow by Scanderbeg. 459. 460
               Speech of Iagup of the fortune of Scanderbeg. 468
               Speech of Lech Ducagin bewayling the death of Scanderbeg. 496
               Speech of Scanderbeg to a Scithian before his combat with him. 8
               Speech of Zampſa a Perſian to Amurath challenging his Courtiers to the combat. 9
               Speech of Amurath to Scanderbeg animating him to vndertake the combat againſt two Perſians. 10
               Speech of Scanderbeg touching the oration made by a ſouldier Turke within Sfetigrade. 33
               Speech of the citizens of Sfetigrade to Scanderbeg. 41
               Speech of Haly Baſſa touching the order obſerued by Scanderbeg in ſetting of his battels. 58
               Speech of the Deſpot of Seruia to Frier Iohn Capiſtran. 71
               Speech of Iohn Huniades to Vladiſlaus King of Hungarie in the battell of Varna. 74
               Spies their puniſhment. 149
               Sponderbeg Prince of Penderacia. 253
               Stelluſa a towne in Epire deſcribed, it is yeelded to Scanderbeg. 30
               Stephen Cernouiche husband of Mara the ſiſter of Scanderbeg aideth him againſt the Turkes 35. his iſſue. 47
               Stephen King of Hungarie. 388
               Stratagemes of Scanderbeg againſt Haly Baſſa. 57. againſt the Turkes before Sfetigrade. 142. in the often remouing of his campe. 160 in retyring from the Turkes. 359. in the battell of Pharſalia. 367
               Stratageme vſuall with the Turkes againſt the Chriſtians. 140
               Stratageme of Amurath to diuert Scanderbeg from troubling his army during the aſſault of Croy. 224
               Stratagemes or ſtrange enterpriſes of the Turks againſt Conſtantinople to get the hauen. 317 and in building a bridge. ibidem.
               Stratageme of Mahomet to ſurpriſe Chidna. 476.
               Streezes their familie. 46. the nephewes of Scanderbeg. 25
               Subaſſides a Turkiſh leader of horſemen. 139
               Subiectes of Scanderbeg, vvilling to haue peace vvith the Turkes. 82
               Succours ſent by Alphonſus king of Naples to Scanderbeg. 280. by the Venetians and others to Scanderbeg for the reliefe of Croy. 480
               Superſtition of the Dibrians moſt ſtraunge. 181. cauſeth the loſſe of Sfetigrade. ibidem
               Synam ſent vvith an armie to defend the Turkiſh frontiers. 377. 378. ſent vvith an armie to inuade Epire. 426. ſurpriſed and ouerthrowen by Scanderbeg. 427
               Synope the countrey of Mithridates. 426
            
            
               T
               Talaſmans a kind of Prieſts among the Turkes. 5.
               Tanuſee Thopie. 45. inuadeth the Turkiſh camp before Croy. 229. ſent to begin the ſiege of Belgrade. 282. his valure in the battell of Belgrad. 296. he is ſent with an army to burie the Chriſtians ſlaine at Belgrade. 308. he ſpoileth and burneth all the countrie about Belgrade. 305 he is appointed to keepe the frontiers of Epire againſt Sinam and the Turks. 379. he is Scanderbegs Lieutenant at the battell of Valcala. 463
               Theodore Cariſtin a Greeke, a good archer. 318
               Theodore Corona Lord of Belgrade in Bulgary. 282
               Theophilus Paleologus. 318. his honourable end and death. 330
               Thuraca, Saniacke of Romania councellour to Mahomet. 326
               Timariot a Turkiſh horſeman. 139
               Townes in Apulia giuen to Scanderbeg by Ferdinand. 423
               Trana a citie in Apulia vſurped by Fuſian againſt Ferdinand, 421. yeelded to Scanderbeg and by Ferdinand giuen vnto him. 422. 423
               Trechery intended by Amurath to corrupt ſome of the garriſon of Sfetigrade. 180
               Treacherie intended by Mahomet to corrupt ſome of Scanderbegs friends. 275. 276
               Treaſon of Anell a Maſon betraying Naples to Alphonſus. 403
               
                  Treaſon of certain ſouldiers ſeruing vnder Scanderbeg. 461
               Treaſon of a labourer corrupted by Amurath to betray Sfetigrade. 180. the manner thereof. 181 rewarded by Amurath. 186. the end and eſtimate of it. ibid.
               Trebizond beſieged and won by Mahomet. 476
               Triballians people of Miſia. 19. enhabite the vpper Dibria. 181. they holde of the Greeke Church. ibidem.
               Truce graunted by Scanderbeg to the Turkes within Sfetigrade. 202
               Truce for ſixteene daies graunted by Scanderbeg. to the Belgradians. 287
               Truce betweene Scanderbeg and Mahomet. 407
               Triumphes and generall ioy of the Chriſtians for the death of Amurath. 247
               Triumphs in Epire for the ouerthrow & death of Amurath. 249. for the victory againſt Moſes. 344. for his returne and reconciliation. 348
               Triumph of Scanderbeg for the ouerthrow of Ameſa and the Turkes. 373. after his victorie of Iagub and Ballaban. 470
               Triumph of Sebalias after his returne from relieuing Belgrade. 310
               Tumeniſt a amountaine in Epire foure miles from Croy. 208
               Turkes maſſacred within Croy. 20. their obſtinacie. 22. they make head againſt Scanderbeg and are put to the ſword. 24. their deuiſe in their enſignes. 125. within Belgrade they doubt of the faith of the citizens. 283. their wonderfull care to preſerue their conqueſts. 291. they cut off the heads of the Chriſtians ſlaine at Belgrade. 301. Their opinion of the Epirots. 310. they honour vertue and valure euen in their enemies. 346
               Turkes conſpiring the death of Scanderbeg are executed. 474
               Turſines brother to Mahomet drowned. 253
               Tyranna the greater a towne in Epire. 28
               Tyranna the leſſer in Epire. 208
               Tyre the leſſer in Epire. 45
            
            
               V
               Valachia the countrey of Huniades. 72
               Valley of Mocrea. 88
               Valley called the fayre Valley. 167
               Valley of Valcala. 453
               Valmes a citie in Epire. 271. reedified by Mahomet. 486
               Varietie of opimons touching Amuraths religious life. 86
               Varna or Dioniſiopolis a citie neer to Romania 73
               Venetians aide Scanderbeg in his wars vvith ſupplues of money. 205. in peace and amitie vvith the Turkes. ibidem. their ſubiects relieue the Turkes before Croy vvith victuals. 227
               Viziers counſellers to the great Turke. 330
               Vlach Poaſtes of Turkie. 292
               Vladien Goleme de Ariamnite, father to Goleme Ariamnite or Muſache de Angeline. 271
               Vladiſlaus king of Hungary craueth aid of Scanderbeg against the Turkes. 63. he marcheth againſt the Turkes. 72. his raſhneſſe or ouer great hardineſſe. 74. he is ſlaine. ibidem
               Vlaica daughter to Iohn Caſtriot and Voiſaue, ſiſter to Scanderbeg. 3
               Vlixians a people of Epyre. 45
               Voyage of the Chriſtians againſt the Turkes broken. 449
               
                  Ʋoyage of Scanderbeg into Italie. 477
               Voyſaue the mother of Scanderbeg dieth. 12
               Vranocontes. 58. made gouernour of Croy. 361. his praiſe and commendations. 209. he is by Scanderbeg made Duke of Emathia. 247
               Vrban the ſixth created Pope. 390. enmitie betwene him and maſter Nicholas of Naples. 391 he is beſieged within Nocera by Charles of Duras king of Naples. 394
               Vſuncaſſan king of Capadocia, Armenia, and Perſia, his diſcent. 386. his acts and mariage. ibidem. in two battels he ouercommeth Mahomet, but in the third is himſelfe ouercome by Mahomet in the battell of Arſengua. 387
            
            
               W
               VVarre determined by Amurath againſt Scanderbeg. 79
               VVarre betwene the Turkes and the Hungarians. 62. betwene Scanderbeg & the Venetians. 94. betwene Mahomet and the Perſians. 386
               Warre renued betweene Mahomet and Scanderbeg. 442
               Waters of Albulae. 366
               Winter wars moſt diſcōmodious & hurtfull. 262
            
            
               X
               Xabiac a towne in Epyre vnder the dominion of Stephen Cernouitch. 47
            
            
               Z
               Zacharie Groppe. 196. 197. he deſireth leaue of Scanderbeg to anſwere the chalenge of Ahemaze. 333. he is in pay vvith the French in Italie. 415. he is Lieutenant to Scanderbeg at the two battels of Valcala. 463
               Zadrime a coūtrey in Epire, vpon the riuer Drine, belonging to the familie of the Ducagines. 46
               Zagan a counſeller to Mahomet. 326
               Zemalda eldeſt ſonne to Vſuncaſſan king of Perſia ſlaine in the battell of Arſenuag. 387
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   