
      
         
            
            A TREATISE
TOVCHING
THE WORD OF
GOD WRITTEN,
againſt the Traditions
of men. Handled both Schoolelike,
and Diuinelike. Where alſo is ſet downe a true
Method to diſpute Diuinely
and Schoolelike. Made by A. SADEELE.
And tranſlated into Engliſh,
by Iohn Coxe, Miniſter of
the vvord of God.
            Ephe. 5.
            Awake thou that ſleepest, ſtand vp
from death, and Christ ſhall giue
thee life.
            Imprinted at London for Iohn Hariſon,
& are to be ſold at the vvhite
Greihound in Paules churchyard.
1583.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE FAITHFVLL
SERVANTS OF IESVS
CHRIT, THE GODLY AND
learned Paſtors and Doctors in the Churches
of Fraunce, profeſsing the true doctrine
of the Goſpell, his deere bretheren and
faithfull fellowe Miniſters: ANTHONIE
SADEELE
wiſheth all grace & peace
from GOD.
            
               CHRISOSTOM writing
on the 34.In Pſa. 43. Ioſ. 6. Pſalme,
compareth the Paſtors of
Chriſts Church, vnto thoſe
Trumpets, by whoſe ſound
the walls of Iericho were
quite ouerthrowen. The which ſaying (my
deere brethren) the great diligence you vſe
in your function and office wherevnto you
are called, and your extreame labours
which you haue ſuſteyned of late, (yea,
and that not without greate fruite) maketh
mee applye the ſame vnto you,

For although the the Romish doctrine (i
                  •
                in anie
place it preuailed) moſt chiefly flouriſhed
it 
                  〈◊〉
               , becauſe there it was difended
by the forces of men and as it were compaſſed
about with moſt high and ſtrong wall
                  •
               
yet notwithſtanding by your voice & preaching
the Goſpell it is at the laſt brought to
paſſe that the whole foundation of the Popiſh
doctrine throwen downe, & the Walls
therof being 
                  •
               aſed, the horrible corruption,
abuſes &, errors there of is made manifeſt to
the eies of all men. Wherfore when I compare
this our time with the time of the Iſraelites,
I cannot ſufficiently accuſe and condemne
the ſluggiſh ſlothful 
                  〈…〉
                This our
age, in respect of the greate 
                  〈…〉
                and
watchfulneſſe of the olde 
                  〈…〉
               
they ſo ſoone as they ſawe 
                  〈…〉
               
               
                  •
               ho ouerthrowen, ſtraight waies 
                  〈◊〉
                and

                  〈◊〉
                the whole For Citie but 
                  〈…〉
               
age although they haue ſeene, yea, and that
now along time the hereſies of the P
                  •
               piſh

                  〈…〉
                to be made manifest and brought
into 
                  〈…〉
                notwithſtanding ſo far
from 
                  〈…〉
                and raſe them

                  〈…〉
                of their mindes, that
rather they helpe them with all their force.

But to you my brethren which haue ſuffred
many and ſo greate ſtormes, troubles, and
griefes euen to you (I ſaie) beholde new labours
daily ariſe, which muſt be ouercome
with gret cōſtācie & inuincible fortitude of
minde. For that I may omit diuers & almoſt
infinit other diſcommodities, I perceiue that
you are exerciſed chiefly in two kindes of
battailes. The one is for that daily wicked
ſlaunderers (to wit) the miniſters of lyes, oppone
themſelues againſt the miniſters of the
truth, which by their lying Libels go about
to vexe and deface the innocencie of the
godly Paſtours of the Church, with moſt
horrible vntruths and impudent ſlaunders.
Of this ſort are ſome whome the heate of
perſecution hath deuoured, who by force,
and as it were, with a ſtorme and vehement
tempeſt, carried vnto the Popiſh hereſies, do
now, with moſt obſtinate mindes cleaue
vnto the ſame, as it were vnto a moſt firme
rocke. Yea, and that which is to be lamented,
they begging as it were thereby the popiſh
prelates good will and fauour make no
end of their malitious ſlaundering and wicked
writings. This kinde of conflict in my
opinion) you ſhall right well ſuſtaine not by

ſtriuing againſt it, but by calling to minde
the faying of Dauid in his 54.Pſa. 54. Pſalme, to
wit, that it will at laſt come to paſſe that
the ſlanderous tongue of theſe wicked ſlanderets,
will rebound & fall vpon themſelues.
For ſo it alwaies happene
                  ••
               , that the wicked
wound themſelues with their owne weapons,
and the innocencie of the godly remaineth
vnſpotted, beeing deliuered from
their vniuſt reports. The other kind of conflict
reſteth, in the which you muſt thinke to
labour both earneſtly and diligently, as I
know right wel ye do. For about a few yeres
paſt, there hath riſen vp certaine men,
who abuſing liberall artes and ſciences, and
chiefly that ſcience which is ordained to the
ſearching out of the truth, to wit, Logicke:
wherby they might cōfirme & eſtabliſh the
Popiſh hereſiesei and that they may the better
carrie awaie the matter with craftie conueiaunce
they turne the habite and forme
of good learning, into a certaine ſophyſticall
and contentious manner of diſputing,
and ſuch are chiefely thoſe falſe named Iesuits,
for ſo I tearme thoſe Monkes which
wickedly take vppon them that moſt holy
name of Ieſus, attributing it to theyr

diuelish sect, and that not without greate
blaſphemie: And theſe nowe of late haue
ſtuffed Vniuerſities, which in times paſt
were of great fame: and doo euen as it were
poſſeſſe them alone, bearing an outwarde
ſhew of greate learning, and chiefly challenging
vnto themſelues the exact and right
knowledge of diſputing. Whoſe enterpriſes
ſith I perceiue you goe aboute moſt
chiefely and valiauntly to reſiſt: I thought
it meete and conuenient to publiſh ſome
thing according to the abilitie which is 
                  〈◊〉
               
mee. And I whome no force, no tempeſt;
no diſtaunce of place coulde ſeparate from
you, thought it good (I ſaie) to 
                  •
               ee ioyned a
fellowe companion with you in this conflict
and moſt happie labour. And furthermore,
I haue determined with my ſelfe to
followe that method of diſputation, which
ſeemeth to bee moſt fit for their purpoſe,
as Theologicall, and therefore that kinde
which moſt truely giueth reſolutions to arguments:
And this ſhall not onely be voide
of all ſubtill Argumentes, and ſophysticall
falacies, but alſo of all Rethorical exerciſe.
            
               
And I haue choſen rather to drawe this
ſame methode of diſputing as much as in
mee 
                  〈◊〉
               ) from the pure fountaines of the

                  〈◊〉
                Fathers, then followe the filthie 
                  〈…〉
               
of thoſe which 
                  〈◊〉
                of late

                  〈…〉
                kinde and order of
disgu
                  ••
               ing: and touching this thing, I expect
both 
                  〈…〉
               , and the iudgement
of rather the beſt learned Diuines: to

                  〈◊〉
                I willinglie ſubmit both this my opini
                  •••••
               ,
and alſo my ſelfe, and although I

                  〈…〉
                short kinde of diſputing,

                  〈…〉
                my purpose heereby

                  〈…〉
                the 
                  〈◊〉
                of other mens
large and copious are 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ For as a certain
man was 
                  •
               ont to saie, that the hande maie
be spread abroad
                  •
                and againe 
                  〈◊〉
                him together
the 
                  •
               ingers, be bro
                  •
               ght 
                  〈…〉
               
likewise one matter maie by copious
eloquen
                  ••
                behand that 
                  〈◊〉
               , and beeing
drawen together by short 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
maie as effe
                  •••
               llie be 
                  〈◊〉
               , more briefe.
Let therfore each treatise whit
                  •
                is written
at large with copious & slowing stile haue
his 
                  〈◊〉
                honour, so that it he 
                  •
               at 
                  〈◊〉
                to cō
               firme
the truth.Plut. in Cic. For (as Plutarke ſaith) truth

               
                  〈◊〉
                inuineible if it be trulie declared & rightlie
applied. And to Auguſtine (not without
good cauſe,) eloquence ſeemeth ſo much
the more to terrifie,De doct. Chriſt. lib. 3. cap. 14 in how much the more
it is plaintie pronounced. Neuertheles, when
need requireth, let vs alſo imbrace this ſhort
kinde of diſputing, which is verie profitable
ſo ofte a
                  •
                we be occupied in the ſearching
out of the truth, inaſmuch as it draweth vs
backe, that we follow not the ſimilitude of
truth, for truth it ſelfe, and ſo ſhoulde bee
deceiued with a counterfaite probabilitie of
truth: which things; sith they are ſo, ſome
man maie dema
                  •
               nd, wherefore that great
Orator Tullie, comparing Oratorie with
this ſharp and ſchoole like Diſputation,De nat. deor, l
                     •
                  , 2. and
peraduenture ouer-well liking his owne
Arte, saith thus: As a flowing Riuer can
ſcarce or not at all be corrupted or putrified,
but a ſtanding water maie verie ſoone:
ſo likewiſe by the floud of eloquence, the
faults of the reprehender are ſoone wiped
awaie, when as niggiſhnes of ſpeach, and
want of eloquence, ſcarce can defend it ſelfe:
thus much Cicero. The which as I confeſſe
that it maie happen both in the ſophiſticall
and probable kinde of diſputing, ſo do

I denie that it can chaunce or agree with
true and demonſtratiueie Silogiſmes. For as
the Riuer (that we maie not ſwarue from
the similitude which wee haue propo
                  •
               ed)
while it runneth afloate 
                  〈◊〉
                aboue his
bankes, doth gather moſt foule and filthie
things of 
                  〈◊〉
                sort, which 
                  〈◊〉
                and are
couered while as the flouds are aloft: ſo oftentimes
great errors (with copiouſneſſe of
ſpeach did) are by true and briefe diſputations
declared & laid open for the copie of
eloquence taken awaie, things doo appeare
both naked and manifeſt as they are. But
heereof we will ſpeake more in the Preface.
And now I ſet downe first a diſputation
touching the word of god writtē, which
as it is chiefe, ſo ought it to be the verie foū
               dation
of all diſputations. The other diſputations
as of the true humane nature of
Chriſt, of the preſence of Chriſt in the ſacrament,
of the true and lawfull making of
Miniſters, (touching which thinges I wrote
ſome thing about two yeares paſt againſt
Turrianus that falſe named Iesuit, and will
handle it more at large, whenſoeuer he ſhal
giue anie newe occaſion to write) alſo free
will, Purgatorie, and ſuch lyke, maye bee

grounded on this ſayde Diſputation. And
this my bretheren I hope you will dooe,
either according to this methode which
I haue followed, or according to that which
you ſhall better like of. Wherefore I beſeech
the defenders of the Romiſh Church,
and chiefelye thoſe which challenge vnto
them ſuch ſkill in diſputing, that they
will bring the ſame from the darke ſhaddowe
of the Schooles, into the open and
cleere light, yea, to the true point of diſputing
in deede, and that all mallice put a
parte, all nipping tauntes ſet aſide, let them
modeſtlye and with quiet mindes purſue
this my treatiſe, and when they haue entered
into diſputation with me, let them firſt
note what is worthie of reprehention, and
then let them giue ſolutions vnto my argumentes:
and on the other ſide, let them
confirme theyr opinions with plaine and
euident Sylogiſmes and Argumentes, and
ſo I hope it ſhall at the laſt come to paſſe
(if GOD permit) that when both our
opinions are conferred together, the truth
will ſhewe it ſelfe, and bee manifeſtly
ſeene euen of thoſe which bee almoſt
blinde.
            
               
Let therefore thoſe bookes which are repleat
with nothing els but with bitter choler,
ſpotted & ſtained with the ſores of their
maſters
                  •
                yea, and thoſe ſeditious Sermons
which blovve forth nothing elſe but fire &
ſword, let them (I say) ceaſe & be quite baniſhed,
& in ſteed hereof let there be meeknes
& tranquilitie: yea, let the loue & inward affection
of the truth beare ſwaie: & let thoſe
which ſo greatly affect that excellent name
of Catholikes (which ſo often with open
mouthes repeat & pronounce the ſame) remember
what S. Auguſtin hath written, to
wit, that the Catholike Church doth teach
that wee owe loue vnto all, and iniurie to
none. But if there be anie ſuch, which go forward
with ſhameleſſe faces and obſtinate
mindes ſtill to write and ſpread abroad their
ſichophanticall and infamous Libells, or if
there bee anie ſuch which ſo farre degenerateth
from men, that they had rather obſtinately
to bark againſt the truth, then to imbrace
the ſame, the vvhich amongeſt others
I heare there is one eſpecially, vpon whom
the fearful exāple of Gods moſt iuſt iudgment
is manifeſt, not onlie for other his vngodlineſſe,
but chiefly for his wicked Apoſtacie

and backe ſliding from the Goſpell,
which ſometime he profeſſed. If I ſay there
bee anie ſuch, I vviſh vnto them better
mindes, & oppoſe this my vowe and wiſh
againſt their ſhameleſſe wickedneſſe and
malitious railing, profeſsing that I will not
vouchſafe to anſvvere ſuch their pamphlets,
knowing right well that ſuch their dooings
may be vtterly wiped awaie euen with one
little ſpark of patience. Againe, touching my
ſelfe, I profeſſe that I will not reade thoſe
their vvritings in the vvhich they ſpue forth
their foule poiſoned choler, becauſe I haue
determined to diſpute, and not to braule, to
contend vvith arguments, and not vvith impious
railings. And you my reuerend brethren,
fight 
                  〈…〉
                of faith (for
I may lavvfully vſe the Apostles exhortation
vnto you fight 
                  〈…〉
                vvorthie
battaile of faith, and apprehend euerlaſting
life, for vvhich cauſe you are called,
& haue profeſſed a good profeſsion before
manie vvitneſſes. And therefore regarding
nothing at all this vvicked rable, run your
courſe vvith ſtout courage, vnremoued conſtancie,
and inuincible patience, in the truth
of the Goſpell of God, as you haue begun:

that is that you go forvvard vvith exact diligence
and integritie, to fight againſt mans

                  •
               rrors, that the courſe of your labours moſt
manfully being finiſhed, yee may leaue vnto
the poſterities to come, the puritie of

                  〈◊〉
               , and the true vſe of ecclesiasticall
discipline.
            
               From my ſtudie the
23, of Februarie
                        •
                     
An Domini.
1580.
               
            
            FINIS.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
A COMMON PLACE
TOVCHING THE
WORD OF GOD WRITTEN,
AGAINST THE TRAditions
of Men. Handled both Schoole like, & Diuinely. Wherein is intreated of the true method
of Diſputing.
         
            THE PREFACE.
            
               THE Apoſtle Paule writing
to Timothie,
               2. Epiſt. 3. affirmeth that
the holie Scripture is profitable
both to teach, as alſo
to reproue: thereby ſhewing
that men are not onely
to be taught, but alſo often times to be reproued.The preacher ought to teach & reproue.
For truly it is manifeſt, that men
are ſo corrupt, that they doe not onely remaine
in ignorance of the truth, euen as it
were in a palpable and thicke darkneſſe,
but alſo for the moſt part, they hate & flie
the light of the ſame. And although both

are greatly to be lamented, yet it is better
to haue to doo with thoſe which are ignorant
and willing to learne, then with
them which are delighted with their blindneſſe
and ignorance: becauſe it is a great
deale more tollerable to be ignorant, then
not to be willing to learne. Whereby it
commeth to paſſe, that becauſe the miniſters
and the inſtructors of the congregations,Tit, 
                     •
                  ,
muſt haue to doo with both theſe kind
of men, they are therefore willed by the Apoſtle
to be ſuch, as ſhoulde holde faſt the
word of truth: ſo that they ſhuld be able to
inſtruct by wholſome doctrine, and alſo to
confute the gaine-ſaiers thereof. And as
touching theſe two points in ye true Preacher,Aug, Enc. ad Laure,
when Auguſtine had diſputed and
compared the one with the other: It is an
eaſie matter (ſaith he) to declare what wee
ought to beleeue, what wee ought to hope
for, and what we ought to loue: but to defend
the truth, and refell the wicked opinions
of others which thinke to the contrarie,
is the greater and better part of learning.
Theſe are Auguſtines words: The which

                  〈◊〉
                they are, experience it ſelfe long
time ſince hath taught vs: for what great
troubles the godly fathers of the Church

had in times paſt with the olde heretikes,
and chiefly with thoſe which did excell in
the ſophiſticall and litigious kinde of diſputation,
we may eaſilye ſée by the writings
of the catholicke Doctors, and thoſe
which on our part did enter into yt ſharpe
conflict of diſputation,To reproue falſe doctrine the right vſe of diſputation is no ſmall helpe In laud. Baſil
                better furniſhed, to
wit, armed with weapons of good lerning,
diſperſed without any great adoo, the thick
myſtes of ſophiſticall diſputation, by the
manifeſt light of ye truth. Amongſt which
auncient Fathers, Nazianzenus ſéemeth
to giue the chiefeſt commendation to Baſil,
for that he aboue all others, excelled in
the true ſcience of diſputation and reaſoning,
the which praiſe we maye attribute
alſo to Gregorius Niſſenus. And Auguſtine
(that I maye vſe his owne wordes,Epiſt. 151 who
was woont to reioyce of his diſputations,
and therein delighted himſelfe) did fréely
confeſſe,Contra Aca. li. 3 ca 13. that the Arte of Logicke was a
very great & ready helpe vnto him in the
vnderſtanding and vndooing of the Heretickes
Sophiſticall and ſubtill Arguments.
            And Tertulian,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                who was long time
before Auguſtine, doeth not denye in theſe
his Bookes, in which moſt happelye

he contended with the heretikes, that hée
was often times driuen to diſpute with
them in Philoſophie: which things I héere
bring in,They are refuted vvhich wold not haue diuines me dle vvith the true art of diſputing. Col. 2. becauſe I ſée all (for ye moſt part)
ſomewhat to miſlike this Art of Logicke,
otherwiſe moſt profitable: as though Paule
had vtterly excluded the ſame from diuinitie,
wher he warneth, that we muſt take
héed leaſt anie man ſpoile vs through Philoſophie:
& héere they gather much out of ye
writings of the olde Fathers, which they
ſuppoſe maketh for them againſt Logicke,
and againſt the exact knowledge of diſputation.Aduer. 159. Epiſ. in cap. 2. Eſa.
And therefore they willingly harken
to Nazianzene, in that place where he
compareth the Logitians, vnto the Moabites
and Ammonites: and now they ſnatch
after that place of Baſil, where he tearmeth
Logicke to bée the mother of contention:
& ſometimes they crie out with Tertulian,
ſaying.De praeſcri. haer. O miſerable Ariſtotle, which firſt
armed the heretiks wt Logick, wherby like
crafty artificers, they might (as they liſted)
ſet vp & deſtroie. To whom in few words
I doo thus anſwere: The Apoſtle Paule
did not reiect the good & right knowledge
of diſputing, which by certaine neceſſarie
principles produceth and bringeth forth

the knowledge of the truth: but rather that
vaine art of deceiuing with thoſe ſophiſticall
and deceitful ſnares, the which the heretikes
are wont full ſubtilly to folde together,
whereby they may deceiue the godly
& faithfull. And that this was the mind
of the Apoſtle, it is manifeſt not onely by
the order of the Apoſtles ſpéech, but alſo by
that he vſeth this word [Apates] which is

                  〈◊〉
                craft or circumuention by ſubtiltie.
Sith then the good vſe of Logicke chiefly
tends vnto this end, to diſpearſe abroade
the fallaces and ſubtill crafts of ſophiſtrie,
to expell errours, to reproue lies, and to ſet
before our eies moſt manifeſtly the light
of the truth: Who can with good conſcience
thinke that the Apoſtle at anie time
did reiect this ſo worthie & neceſſarie ſcience?
For how can it be poſſible, that hée
which doth profeſſe himſelfe an enimie to
falſe ſophiſtications, ſhould not loue ye ſcience
of right diſputing, which is Logicke,
being altogether contrarie to falſe & ſubtil
reaſoning: and ordained to this end, that
by the helpe and aide therof, we may more
eaſily auoide the ſnares of thoſe which are
captious? For as he which hateth darknes,A ſimilitude.
muſt of neceſſitie greatly reioyce in ye beutie

of the light: ſo he that will ſhut out of
the church the falſe de
                  •
               eits of arguments,
he I ſay, muſt of neceſſitie, leaue a place in
the Church for ſound and true reaſoning,
by the which ye vaine deceits of thoſe men
may be the eaſier reproued, and the better
auoided: Except peraduenture we thinke
the ſcience and art of phiſicke is altogether
to be reiected, becauſe it teacheth men to
knowe thoſe thinges which are hurtfull;
wherby to take he
                  •
               d of them, & to vſe onely
thoſe things which appertaine to y• preſeruation
of health & life. Wherfore Nazianzene
ſaith (yea, truly right excellent is his
ſaying) for ſomwhat the muſt anſwere to
the former obiection) y• the Sophiſters are
like vnto the Moabites & Ammonits which
were prohibited the temple of God: so y• alſo
we acknowledge this, yt the true art of
Logicke is not compared to the Morbites &
Ammonits, but rather to them of Tyrc and
Sidon, by whoſe helpe Solomon was greatly
furthered in building of the 
                  〈…〉
               
alſo is worthie of great praises, in y•
he ſaith, y• Sophistre is the mother of contentions,
ſo y• thereby wée lou
                  •
                the more ye
armour, by which y• forme of good learning
maketh vs able to fight for the truth 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               
Finally we may hearken to Tertulian
crying out againſt the ſame, calling it the
craftie art of ſetting vp & plucking downe
againe, to wit, euen indéede that parte of
Logicke which is alwaies occupied in contentions,
and neuer maketh end. But let
vs reuerence the other part, which giueth
reſolutions to falſe arguments, & ſeuereth
things neceſſary from thoſe which are not,
and doth ſo maintaine the truth and beat
downe falſehood, that it remaineth alwaies
one, becauſe it is ioyned to the firme foundation
of the truth. And that this was the
minde of the olde Fathers touching the
right order of diſputing, whoſoeuer shall
diligently marke the auncient doctors, wil
eaſily agrée vnto vs. For what ſaith Nazianzenus
whom thoſe men ſo often caſt in
our téeth;Ad 150. Epi, in S, ca. Eſai. The truth (ſaith he) by Logicall
diſputations is filed and brought to light.
And furthermore what ſayth Baſil? That
the true force of Logicke is diſtinctly to diuide
the nature of things,
               The auncient Fathers cō
                  mended 
                     •
                   right vſe of Logick 
               whereby we may
knowe thoſe things which are of affinitie,
and diſtinguiſh thoſe which are contrarie.
And Auguſtine ſeuering the true vſe
of Logicke from the abuſe of Sophiſtrie,
ſaith:Con. Acali. 3 
               If Logicke bee the knowledge

of the truth, ſo then it behooueth the
wiſe to haue knowledge thereof, that therby
he may vtterly race out the malitious falſehod
of the craftie diſputers, & contemne the
ſame. But there cannot be a more excellent
witneſſe for this, then the teſtimonie of S.
Auguſtine, where he ſaith, that Logicke is
the onely Science of all other,
               De ord, li. 2. ca. 12 
               which teacheth
both how to teach, and how to learne:
and doth ſhew a man how to perceiue, and
to make other to vnderſtand: Thus much
Auguſtine. Wherefore, ſith the caſe ſo
ſtandeth, let this ſo worthie arte & ſcience,
haue hir condigne and due praiſe, and let
vs be bold to ſay, that they reaſon nothing
wiſely, which in theſe our dayes ſtart vp,
and fooliſhly ſpeake againſt Logicke.
            But héere peraduenture ſome man may
demand of me,Touching the writings and diſputations of y• ſchoole Doctors. whether this my commendation
doth extend it ſelfe to the Schoolemen,
and chiefely vnto thoſe which haue
taken their originall from the Maſter of
ſentences, and whether their writings
doo appertaine to that good and true parte
of Logicke, which reſolueth doubtfull arguments?
Truly, as I am not willing at
this time to ſet down my abſolute opinion
(touching ſo many me
                  •
               ) héerein: for, for my

owne part let each one of them haue his
due reuerence for his trauaile and labour,
ſo am I not afeard to ſpeake both boldly &
fréely my minde, what I thinke, alwayes
(not withſtanding) kéeping my ſelfe within
my compaſſe:In. 3. ſent. diſt. 24. queſt. 1. 
               Iohn Duns Scotus (commonly
called the ſubtill Doctor) ſaith that
the Diuines haue in ſome places mixed
Philoſophie with Diuinitie, & that with
great profit: I truly confeſſe that they haue
mingled it with diuinitie, yea I adde they
haue therewith confuſed Diuinitie, but if
he thinke it was done with any fruite, I
beſéech maſter Doctor pardon me if I cannot
héerein agrée with him: for ſithen the
Schoolemen haue not followed that good
part of diſputing, which giueth true reſolutions
to arguments (as we ſhall héerafter
declare) but haue as it were dallied &
ſported themſelues in probabilities, & béeing
for the moſt part vaine & friuolous argumēts,
me thinks they haue not brought
into the Church of God the true vſe, but
rather the abuſe of Philoſophie: and truly,
I ſay it ſéemeth to me, that into ye midſt
of ye Church, the Schoolemen haue brought
ſophiſtication and ſhameleſſe falſhood, decked
and adorned with the colour & name

of Philoſophie, as of an honeſt matrone, to
the great detriment & hurt of the Church.
But you will ſaye, they haue not gotten
this ſharpe knowledge of diſputing without
great labour and paines: I graunt it
to be ſo: for oftentimes when I ſée theſe
ſchoole men labouring, ſweating, and as it
were out of breath in theſe their, ſubtill
diſputations, they make me to remember
the Troyans, which with great labour and
care brought into their Citie, the counterfaite
Grecian Horſe, whereby enſued the
ruine of the whole Kingdome of Troy.
               Great, but vnprofitable is the labour of the ſchoole Doctors. So
theſe ſchoolemen with great induſtrie and
labour, haue brought into the church falſe
Philoſophie: that therehence, as from the
Troyan horſe might ſpring infinit errors:
by which, while theſe who ſhould haue ben
the watchmen ouer the Church, were euen
ouer whelmed in ſchoole ignoraunce, thoſe
errors haue crept in, corrupted and waſted
the Church of God (ſo as I maye vſe the
ſaieng of Eſayas) Except the Lord had left
vs a ſmal remnant, we had had no church
at all. A proofe héereof is the Church of
Rome, ſo depraued and corrupted, that
while we ſéeke the Church in the Church,
we are conſtrained, not without great ſorrow

and teares, onely to behold the aſhes
of the true Church. But becauſe I maye
not ſéeme héere more willing to lament,
then to diſpute: mark what I ſay, to wit,
that the ſchoolemen and queſtionarie Doctors,
haue neither followed the true manner
of diuine diſputations,Certaine Errours which are to bee found in the diſputations of the ſchoole Doctors The firſt errour to make their ground Logicke See Scotus and others, who haue vvritten vpon the maſter of ſentences, and in their diſputations called Quodlibets, &c. neither lawful
vſe of Logicke: & that this may the more
euidently appeare, out of diuers & ſundry
their errors, I will gather certaine, by the
which we may plainly ſée, that they haue

                  •
               rred not a little in their diſputations,
from the true manner of diuine Diſputing.
            The firſt errour that the ſchoolemen admit
in their diſputations is this: yt they
are wont to diſpute by the principles of
Logicke, and from thence to fetch their
concluſions. So queſtions being propoſed,
they make the grounde thereof Logicke,
and not Diuinitie, ſo that the Scriptures
in theſe their Diſputations, are
dumme and ſpeachleſſe: for they oftentimes
alleadge the Philoſophers as Authoures
in theyr Diſputations, but verye
ſeldome the Apoſtles.
            And if at anye time they bring in
the Doctours, they confuſedlye mingle

their authoritie with the authoritie of the
Scriptures, neither doubt they to tearme
their writings, by the name of the Scriptures.Lomb. li. 1. Sent. diſt. 34. & li. 2. ſent. diſt. 9. &c
But we haue learned and that out
of diuinitie to take our principles from diuinitie,
when ſo euer we diſpute thereof:
and that we ought ſo to doe, it is manifeſt
euen by Logicke, which doth forbid to goe
from the principles of one art to another,
or to wander without the compaſſe
of the ſcience, wherein wée haue begun to
diſpute. Sithen then, diuinitie is farre aboue
all other ſciences, it were not onely
v
                  •
               rie fooliſh, but alſo impious and vngodly,
to make it ſubiect to the principles of
Philoſophie. And alſo to make the Doctors
equall with the Prophets and Apoſtles, is
altogether a thing intollerable. Wherefore
I thinke no man doubteth (except hée
wil reaſon like an Atheiſt) but that I haue
ſufficiently proued this firſt errour of the
Shoolemen.
            The ſecond errour is this, that in matters
of diuinitie which are moſt true and
plaine,
                  
                     •
                  . Error. To reaſō probably on plaine truths. they diſpute both Pro and Contra,
as it were with probable argument vpon
the grounds thereof: when as they ought
not ſo to doo in theſe pointes: it béeing

both from the vſe of true reaſoning, as alſo
from the nature of diuinitie: for Topicall
talke of diſputations are to be left to
common kinde and exerciſes. But treatiſes
or diſputings ſtanding vpon infallable
grounds (of which ſort moſt chiefly are
the diſputations of diuinitie) doe require
demonſtratiue, plaine, and euident diſputatiōs,
which ought to ſtand on moſt true,
neceſſarie, and infallable Sylogiſmes or
arguments. Indéede the Philoſophers
were wont ſometimes to diſpute both
Pro and Contra, touching the principles
of their artes and ſciences, that the truth
might thereby more manifeſtly appeare.
But the diuines diſpute not about the
principles of diuinitie, becauſe they are of
themſelues moſt true, and without all controuerſie.
And furthermore ther is nothing
more contrarie to the nature of faith, then
doubtfulneſſe, and that accademicall wauering
in giuing conſent; the which being
a long time a goe buryed and cleane wiped
awaie by the moſt learned diſputations
of Saint Auguſtine,
               Contra Aca. and other the
olde Fathers, is nowe at laſt moſt vnluckely
(I know not by what meanes)
raiſed newe by the Schoole Doctors, and

euen as it were brought out againe from
hell.Apolog, ad 
                     〈◊〉
                  , louin Verie ſharply did Hierome taunt
Iouinian, for that hée diſputed in a queſtion
of diuinitie after the manner of the
Schooles, and not according to the true vſe
of doctrine: If then hée so taunted him,
how much more ſharply would he inueigh
againſt theſe our Schoole men▪ which haue
accuſtomed themſelues to diſpute no
other wayes euen in the principles and
grounds of diuinitie.
            And moreouer it commeth to paſſe and
often times happeneth to the Schoole men
which are toſſed nowe on this ſide, and
nowe on that ſide, as in many▪ and ſundrie
waues of Argumentes: at the laſt
(I ſaie) it commeth to paſſe, y• they themſelues
knowe not to what hauen, as to
a ſure porte to betake themſelues: Yea,
euen ſo, that that ſubtill Scotus, as alſo
many other doo leaue theyr matter euen
rawe and vndetermined, giuing leaue to
theyr Readers to bée on which ſide they
will. If you bée of this ſide (ſaie they) then
muſt you aunſwere the contrarie argumentes:
but if you had rather to bée on
the other side, then loe, this haue you
to aunſwere to the contrarie parte.

Naie: what is this: That in many obiections
they ſaye nothing, but bidde the
Reader ſéeke the reſolution himſelfe if
hée will haue it: yea, and againe ſometime
they ſaie, let him anſwere that can.
I pray you now tell me, are theſe diuinelike
diſputations wherein aboue all other
things is required a certaine perſwaſiō of
faith? or is this analitical or reſolute, wher
as the Philoſophers wil haue nothing taken
for reſolute & certaintie, except it bée
brought to an infallible knowledge: and
then to place theſe things in the moſt firm
degrée of truth?
            The thirde errour is that they obſcure
and doo not beautifie the truth with their
ſubtill craftineſſe:3. Error▪ They darken the truth. for they make thoſe
things which be difficult and harde, more
harde by their crooked and ill fauoured
queſtions: and againe, thoſe thinges,
which are eaſie, and not harde of themſelues,
they altogether darken by theyr
intricate obſcuritie and darkeneſſe of queſtions;
and as the common ſaieng is,
they séeke to vndoo a knotte where none
is.
            And is there anye man (I praye you
whatſoeuer) except hée haue altogether

hardened himſelfe with theſe their barbariſmes,
which doth not vtterly flie them:
yea if he doo but onely heare the horrible
hiſſing of their barbarous wordes, right
ſoone perſwadeth himſelfe, g he ſhal neuer
be able to carrie in his mind thoſe things,
which his eares cannot abide to heare.
Wherfore, that which Auguſtine ſomtime
ſpake of Sophiſtrie,Con. Aca. may very well (as me
thīketh) agrée with ye ſchoole doctors, to wit,
that it was like to Cacus caue: for while
as the Schoolemen doo ſo reioyce in ſtrange
opinions as in forreine riches, they ſo affect
obſcuritie & ſéeke ſuch ſtarting holes, that
ſo often as they diſpute, they ſéeme not to
explicate the matters, but rather to make
the ſame intricate, and in truth there is
not ſo much heard the voyce of men, as the
bellowing of beaſtes, out of thoſe darke
caues of their obſcure queſtions.
            And finally the fourth error is,Error. 4 Is theyr vaine queſtions that the
ſchoolemen or rather queſtionarie Doctors,
doo ſpend their time in vain and friuolous
queſtions, and thoſe not ſo expounded, as
darkened by them: the which vainneſſe in
words the Apoſtle would haue altogether
abandoned from him, who is a preacher in
the Church of God. For a little after hée

ſaith, Fooliſh and vnprofitable queſtions
forſake,2. Tim. 2 knowing that they bréede ſtrife.
And how true this is, it doeth enidently
appeare in the queſtionarie Doctors, of
whome you ſhall ſcarce finde two that doo
agrée in one opinion. For ſo Scotus doeth
diſagrée from Thomas of Aquine, and Occam
from Scotus, and the other from Occam,
that you can ſcarce enter into theyr
writings, but that you muſt be pertaker of
their contention and ſtrife: when as indéed
thoſe are the true diuine treatiſes and exerciſes
in diuinitie, which eſtabliſh & confirme
our faith, and are made to the edifi
               
                  •
               ng
& comfort of ye whole church. And therfore
r
                  •
               ght well doth Auguſtine admoniſh
vel, ſaying:E
                     •
                  chi. 
                     •
                  d Lauren. cap. 55. 
               That there is no neede to determinate
or open thoſe things with daunger,
which may be vnknown without danger or
hurt▪ wherby we may easily perceiue that
ye kind of diſputing which y• Popiſh ſchoole
doctors haue vſed, hath verie litle or no fellowſhip,
with ye true diuine treatiſes or excerciſes.
Wherefore y• I may haue ſome fa
               
                  •
               uour
of thoſe which professe thēſelues eni
               
                  •
               ious
to Logicke: héere I ſhew them how y•
they may turne their former vpbraidings
& repr
                  •
               hentions: and may ſay y• the philoſophie

of theſe queſtionarie doctors & ſchoolemen
is altogether vain deceit, yea, the mother
of contention, that craftie art of building
and deſtroying, which ought vtterly
to be repulſed from ye true Church of God,

                  •
               ogether both with the Moabites & Ammonits:
Thus let them ſaie, and then I muſt
néeds confeſſe, that I haue nothing to ſaie
againſt them.
            But the Popiſh Schoole men of this
our age,The Popiſh ſchol doctours of ou
                     •
                   time frame not ſuch argumentes in their diſputations as y• auncient learned vvere vvont. fa
                  •
               e vnto themſelues another

                  •
               inde of writing: for theſe contriue not
together naked Silogismes as the other
were want, but they vſe long and tedious
declamations, chiefly againſt thoſe which
professe the ſinceritie of pure doctrine of ye
Goſpell: in dooing of which matter, they
willingly abſtaine from ſilogiſmes or arguments.
For where as for the moſt parte
they blowe forth their malitious 
                  〈◊〉
               , &

                  〈…〉
                their vile 
                  〈◊〉
               , thinking it
cannot be aptly concluded in mode and figure
after a short forme of argument, therfore
they rather 
                  〈…〉
                a more larger
scope of diſputing. Sith thē as I ſuppoſe▪ it
is manifeſt euen by those thinges which I
haue before declared, y• the diſputations of
ye popish doctors are neither true diuine diſputatiōs,

nor ordered by ye rules of logicke.
It ſhall be neceſſarie & néedfull therefore
to ſet down ſome method,The method to diſpute both diuinely & ſchoole like, neceſſatie in our time. wherby we may
diſpute both diuinely & alſo ſchoolike: & (to
repeat Auguſtines words) y• we may be able
vtterly to baniſh the falſe brauling of
ſophiſtrie, the which (I woulde to God) the
learned diuines & thoſe which are ſkilfull
in ye ſame moſt excellent art of Logick, (of
the which ſorte I doubt not but there bee
many) would determine with themſelues
to doo, & ſo to ſet downe both to vs nowe, &
alſo to the poſterities héereafter, ye waie to
diſpute both ſchoolike & diuinelike. For if
S. Auguſtine moſt excellently compared ye
knowledge of humane ſciences,D
                     •
                   doct. Chri. lib. 2. cap. 40. vnto ye treſure
of Aegypt, which ye 
               Iſraelites carried away
with them: truely then we which ſee
many in theſe our daies to abuſe thoſe so
               
                  •
               en
ornaments and riches, to the f
                  •
               aming
of error, that Idoll: it were not amiſſe but
very requiſite & neceſſarie, that the good &
learned men, shuld willingly beſtow thoſe
riches, to the building of the tabernacle of
God, and to the fortifying of the truth againſt
the errors of men. And vntill thoſe
which doe excell in the ſtudie of diuinitie,
as alſo in the ſcience of Logicke, doo take

in hand to perfourme this matter, I will
ſet downe ſomething as touching this,
(although ſlender) for thoſe young mens
ſakes, which are ſtudious of Diuinitie: ſo
that they which héerafter write, may adde
the true colours to theſe my firſt and rude
liniaments.
            There are two waies how to intreate
of Diuinitie,Tvvo vvayes to intreat of diuinitie. the one compact with a full
and flowing ſtyle, which teacheth the ſimple,
 & ſtirreth vp the slouthfull to imbrace
 the doctrine of truth: The other more
pithie, but ſhort, the which putting away
thoſe things that may moue the affections
of the minde, and deueſting it ſelfe of all
flowers of Rhetoricke, ſheweth vnto vs
things ſimple and plaine as they are of
themſelues, and ſetteth downe plaine and
naked arguments, ſo that the truth of matters
may be manifeſtly séene, and as it
were touched with our hands. And this
laſt way perchaunce, is not ſo well welcome
to thoſe which, are delighted in pleſantneſſe
of ſpeach but truly no leſſe profitable
to all thoſe which are both louers
of simplicitie, and desirous of the truth.A ſimilitude.
For like as the view of mans bodie is a
great deale more pleaſaunt to beholde,

while it is clad with the fleſh, & the bloud
running in each veyne, hauing a comelye
colour: yet notwithſtanding if we come
at any time to the Anatomie, then the facultie
of each part, and the conſtitution of
the whole bodie is a great deale better
knowne: ſo if any wil wiſely & diligently
weigh thoſe larger and pleaſanter treatiſes,The brief & ſchool like treatiſes are as it vver an Anatomy of ye large and copious vvriting or ſpeakings
and bring them to arguments as vnto
Anatomies, then without doubt he ſhal
eaſily perceiue, whether they be abſolute &
perfect in euerie point; or whether there be
anye thing wanting: and as the Phiſition
ſheweth foorth euen as it wer with the
finger, the original and cauſes of diſeaſes,
ſo ſhal he héere doo touching errors, if there
be any. The former ſort doeth indéede delyght
the mindes, as wll of thoſe which
are learned, as thoſe which are vnlearned:
but this latter manner of exerciſe, ſith it
is occupied in that onely kinde of matter,
which appertaineth to doctrine, is more
méete for thoſe which are beſt learned, who
are nothing moued with the floud of vain
wordes, if eſpecially there be no force of
matter contained in them, becauſe that
ſpeach without reaſon, is not to be counted
any thing worth. Auguſtine, Ciprian,

Hillarie, Hieronimus, and diuers olde learned
Fathers, haue vſed this kinde of diſputing
very much: & this alſo the ſchoolemen
ſeemed to profeſſe, but with what ſucceſſe
I haue ſhewed alreadie. But chieflye
we muſt conſider and haue great care on
doth ſides, that when we diſpute touching
doctrine, all our arguments be neceſſarye
and pertaining to doctrine, ſo that they bée
grounded vppon moſt ſure principles and
infallible groundes of Diuinitie. And aboue
all things, we muſt beware that we
take not things which may be diſputed on
both ſides, for things neceſſarie: things
which be ſtrange, for thoſe that are knowen:
falſhoode, for truth; the which trulye
dooth happen oftentimes in much lauiſhing
out of ſpeach, the which ye aduerſaries
of the truth, moſt commonly abuſe, where
by they may the more conuenientlye hyde
themſelues vnder the couerte of manye
words: ſo that when they haue ſaid much,

                  •
               hey would alſo ſéeme to haue ſpokē truth.
The beſt & chiefest for this miſchiefe
is, if after the long circumſtaunces,
that then there be
               
                  •
                fet downe a briefe Logicall
handling of thoſe their wordes ſpoken
before, to be as it were an Anatomie

and recapitualation of all ſubtil ſophemes,
and craftie fallaces: And when the falſehood
of words is cleane taken away, it wil
bewray thoſe things which are falſe, it wil
ſet truth againſt falſhood, and beare them
both out: yea finally it wil bring to paſſe
(euen as Auguſtine ſometime ſaid) That
each thing with other,Cout. Ma
                     •
                  . lib. 3. cauſe with cauſe, and
reaſon with reaſon may ſtriue together. And
héere who ſéeth not, that when errors are
cleane taken awaye, how eaſely the truth
will ouercome: and the ſame truth which
the huge floud of words had ouer whelmed,
will euen willingly as it were aduaunce
hir ſelfe vp againe. Sith then that ſchoollike
handeling of matters will bring ſo
great profit (ſo ye Logick be directed by the
true rules of diuinitie) I thē intreat & beſéech
theſe learned diuines of this our age,
which are defēders of ye goſpel, yt they haue

                  •
               are héerof, & ſet down vnto vs ſome certain
& eaſie methode of this ſchoolike way, how
to handle each point: y• which we may follow,
and the which alſo may be both to vs
preſent, as alſo to ye poſterities héereafter a
moſt true touchſtone wherby we may trie
the ſundry workes of diuers men, which
haue written of diuinitie: ye which if they

ſhall performe, they ſhal greatly profit the
Church of God, eſpecially in theſe times,
in which each man ſtriueth in ſetting forth
of bookes touching the principall pointes
of diuinitie, who may doo beſt. For where
as the Ciuilians only write touching their
lawes, the Phiſitions of their facultie, and
ſo all others of thoſe artes and ſciences
which they profeſſe, & in ye which they are
conuerſant: yet notwithſtanding it commeth
to paſſe (I knowe not by what
meanes) that not onely diuines, but alſo
men cleane voide of diuinitie, of all ſorts,
are wont now euerie where to diſpute in
their bookes touching diuinitie: ſo yt héerein
I aſſent with Nazianzene,
               De mod. in diſp. Ser. which before
time hath moſt gréeuouſly complained
of this matter. And we haue thought
good to publiſh this our ſmall labour abroad,
not yt we thinke we haue obteyned
ye ſame methode whith we deſire, but that
by this meanes we may at the leaſt giue
a teſtimonie that wée looke for a more exact
methode from the learned diuines, yea,
and earneſtly deſire them to performe the
ſame.
            Beholde then wée héere ſet downe a
ſchoolelike treatiſe of diuinitie, takē out of

the firſt Chapter of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,
to wit,A treatiſe of ye word of God vvritten. touching the word of God
written, againſt mannes traditions, about
which matter there is great controuerſie
betwéene vs and the Papiſts. And for this
cauſe I omit the handling of this point at
large, becauſe it may be eaſily ſéene in the
writings of late, ſet forth on both partes:
of which writings I wil make as it were
a certaine reſolution or anatomie in this
ſchoole like treatiſe.Hovv the diſputations of diunitie differ frō others, & that they ought reuerently to bee handled. But before I come to
this my purpoſe, I am willing ſomewhat
to admoniſh the Reader, howe that theſe
diſputations touching ye Scriptures doth
farre differ from all others. For in diſputations
of Philoſophie, Phiſicke, ciuill gouernment,
and ſuch other, there eloquence
ſheweth it ſelfe, there deſire to excell doeth
rule, there oratorie pleading burſteth out:
yea, oftentimes in ſuch matters, men deſire
nothing but to ſhew forth the braueneſſe of
their wits, or elſe ſéeke after glorie and
praiſe. But in diuine diſputations, where
(as Auguſtine ſayth) Brauerie muſt not
bée ſought,De doct. Chri. li. 4. cap. 19 but good documentes and leſſons,
and that with great reuerence: yea,
and verie reuerently wée muſt diſpute of
holy things, not as vpon the ſtage before

men, but as in the middeſt of the Church
before the liuing God and his Angelles:
not for the deſire of victorie, but for the
maintenaurce of the truth, in as much as
Paule forbiddeth the Paſtours of the
Church, once to ſpeake of vaine queſtions,1. Tim. 6.
or contentions of wordes, which can ſcarce
be done without the detrument of the
truth. Wherfore praying aide at the hands
of almightie God, that he will direct and
eſtabliſh this our labour by his holy ſpirit,
let vs procéede into this moſt holy conflict,
in the which the worde of GOD is
the place of combat, God himſelfe the
chiefe Iudge, truth the victorie, ſaluation
the garland of triumph. And héereby
with more valiant mindes we take vpon
vs this moſt noble conflicte, becauſe it
otherwiſe happeneth in this, then in other
battayles, for there hée alone is crowned
which vanquiſheth, but ye ende of this battaile
is ſuch, that euen hée which is vanquiſhed
(ſo that hée acknowledge himſelfe
ouercome and imbrace the truth) ſhal likewiſe
bée crowned,Queſt. ver. 108. together with the victour.
And Auguſtine ſayth, that it is better
to be ouercome of the truth, then to be
willing to ouercome the truth with falſehoode.

For whatſoeuer men practiſe againſt
the truth, yet this muſt they know,
to wit, that veritie cannot be vanquiſhed:
the which Auguſtine alſo calleth perpetuall
victorie.De Ciuie. Dei. li. 2. cap. 29. 1
            
            Furthermore, this point of doctrine,The vſe of this diſputation.
touching the which our diſputation is, is
of ſo greate weight that it maye bée
thought (and that worthelye) to bée the
verie foundation of all Religion. And
therefore (not without greate cauſe) the
Prophet Dauid doeth acknowledge the
worde of GOD to bée a Lanterne,Pſal. 119. the
which except it lighten our féete, of neceſſitie
wée muſt walke in moſt horrible
darkeneſſe: yea, alſo wée both ſtumble
and fall. But the defenders of the Popiſh
Church, doo ſo hotly ſtriue and contende
for mans Traditions, and thinke
them no leſſe worthie to bée retayned,
then ſome precious Picture of Pallas, the
which béeing taken awaye, they thinke it
not poſſible any longer to defend or maintaine
their pontificiall chaire, wherein there
haue bene ſo manye Vicars aſſaulted, and
nowe at the laſt (Truth preuaylyng)
ſhall be quite ouerthrowen and brought
vnto naught. But that wée maye

come to the matter,The diuiſiō of this vvorke this diſputation ſhall
be diuided into ſixe parts. Firſt, we will
 ſet downe our owne opinion and then the
opinion of the aduerſarie: & then we will
trie them both, ſo y• thereby maye appeare
 what is the ſtate of our controuerſie. Secondly,
we will confirme our opinion by
manifeſt proofe of ſcriptures, and by moſt
ſure and flat demonſtrations grounded on
 thoſe places ſo collected. Thirdly, we will
refell the opinion of the other partie by negatiue
 diſputations. Fourthly, we will
wipe away the obiections of the aduerſarie,
which they wreſt out of the ſcriptures.
 Fiftly, we will take away ye foundations
which they take out of the writings of the
Doctors, to ground their opinions on.
 And ſixtly, we will heare the olde
Doctors touching this point, agreeing
both with vs, and
the word of God.
⁂
         
         
            
            THE FIRST CHAPTER.
            
               
                  
                     He, 1. ve. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   ¶At ſundrie times, and in diuers manners,
God ſpake in the olde time to our Fathers
by the Prophets: In theſe laſt
dayes, he hath ſpoken vnto vs by his
ſonne.
            
            
               WHen Tertulian would enter
into the conflict of diſputation,
and ioyne with
the aduerſarie: hée was
woont to bonder the whole
ſumme of the queſtion,
with certain bondes (for ſo himſelfe ſaith)
whereby he might not ſwarue from the
matter which he had in hand. And that we
alſo may doo the like,Our opinion and mind touching the vvorde of God. we will firſt propone
or ſet down our minde and opinion (which
is the opinion of each reformed Church,)
touching the word of God, by the teſtimonie
of the ſame word of God which is this.
            All neceſſarie principles of chriſtiā faith,
are contained in the holy Scriptures.
            
               
This our ſentence or opinion we thus
expound, out of that place of ye Epiſtle to ye
               Hebrewes which miniſtreth vnto vs,The declaration of our opinion or minde. ſufficiēt
matter for this diſputation. God ſpake
in the time of the olde Teſtament in diuers
and ſundrie manners to our fathers,
to wit, by oracles, viſions, dreames, by Vrim
and Thummim, finaly by ye prophets,
ſpeaking by the motion or inſpiration of
the ſpirit of God, and the ſame worde of
God, (the ſpirit of God ſo commaunding)
was committed to writing, both by Moyſes,
and alſo by other Prophets, and moſt
holy men: Now in theſe laſt dayes, Ieſus
Chriſt, the chiefe and moſt perfect Doctour
and teacher of his Church being giuen to
the world, taught the Apoſtles by mouth, &
ordained them teachers for his Church,
which did publiſh in writing the doctrine
of the Goſpell receiued from Chriſt, & by
them taught by mouth. Sith then ye word
of God is the meaſure of our faith, & that
that word of God remaineth in the moſt
holy monuments or writings of the ſcriptures,
it followeth of neceſſitie, that al the
principles which are neceſſarie to faith
and ſaluation of the Church, are contayned
in the holy Scriptures: and whatſoeuer

the Apoſtles haue taught, we ought to
looke for them in the holy Scriptures: neither
ought we to receiue any tradition in
matter of faith. And becauſe matters are
made more manifeſt by ūmilitudes, wée
will take our ſimilitude from a King,
which by mouth proclaimeth an Edict, &
then willeth the ſame to be printed, the
which being done, men are not wont curiouſlye
to enquire of others, which eyther
heard or wer preſent at the proclamation,
what is contained in the Kings Edict, becauſe
the Edict is in print, to ye which they
muſt ſtand, and the which they muſt alſo
beléeue. So then I affirme, in as much as
the word was proclaimed and declared by
the Apoſtles and euangeliſts, and by them
committed to writing, it were in vayne
and foolish now a dayes anye other where
to be ſought, then in the Scriptures:
what the Apoſtles and Euangeliſtes did
teach by mouth.
            But now the opinion of the aduerſarie
is this. That all principles of Religion
neceſſarye for our Chriſtian faith,The opinion and minde of ye Papiſt
                     •
                  .
are not contained in the holye Scriptures.
The which theyr opinion they
thus expounde. Although the worde of

God be the meaſure of our faith, yet the
whole worde of God is not extant in the
ſcriptures:The declaration & expoſition of their opinion. for many things were ſpoken
by the Apoſtles & Euangeliſts which they
writ not. Furthermore the Catholike
church ſay they, (meaning the Church of
Rome) is ſo endowed with the ſpirite of
God, that ſhe is able of hir ſelfe to deliuer
thoſe things which are neceſſarie both to
faith & ſaluation. Wherefore that we may
haue the whole word of God, the Apoſtolicall
and eccle
                  ••
               aſticall traditions muſt bée
added to the ſcriptures: this is their opinion.The ſtate & point of this cō
                  trouerſie
Now then you may ſée manifeſtlye,
what is the ſtate or iſſue of our controuerſie:
for this is that which muſt be diſcuſſed:
whether the whole word of God deliuered
by the Prophets and Apoſtles, and
neceſſary for our ſaluation, be contained in
the Scriptures, which is the word written,
or not: we affirme that it is: they
ſaye naye: ſo then there 
                  •
               anne bee but
one of our opinions true: as is manifeſt
by the first groundes of Logicke.The tearms of this queſtion expounded In anye
reaſoning, the affirmatiue or negatiue

                  〈◊〉
                needes be true, but before we
goe about the confirmation of our opinion,
we will ſet downe the bounds & limits

of our queſtion both briefely and ſhorte.What the vvorde of God is.
When we ſay the word of God, we mean
not that eternall Word the Sonne of the
eternall and euerlaſting father, being the
ſecond perſon in Trinitie: but that externall
worde by the which God hath made
manifeſt vnto men his will and pleaſure,
and therefore we adde and ſay that worde
which was deliuered & taught by the Apoſtles
and Prophets, ſo that it may be more
manifeſt what we meane by the word of
God.What tradition is. Alſo this word Tradition maye not
onely be referred to the word taught by
mouth, but alſo to the word written, as it
is manifeſt in the ſecond to the Theſſalonians,
the ſecond chapter, where the Apoſtle
ſaith, Stand faſt and keepe the traditions
or inſtructiōs which you haue ben taught
either by word or by Epiſtle. And euen after
this ſort alſo, haue the old fathers vſed
to ſpeake, as we will ſhewe in the proper
place: notwithſtanding in this queſtion,
according to the manner of ſpeaking, it is
reſtrained to that worde which is taught
by mouth.What is meant by this word: Neceſſarie to ſaluation. Furthermore we meane by the
word of God, neceſſary to our ſaluation, al
thoſe things which God hath commaunded
vs to beléeue with a moſt ſure perſwaſion

of faith, ſo that we maye make a difference,
betwéene faith and opinion, and
betwéene the principles of Chriſtian religion,What is meant by holye Scripture.
and the probable diſputations and ordinaunces
of men. Laſt of all, by ye name
of the holy Scripture, we vnderſtand all
the bookes Canonicall both of the new and
olde teſtament. And thus much I thought
good to ſpeak briefly touching the explication
of our queſtion.
         
         
            The ſecond Chapter.
            
               HEther to we haue declared
our minde & opinion touching
the worde of God:A demonſtratiue or euident diſputation.
nowe it reſteth that wée
confirme the ſame by moſt
certaine proofes and arguments
deriued and taken out of the ſame
word of God, and ſo at the laſt a flatte demonſtratiue
or moſt true argument being
gathered from moſt true principles, wée
may rid the whole matter out of all obſcuritie,
placing it in the moſt manifeſt lyght
of truth. And to bring this to paſſe, we wil
 follow this order. Firſt to ſet downe certaine
places of ſcripture, from whence we
 will draw our arguments. Secondly the

places of Scripture being collected and
brought together, we will fet a true definition
of the word of God: the which definition
alſo, ſhall be ye proofe of our argument,
cutting away all exception & doubt.
And although in the reciting of the places
of ſcripture, I doo not curiouſly labor touching
the order thereof (for each place of
ſcripture is of ſufficient authority to make
anye concluſion) yet notwithſtanding, I
haue taken ſome care, that the order of the
places of ſcripture, maye aunſwere vnto
each parts of the definition, aſmuch as may
be. Wherefore let vs begin with this place
of the Apoſtle, which hath miniſtred occaſion
vnto vs of this diſputations.
            
               The firſt place.
               God at ſundrie times and indiuers manners
in the old times,Heb. 1 ſpake to our fathers by
the Prophets, but in theſe laſt daies, he hath
ſpoken vnto vs by his ſonne.
               Whereby we conclude thus.
               If the word of God being ſufficient or
neceſſarie vnto the ſaluation of the church,The Sylogiſme or argument
was deliuered firſt vnto vs by the Prophets
and then by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and
that worde of GOD ſo deliuered by the
Prophettes, is this daye onelye to bee

ſought for in the writings of the Prophets.
Then truly the word of God deliuered vnto
vs by Chriſt and his Apoſtles, muſt bee
ſought for onely in the writings of the Apoſtles,
except any good reaſon may be giuen
to the contrarie.
               But the word of God neceſſarie to the
ſaluation of the Church, was deliuered firſt
vnto vs by the Prophets, & then by Chriſt
& his Apoſtles, & the ſame word of God
deliuered by the Prophets, is this day onely
to be ſought in the writings of the Prophets
& no wher els: neither any good reſon to the
cōtrarie can be rendred, why the like ſhuld
not be, touching the word of god deliuered
by Chriſt and his Apoſtles.
               Wherefore we conclude, that the word of
god neceſſarie to the ſaluatiō of the church,
is onely to be ſought for in the writings of
the Prophets and Apoſtles.
               Now let vs trye our argument.The explication or proofe of the argument. This
ſyllogiſme or argument is hypothetical or
double, ye vſe wherof is verie neceſſarie ſo
often as we ſhall be occupied in ye comparing
of things together. And ye hypothetical
or double arguments are verie néedful
in diuine diſputations, is manifeſt both by
the old Doctors, alſo by ye new ſchoolemen,

who moſt often vſe them. Wherefore I
doubt not to vſe theſe, euen as well as the
categoricall arguments: becauſe the matter
or grounds of our diſputations are not
Topicall, or ſtanding on the inuention of
art, but grounded on expresſſe places of
Scriptures, and therefore thoſe kind of arguments,
are not inferiour to others. The
ground or matter therefore of our argument
is made manifeſt euen by the light
of nature,The confirmation of the cōference. who biddeth vs of things like, to
iudge the like. And theſe principles which
we haue drawne from nature her ſelfe, the
Apoſtle teacheth vs that they are not to be
reiected, when as in the matter of regeneration,
he bringeth the Corinthians to the
conſideration of nature: For being ſchooled
by natures rule, ſayth Tertulian,
                  Tert. de reſur. car. thou
maiſt the eaſilier beléeue the Propheſie.
Now if wée marke the ſubſtance, we ſhall
finde the worde of God both in the olde
teſtament and in the new to bée all one:
For the Apoſtle profeſſeth, ſaying: That
he hath ſpoken nothing, but that which the
Prophets and Moſes had before ſpoken.Act. 26.
I confeſſe that the publiſhing of the word
of God in ye new Teſtament, was a great
deale more excellent and fruitfull then before:

yea, and that maketh for our cauſe,
and therefore farre wide is it, that it ſhuld
hurt vs or our matter, as héereafter in our
diſputation, we will more at large proue.
Let vs then make a compariſon betwéene
the olde and newe Teſtament, as much as
appertaineth to the word of God exhibited
in them both after this ſort: If God ſpake
by the Prophets in the old teſtament, then
alſo he hath ſpoken by the Apoſtles in the
new teſtament. And if the prophets taught
the word of God by mouth, the like ſo thē
the apoſtles haue done. And if the prophets
committed to writing the word of God, ſo
alſo haue the Apoſtles. Wherefore if the
prophets comprehended the whole doctrine
of ye old teſtament in their writings, why
ſhould not we ſay, yt the Apoſtles haue alſo
compriſed the whole doctrine of the goſpel,
in their bookes? Now let the defenders of
the contrarie opinion, bring foorth & ſhewe
ſome reaſon to diſprooue this my aſſertion.
I ſay ſome good reaſon, not borowed from
the dreames of mens braines, nor from topicall
& cauilling arguments, but deriued
from the word of God. But this they cannot
doo. Furthermore, I vrge this place of
the Apoſtle which we haue in hand, & reaſon

thus. If the word of God deliuered after
diuers manners, waies, and at manie
times, be now altogether to be found in ye
writings of the prophets: why ſhould not
we ſay the like of ye Goſpell, being ye word
of god, which (as ye apoſtle witneſſeth) was
not at ſundrie times or in diuers manners
deliuered? For otherwiſe who ſéeth
not, y• the apoſtles compariſon in the recited
text, were of no force. For if ye Apoſtle
had ſaide thus, then were our aduerſaries
opinion true: to wit, Like as in times paſt
vnder ye old teſtamēt God ſpake at ſundry
times & in diuers manners: ſo now likewiſe
hath he alſo ſpoken to vs in ye time of
the new teſtamēt at ſundry times, & in diuers
manners that is by ye writings of the
apoſtles, by apoſtolicall traditiōs not writen,
& alſo now ſpeaketh by the traditions
of ye church: ye which how it repugneth & is
contrarie to ye mind of ye apoſtle, euen our
aduerſaries thēſelues cānot denie ye ſame: &
thus much touching ye firſt part of our argument.
The minor,The confirmation of the ſecond part of the argument. which is ye ſecōd part
of our argumēt, containeth in it ſelfe, thrée
mēbers. Firſt, y• the word of god (neceſſary
to ye ſaluation of ye Church) was deliuered
vnto vs, firſt by ye prophets, & then after by 
                  
Chriſt and his Apoſtles: and this is manifeſt
by this place of the Apoſtle, in that he
ſayth, In times paſt he ſpake by his Prophets,
but in theſe laſt dayes by his ſonne:
And that this laſt ſpeaking apperteineth
alſo to the Apoſtles, it is manifeſt by the
words of the Apoſtle, in his ſecond chapter
of this Epiſtle, where he ſayth, y• the goſpel
was firſt preached vnto vs by Chriſt, and
then confirmed by thoſe which heard him.
And againe Iohn the 20. and 17. Chriſt ſaieth,Ioh, 20. 17
As my Father ſent me, euen ſo ſend I
you. And it cannot be denied but that the
Apoſtles publiſhed the Goſpel in writing.
               
                   The ſecond part of the minor is, that the
word of God deliuered by the Prophets, is
now only to be ſought for in the writings
of the Prophets. And this is proued by the
vſuall phraſes of the Scriptures, which by
the Prophets, meane the writings of the
Prophets, as Romanes the firſt, where hée
ſaith: Put a part for the Goſpell,Rom. 1. which
he had promiſed before by his Prophets,
in the holy Scriptures.Lu. 16 And againe Luk.
16. They haue Moſes and the Prophets.
Iohn. 6.Iohn. 6. It is written in ye Prophets. Acts.
26. Paule ſaith.Act. 26. O king Agrippa beléeueſt
thou ye Prophets? I know thou beléeueſt.

                  Luke. 24. And he began at Moſes,
                  Lu. 24 & at all
the Prophets, and interpreted vnto them
in all the Scriptures ye things which were
written of him. To conclude, becauſe I
will not recite many places, finally Peter
by the wordes of the Prophets meaneth
the writings of the Prophets.2, Pet. 1. 2. Epiſtle,
chapter. 1. And in the laſt ende of the ſame
chapter he ſaith thus: For ye propheſie came
not in olde time by ye wil of man, but holie
men of God ſpake as they were moued by
ye holy Ghoſt. Now if our aduerſaries will
not yéeld vnto vs, let thē bring good proofe
vnto vs to the contrarie: but y•, (as I haue
alreadie ſaid) they cannot doo.
               Now the third and laſt member is, that
they of the contrarie part, can bring forth
no proofe to the contrarie, but that we may
conclude touching the word of God deliuered
vnto vs by Chriſt and the Apoſtles, y•
it is wholy conteined in the writing of the
Apoſtles, as well as the word of God deliuered
by the Prophets, is contained in the
writings of ye Prophets, to wit, ſo much as
is neceſſarie for our faith & ſaluation. But
if at any time our aduerſaries affirme that
they can bring ſome good reſon to ye contrarie,
then they muſt bring ſuch as muſt be

both true and alſo agréeing to the Scripture.
And thus the parts of our argument
béeing confirmed, ye concluſion therof muſt
néeds be true.
            
            
               The ſecond place.
               It ſeemed good to me moſt noble Theophilus,Act. 1
to write vnto thee thereof from
point to point that thou mighteſt knowe
the certaintie of thoſe things, whereof thou
haſt ben inſtructed.
               
                  To this purpoſe alſo theſe places maye
ſerue.
                  Iude. I gaue my diligence (ſaith he) to write
vnto you of the common ſaluation. Philip.
chap. 3.Philip. 3. It greeueth mee not to write
the ſame things vnto you, and it is profitable
for you.1. Iohn. 1. 
                  Iohn. 1. Epiſtle. chap. 1. We declare
vnto you that which wee haue ſeene.
2. Peter. chap. 3.2. Pet. 3. This ſecond Epiſtle I now
write vnto you beloued, wherewith I ſturre
vp your pure mindes, to call to your remē
                  brance
the words which wer ſpoken before
of the holie Prophets, & alſo the commandements
of vs, the Apoſtles of the Lorde
and ſauiour. 2.2. Pet. 1. 
                  Peter. chap. 1. I will not ceaſe
to put you alwaies in remēbrance of theſe
things, although yee bee alreadie inſtructed
therein.
               From theſe and ſuch other places, we

drawe this argument.
               If the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts publiſhed
in writing the Goſpell, to his end,The argument. that the
truth of thoſe things which they taught by
mouth, might be the better knowne & confirmed,
and that thereby alſo it ſhould the
better ſinke into the mind and memorie of
men: then trulie the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts,
left all thoſe things in writing, which
by mouth they had taught, being neceſſarie
to faith and ſaluation.
               The Antecedent is true,
               And therfore my concluſion is alſo true
               The ground of our argument which is ye
firſt part cannot be denied,The explication or proofe of the argument. for then ye middle
would repugne with ye end: the which
far be it from vs, y• we ſhould once thinke,
eſpecially in them which did both ſpeake &
write ye goſpel, wt one & the ſelf ſame ſpirit.
As for ye ſecōd part of our argumēt it is cō
                  firmed
by ye former places in plaine words.
            
            
               The third place.
               Thou ſhalt not adde to the word which I
teach & command thee. And againe,
                  Deu, 4. Prou. 30. Thou
maiſt not adde vnto his word leaſt hee reproue
thee, and thou be found a liar.
Wherfore I ſaie,The argument if it be not lawful for mā to
ad anie thing to the writings of Moſes, then

truely, after that the writings of the Apoſtles,
were ioyned to the writings of Moſes
and the Prophets, we may plainly ſaie, that
the ſcriptures doo containe all thoſe things,
the knowledge and faith whereof is neceſſarie
and ſufficient, to ſaluation.
               The antecedent is true:
               Wherefore we ought not to doubt of the
truth of the conſequence.
               The firſt part of our ſylogiſme is manifeſt
not onely by the ſimilitude,The examining or triall of ye argument but alſo
by the often comparing of the worde of
God deliuered by Moſes, as alſo by the Apoſtles,
as it is prooued in the firſt place.
Our Minor is prooued by the places before
recited: which prooueth that we may
not adde vnto the word of God. And leaſt
our aduerſaries ſhould ſay, that that place
of Moſes is not tyed vnto the worde of
God written by Moſes: we will recite
certain places, which ſhall cut off all ſhifts
of our aduerſaries. Moſes Exodus. 24.
Writ all theſe words of the Lord. Againe,
Deut. Moſes wrote this law. Again, Deut. 28.Exod. 24.
                  All the words of this law,
                  Deu. 31. 
                  which is writen
in this booke.
                  Deu. 28. And Paule in the Act. 24.
I beleeue (ſaith he) all thoſe things which
are written in the Lawe & in the Prophets.
                  Act. 24.
                  
And that which Moſes ſaith Deut. 27. Let
each one be accurſed which abideth not in
all the words of this lawe:
                  Deu. 27. 
                  Paule thus expoundeth
Gal. 3. ſaieng,Gal. 3 
                  In all things which
are written in the booke of the lawe. By
which places we may eaſily perceiue, that
the word of God touching the which Moſes
ſpeaketh, is not to be interpreted the
writings of Moſes alone, neither to be applied
vnto certaine vnwritten verities deliuered
onely by the mouth of Moſes, as
the Iewes doctors doo falſly ſurmiſe, whoſe
errors haue long time ſince bene euen hiſſed
out of the Church of Chriſt.
            
            
               The 4. place.
               Get thee to the lawe and teſtimonie:Eſa. 8. If
they ſay not after this worde, there is no
light in them.
               Héereof we frame this argument.
               If the people vnder the lawe ought to
repaire to the Scriptures,The argument. and nothing was
to be receiued in matters of faith the which
was not contained in the holy Scriptures:
then truly by greater reaſon, afterward that
the doctrine of the Goſpell written of the
Apoſtles, was ioyned to the writings of the
olde Teſtament, (the which Apoſtles did
explicate and teach the true meaning of the

law) thoſe things alone muſt be receiued in
matters of faith, which are contained in the
writings of the olde and new teſtaments.
               The antecedent is true:
               Wherefore alſo the conſequent muſt be
true.
               The firſt part of our argument is manifeſt
of it ſelfe,The examining or triall of the argument through the force of compariſon.
Although, (if we haue reſpect to
the ground and ſubſtaunce thereof) the Apoſtles
ſpake no other thing, then y• which
was before ſpokē by Moſes & the prophets
as Paul affirmeth. Act. 26.Act. 26. Yet no chriſtian
hath at anie time doubted, but y• the publiſhing
of the word of God was far more
excellent and plentifull, after the Incar
                  
                     •
                  ation
of Chriſt, then it was before: lyke
as ye apoſtles in diuers places haue taught.2. Cor, 3. &c.
Wherefore; if before his incarnation, they
ought to be ruled by the word of god writen,
how much more then ought we now?
The minor is manifeſt by the recited places.
And h
                     •
                  re I am not ignorant, that this
afore recited place of the prophet, is diuerſly.
expounded of the learned: but howſoeuer
they expound theſe words, it cōmeth
to this effect: that they liue in moſt horrible
darkneſſe which deſpiſing the worde

of God, take vnto themſelues the errors of
inchanters, witches, and mans dreames.
            
            
               The fift place.
               Thou haſt knowne the holie Scriptures of
a childe,2. Tim. 3. which are able to make thee wiſe
vnto ſaluation, through the faith which is in
Chriſt Ieſus: for the whole Scripture is giuen
by inſpiration of God, and is profitable
to teach, to reproue, to correct, & to inſtruct,
in righteouſneſſe: that the man of God may
be abſolute beeing made perfect to euerie
good worke.
               If ſuch be the force of the holie Scriptures,The argument.
that it maketh a man wiſe & perfectlie inſtructed
vnto ſaluation, then ought we to be
content with the holie Scriptures in cauſes
and matters of faith.
               The Antecedent is true, And therefore
the conſequent muſt be the like.
               The firſt part of our argument is manifeſt
through the nature of perfection:The examining or triail o
                        •
                      ye ſilogiſme
for if ye ſcriptures make vs perfect, to what
ende then ſerue traditions not written?
And vnto this ende ſerueth the ſaying of
Paule before alleadged. The minor is manifeſt
and prooued by the place recited of
Paule. But peraduenture our aduerſaries
will héere obiect and ſaye, that Paule
                  
ſpake héere onely of the ſcriptures of the
olde Teſtament, becauſe Timothie was
inſtructed from his youth. But ſith Paule
héere addeth and ſaith, Through the faith
that is in Chriſt Ieſus, he doeth manifeſtly
declare, that the doctrine of the Goſpell,
was ioyned with the knowledge of the old
Teſtament. But they may ſaye, that the
Goſpell was not then publiſhed in writing,
but onely deliuered and taught by
mouth. Firſt let them tell me, whereby
they gather this? for it is manifeſt by the
fourth Chapter of that his Epiſtle, that
Paule wrote this ſame Epiſtle, verie
néere about the time of his death. And
héere if you will make a good account of
the times, you ſhall eaſilye perceiue, that
then: when this Epiſtle was ſent vnto
Timothie, all the Epiſtles of the Apoſtles,
(or well néere all) were put in writing.
And furthermore, what matter were it, if
then the doctrine of the Goſpell had not
bene publiſhed in writing, inaſmuch as it
was afterward done. Finally, if ye would
that Paule ſhould héere ſpeak touching the
writing of the olde Teſtament onely, then
woulde I make mine argument of more
force and reaſon thus: If the writings of

the olde Teſtament were of ſuch force that
they were able to make men wiſe vnto ſaluation,
how much more ſhall the whole
Scripture of the olde and new Teſtament,
be able to perform the ſame? But he which
ſhall denie y• this ſame excellent ſentence
of Paule touching the whole Scriptures,
(to wit, that it was giuen by inſpiration
of God, and is profitable to teach) doth appertaine
vnto the writings of the new teſtament,
he is not onely to be thruſt out
of the number of diuines, but is alſo to be
baniſhed out of the ſocietie of Chriſtians.
Neither yet let them goe about to cauill
with vs, for that the olde tranſlation hath
this word Prepared, and not abſolute Perfect
to all good workes. For truly (that I
maye not omit anie thing, and ſo ſwarue
from our argument) the Gréeke word ſignifieth
Perfection, as in the Actes. 21. ver. 5.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  But when the daies were full perfected and
ended, we went on our iournie, &c. Where
and in which place, Luke vſeth the ſame
Gréeke word which Paule doth vſe in the
Texte to Timothie, ſignifieng as you ſée
Abſolute and Perfect. Alſo the compounde
of the ſame verbe in Gréeke hath the lyke
ſignification: As Mathew. 21. ver. 26. By

the mouthes of babes and ſucklings, thou
haſt made perfect thy praiſe. Againe. 1.
Theſſa. 3. ver. 10.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Night & day praieng exceedingly,
that we might ſee your face, and
might accompliſh or make perfect,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  that
which is wanting in your faith. And again,
Heb. 13. ver. 22.
            
            
               The 6. place.
               Search the Scriptures, for in them you
thinke to haue eternall life.Iohn. 5.
               
               If the people in times paſt vnder the
lawe,The argument. doo thinke, and that not without good
cauſe to haue eternall life in the Scriptures,
that is, that all thoſe things were contained
in the Scriptures, the knowledge and faith
wherof attained euerlaſting life: then trulie
by greater reaſon we ought to beleeue the
ſelfe ſame, being now vnder the Goſpell:
after that to the ſcriptures of the old teſtament,
the writings of the Apoſtles was alſo
ioyned, which interprete and teach the veritie
and truth of the olde teſtament.
               The antecedent is true:The explication or triall of the argument.
               
               And therefore there is no doubt of the
conſequent.
               The force of compariſon, confirmeth the
firſt part of our argument: for ſuch kinds
of reaſons hath both Chriſt and his ApoſtlesLu, 23. 31.
                  
vſed,1. Pet. 4. 17 &c. neither can our aduerſaries deuie,
but that the writings of the new Teſtament,
are more excellent then the writings
of the olde.
               The other part of our argument is
proued by the expreſſe words of Chriſt: for
ſo far was it from Chriſt, that he wold reprooue
the Iewes for ſearching the Scriptures:
but did himſelfe rather reaſon after
that manner.
            
            
               The 7. place.
               That ye may learne by vs: that no man
preſume aboue that which is written,1. Cor. 4. &c.
               If we ought not to preſume to be wiſe
aboue that which is written:The Sylogiſme and the principles
of faith, appertain vnto true and perfect
wiſedome: then trulie ought wee to be
contented with the ſcriptures in cauſes and
matters of faith.
               The antecedent is true:
               Therefore the conſequent cannot be denied.
               The firſt parte of our Argument
is manifeſt of it ſelfe:The exaaminatiō of the Silogiſme The other part is
prooued by the place of the Apoſtle.
               Yet héere I muſt allſo confeſſe,
that this place of the Apoſtle Paule, is
otherwiſe expounded of certayne newe

Writers (to wit) of thoſe things, which
Paule himſelfe had before written. The
which ſence if anye man be willing to followe,
then thus make we our argument:
If Paule called backe the Corinthians vnto
his owne writings, how much more then
ought we to be called backe vnto the writings
of the whole Scriptures? But becauſe
the olde writers whome our aduerſaryes
followe moſt, doo expounde this place of
Paule generallye, I had rather to frame
mine argument from the interpretation
of them. There maye be alſo framed an
euident and plaine ſylogiſme in the ſecond
mode of the ſecond figure, flatlye denieng
their aſſertion in this ſort.
               Whoſoeuer groundeth anie Article of
faith vpō traditions not writtē, taketh vpon
him to be wiſe aboue that which is written.An euidēt argument
               
               But no man truly obeying the Chriſtian
& Apoſtolike, doctrine, doth take vpon
him, to be wiſe aboue that which is writtē.
               Ergo, No man truly obeying the chriſtian
& apoſtolike doctrine, doth groūd any principle
of faith vpon traditions not written.
            
            
               The 8. Place.
               Manie other things did Ieſus which are
not written in this booke:Iohn. 20. but theſe things

are written that you might beleeue that Ieſus
Chriſt is the ſonne of God, and in beleeuing
you might haue euerlaſting lyfe
through his name.
               If the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts wrote
thoſe things which ſeemed ſufficient and
neceſſarie,The argument. that we which beleeue may haue
eternall life: then truely the Articles of our
faith, are to be grounded vppon the Scriptures,
and not vpon traditions which are vnwritten,
which our aduerſaries tearme Apoſtolike.
               The Antecedent is true.
               And therefore the conſequent cannot
be denied.
               The truth of the firſt part of our Argument
is manifeſt,The explication of the argument. except peraduenture anie
man would goe about to thinke himſelfe
wiſer then either the Apoſtles or Euangeliſts:
the which God forbid that anie
man ſhould do. The conſequent is proued
by the words of Iohn.
               
            
            
               The 9. place.
               The lawe of the Lord is perfect, giuing
life & true wiſdome vnto man: yea,Pſa. 19 the law
of the Lord is right and iuſt,Pſa. 119 more precious
then golde,Deu. 4. ſweeter then honnie: the wiſedome
and vnderſtanding of the Church,Pſa. 4. &

he is bleſſed that meditateth or occupieth
himſelfe therein.
               If the ſcriptures of the olde teſtament in
their kinde were perfect,The argument. becauſe therein is
contained true wiſedome, and made thoſe
bleſſed euen as manie as willinglie and conſtantlie
did meditate therein: then trulie after
that the writings of the Apoſtles were
ioyned vnto the olde teſtament, (the which
writings of the Apoſtles doo explicate and
teach the veritie and truth of the ſaide olde
teſtament) then (I ſay) by good right & conſequence
the whole ſcriptures both of the
olde and new teſtament, may be called perfect,
as that which perfectlie containeth all
neceſſarie doctrine for the church of Chriſt.
               The antecedent is true:The explication of the argument. And therefore
the conſequence muſt be alſo true.
               The antecedent is manifeſt inough of
it ſelfe. The minor is prooued by the recited
places. For by the name and title of
the law, is often vnderstood ye whole ſcriptures
of the olde testament, as it is manifeſt
by the Apoſtle Paule Gal. 4. ver. 21. as
alſo the circumſtance of the afore alleaged
place doth most manifeſtly proue.Gal. 4. 21. Now frō
theſe and ſuch other places we will gather
a true definition of the holye Scriptures

after this ſort.
               
                  
                     A definitiō of holy Scripture. Heb. 1. 1 2. Ti. 3. 16 Heb 1. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 21 Lu. 1. 3 1. Iohn. 1. 1. Ioh. 20. 31 &c. The holie ſcripture is the word of God
giuen by diuine inſpiration from God, and
by the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts,
(mooued by the ſpirit of God) was written
in the bookes Canonicall of the olde and
new teſtament, that the veritie and truth of
God, might be taken and ſet free from the
obliuion and corruptings of men, & that the
Church might be perfectlie inſtructed and
confirmed in all thoſe things, the knowledge
and faith whereof is neceſſarie to ſaluation.
               This definition is moſt perfectly & subſtancially
true.
                     The explicating of the definition. 2. Pe. 3. 1. 2 Col. 3. 1 Pro. 30. 6 Eſa. 8. 20 &c. Pſa. 1. & 19. & 1. 9 &c, 2. Tim. 3 16. 17. 2. Pe. 1. 12 Ioh. 20. 31 2. Tim. 3 15 Iohn. 5. 39 For it standeth vpon ye 
                  Genus
& differēce, & containeth al thoſe cauſes,
both which ye Logitiās ſay belōg to ye 
                  Subiectū,
as alſo y• belōg vnto ye 
                  Attributū. And
eſpecially it cōtaineth ye efficiēt cauſe, vnder
ye which is added ye inſtrumētal, & thē ye
final cauſe, which two cauſes in ſuch kind
of matters, are eſpecially to be conſidered.
The ſpirit of god is ye cauſe efficiēt, who vsed
ye prophets & apoſtles as inſtrumēts: ye
cōīeruatiō of ye truth, & cōfirmation of the
church, is the end wherefore ye word of God
was put in writing: ſo this definition
ſtandeth vppon his full partes: and the
thing defined, and the definition, doo both

agrée together. Now from this definition
as from a moſt perfect & true ground, we
make thus our demonſtratiue argument.
               Whatſoeuer is the word of God giuen
by inſpiration from God,The argument. and written by
the Prophets, Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts, by
the motion of Gods ſpirit, &c. that contayneth
all principles neceſſarie to chriſtian
faith. But the holie Scripture is the word giuen
by diuine inſpiration, &c. Ergo the holie
Scriptures containe al principles neceſſarie
to the chriſtian faith.
               This argument is moſt euident and neceſſarie,
and ſtandeth grounded vppon
grounds of the former places, and contayneth
the veritie and truth of our whole
queſtion. Wherefore doth the Scriptures
containe all theſe things, the knowledge &
faith whereof are neceſſarie vnto ſaluation.
Truely becauſe the word of God was
written by the Prophets and Apoſtles to
this end, that the Church ſhould be perfectly
inſtructed, &c. Againe, whatſoeuer is ſpoken
of the one partie may be ſayde of the
other.The vnfolding of ye former reason. Furthermore, if anie doe aſke what
theſe things be, the knowledge and faith
whereof are neceſſarie to ſaluation? I anſwere,
the Scriptures. And againe when

I name the Scriptures, I name all thoſe
things, the knowledge whereof is neceſſarie
to ſaluation. The like alſo may be ſaid
touching the ground of our argument, the
which is the definition of the Scripture,
as is before ſaid: wherfore this our demonſtration
and argument is moſt manifeſt,
and hath brought the truth of our opinion
out of all queſtion or doubt: to wit, that
the holy ſcriptures containe all thoſe principles
neceſſarie to Chriſtian faith, the
which was our purpoſe to proue.
            
         
         
            The third Chapter.
            
               NOW after that the truth
of our opinion is made
manifeſt by the former demonſtrations
& affirmatiue
diſputation as at the
firſt we did determine:A diſputation confutatiue, vherein is refelled or confuted the opiniō or iudgement of ye Papistes, ſo
will we now come vnto the negatiue diſputation,
which is to refell and refute the
opinion of our aduerſaries. For although
ye truth béeing made manifeſt, ye falsehoode
muſt néeds bée confuted & ouerthrowen, &
by this our affirmatiue diſputation wée
haue manifeſtly proued, yt the ſcriptures do
containe all thoſe things, the knowledge &
faith whereof is neceſſarye to ſaluation:

yet notwithſtāding this ou
                  •
                
               
                  •
               egatiue diſputation
procéedeth as riſing of neceſſarie
conſequence, which is this: That ther is nothing
to be ſought for out of the holie ſcriptures,
the knowledge and faith whereof, is
neceſſarie to ſaluation. And by force of the
conſequence, traditions not written by the
Apoſtles, are not to be receiued in anie Article
and principle of faith: yet notwithſtanding,
it commeth to paſſe (I know not
by what meanes) that we are more delighted
in the confuting of errour and falſehoode,
then in confirming the truth. Wherfore
I could not let ſlip this kind of diſputation,
wherby the reader may be throughly
confirmed in the knowledge of ye truth.
This therefore is the opinion of our aduerſaries
which repugneth wt ours, euen as
it were Ex Diametro, to wit. That the holy
ſcriptures, do not cōtain al things, the knowledge
& faith whereof is neceſſarie to ſaluation.
The which error we thus confute.
            If Moſes, the Prophets, Chriſt, & the Apoſtles,The firſt argument againſt papiſtical traditions
did alwaies confirme the principles
of faith by the Scriptures, and not by vnwritten
traditions: & our aduerſaries on the
contrarie part will confirme the principles
of faith verie ſeldome by the Scripture, but

moſt vſualli
                  •
               a
                  •
               y vnwritten traditions, then
truelie our a
                  ••
               erſaries doo otherwiſe teach
the Church, then either did Moſes, the Prophets,
Chriſt, or the Apoſtles.
            The Antecedent is true,
            And ſo is the conſequent.
            And by force of the conſequent our aduerſaries
are not to be allowed in ye manner
of inſtructing ye church.The vnfolding of ye former reaſon. The antecedent
is true: & the cōſequēt is proued by this inductiō,
collected frō places of holy ſcripture.
            Moſes doth call them backe to the lawe
written, as S. Paule doth interprete it.Deu. 27. Gal. 3
            
            The ſame Moſes,Deu. 31 cōmandeth the law writen
to be publiſhed before all the people.
            Ioſua exhorteth the Iſraelits,Ioſu. 23 that they do
thoſe things which are written in the booke
of the lawe.
            In the time of Ioſia king of Iſrael,2. Kin. 23. the
people ſware to obſerue thoſe things which
were written in the lawe.
            The Prophets each where call the Iſraelites,Eſa, 8.
to the writings of Moſes.
            After the people returned from the captiuitie,Neh
                     •
                  m, 8.
the lawe of Moſes was recited: & the
worſhipping of God was taken from that
lawe written.
            Chriſt biddeth thē ſearch the Scriptures.Iohn. 5. Mat. 22.
            
            
               
Chriſt ſpeaking to the 
                  〈◊〉
                ſaith, yee
erre, becauſe ye know not the Scriptures.
            They haue Moſes and the Prophets,Lu. 16. let
them heare them.
            And Chriſt opened the vnderſtanding of
the Apoſtles,Lu. 24. that they might vnderſtand
the Scriptures.
            Paule preached Chriſt, alleadging the law
and the Prophets.Act. 26.
            
            Appollos reproueth the Iewes & proueth
that Ieſus is Chriſt by the Scriptures.Act. 28. &c.
            
            The Theſſalonians or chiefe of Beraea are
praiſed,Act. 18. becauſe they ſearched the Scriptures,Act. 17.
whether it were ſo, yea, or no, as
Paule had preached.
            And thus I conclude, that I may not bring
in all thoſe places of Scripture, which Chriſt
and the Apoſtles moſt often times alledged.
            This kind of induction is moſt firme and
cannot be refelled by any argument. And ye
force of ye conſequēt to what end it is directed
doth manifeſtly appeare, for ye prophets
& apoſtles are ordeined of god, to be inſtructers
of ye church, & were inſpired by the holy
Ghoſt. And Chriſt himſelfe is the moſt
perfect doctor of the Church, wherby we ſée
yt they which teach ye church of Chriſt other
wiſe then Chriſt himſelf, his Apoſtles and

Prophets haue taught: that is, not laieng
thoſe foundations which they layde, but
other: that they inſtruct the Church of
Chriſt amiſſe. But our aduerſaries teach
otherwiſe, inaſmuch, as they call ye church
not to the Scriptures alone, as is before
ſaid: but to traditions not written. And
out of the former argument, there ariſeth
this concluſion.
            If the Apoſtles (who although they wer
indued with the ſpirit of God) and taught
by mouth,The ſecōd argument againſt traditions. yet notwithſtanding did referre
themſelues vnto the Prophetical ſcriptures:
then a great deale more ought our aduerſaries
to referre their principles of doctrine,
vnto the holye Scriptures. And ſith they
doo not ſo: they are not to be heard.
            The antecedent is true:
            And therefore the conſequent muſt be
true.
            The antecedent is manifeſt by compariſon:The explication of the argument.
            
            And the truth of the conſequent is confirmed
in the former argument.
            If all things be not contained in the ſcriptures,
the knowledge and faith whereof,The third argument against traditions, is
neceſſarie to ſaluation, then it followeth,
that the ſpirit of God did not accompliſh

his effect, when he gaue the ſcriptures vnto
the Church.
            But the conſequent is moſt falſe & blaſphemous:
            So likewiſe is the antecedent.
            The conſequent of the former propoſ
                  •
               
               tion
was prooued, when we went to ſearch
out the cauſes of the ſcriptures in ye ſecond
chapter of this our diſputation,The vnfolding of the argument. where wée
affirmed yt the word of God was to this
end & purpoſe committed to writing, that
it might be freed and deliuered from the
corruption of man, and that it might help
the memorie of the godly, and finally, that
the Church might more and more bée inſtructed
and confirmed in thoſe things, the
knowledg & faith whereof, is neceſſarie to
ſaluation. Now, if all thoſe things be not
contained in the ſcriptures, then truly it
followeth, y• the ſpirit of God did not perfectly,
but in part accompliſh his effect: the
which God forbid. And certainly, if you
graunt this, (which cannot be denied) that
the ſcriptures were giuen vnto the church
not raſhly nor in vaine, but by the great
prouidence and wiſedome of God: then I
vrge this and ſay: If the ſcriptures were
giuen by God, that the word of god ſhuld

be ſet frée and deliuered from the corruption
of men, I pray you would the ſpirite of
God then, haue ſome certaine things neceſſarie
to ſaluation to be ſet frée from the
corruption of men, and ſome things not?
If the Scriptures were giuen to helpe the
memorie of the godly: was it then giuen
in part onely? or ſhall we ſay, that of thoſe
things which were neceſſarie to ſaluation,
that ſome things are to be committed
to memorie, and ſome things not? or if the
memorie of thoſe things could haue bene
kept and preſerued without the ſcriptures,
to what ende were the Scriptures? for
the ſpirite of God doth nothing in vaine.
If the Scriptures were written, to the
ende our memorie might be holpen, who
then can denie, that our memorie muſt bée
holpen by the Scriptures, in all things neceſſarie
to ſaluation? Finally, and to conclude,
If the Scripture were giuen by the
ſpirite of God, that thereby the Church
might be the better inſtructed, why then
ſhould not the Scriptures haue in them
al thoſe things, which are neceſſarie to ſaluation?
Wherefore, what starting holes ſo
euer our aduerſaries ſéeke: yet the truth of
our former propoſition remaineth: to wit,

that they goe about to fruſtrate the ſpirit
of God, of his effect in giuing the Scriptures,
except in them be contained whatſoeuer
is neceſſarie to our ſaluation.
            The conſequent no Chriſtian can deny.
            If the Apoſtles were led into all truth
by the ſpirit of God,The 4. argument againſt traditions. as it appeareth Ioh. 16,
and wrote not all things that were neceſſarie
to ſaluation, that came to paſſe either
becauſe they ought not to write them, or
becauſe they would not write, or becauſe
they could not.
            But to affirme that they ought not, is
falſe: that they would not, is abſurd: and
that they could not, is the part of one that
diſputeth like an Atheiſt.
            Wherefore the antecedent is falſe, abſurd,
and altogether from Diuinitie.
            The conſequence of the former propoſition
is maniſeſt,The opening of the argument, except our aduerſaries
can bring any thing to the contrary. For
we diſpute not héere of euerye man, but
only of ye Apoſtles, whom ye ſpirit of God
gouerned, and directed in the writing of
the Goſpell.
            The minor is manifeſt, except our aduerſaries
can proue what reaſon there is
of diſſimilitude or vnlikeneſse in things

not onely like, but alſo euen béeing the
ſelfe ſame. And this truly is moſt certaine
and moſt vndoubted amongſt all Chriſtians:
that if the Apoſtles wrote not all
things which are neceſſary to ſaluation,
that it was becauſe they ought not ſo to
doo. Qur aduerſaries of neceſſitie, muſt
proue ſome one of theſe cauſes, or els them
what was the cauſe, that ye Apoſtles ought
to write ſome things which were neceſſa
               
                  •
               ie
to ſaluation, and to omit other ſome, or
elſe truly yt the Apoſtles themſelues haue
by manifeſt & plaine words teſtified, that
they haue not written all things which
appertaine vnto Chriſtian faith and Religion,
for good and neceſſarye cauſes, which
God himſelfe would not that men ſhould
know. But vndoubtedly our aduerſaryes
can prooue neither of theſe, and therefore
the concluſion of this argument, resteth
moſt firme and vnuiolable.
            If the Canonicall bookes of the old Teſtament,The fifte argument againſt traditions
doo containe all things which appertained
vnto the olde teſtament. And the
Canonicall bookes of the new Teſtament,
doo not containe all ſuch things, as doo appertaine
vnto the new teſtament: then doeth
it follow, that the old teſtament is more

perfect then the new.
            The conſequence is falſe:
            And therefore the antecedent is falſe.
            The conſequent of the maior is thus
prooued.The vnfolding of the argument 2. Cor. 3. 14
            
            The bookes of the old teſtament are called
the olde teſtament of Paule where as
hée dooth intreate of the reading of the old
teſtament. To this maye be added, that
which Moſes ſaith:Deu. 29. 21 The couenant (ſaith
he) which is written in the booke of the
lawe:2. Reg. 23. and in the diuine and holy hiſtorie,
there is mention made of the booke of the
couenaunt. Wherefore there is no doubt,
but that the olde Teſtament, (that is the
writings of the olde teſtament) is agréeable
to his title. For nothing can be allea
                  •
               
               ged
beſides yt ſcripture, which may rightly
be ſaid to appertaine to the old teſtament:
to wit, the knowledge whereof were neceſſarie
to the ſaluation of thoſe godly fathers,
that liued vnder the olde teſtament.
Now if you ſay not the like of the newe
teſtament, who dooth not ſée that the newe
teſtament is more weake & unperfect then
the olde? For it is as much as if you wold
thus expound the title: The newe teſtament:
(that is to ſaie), Some certain things,

appe
                     •
                  taining to the new teſtament. The
which how abſurd it is▪ I ſuppoſe I ſhall
not néede with 
                  〈◊〉
                more arguments to
prooud, for no 
                  〈◊〉
                hath at anie time
héeretofore affirmed; that the Scriptures
and writings of th
                  ••
                we 
                  〈…〉
               
not ſo perfect, as the writings at the old.
Wherefore we wil 
                  〈…〉
                more to the
pr
                  •
               uing of our 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
            
            If the Scripture of the new teſtament be
a couenaunt,The 6 argument againſt
                     •
                   traditions will, or teſtament, & nothing
muſt be added vnto a will or Testament,
then trulye it is not lawfull to a
                  •
               de anye
thing to the writinges of the newe Teſtament.
            The Antecedent is true:
            And the conſequent is the like.
            And by the force of the ſame conſequent,
the traditions not w
                  •
               tten of the Apoſtles,
are not to be receiued.
            The antecedent is manifeſt.
            The minor doth containe two parts the

                  〈◊〉
                part is mainfeſt and prooued by the
verie title,The triall of the argument to wit, y• it is a will or a testament,
neither néedeth the
                  •
               e any other probation.
The latter part is prooued by
Paule, when hée ſayeth:Gal. 3. That it is
not lawfull to adde vnto a mannes

Teſtament: and from thence hée gathereth
that we ought not to adde vnto the
diuine Teſtament of God. But if yée interpret
it to bée a testament, and not a rouenant:
then our concluſion remaineth of
more ſorce: for dareth anie man adde vnto
the Will and Teſtament of a man? The
which if it be not lawofull to doe in the
Wil and Teſtament of a man, how much
leſſe then is it lawfull ſo to doe in the Teſtament
of God.
            If till the later end and conſumation of
the world,The 7. argument againſt traditions we ought not to looke for anie
other bookes canonicalt, beſides theſe which
we haue alreadie in the writings of the old
& new Teſtament: Then it followeth that
the Scripture is abſolute and pefect in euerie
part.
            The antecedent is true,
            And therfore ſo is the conſequent: & by
force of the ſaide conſequent the Scripture
hath no need of anie traditions not writtē.
            The Maior is euident inough, eſpecially
ſith God is the author of the ſaid ſcripture,The explication of the argument.
which would not suffer the ſame during
the world to remaine vnperfect, becauſe he
being the author is moſt perfect.
            The Minor our aduerſaries themſelues

cannot denie, for they are not ignorāt that
the time (now after Chriſt is exhibited &
giuen to the world) is called the fulneſſe
of time, as the Apoſtle ſaith.
            If traditions not written are as wel to be
receiued as the Scriptures (as our aduerſaries
would haue it) then muſt wee beleeue the
writings of the Doctors with the like perſwaſion
of faith,The 8. argument againſt tradition
                     •
                  
                as we beleeue the writings
of the Prophets and Apoſtles.
            But the conſequent is falſe,
            And therefore the Antecedent cannot be
true: and by force of the conſequent traditions
not written, are not to bee receiued in
matters of faith.
            The conſequent of the maior propoſition
is thus proued. For ſo often as our aduerſaries
propoue vnto the traditions of
men,The explication of the argument. which they call Apoſtolike, wée denie
that they are the traditions of ye Apoſtles:
then they recite Tertulian, Ireneus, and eſpecially
one Clement, I knowe not who,
which of late yeres hath ſtepped out of the
Monkiſh Cloiſters: all theſe Doctors, ſaie
our aduerſaries, affirme the traditions to
be the traditions of ye Apoſtles. But if ſuch
kind of traditions are to be receiued wt like
authoritie with the ſcriptures, then it followeth,

that with like conſtancie of fayth
we muſt beléeue that thoſe traditions are
the traditions of the (
                  〈◊〉
               , euen: as
we beléeue that the hoye Scripture was

                  •
               witten by the commaundement of the holie
Ghoſt: The which if it bee true, then
it followeth againe, that wée muſt euen
giue the lyke credite to the writinges of
Tertulian, Irenaeus, and Clement, as we
giue to the writinges of the Prophetes
and Apoſtles. But let it bée that ſons
demaundeth why I doe beleeue that the
Apoſtles did preach by mouth, that Chriſt
was 
                  〈◊〉
                for our ſaluation
                  •
                I 
                  •••
               
               ſwere,
that I beléeue becauſe, that the

                  〈◊〉
                and Euangeliſ
                  •
               e
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſo written.
But if I ſhould
                  •
                demaunde our 
                  〈…〉
               
wherefore they beléeue that the
Apoſtl
                  ••
                ta
                  •
               ght thoſe 
                  〈◊〉
                by mouth
whi
                  ••
                doe appertaine with their 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪
then they▪ will aunswere, they doe 
                  〈◊〉
               
it because some of the olde Doctors

                  〈…〉
                beléeue the
writings of the 
                  〈…〉
               , with the

                  〈…〉
                belé the

                  〈…〉
                Apoſtles I do not héere dispute

                  〈…〉
                the mind & opinion of the old fathers,

of which we wil ſpeak in his proper
place, but héere only I am willing to ma
                  ••
               e
the conſequent of our former propoſition,
ſomewhat more plaine.
            The Minor is manifeſt: for what godly
man did euer make the writings of the old
fathers equiualent with the writings of ye
Apoſtles? Naie; I ſuppoſe our aduerſaries
themſelues will not ſay ſo, except they bée
altogether vnmindfull of their owne Canon
taken out of Auguſtine.
               Can. 
                     •
                   go ſolis Diſt. 9. And the force
of the conſequēt which we haue added vnto
the end of the argument is manifeſt, as
it ſhall appeare in the argument heere following.
            We maie not beleeue anie traditions
touching the which there remaineth no certaintie.The 9. argument againſt traditions
But all traditions not written, the
which our aduerſaries bring forth are euen
ſuch, that there remaineth no certaintie touching
them: Ergo wee maye not beleeue
anie traditions not written, which our aduerſaries
bring or alleadge.
            And by force of the conſequent all traditions
are to bee reiected and not to be receiued
in cauſes of faith.The opening of the argument.
            
            The truth of the Maior propoſition is
manifeſt of himſelfe.
            
               
And the minor is prooued by theſe inductions
following.
            Clemens Alexandrinus affirmeth That
the Apoſtles deliuered certaine ſecrets vnto
ſome men as traditions from the apoſtles, &


citeth this place of Paul. 1.Lib. 1. ſtro 
                     〈◊〉
                  . li. 5. 
               Cor. 2. We ſpeak
wiſdome amongſt thoſe which are perfect.
            Tertulian contrariwiſe,
               Li. de preſcri. refelleth that error
with moſt graue arguments.
            
               And Irenaeus ſaith,
               Iraen. lib. 13. ca. 2. That this was the
opinion of the olde Heretikes, and aunſwereth
that place of Paule which thoſe Heretikes
did corrupt.
            Manie doo attribute the whole cannon
of the Maſſe vnto the Apoſtles.
            
               Contrariwiſe, Saint Hierome and ſome
other of the olde Fathers affirme, that the
Apoſtles were content with the Lordes
praier.
            Epiphanius ſaith,
               Aduer. he reſ. in Epilog. That the Apoſtles did
command both thurſdaie and fridaie to be
faſted through the whole yeare, and that in
the whole time of Lent onelie to vſe bread,
ſalt, and water.
            
               Contrariwiſe, Auguſtine ſaith, That it
was neuer determined by Chriſt nor his apoſtles,
what daies we ſhould faſt.
            
               And Irenaeus writing to Euſebius ſaith.
               
That that faſt of Lent was diuerſly vſed in
times paſt,Epiſt. 86. li. 5. c. 26. when ſome faſted one daye,
ſome two, ſome more: neither doth he call
it a tradition of the Apoſtles, but a cuſtome
of a ſimple and priuate inſtitution.
            Alſo Tertulian when he had made his
reuolt from the Church vnto Montanus,
reckoning vp the obiections of the Catholikes,
which they vſed againſt the Montaniſts:
Becauſe (ſaith he) we obſerue the eating
of drie meates, they ſaie, that the conſtituted
faſting being worn out,Lib. de. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                touching anie
other, we maie faſt at our owne will, & not
by the commaundement of anie lawe or
diſcipline, &c.
            And in that controuerſie touching Eaſter
daie, which a long time in times paſt troubled
the Church:Soc, lib. 5. c. 22 thoſe of the Weſt (ſaith
Socrates) referred their inſtitution to Peter
and Paule, and thoſe of the Eaſt, to other
of the Apoſtles: but neither of thē broght
foorth anie certaine or approued ſcripture
for the profe thereof: & therefore I thinke
it was a cuſtome.
            Tertulian ſaith,
               Adu. Mar. li. 1. & de cor. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                That by traditiōs of the
Apoſtles, milke and honnie was wont to be
poured into the mouth of the infant in baptiſme.
            
               
And Saint Hierome maketh mention onely
of wine and not of honnie,In cap. 55. Es
                     •
                  ei cont. Lucifer, and calleth it
cuſtome.
            Our aduerſaries contrariwise obſerue not
thēſelues thoſe rites & ceremonies, although
they would bee accounted obſeruers of the
traditions which the Apoſtles left.
            Tertulian in the former place maketh
mention of oblations and offerings for birth
daies,As afore. to be amongſt the rites and ceremonies
which came from the Apoſtles.
            Contrariwise, the Church left this cuſtome
after the Nicene counſell,Tertu, as afore. for that it
ſauoured of Paganiſme.
            Manie of the olde Fathers referred theſe
things vnto the Apoſtles: firſt, that it was
not lawfull to kneele when they praied on
the Sundaie: And againe, that it was not
lawfull to decke the head with garlands and
flowers, and manie ſuch like things.
            Contrariwiſe our aduerſaries themſelues
thinke theſe thinges maye bee obſerued becauſe
they put garlands about the neckes &
heads of their Images, &c.
            Ciprian witneſſeth,Ser de 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that the Euchariſt or
Communion was wont to bée giuen to infants.
            And contrariwiſe our aduerſaries themſelues

thinke not this expedient to bee
done.
            Irenaeus ſayth, that by tradition Chriſt
ſuffered when he was almoſt fiftie yeres old.
            Contrariwiſe the Church hath moſt conſtantlye
refuſed that ſaying.
            Clemens referreth his Canon to the Apoſtles,
making them authors thereof.
            On the other ſide euen the Church of
Rome her ſelfe hath a long time reiected
thoſe Canons,In Cannō Apoſt. as if they had bene forged by
heretikes.
            Furthermore, Zepherius Biſhoppe of
Rome,Cont, Can. Diſt. 16 ibi, C
                     •
                  placuit ibi. hath receiued ſixtie of the ſame
Canons, and after the ſixt Synode receiued
85, &c.
            Finally, that we may leaue infinit of ſuch
examples, and come vnto our aduerſaries,
thoſe things which they referre vnto the Apoſtles,
hiſtories attribute to others, as Lent
to Telephorus, &c. So that nowe by
theſe examples, the truth of our minor
propoſition is made manifest.
            
            It the olde heretikes for the moſt part,
(when the worde of God failed them) did

                  •
               he vnto traditions,The 10. argument againſt traditions & falſely fathered them
vpon the Apoſtles: and our aduerſaries

doo thee ſame now at this time. Then truly
in this point, they are to be accounted rather
among the heretikes, then with the true
Catholikes.
            The Antecedent is true,
            Therefore the conſequent is alſo true.
            The Maior propoſition is manifeſt of
humſelfe.The vnfol
                     •
                  ding of the argu
                     •
                  ment And the Minor is thus prooued.
They which vrged the ceremonies of the
lawe, did ſhroude themſelues vnder traditions,
which they called Apoſtolike, as the
olde Doctors doo teſtifie. And in the Acts of
the Apoſtles,Act, 15. 24 chap. 15. ver. 24. Luke ſéemth
to touch the like.2. Cor. 11. 13 And Paule in 2. Corint.
chap. 11. verſe. 13. ſaith, That the olde heretiks
were wont falſely to take vpon them
the names and titles of the Apoſtles: And
in another place he exhorteth the Theſſalonians,
               2. The, 2. 2
               cha. 2. ver 2. not to ſuffer thēſelues
to be ſeduced frō ye faith, neither by word,
neither yet by epiſtle, as cōming (ſaith he)
from vs▪ The which laſt words I do not ſo
reſtraine vnto this word Epiſtle, but refer
it vnto that that they ſhoulde not be deceiued
by worde: for there is no doubte,
but that the Heretikes would often times
boaſt that they had hearde thoſe thinges
which they did teach, euen from the Apoſtles:

whereby they might get vnto themſelues
credit.Li. 3. ca. 2 Li. 3. cap. vlti, This thing doth Ireneus teſtifie,
lib. 3. cap. 2. And Euſebius declareth ye
one Papias did forge his errours, as though
(ſaith hée) they came from vnwritten traditions.
I will not héere ſpeake anie thing
of the Iewes Calaba, which maintaine by
their dreams vnwritten traditions, as the
chiefeſt piller of their religion, as Elias, in
Thisbith: as in the Radicall Kara Baruck
appeareth.
            If the traditions which repugne the writings
of the Apoſtles are not Apoſtolyke,The 11. argument againſt traditions
and the traditions of our aduerſaries are altogether
ſuch: then truelie the traditions of
our aduerſaryes are not Apoſtolike.
            The Antecedent is true,
            Wherefore the conſequent is alſo
true.
            The veritie of the Maior propoſition is
moſt plaine,The expoūding of the argument. or elſe it would followe that
the Apoſtles did not write by the ſame
ſpirit by which they did ſpeake, the which
God forbid that we ſhould once thinke.
The Minor ſhall appeare by this induction,
which the reader ſhall moſt caſtly finde
in the writings of the Doctors: whereby
it is manifeſt, that thoſe principles

of Religion in controuerſie betwéene vs,
which they refer vnto the vnwritten traditions
of the Apoſtles, doo manifeſtly repugne
with the writings of the Apoſtles▪
ſo that whether ſoeuer our aduerſaries
tourne them, they ſhall be conſtrained to
referre their principles of Religion, vnto
the writinges of the Apoſtles. For
I will vrge the former grounde and argument:
that if thoſe principles repugne
with the writings of the Apoſtles, then
they are not Apoſtolike: If they confeſſe
that they doo repugne, then haue we our
purpoſe: if they denie it, then of neceſſity
they muſt turne to the writings of the Apoſtles,
that theſe their opinions, whereof
the queſtion is, may be tried by them, whether
they repugne with the writings of
the Apoſtles, yea or nay: whereby it commeth
to paſſe, that our aduerſaries (after
manie errors) will they or nill they, muſt
néeds returne again within the compaſſe
of the ſcriptures. But leaſt we should bée
ouerlong in theſe our argumentes, wée
wil comprehend the ſumme of all our former
arguments in this one ſylogiſme.
            If that theſe Errors doo follow the opinion,The 12. argumēt & ſumme of all that hath ben ſayde againſt traditions.
of our aduerſaries touching traditions

not writtē, to wit, that they otherwiſe teach
in the Church, then the Prophets and Apoſtles
haue taught: that the ſpirite of God
hath not accompliſhed his effect in publiſhing
of the ſcriptures: that the Apoſtles
neither ought, neither could, or would write
all things neceſſarie to ſaluation: that the
writings of the old teſtament, is more perfect,
then the writings of the new: that the
holy Bible is not correſpondent to the title,
which is a Teſtament (if it bee lawfull for
men to adde to the will of God): that the
holy ſcriptures giuen after Christs incarnation,
and afterward the writings of the Apoſtles
are not abſolute in euerie point. And
that the ſame credite muſt bee giuen vnto
the writings of the olde Doctors, which is
giuen vnto the ſcriptures of God: that we
muſt beleeue thoſe things whereof there is
no certaintie: that the cauſe of the old heretikes
was not a little holpen which leaned
vnto vnwritten traditions: and finally that
the Apoſtles did not ſpeak with that ſpirit
with the which they did write.
            If (I ſaye) theſe former abſurdities doo
followe the opinion of our aduerſaries touching
Traditions not written. Then truely
the minde and opinion of our aduerſaries

touching traditions not written, is of all
godlie and true Catholikes to bee vtterlie
refuſed and reiected.
            The antecedent is true:
            And therefore the conſequent cannot
be falſe.
            The maior propoſition cannot be denyed.The triall of this argument
            
            The minor is made manifeſt in this
our former negatiue diſputation: wherin
we haue ouerthrowen the opinion of our
aduerſarie.
            And héere we ende the third Chapter:
and now we will procéed to the wiping awaie
of all the obiections which our aduerſaries
can make.
         
         
            The 4. Chapter.
            
               IN our former diſputation
we haue confuted the opinion
of our aduerſaries, and
haue euen as it were with
our finger pointed out their
manifolde errours in which
they muſt néedes remaine, ſo long as they
doo obſtinately ſtriue for theſe their traditions,
which they call vnwritten. And we

affirme, that they were neuer written of
the Apoſtles, neither yet to be written of
anie others. But becauſe they maintaine
their opinion by diuers and ſundrie arguments,
ſo to hide the falſhood thereof, and
to deceiue the ſimple: I thinke it verye
néedful to aunswere all their arguments,
ſo many as we know. Firſt of all therefore,
we wil ſift out their obiections, which
they wreſt out of the holy ſcriptures. Then 
we will come vnto the teſtimonie of the
doctors which they obiect againſt vs. Their
firſt obiection is this.
            The doctrine of the Goſpel was not writen
with inke,The firſt obiection. but with the ſpirite of God,
not in Tables of ſtone, but in the heart.
            Ergo, we muſt returne vnto the doctrine
taught by the mouth of the Apoſtles. Neither
muſt we cleaue ſo preciſely vnto the
writings of the Apoſtles.
            The antecedent is manifeſt by Ieremie,
chap. 31.
            This is the couenaunt which I will
make with the houſe of Iſrael,lere. 3 
                     •
                  . I will put my
lawe into theyr minde, and will write it in
their heart, and I will bee their God, and
they ſhall be my people.
            
               Againe Paule. 2. Cor. 3.2. Cor. 3. It is manifeſt

(ſaith he) that you are the Epiſtle of
Chriſt ordained by vs, not written with
inke, but with the ſpirit of the liuing god:
not in tables of ſtone, but in the fleſhie tables
of the heart.
            That we may orderly aunſwere vnto
each part:The aunſvvere. Firſt we will trie the antecedent,
then wil we come to the conſequent:
and this order will we kéepe, to helpe the
memorie of the reader.
            Now, will I aunſwere the antecedent,
concerning y• which, I ſée they cannot well
agrée, no not the Popiſh ſchoolmen among
themſelues: for when the Apoſtle vnto the
Heb. 8.Heb, 8. had ſet downe a difference betwéen
the old & new teſtament, he bringeth forth
this place aboue recited of Ieremie, where
the ſchoolemen beginne to queſtion, what
ſhuld be the cauſe wherfore it is ſaid, that
the goſpell ſhuld be written in the minde?
Some bring forth this reaſon: for becauſe
the grace of God cannot be written. Of
which opinion is Thomas, whom ye whole
swarme of ſchoolemen and Queſtionarye
Doctors doo moſt eſtéeme. But ſome had
rather this to be the cauſe: for that ye doctrine
of the Lawe, began from writing,
(for by and by the Tables of the Law being

written, were publyſhed): but the
doctrine of the goſpell began from the preching
of Chriſt & his Apoſtles. Touching
the which controuersie, that we maye not
wander out of our determined limits) let
the Reader looke Lira his eight chapter in
the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes chap. 10.
            But for as much as appertayneth to
the former Obiection, wée ſaye, that neyther
Ieremie nor Paule doo there denie the
writings of the newe Teſtament, but that
they onelye diſpute there touching the eſſtcacie
of the ſpirituall giftes of the holye
Ghoſt, which were farre greater in the
time of the newe Teſtament, then euer
at any time before,loel. 2. Act. 2. according to the Prophecie
of Ioel, which Peter expoundeth the
ſecond to the Acts.
            Wherefore thoſe places muſt be vnderſtoode
by compariſon: for otherwiſe it
would followe, that the lawe of God was
not written in the minde and heart of the
godly, which liued in the time of the olde
Teſtament: which thing, theſe places of
Scripture, which héere we alleadge doo
otherwiſe prooue.
            Eſa. 51. Harken vnto me,Eſay. 51. ye which know
iuſtice, the people in whoſe hart is my law.
            
               
And Pſa. 37.Pſal. 37. 
               The law of the Lord is in his
heart. Alſo 51. Recreate a new heart within
me O God,
               Pſal. 11 
               and renue a right ſpirit within
me. Alſo Deut. 30.Deu. 30 
               The Lord will circumciſe
the heart. And againe Pſal. 1.Pſa. 1. 
               His delight
is in the lawe of the Lord, & doth meditate
therein daie and night. And in diuers
other places, doeth Dauid teſtifie, that hée
hath the lawe of the Lord euen as it were
ingraffed within his minde. And finally,
that I may paſſe ouer many ſuch like places,Pro. 3
when Salomon ſheweth forth precepts
out of the law of God, he biddeth that they
ſhould be written in the tables of ye heart.
And thus much touching the Anteredent,
where our aduerſaries commit moſt great
errour,Taking their argument frō yt which is in ſome ſort granted, to be graunted generally. The errors of ye obiection reaſoning: Secundum quid ad
id quod impliciter. Now therefore I denie
their conſequent, the errours of the
which I will perticularly recite. The firſt
errour is, that ye conſequent cannot follow:
for it followeth not to ſaie the doctrine of
the lawe was written in Tables, ergo the
doctrine of the Goſpell is not written at
all. Againe, the Goſpell is written in the
heart, ergo it is not written in Tables:
Who ſéeth not that theſe are friuolous argumentes,
and that their conſequents are

falſe. Againe, they bring in a new kind of
reaſoning and reaſon from an vniuerſall
affirmatiue, to a particular negatiue, for
thus they ſay. God wrote al the doctrine of
the Goſpell in the minde of the godly: Ergo
certaine things appertaining vnto the
doctrine of the Goſpell are not written by
the Apoſtles. The which kinde of concluding
euen children would hiſſe at: for of
neceſſitie thus they muſt reaſon. Nothing
yt is written in the heart is written in tables,
but the whole doctrine of the Goſpell
is written in the heart, ergo no part of the
doctrine of the Goſpel is written in tables.
The Maior is ſo falſe that euery man may
ſée it.
            The ſecond errour is, Falacia in figura
dictionis, as ye Logitians terme it,The 2. errour. for they
confound words of one ſignification, with
thoſe of diuerſe ſignifications: for, to write
in tables is a proper kinde of ſpéech, but to
write in the heart, is a borowed kinde of
ſpéech, and therefore of diuers ſignifications,
ſpoken by a Metaphore, and ſimilitude:
Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that
Paule vſed another kinde of ſpeaking,
when hée ſayde that the Corinthians were
his Epiſtle, (for hée went forwarde with

the argument he had in hande) which was
when falſe Apostles would haue crept into
the mindes of the Corinthians by Letters
of commendations, then (ſayth he) I
haue no néed of ſuch Epiſtles, for you are
mine epiſtle, for my labor & my diligence
is manifeſt towards you, euen in the eies
of all men. For all ſée, and (as I may ſaie)
may reade in you the doctrine of Chriſt,
which I haue preached vnto you: and to
conclude, this is the ſumme, that the Corinthians
were ſo perfectly inſtructed, and
ſo well taught in the doctrine of ye goſpel,
yt they might well remaine therin. Whoſoeuer
thefore doth gather by theſe words
of ye apoſtle, that the apoſtles did not write
all things neceſſarie to ſaluation, truly he
may be thought not to be well in his wits.
            The third errour is, for that they make
the efficient cauſe to repugne with the
cauſe inſtrumentall.The 3. errour. For God is hée who
writeth the Goſpell in the heart: but Mathew,
Paule, and the reſt, write the doctrine
of the Goſpell in tables, and were the inſtruments
of the ſpirit of God. Therefore
Paule in that place ſayd, that the Corinthians
were his Epiſtle: & the epiſtle of Chriſt
miniſtred ſaith hée by vs, Loe héere you

may ſée that hée maketh diſtinction betwéene
his owne miniſterie and the efficacie
of the holie Ghoſt. Wherefore our aduerſaries
conclude as if one ſhould reaſon
thus. God hath reſtored a ſicke perſon vnto
his former health, ergo the Phiſition
preſcribed nothing, gaue him nothing to
drinke, neither yet vſed anie outwarde remedies.
Now if this concluſion be of anie
force, then this muſt néeds followe, GOD
wrote the Goſpel in the minde, ergo the Apoſtles
wrote not the whole doctrine of the
Goſpell in Tables.
            The fourth errour is,The 4. errour. becauſe the conſequent
agréeth not with their antecedent:
for if in the antecedent they oppone ye inuiſible
Scriptures vnto ye viſible, then trulie
they would bring this to paſe, ye one ſcripture
being, ye other cānot be: for vnto what
other ende doe they applie their oppoſition
opponing ye inuiſible ſcriptures to the viſible,
but yt they may cōclude ſomwhat? But
in the conſequent they come backe againe
and ſay, that certaine things are not written
neceſſary to ſaluation, when as they
ſhould haue ſaid (if ſo be they wold reaſon
like logitians, as before it is ſhewed, y• ther
was nothing writtē neceſſary to ſaluatiō.

But the manifeſt truth in this point hath
amaſed them. And that they may ſée howe
vnhanſomely they goe to worke in their

                  •
               ppoſition: I demaund this, whether the
faithfull haue not all thoſe things written
in their hearts, which are written in
Tables, being neceſſarie to faith and ſaluation?
Truly I thinke yes. For Saint
Iohn ſaith,Iohn. 20. 
               Theſe things are written that ye
might beleeue, and in beleeuing haue eternall
life. So farre void is it therefore, that
the one being, the other ſhuld be cleane taken
awaie: but rather the one is a helpe
to the other: to wit, that the viſible writings
of the Apoſtles, is a furtherance vnto
the inuiſible writings of the ſpirite of
God.
            The 5. Error is,The fift errour. 
               Secundum ignorantiam
Elenchi, as the Schoolemen ſaie; becauſe
they put in other words, then the Apoſtle
Paule vſed. For thus Paule ſaith, Yee are
our Epiſtle not written with inke, but with
the ſpirite of God: for he ſpeaketh of the
inuisible Scriptures, neither doth he therfore
vtterly take awaie the viſible, as his
Epiſtle which he then wrote to the Cornthians
is witneſſe. But our aduerſaryes
reaſon farre otherwiſe, for they ſay, the Epiſtle

not written in Tables, but deliuered
by hand: the which is farre both from the
words and minde of the Apoſtle.
            The abſurdities which follovveth ye former obiection
            Now let vs ouerthrowe the conſequence
of our aduerſaries, being ful of abſurdities
and without reaſon.
            If we muſt not abſolutely ſtick vnto the
writings of the Apoſtles, becauſe God hath
written the Goſpell in the mindes of the
godly: the ſhould it followe, that the writings
of the Apoſtles are not neceſſarie for
godlie men: If all things (as they ſaie) are
not written which are neceſſarie to ſaluation,
to what end then appertaineth the ſcriptures?
For all things (ſaie they) that are neceſſarie
to ſaluation, God hath written in
the mindes of the godlie. But this argument
cannot bee concluded in one part onely: for
either it is vniuerſallie true, or els vniuerſally
falſe, & ſo the whole authoritie of the ſcriptures
muſt bee vtterly aboliſhed, the which
God forbid.
            
               Againe, If this conſequence be of anie
force, that is to ſaye, we muſt haue recourſe
to vnwritten traditions, becauſe GOD
hath written the goſpell in the minds of the
godly: then would it followe that the ſpirituall
efficacie of God ſhould be confounded

with the externall and viſible miniſterie of
the Apoſtles, and that traditions deliuered
by mouth, are the inuiſible Scriptures of
God, the which the holie Ghoſt did imprint
in the mind of the faithfull, the which thing
is moſt falſe.
            
               Againe, if they make any good concluſion
out of that place of Ieremie, that all thinges
are not written that appertaine to the Goſpell,
becauſe vnder the new teſtament God
doth write his law in the minds of the faithfull,
when as it was written in tables vnder
the old teſtament: Ergo by the force of this
oppoſition it followeth, that God in the old
teſtament did onely remit ſinne in part, and
that he was the God of the Iſraelites but in
part alſo: becauſe that Ieremie addeth, ſaieng,
that it wil come to paſſe that in the new
teſtamēt God will remit the ſins of the people,
and be their God. The which is too too
abſurde and contrarie to the opinion of all
men.
            Now finally let vs turne this argument
of our aduerſaries vpon themſelues,The obiection is turned vpon the aduerſaries. & ſaie
thus.
            All the lawes of God are written in the
hearts and minds of the faithfull, as our aduerſaries
ſeeme to affirme by the former

places cited: (for Paule saith, it is not written
with inke, but with the ſpirit of God) but
none of the traditions of our aduerſaries are
written in the minds of the godly, for they
are written with inke, and not with the ſpirit
of God: Ergo none of our aduerſaries traditions
are the lawes of God.
            So that héereby it is moſt manifeſt as
I ſuppoſe how fooliſh or rather no argumēt
at al,The correcting of ye former obiection this argument of our aduerſaries is,
y• which that we may correct, we muſt ſaie
with the word of God, that the writings
of the Apoſtles and Euangeliſts, doth containe
all that doctrine of the Goſpell, the
which the Apoſtles and Euangeliſtes did
teach and afterward put in writings, the
which alſo God by his ſpirit did write in
the mindes of the godly, & thus much touching
this obiection. And now we come
vnto the ſecond.
            The Church of Chriſt for the ſpace of
20. yeares wanted the writings of the Apoſtles,The 2. obiection
and was only contented with their traditions:
Ergo the writings of the Apoſtles
are not abſolutely neceſſarie vnto ſaluation,
neither is it needfull that al things appertaining
to the doctrine of the Goſpel, ſhuld be
contained in the writings of the Apoſtles.
            
               
The Antecedent is manifeſt by reading
of hiſtories.
            Although I doo not meddle much with
the antecedent,The aunsvvere neither doo diſpute touching
the number of yeares: yet would I
that the readers ſhould call to their remē
               braunce,
that the Church wanted not the
ſcriptures, before that the Goſpell was extant
by the writings of the Apoſtles. Yea,
that Chriſt himſelfe and the Apoſtles did
preach the Goſpell out of the writings of
the Prophets, as before in his proper place
we haue ſhewed.
            Wherefore the antecedent of our aduerſaries
is no other thing then a foundation
laid vpon ſand or water: ſo that the concluſion
which they bring cannot ſtand.
            Therefore I denie the conſequent,The error of the obiection. for
the errour is (as the Logitians tearme it)
Secundum ignorantiam Elenchi: for they
chaunge the forme of affirmation, & come
from the time paſt, vnto the time preſent,
and the time to come. The Church (ſaye
they) wanted the goſpel. Be it ſo, although
the writings of the Prophets to contayne
the promiſes of the Goſpell, inſomuch that
the Apoſtles did altogether depende vppon
the ſayd writings of the Prophets: adde

héer vnto alſo (if it pleaſe you) that the writings
of the Apoſtles, were not altogether
neceſſarie: what doo you héereof conclude?
That they are not now therfore neceſſarie,
or héereafter ſhall not bée: What man is
ſo ignorant to grant that? This is the difference
y• the Apoſtles ought firſt to haue
preached by mouth before they committed
anie thing to writing: And when the Apoſtles
did preach the goſpell, they did then
publiſh by mouth thoſe thinges which afterward
they wrote: But ſithens the Apoſtles
died & coulde not by mouth inſtruct
the Church, without doubt their writings
are now ſo neceſſarie vnto vs, as their preching
by mouth was in thoſe dayes: in
ſtéede whereof their writinges doo nowe
remaine.An abſourditie. Let vs bring them therfore to an
abſurditie. If the conſequence of our aduerſaries
be of force or value: this is alſo of
force or value, the Church of the Iſralites,
not twentie yeares, but two thouſande
yeares, or ſomewhat more, wanted the law
written: therefore it was not neceſſarie to
the Church, that the lawe ſhould be written,
or the law written contained not all
thoſe things ye wer neceſſarie to ye doctrine
of ye old teſtamēt. But this is very abſurd?
            
               
Let vs turne the argument of our aduerſaries
againſt themſelues after this
manner.
            If God being perfect wiſe,The obiection is returned. hath not ſuffered
the church of Chriſt, long time to want
the writings of the Apoſtles, both that hee
might maintaine the truth of the Goſpell,
as alſo he might prouide for the ſafegarde
of his church: Ergo, theſe men are blaſphemous
againſt the prouidence of god: which
denie that all things are contained in the apoſtolicall
writings, which are neceſſarie to
the doctrine of the Goſpell.
            For to what end would God by his diuine
prouidence, that the Apoſtles ſhould
write the goſpell, which they by mouth did
preach? was it becauſe they ſhould deliuer
an vncertain and imperfect doctrine? Furthermore,
if at anie time the Church was
contented with the preaching of the Apoſtles:
to wit, in the firſt primitiue church:
I beſeech you why ſhall not ſhe nowe at
this time be contented with the writings
of the Apoſtles, yt which (as is before ſaid)
are now in ſtéed of the apoſtles prechings,
rather then to runne to the fained, forged,
& falſe traditions, which wer neuer writtē
by the Apoſtles. Wherefore the argument

of our aduerſaries is falſe, the which wée
thus correct.
            In the firſt primitiue Church the Apoſtles
depending vpon the writings of the
Prophets,The corction. did firſt of all preach by mouth
the Euangelicall doctrine out of the writings
of the Prophets. And afterwarde,
leaſt that the doctrine by them preached,
ſhould be either corrupted of men: or els,
(ſuch is the infirmitie of man) the remembrance
thereof ſhoulde by little and little
ſlide out of the hearts of men. That therefore
they might leaue yt holy veritie, which
they preached vnto vs, moſt firme & ſure,
they committed ye ſame vnto writings, by
the working of ye holy ghoſt, to be a pledge
for ye poſterities, which after ſhould come.
Chriſt being cōuerſant with his apoſtles. 40
daies after his reſurrection,
               3. Obiection. 
               taught thē thoſe
things which did appertain vnto the kingdōe
of god, neither are thoſe things which he
taught thē now extāt in anie writings, Ergo
al things appertaining to the kingdō of god,
are not writtē of the apoſtles: & therfore are
to be ſought for in traditions not writtē of
the apoſtles. The antecedent is manifeſt in
the firſt chap. of the Acts of the Apo. ver. 3
            I admit the former part of the Antecedent,Anſvvere
               
but I denie the latter, for the Error
is in Fallacia petitionis principij, as the
Schoolemen ſaie.
            I therefore denie the conſequence.The error For
from whence haue they learned or rather
dreamed, that thoſe things which Chriſt
did then teach, were not written of the apoſtles:
nay, that dreame of our aduerſaries,
is plainly and manifeſtly refelled and
confuted. Mathew. 28. Marke. 16. Luke. 24.
Iohn. 20. and. 21. All which foure Euangeliſts
doo ſhew vs things which Chriſt then
taught. And Luke in ſpeciall wordes dooth
witnes ye Chriſt did expound thoſe things
which were written of him: ſo vnlikely it
is that he ſhould call vs backe to traditions
not written.
            But let vs bring them to an abſurditie.
            If Chriſt after his reſurrection, did teach
all thoſe things which did appertaine vnto
the kingdome of God (for that ſeemeth toAbſurditie.
be the verie ſenſe & meaning of the words
of Saint Luke, which are theſe, Act. the firſt,
verſe. 3. He ſpake thoſe things which appertaine
to the kingdome of God. And thoſe
things which he then taught are not written
of the Apoſtles: Ergo, thoſe thinges

which are written of the Apoſtles, doe not
appertaine vnto the kingdome of God. An
abſurde and a blaſphemous argument.
            
               Let vs turne it againſt themſelues
thus.
               Obiectiō returned. If the Apoſtles were fullie inſtructed
and taught of Chriſt touching thoſe things
which appertaine to the kingdome of God:
And the holie Ghoſt inſpiring them, did
write touching the ſame kingdome of God:
ergo they wrote all things moſt fully, and
omitted nothing whereby we ſhould runne
to fetch anie thing from traditions not written.
            That therfore we may now correct and
amend this their errour, we ſaie,The correcting of the former obiection. ye Chriſt
to the end hée might appoint his Apoſtles
to be moſt perfect Doctors and teachers of
the Church, did after his reſurrection for ye
ſpace of 40. daies, moſt diligently inſtruct
them touching all thoſe points of doctrine
which appertained vnto the Goſpell, that
the Apoſtles being ſo inſtructed, might not
onely declare the ſame doctrine by mouth,
but alſo that they might commit all thoſe
thinges vnto writings which appertaine
to the kingdome of God & ſaluation of his
Church.
            Paule confeſſeth that he wrote in parteObiectiō.
               
and not in whole, ergo Paule wrote not all
things which are neceſſarie to the ſaluation
of the Church. The antecedent is prooued
Rom. 15. I haue written vnto you brethren
ſomewhat boldly (ſaith hee) after a ſort, or as
the verie Greeke is: In part.
            Now let vs make plaine the antecedent.Anſwere.
               Paule ſaith, that he hath written to ye 
               Romanes
in part, and this word In part, the
which the olde interpreters haue tranſlated
worde by worde, is not to be ioyned
with this vearbe, I haue written: but this
word More boldly: the which the verie order
of the text, and the Gréeke phraſe, doo
moſt manifeſtly ſhew: for otherwiſe the Apoſtle
muſt haue ſayde [Tomeros] & not
haue added the Prepoſition [Apio] the
like phraſe is manifeſt in ye 2. Co. 2. c. 5. ve.
which is thus: If any haue cauſed ſorow, y•
ſame hath not made me ſorrie, but partly
or in part, leſt it ſhuld more gréeue you al.
I deny ye conſequence of their argument.
The errour is,The error 
               ſecundū figuram dictionis, &
their conſequēce hangeth not wt their antecedent.
For Paul wrote not all to the Romanes
ſay they, ergo he wrote not all neceſſarie
to ſaluatiō. But Paul wrote more thē
yt which he wrote to the Romanes: ſo héere

we ſée yt their conſequēt on cōcluſiō agréeth
not with their firſt propoſition. Paul wrote
not all, ergo al things neceſſary to ſaluation
is not contained in the writings of the
apoſtles. This is too too abſurd an argumēt
and not worth the aunſwering.
            Chriſt ſaid vnto his Apoſtles, that he had
many things to ſpeake vnto thē which they
could not beare away:5. obiection. ergo the apoſtles haue
not written all things neceſſarie to ſaluatiō.
The antecedent is proued in the 16. chapter
of the Goſpell after Iohn.
            Now touching their antecedent:Anſvvere firſt of al
I do greatly wonder yt our aduerſaries doo
ſtick their ſhip vpon thoſe rocks vpō which
ye heretikes héertofore haue made ſo great
ſhipwracks. S. Auguſtine in his Tract. 97.
vpon Iohn, doth teſtifie, yt the heretiks were
wont to take this place of Iohn to coulour
their errours,In Ioan Tract. 97. but Auguſtine himſelfe doth
handle thoſe words of Chriſt with ſo great
reuerēce, yt if they wold heare him he wold
eaſily withdraw our aduerſaries frō their
curioſitie: for Auguſtine vpon ye ſame ſaith:
Which of vs can declare thoſe things,
               In loan Tract. 96. 
               that
Chriſt would not ſpeak: which of vs can do
that, for which ther is not ſufficiēt authoritie
of prophets or Apoſtles. Thus far Auguſt.
               
But let Auguſtine ceaſe to inquire thoſe
things, for the Papiſts are now growen to
this point, yt they rehearſe vnto vs things
which Chriſt neuer ſpake, and that with
great boldneſſe, when as they commend &
ſet forth vnto men the rites and ceremonies
of their Maſſe, and other like trumperie.
And I would to God that they would
be perſwaded, that thoſe their traditions,
that is to ſaie, the foule filth of their errours
and ſuperſtitions, could neuer flow
from ſo pure a fountain, to wit, as Chriſt.
But let vs returne vnto the expoſition of
ye ſame place, the which we will take and
drawe from the verie place it ſelfe. Chriſt
his words are theſe:Iohn. 16 
               I haue manie things
to ſpeake vnto you, but you cannot beare
them awaie nowe, but when the ſpirit
of truth ſhall come, hee ſhall leade you into
all truth. Wherefore that we may now vſe
rather the wordes of Tertulian, then our
owne, we ſaie thus:De prae. haeret. Chriſt ſayd plainly,
I haue manie things to ſaie vnto you, but
yet adding this, When the ſpirit of truth
ſhall come, he ſhal lead you into all truth:
he héerby ſheweth, that the Apoſtles were
not ignorāt of any thing, &c. Wherby it cō
               meth
to paſſe, that the Apoſtles taught all

thoſe things, which were neceſſarie to ſaluation:
& as Tertulian ſaith, did publiſh a
ſufficiēt rule vnto al men. Therfore Chriſt
in this place meaneth thus, yt then ye Apoſtles
ſhould be fully & perfectly inſtructed,
when they ſhuld be indowed with ye viſible
& miraculous gifts of the holy ghoſt, & this
our expoſitiō is eaſily gathered from Iohn.
               Ioh. 14. 26
Nowe I come to the conſequence or concluſion:
in ye which truely I find not anie
ſhew of truth, nor any kind of taſt of true
diuinitie, for their error is ſecundū ignorā
                  tiam
elenchi,
               The error as the ſchoolmen ſay, inaſmuch
as y• like proportiō of time is not obſerued.
The Apoſtles before ye reſurrectiō of Chriſt
& before they had receiued the miraculous
gifts of ye holy ghoſt, were not able ſufficiently
to bere away al things which appertained
to ye myſteries of chriſtian religion:
ergo ſay they, the Apoſtles were ignorant
of thoſe myſteries after the reſurrection of
Chriſt, & after the receiuing of the gifts of
ye holy Ghoſt. Truly a verie fooliſh kind of
reaſoning. Chriſt had many things to declare
vnto them, ergo ſay our aduerſaries,
they muſt be thoſe which ye papiſtical maſſing
priſts do fondly dreame of. No doubt
of yt, their conſequence hangeth not with

their antecedent, therfore we may vrge thē
to this abſurditie.
            If the Apoſtles wrote not all things which
were neceſſarie to ſaluation,Abſurditie. becauſe they
could not beare awaie manie things which
Chriſt had to ſpeake before his reſurrection,
and before the ſending of the Holie
ghoſt, then would it followe that the Apoſtles
were not led into all truth by the holie
ghoſt after that he was ſent vnto them. The
which is moſt falſe, and reproued euen by
the place of Iohn. For he ſaith, And he ſhal
lead you into all truth. Alſo it would folow,
that Paule did neuer declare the full counſel
of god, the which thing is moſt falſe, as Paul
himſelfe affirmeth Act 20. and 27.
            
               Now therefore we will turne this their
argument vpon their owne heads, ſaieng
thus.
               The argument returned. If the apoſtles wrote not al things becauſe
they could not beare awaie all things,
thē trulie did they neuer teach all things by
mouth. And by force of the conſequent, this
place of Iohn can nothing appertaine vnto
traditions of the apoſtles not written.
            But perchance they will ſay, that thoſe
myſteries of ſaluation, ye which Chriſt hid
frō his apoſtles, wer reueled to ye Biſhops
of Rome, y• which if it wer true, then truly

the Biſhops of Rome, were no more to be
called the ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles onely,
but thoſe who farre did excéede all the Apoſtles:
the which God forbid that wée
once ſhould thinke.
            Let vs therfore amend this error in this
ſort,Errour corrected and affirme, that although the Apoſtles
before the ſending of the holie Ghoſt
were not ſo fully capable of the myſteries
of God, which appertain vnto the doctrine
of the Goſpell: yet notwithſtanding, after
the comforter was ſent, and after they
were led into all truth, it is moſt vndoubted,
that the whole truth which appertaineth
vnto our ſaluation, was both taught
by mouth by the Apoſtles, as alſo publiſhed
in writing.
            Paule commendeth the Corinthians, becauſe
they kept his traditions.6. Obiection. Ergo, Paule
taught manie things by mouth which hee
wrote not.
            The antecedent is prooued. 1. Cor. 11. I
praiſe you bretheren (ſaith Paule) that you
remember all my things, and keepe the traditions
or ordinaunce, as I haue deliuered
them vnto you.
            Nowe let vs come to the examining
of theyr Antecedent.Anſvvere. This place of

               Paule is expounded by Chriſoſtome and
Ambroſe, as alſo of many other learned of
this our time, not touching doctrine, but
touching eccleſiaſticall rytes and ceremonies.
Others againe confeſſe indéede, that
Paule doth héere intreate of certaine rytes
both appertaining to good order and comlineſſe.
But yet notwithſtanding, our aduerſaries
denie, that theſe wordes which
they obiect vnto vs, are to be reſtrained to
thoſe rytes: and they rather vnderſtande
and interpret this place generally, becauſe
Paule héere hath ſpoken it generally: for
he ſaith, I commende you brethren, for
that you haue remembred all my thinges,
&c.
            Alſo they adde this word Traditiō
                héere
vſed indefinite or generally, ſcarce ſound
in the writings of the Apoſtles, reſtrained
or tied only to traditions which appertain
to orders and rytes of the Church. Wherfore
they expound Paules words after this
ſort: You will keepe in memorie all thoſe
things which I haue taught, & therein truly
I gretly praiſe you. But becauſe amongſt
other things which I deliuered vnto you,
to be obſerued touching rytes and ceremonies
in your Eccleſiaſtical aſſemblies, and

for that certaine are contencious amongſt
you, which doo not ſo well lyke of them: &
therfore I declare theſe my reaſons, by the
which I was ledde to deliuer them vnto
you: this is theyr expoſition of this place.
But after what ſorte ſoeuer our aduerſaries
doo vnderſtand it, yet truly their concluſion
ſhall neuer be of any force. For if
he diſpute there touching rites and ceremonies
only, then is this place without the
compaſſe of our diſputation: for we diſpute
touching thoſe things which are neceſſarie
to ſaluation, and not of rites and
ceremonies, which may be chaunged for diuers
cauſes.
            Againe, if they be willing héere, that he
ſhould intreate of doctrine, yet ſerueth it
not anie thing for their purpoſe, as I wil
now declare, for I denie the conſequent.
            Paule deliuered many things to the Corinthians.The error
Ergo ſome of them (ſaye they)
are not written. The conſequent hereof
is falſe.
            Yet I confeſſe that this place hath deceiued
Theophilact and ſome others. Yet
truly (that I may ſpeake it by the fauour
of all the godly) they haue héere fowlie ſtū
               bled
in a plain & leuel way. For firſt Paul
               
did write that ſame tradition touching the
rytes of the which, he there ſpeketh. Again
although he had not written to the Corinthians,
yet he might write vnto others. To
conclude, if they were not extant in the
writings of Paul, yet might they be found
in the writings of the other Apoſtles. But
Paule ſaith, Be followers of me, as I follow
Chriſt. He therfore deliuered nothing, that
might in one iote be repugnaunt with
Chriſt, the which notwithſtanding our aduerſaries
doo. I will héere annexe certaine
other places, which alſo our aduerſaries abuſe.
2. Theſſa. 3.2. Theſ. 3 
               We warne you bretheren,
in the name of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that
you withdraw your ſelues from euerie brother
that walketh inordinatelie, and not after
the traditions which he hath receiued of
vs. And then followeth the very ſame tradition,
which Paule wrote. Againe. Actes.
16. And as they went through the Cities,
               Act. 16.
               they deliuered them decrees to keepe ordained
of the Apoſtles & Elders. But yet notwithſtanding
euen thoſe verie decrées of
the Apoſtles were then written, as it is
manifeſt Actes. 15. verſe. 23. and 24. Againe
in the foreſaid 11. chapter of the firſt Epiſtle
of Saint Paule to the Corinthians,

That which I receiued of the Lord, I deliuered
vnto you. Alſo in the ſame Epiſtle,
chapter. 15. verſ. 3. he ſaith the like. But yet
notwithſtanding all thoſe things are writen,
wherefore he that doth thus conclude,
ſaying: Paule taught by mouth, Ergo he
wrote not: truelye hée is altogether ignoraunt
of the right order of Diſputation.
            Let vs therefore now bring them to an
abſurditie.Abſurditie.
            
            If by reaſon that Paul taught by mouth,
traditions to the Corinthians, it follow that
thoſe traditions be not written: Ergo, the
traditions that women ſhoulde bee couered
in Eccleſiaſticall aſſemblies, and touching
prophecieng bare headded and manie ſuch
like, are not written: which is falſe, as appeareth
in the forenamed. 1. Cor. 11.
            We will nowe therefore,Obiection returned. tourne
theyr Argument vppon themſelues, ſaying
thus.
            If the traditions which Paule doth there,
diſpute of, to wit, touching Propheciengs
bare headed, and touching women
to bee couered, are neglected euen
of our Aduerſaryes themſelues, becauſe

their Monkes preach not bare headed, but
couered with their hoods? how much more
ſhall it be lawful for vs, to neglect thoſe traditions,
which our aduerſaries faine, beeing
not written in the word of God, & onelie
falſely cloked vnder the names of the Apoſtles?
            That we may therefore amend this error,The correcting of the obiection.
we muſt ſay that Paule doth in that
Epiſtle put them in minde of thoſe things
which he had taught them by mouth, whē
as he had diligently conſidered how great
the inconſtancie and leuitie of man is.
Whereby we ſée, that wée muſt altogether
cleaue to the writings of the Apoſtles,
leaſt the forged deuices of men, doe
withdrawe vs from the truth of the goſpell.
            Paule biddeth the Theſſalonians to
keep the traditions which they had learned
either by word or by Epiſtle:7. Obiection. Ergo, Paule
wrote not all Traditions neceſſarie to
faith.
            The antecedent is prooued 2. Theſſa. 2.
verſ. 15.
            Now let vs trye the antecedent.Anſvvere In
theſe woordes of Paule, Either by word or
Epiſtle: they are willing to make this

word Either an abſolute diſtunctiue: to
which their opinion I doo not agrée. For
I marke in the writings of the Apoſtles
(that I may héere ſpeake nothing of other
Authors) this perticle or word ſo repeated
to be a copulatiue rather then a diſiunctiue.
I prooue it by theſe places. 1.1. Cor. 13, 
                     •
                  
                Cor.
13. ver. 8. wher the Apoſtle ſaith, Whether
propheciengs be aboliſhed, whether tōgues
ceaſe, and knowledge vaniſh away. Againe,
1.1. Crr. 15. 11 Cor. 15. ver. 11. Whether I or they, ſo wee
haue preached, and ſo yee haue beleeued:
that is both I and they haue preached, &c.
Alſo to the Colloſſ. 1.Col. 1. 20 verſe. 20. Reconciling
to himſelfe all things by himſelfe, yea, I ſay,
reconciling to himſelfe all things, whether
they be in heauen, whether they be in earth.
            So alſo he vſeth this word [Mete] in
this Epiſtle, in the ſame chapter. verse. 2.
wherefore it is as though he ſhoulde ſaye,
ſtande ye faſt in the doctrine, which you
haue learned both by our wordes when
we were preſent, as alſo after in our writings.
            Therefore I deny their conſequence,The error for
the errour as I haue ſaid is Secundum
fallatiam dictionis: for firſt it followeth
not, if the Theſſalonians were taught both

by worde and Epiſtle, that thoſe thinges
were taught by mouth, were contrarie to
thoſe things which were taught by Epiſtle.
But ſecondly, admit that other
things were taught, yet it hurteth vs nothing:
for if they were not written in
the Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, yet truely
they might bée written in other his Epiſtles.
But admit yt 
               Paule did not write
them at all, yet it doeth not therefore followe,
that they were not written of the
other Apoſtles, as of Baptiſme, & the ſupper
of the Lord, &c.
            Let vs now ouerwhelme them with an
abſurditie.
            If it bee true by this kinde of ſpeaking,Abſurditie.
either by word or by Epiſtle, that therefore
it ſhould follow, that Paule did not write
all things neceſſarie to ſaluation, ergo on
the other ſide it woulde follow, that Paule
did not preach by mouth all things neceſſarie
to ſaluation, the which is abſurde and
falſe, as I prooue by theſe places following.
The 2.2. Theſ, 2. 13. 14. Theſſa. 2. verſe 13. and 14. You
are elected vnto ſaluation through the ſantification
of the holie Ghoſt, and through
the faith of the truth, vnto the which yee
were called by our Goſpell.
            
               
               Againe in the ſame Chapter,Ibi. ver. 5 verſe. 5.
Doo you not remember that when I was
with you I tolde you theſe things. Againe
the 1.1. The. 4 Theſſa. 4. Yee knowe what commaundement
I gaue you to abſtaine from
fornication.1. Theſ. 2. 
               Againe, 1. Theſſa. 2. Wee did
not onely deſire to imparte vnto you the
Goſpell of GOD, but our owne ſelues.
And in another place hee attributed vnto
them a moſt ſure perſwaſion of faith, which
they receiued by preaching, Whereby it is
proued, that Paule did deliuer to the Theſſalonians,
all thinges neceſſarie to ſaluation:
the which thinges could not bee if the
argument of our aduerſarie might preuaile.
            Therefore we wil turne their argument
vpon themſelues, ſaying.
            If the Theſlalonians were throughlye
inſtructed in chriſtian religion,The obiection returned, and that by
the preaching of the Apoſtle, which hee
preached by mouth, and neuertheleſſe were
to be confirmed by the writings of the Apoſtle:
howe much more ought wee to
cleaue to the writinges of the Apoſtles,
which were not preſent at their Sermons,
neyther yet inſtructed or them by
mouth.
            
               
Therefore the errour of our aduerſaries
muſt be amended,The correcting. and we muſt ſaye,
that Paule inſtructed the Theſſalonians not
onely by word, but alſo by Epiſtle, when
he had ſéene of what great value his writings
wer, to confirme the faith of the godly.
And thereby alſo that the holy Scripture
might be more highly commēded vnto
vs.
            Paule praied that he might ſee the face
of the Theſſalonians,8. obiection. and that he might accompliſh
or fulfill thoſe things which were
wanting in their faith: Ergo hee reſerued
many things to traditions, which hee ſpake
by mouth, beeing neceſſarie both to faith
and ſaluation. The Antecedent is prooued
2. Theſ. 3.Anſwere.
            
            I doo thus aunſwere their antecedent.
Manie of the olde writers doe vnderſtand
this place touching doctrine:Chriſoſt. For Chriſoſtome
referreth it to the doctrine of the reſurrection
of the dead.Ambr. 
               Ambroſe to the trinitie.
Although Chriſoſtome ſéeme not to
agrée with himſelfe, for thus he ſaith: not
as though vnto you (ſaith he) there were anie
part of faith wanting, or yt you ought
or néed to learne anie thing. And I ſée this
opinion of interpreters greatly to pleaſe

certaine of the learned new writers. But
other expound the name of faith touching
the conſtancie of faith, as in the ſame chapter
he ſayth:1. Theſ. 3. 
               I ſent that I might know your
faith, leaſt Sathan had tempted you by anie
kinde of meanes, and that our labour had
bene in vaine. But our aduerſaries ſtande
vpon theſe points: Firſt there is attributed
vnto the Theſſalonians the fulneſſe of
faith,1. Theſ. 1. as is before ſayd: Secondly there is
no doubt but that they were baptiſed, and
therefore perfectly inſtructed in chriſtian
religion. They bring forth many other argumēts
vnto this end: and chiefly ye whole
2. cha. of ye firſt epiſtle vnto ye 
               Theſſaloniās.
But let our aduerſaries chooſe which interpretation
they will, yet ſhal it not ſerue
anie thing for their purpoſe.
            Now concerning their conſequent,The error I deny
it: for if by this word faith, they vnderſtand
a through perſwaſion or conſtancie
of faith: the error is in the diuers ſignification
of the word. But if they had rather expound
it touching doctrine, then their cōſequence
is falſe. For they doe not well conclude:
thus they ſay, ſome thing was wanting
to ye faith of ye 
               Theſſalonians, ergo Paul
did not declare by mouth all thinges vnto

them: or elſe all thinges were not written
by the apoſtles neceſſarie to faith. For it is
one thing to teach, & another to learne: and
ther may be a defect in the ſcholler, whē as
there is none in the maſter. Therfore Paul
ſaith Phil. 3.Phi. 3. 1 It is profitable for you & not
troubleſōe vnto me to repeat thoſe things
againe vnto you. But that we may return
to ye 
               Theſſaloniās: You know (ſaith he) what
cōmaundements we gaue vnto you, that you
ſhould abſtein from fornication, &c. But let
vs graunt this, yet truly it followeth not,
becauſe ther was ſome thing wāting vnto
the faith of the Theſſalonians: that therfore
Paule & the reſt of the Apoſtles wrote not
all the things neceſſarie to the doctrine of yt
goſpell. Theſe arguments truely are of no
value nor force, neither yet ſcātly hang together.
Therfore we may wel bring thē to
an abſurditie, ſaying. If this argumēt of our
aduerſaries do preuaile,
               Abſurditie. 
               that the apoſtles reſerued
many thinges which they taught by
mouth vnto traditions, beeing neceſſary to
the ſaluation of the Church, becauſe Paule
wiſhed that hee might ſee the face of the
Theſſalonians, that hee might ſupply thoſe
things which wer wanting to their faith: thē
it wold follow, that Paule himſelfe was all

the apoſtles, & the Theſſalonians the whole
vniuerſall church, the which is too abſurde.
And therefore wée may turne their argument
vpō themſelues,Obiectiō returned. ſaying
                  •
                
               If our aduerſaries
do heereby prooue their traditions becauſe
Paule deſired to ſee the face of the
Theſſalonians, that being preſent, he might
fully inſtruct them by mouth: Then wold it
follow that this appertaineth nothing vnto
vs, which a long time ſince could not ſee the
face of Paule. But perchance they wil ſay y•
the olde fathers wrote thoſe things which
Paule then taught when he was preſent.
But becauſe I will not say y• that is falſe,
I will make them this anſwere. If thoſe
things were worth y• writing, why did not
Paule himſelfe write thē? If not, why ſhuld
ye old doctors write thē? Therefore thus we
may auoid their error, ſaying: That Paule
did therfore deſire to ſée y• 
               Theſſalonians,
               Correctiō
                yt
therby he might the more firmely eſtabliſh
their faith, when as he did manifeſtly perceiue
of what great efficacie ye preſence of
their techer was. But ſéeing we cannot inioy
this benefit, we muſt plainly cleaue to
the writinges of the Apoſtles, and thoſe
their writings ought to bée of ſo great value
vnto vs, as if that the Apoſtles

themſelues were preſent to ſpeak vnto vs,
& ſo much the rather becauſe in thoſe writings,
we may heare euē ye voice of Chriſt.
            Paule wrote vnto the Corinthians, that
when he came vnto them,9. obiect. he would ſet the
reſt in order, ergo he reſerued many things
to be taught by mouth. The antecedent is
proued. 1. Cor. 11.
            Thus I anſwere their antecedent, Paule
doth not héere ſpeak of the chiefe points of
faith,Anſvvere but of Eccleſiaſticall order. For the
Gréeke word which he vſeth, ſignifieth to
determine ſome matter according to ſome
order. As Paule to Tit. 1. chap. ſaith: Ordain
elders as I haue commaunded thee, where
Paule vſeth the verie ſame Gréeke worde.
And againe, 1. Cor. 16. Paule vſeth the ſame
word in the actiue voice, touching the beſtowing
of their liberalitie, & ſaith, becauſe
I haue commanded, &c. And ſpeaketh of an
order to be kept in the ſame matter, & ſo the
french men ſay, Ordonner in their tongue,
and we ſay Ordaine.
            Now I denie their conſequent:Error for the
error is Secundum figuram dictionis, for y•
proper ſignification of the worde, ſignifieth
another thing, then they meane. Alſo
their conſequence is falſe.
            
               
               Paule would ſet in order certaine things
amongeſt the Corinthians when hée was
preſent: Ergo ſaie they, hée would conſtitute
new principles of faith. Againe they
reaſon thus: Paule deferred certaine things
vntill his comming, the which he woulde
ſet in order among the Corinthians, ergo
hée neuer wrote them. Alſo thoſe things
are they which the Prelates of Rome doo
obtrude and thruſt vppon vs as traditions
ſpringing from the Apoſtles. All theſe
arguments are fooliſh and falſe, or worſe if
worſe may be.
            
               And therefore wée maye well bring
them to an abſurditie,
               Abſurditie, 
               ſaying: If that be
true which our aduerſaryes would, to wit,
that Paule then when hee wrote that Epiſtle,
had not deliuered to the Corinthians
al thoſe things which wer neceſſarie to
faith: then would it come to paſſe (which
GOD forbid) that thoſe thing which followe
in his Epiſtle, were not true: to wit,
that the Corinthians were made rich in
all knowledge:
               1. Cor. 1 
               The 1. Corinth. Alſo hee
ſayth: I declare vnto you the Goſpell the
which I preached, the which alſo ye haue
receiued, in the which yee ſtande, and by
the which alſo yee are ſaued.
               1. Cor. 15 1. Cor. 15.
            
               
And againe, Ye aboūd in al things, in faith,
in word: in knowledge, in all zeale, and in
all loue towardes vs, euen ſo ſee that yee abound
in this grace alſo.2. Cor. 8 2. Cor. 8. And againe,
What is it in the which you are inferiour
to other churches.2. Cor. 12 2. Cor. 12. And manie
ſuch like examples.
            
            Finally, this their obiection may be turned
vpon themſelues, and correted as wée
haue done in the former arguments,
            Iohn would not write much,Obiectiō
                Ergo, hee
wrote not all things neceſſarie to faith.
            The antecedent is proued in the 2. and
3. Epiſtles of Iohn, wher he ſaith thus: Whē
I had manie things to write vnto you, yet
would I not write with paper and inke.
            I admit their antecedent,Anſvvere Error yet I denye
their conſequent. For theſe things hang
not together. Iohn had manye things to
write, Ergo they were principles of faith.
Ergo, alſo they are not any wher extāt, for
otherwiſe this abſurditie would followe.
            That the ſame Ladie vnto the which
Iohn wrote,Abſurditie. was not fullie inſtructed in chriſtian
religion: therefore thoſe hang not together
with Iohns ſpeeches, whē as he commēdeth
the faith of the ſame ladie, as alſo of
hir childrē, whō he affirmeth to walk in the

truth. And therefore this argument may be
turned vpon themſelues, as ye other before.
            
            Manie other things did Ieſus,11. obiec. beſide thoſe
which were written, the which if they were
euerie one written, the whole world would
not containe the bookes: Ergo, all things neceſſarie
to faith are not written by the Apoſtles.
            The antecedent is proued Iohn. 21.
            I gaunt their antecedent:Anſvvere yet I denye
their conſequent. For the error is, Secundum
ignorantiam Elenchi: for they wander
héere without the compaſſe of our queſtion.
Iohn ſpeaketh in that place of miracles
which Chriſt did, & our diſputation is
of doctrine neceſſarie to faith & saluation.
For theſe are ye words of Iohn, Chriſt did
manie things, & therfore héerof commeth no
conſequent. Al ye miracles yt Chriſt did, are
not written: ergo ſay they, all y• principles
of chriſtian religiō & doctrin are not writē.
            
               Now ſée héere how our aduerſaries beat
themſelues with their owne weapons: For
if our aduerſaries refer their traditions vnto
thoſe things which Iohn faith are not written:The papiſts ouer throwe their own traditions
Ergo, thoſe traditions are infinit & with
out number, & ſo by the force of the conſequent,
without the cōpaſſe of knowledge.

               And truly I eaſely confeſſe, that ſuch kind
of traditions are ſo greatly increaſed, that
the world now can ſcantly beare them.
            
            
               We may therefore turne their argument
vpon themſelues thus:
               The obiection returned. Iohn ſaith,
Chriſt did manie other things, which are
not written: but he alſo affirmeth, That
thoſe things which are written, are written
to the ende we might beleeue & haue eternall
life. Ergo, thoſe things which are written,
are ſufficient to ſaluation.
            The error therefore of our aduerſaries
may thus be amended,Correctiō
                ſaieng. Iohn and
the reſt of the Euangelists, did chooſe out of
thoſe things which Chriſt did, being otherwiſe
infinite, thoſe which ſéemed neceſſary:
whereby it commeth to paſſe, y• we ought
to be contented with the writings of the apoſtles.
            The Apoſtles did often recite teſtimonies
taken from the traditions of ſuch auncient
men,12. Obiec. as liued before their daies. Ergo,
wee muſt not onelie ſticke to the Scriptures.
            The antecedent is manifeſt. 2. Tim 3. As
Iannes & Iambris withſtood Moſes. Againe,
Iude ver. 9. Michael the Archangell diſputed
about the bodie of Moſes. And a little

after he reciteth the Prophecie of Enoch,
Behold the Lord cōmeth with manie thouſands
of his ſaints.
            To their antecedent I aunſwere thus,Anſvvere
Indéede I confeſſe, that the Apoſtles didde
ſometimes recite certaine ſentences taken
out of the bookes Apocripha: And to aunſwere
the place of Paule in Timothie, I
doo not doubt but in his time y• ſome booke
did remaine touching thoſe Magis Iannes
and Iambris: for Plinie in his 30. booke of
his naturall hiſtorie. chap. 1. doth there recken
vp Iannes amongſt the auncient Magi,
the which he would not haue done, except
he had learned it out of ſome booke.
And furthermore, I aunſwere that thoſe
Ethnickes, were not altogether to bée
refuſed of the Apoſtles:Act. 17 Tit. 1. for ſo Paule reciteth
certaine verſes out of Aratus and Epiminides:
but I doo affirme, that the Apoſtles
did not therfore vſe theſe teſtimonies,
that by them they wold confirme any principle
of faith,1. Cor. 15. for when they would ſo doo,
they had alwaies readie expreſſe places taken
out of the writings of the Prophets,
and thoſe they did expounde according to
the motion of the holy Ghoſt. But when
they would teach any doctrine touching

manners, or declare ſome thing, touching
the which very few or none did doubt, thē
if peraduēture they remembred any thing
written in the bookes Apocripha, or in the
writings of thoſe Ethinks, they did not ſo
diſlike their ſentences, but that they wold
apply them vnto their purpoſe: yet notwithſtanding,
the Apoſtles did not attribute
ſo great authoritie vnto them, that
they ſhould be of ſufficient authoritie thē
               ſelues:
for god forbid we ſhuld once think
ſo. But they were willing by that meanes
to mooue mens mindes the more, that they
might thereby the eaſier receiue their doctrine,
which notwithſtanding was otherwiſe
ſufficiently confirmed, euen by the
word of God. As for examples ſake it is
manifeſt in Exodus, that the Magi or wiſe
men of Aegipt withſtood Moſes, what matter
is it by what name thoſe Magi were
called, or can thoſe their names be applyed
to any principle of faith? No, to none truly.
Alſo Michael woulde not vſe railing
words vnto the diuell, as Saint Iude ſaith:
wherby we may learn much leſſe to ſpeak
euil of Magiſtrates ordained of God. This
exhortation of Iude to the reuerencing of
Magiſtrates, is in many places to be found

in the ſcriptures. The like is that which
Peter ſaith,2. Pet. 2 
               That the Angels doo not raile
on thoſe that haue authoritie. 2. Pet. 2. Alſo
the Lord will come ſaith Iude, to rewarde
the wicked, the which threatnings is vſual
in the holy ſcriptures. Whereby we manifeſtly
ſée, to what ende the Apoſtles culled
out certaine ſentences from the bookes Apocripha,
to the ſeruing of their own purpoſe.
Now we come vnto ye cōsequēt, which
I denie. The Apoſtles did vſe certain ſentences
taken out of the bookes Apocripha:
Ergo, they vſed them to the confirmation of
faith. And againe therefore alſo we ought
to runne to traditions ſo often as we diſpute
of faith, as though the teſtimonies of
the holy ſcriptures did faile vs. This is a
falſe argument, & no good conſequent can
come héerof. For the Apoſtles vſed not ſuch
teſtimonies to confirme principles of religion.
Yea: and euen thoſe teſtimonies them
ſelues (if you marke well the matter) you
ſhall ſée them confirmed by many & expres
places of ſcriptures. Wherfore our aduerſaries
ſéeme to be forgetful of our purpoſed
queſtiō, while they go about to obiect theſe
things to vs: for this is ye ſtate of our queſtiō
(whē ther ariſeth cōtrouerſie touching

faith, whether we ought to ſticke onelye to
the teſtimonies of the Scriptures, or els to
adde thervnto traditions, to the which we
may giue the like credite, as we maye to
the ſcriptures. But you ſhall finde no ſuch
thing in theſe teſtimonies which the Apoſtles
vſed, as I haue before ſhewed. Yea,
and I may ſay that this argument is not
rightly applied againſt vs in this cauſe,
taken from the Apoſtles.
            Let vs retourne this abſurditie on our
aduerſaries, ſaieng thus.
            If becauſe the Apoſtles did recite certaine
ſentences out of bookes not Canonicall,Abſurditie.
that therefore it followeth the Apoſtles did
attribute authoritie to thoſe bookes & ſuch
like in matters of faith. Ergo, becauſe ſome
of the Apoſtles did recite ſome out of the
Ethnicks bookes, it muſt follow, that the Apoſtles
did attribute authoritie to thoſe
bookes in matters of faith, which thing is
abſurde and contrarie to the opinion of all
men.
            Let vs tourne this obiection vppon our
aduerſaries, after this ſort.
            If the Apoſtles did at anie time recite
the traditions of auncient fathers,Obiectiō returned. but onelie
to beautifie thoſe things which wer eſtabliſhed

and confirmed by moſt firme teſtimonies
of holie ſcriptures? How much leſſe
then ought wee to recite the traditions of
the olde fathers, to the confirming of thoſe
things which want teſtimonie of the Scripture.
            Thus therefore we may amend the errour
of this their obiection, and ſaye,Correction. that
the Apoſtles whereas they did applie thē
               ſelues
to the capacitie of men, that they
might thereby the better ſtirre them vp, or
the more eaſily conuince them, they vſed
ſome times the bookes Apocripha, as alſo
ſentences gathred from Ethincks, to wit,
when they did diſpute of thoſe things, the
truth whereof was manifeſt in the holye
ſcriptures.
            The heretikes did wreaſt the writinges
of Paule,13. obiect & that in the verie time of the Apoſtles,
and alſo it is moſt manifeſt that the
heretiks: yea, & Sathan himſelfe haue cloked
their hereſies euen with the Scriptures: ergo
we muſt not cleaue to the Scriptures alone.
The antecedent is proued, 2. Pe. 3. as alſo by
the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, and alſo Math 4.
If thou be the ſonne of GOD caſt thy ſelfe
down headlong, for it is written he ſhal giue
his Angells charge ouer thee, &c.
            
               
I admit their antecedent.
            But I denie their conſequent.Anſvvere Neither
doth Peter ſo conclude, but rather calleth
them vnto the writings of Paule, then in
anie part to abridge the ſame. The error is
as the Logitians ſay, Secundum non cauſam
vt cauſam.
            
            The heretikes abuſed the Scriptures,Error &
wreſted the writings of the Apoſtles into
a contrarie ſence, ergo ſaye they, we ought
to run other where then to the ſcriptures,
to the eſtabliſhing of our faith. The Scripture
is not in fault, but onely men themſelues,
which doo wreſt ſo worthie a matter
vnto their owne errours. Wherefore
this is ſo farre from the Apoſtles minde,
that we ſhould leaue the aide of the ſcripture,
becauſe heretikes haue abuſed them,
that rather the heretikes are by the verie
ſcriptures to be conuinced, like as we haue
alreadie proued out of the places of Paule,
2. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. And when Sathan abuſed
the Scriptures,2. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. that he might weaken the
faith of Chriſt, truely Chriſt went not to
traditions, but with the Scriptures again
ouerthrew the enimy. For ſathan obiecting
and ſaying it is written: Chriſt alſo on the
other ſide anſwered, it is written, and not

left in tradition.Abſurditie, And therefore we muſt
bring them to this inconuenience, ſaying.
            If becauſe the heretikes falſified the Scriptures,
we may not therefore only cleaue vnto
the Scriptures: then truely becauſe the
heretikes falſely fathered traditions to be Apoſtolike,
as wee haue prooued before both
out of the writings of the Apoſtles, as alſo
out of Irenaeus and Euſebius: therefore wee
may not ſticke onely to traditions. And againe,
becauſe heretikes abuſed both Scriptures
and traditions, therefore we muſt neyther
cleaue to Scriptures, nor to traditions:
the which is abſurde, and euen our aduerſaries
themſelues yeeld to the ſame.
            Let vs therefore turne their argument
vpon themſelues, ſaying.Obiectiō returned.
            
            If like as Sathan abuſed the Scriptures againſt
Chriſt, ſo likewiſe the heretiks do againſt
true Chriſtians. Then truly as Chriſt
vſed the Scripture onely to repell Sathan:
ſo likewiſe the true Chriſtians muſt vſe
onely the Scriptures in repelling of heretikes.
            And therefore we may amend their error
thus:Correction. If ſuch be the wickednes of the heretikes,
ye they abuſe ye ſcriptures, then ought
we to giue al diligēce, yt the ſcripture may

kéepe both their authoritie and puritie, the
which will be if the heretiks be conuinced
by the Scriptures alone, and thoſe places
which ſhall ſéeme ſomewhat obſcure, maye
take their interpretation from places more
plaine. But if our aduerſaries hearken not
vnto vs: yet at the leaſt waies let them
giue eare euen vnto themſelues,Can. rela. Diſt. 37 in whoſe
decretalls this ſentence remaineth: That
from the Scriptures themſelues, the ſence
of truth muſt be taken.
            The doctrine touching the baptiſme of
Infants is not found in the holy Scriptures,14. obiec.
neither theſe words, Trinitie, like ſubſtance,
perſons, & manie ſuch like: all which words
notwithſtanding do appertaine vnto groūds
and principles of faith: Ergo all things appertaining
vnto faith are not to be found in
the Scriptures.
            The antecedent is found true by reading
of the Scriptures.
            Now touching their antecedent,Anſvvere I ſaie
thus: In that they affirme the doctrine
concerning Baptiſme of children not to be
found in the Scriptures is moſt falſe, like
as our late writers haue taught in theyr
learned workes againſt the Anabaptiſtes,
touching the which I will not héere make

any longer diſputation, leaſt I ſhuld ſéeme
to wander without ye compaſſe of my proponed
queſtiō. Now touching theſe words
Trinitie, like ſubſtance, and perſons: I confeſſe
they are not found in the writings of
the Apoſtles, but yet I ſaie y• the verie doctrine
which is ſignified by theſe words, is
deriued from the Scriptures: for when certaine
heretiks roſe vp which denied ye veritie
of ye doctrine, then the godly Fathers
which liued in thoſe daies, hauing care of ye
circumſtances, added theſe wordes: by the
which they might the more eaſily explicate
& declare the doctrine touching ye trinitie,
y• which doctrine they had before confirmed
by expreſſe and manifeſt teſtimonies of the
holy Scriptures.
            Now touching their conſequence. The
error is,Errour 
               Secundum fallaciam figurae dictionis.
Theſe words Trinitie, the baptiſme of
infants, like ſubſtance, are not found in the
Scripture, it is called [Omonomos] for the
words indéede are not found in the holie
Scriptures, but the things ſignified by the
words are there found. And our chriſtian
faith conſiſteth not in the title of words,
but in ſubſtance of matter, not in many
volumes of bookes as S. Hierom ſaith,

but in the verye ground of reaſon.Tract. de ver. & pia fid. And
therefore Baſil confeſſeth, y• he vſed againſt
the heretikes certaine termes, which were
not found written: but yet notwithſtanding
(ſaith he) they were nothing contrary
to the ſence of the holy Scriptures.
            And therfore our aduerſaries reaſoning
thus, we may wel bring them to an abſurditie,
ſaying.
            If becauſe the perſons, the trinitie,Abſurditie. and ſuch
like words be not extant in the holy Scriptures,
it therfore followeth, that all things neceſſarie
to faith are not found in the holye
ſcriptures: Ergo theſe words are neceſſarie to
faith, and ſo by force of the conſequent: Sith
this worde [Omoouſios] that is like ſubſtance,
and ſuch other wordes were onely
found out by the godly Doctors after the
hereſie of Arius began to ſpring, then wold
it followe that the Church of Chriſt, before
the time of Arius, yea, & the Apoſtles
thēſelues knew not al things neceſſarie vnto
faith: The which thing is moſt abſurd &
ſauouring of Athiſme.
            And therefore we may well turne this
argument home againe vnto our aduerſaries,
ſaying.Obiectiō returned.
            
            If ſuch were the religion of the auncient

fathers, that they would not inuent anie one
word to the intreating vpon anie principle
of faith, the which was not grounded vpon
expreſſe places of ſcriptures (as it is manifeſt
by theſe words, trinitie, ſubſtance, & perſons:
& ſuch like) what ſhal we then think of our
aduerſaries which do not only inuēt words,
but alſo euē matter it ſelf, altogether abhorring
& contrarie to the Scriptures of God.
            And therefore we may amend ye error
of this their obiection,Correctiō
                ſaying: That it is
lawfull for the godly fathers of the church
of God, to vſe & inuent certaine words and
tearmes, whereby the matter contained in
the ſcriptures, may the better & eaſier bée
expreſſed.
            If we muſt altogether beleeue the church
& in no part ſwarue from the credit of the
church,Obiec. 15. & we beleeue the church in this part
affirming, that the ſcriptures came from the
ſpirit of God, thē truly we ought to beleeue
the church, likewiſe affirming that theſe &
ſuch other like traditions came from the Apoſtles.
The antecedent is true: and therfore
it muſt follow that the cōsequēt is alſo true.
            The Maior hath two parts, touching the
which we will particularly ſpeake.Anſvvere And
touching the firſt point, I doe make a diſtinction

of the Church, which Paule calleth
the houſe of God, the piller & foundation of
truth, which heareth ye voice of her ſpouſe, &
onely dependeth vpon his mouth, and is alwaies
gouerned by the ſpirit of God, & cannot
be ſéene becauſe ſhée is not tied to circūſtances
of place, time or perſons, yet notwithſtāding
we beleeue y• the ſame church
is vpholden by the word of God, & that ſhe
nothing eſtéemeth mans traditions. But
this or ye viſible Church, or the companie of
many viſible congregations may ſwarue
from the truth, as it is manifeſt touching
the Churches in the Eaſt, of which y• moſt
part haue turned to Mahumet. I will not
héere bring in the ancient counſells, which
haue both allowed & brought into ye church
great & gréeuous errors. And touching this
church we may thus determine: inaſmuch
as ſhe is ſubiect to many errors, ſhe is not
otherwiſe to be heard, except ſhée ſpeake
thoſe thinges which are agréeable to the
Scriptures, touching which matter I haue
diſputed more at large in another place:
wherefore this hath héere no place which
they ſay & affirme, y• wée muſt altogether
beléeue the church, & in part ſwarue frō the
credit of the ſame, thē muſt we beléeue the

viſible Churches, when as they propound
nothing els vnto vs but the word of God:
& on the other ſide we ought not to beléeue
the viſible churches when they ſwarue frō
the word of God, for I make my example
by the Sinagogue which very religiously
hath reſerued the Cannons or bookes
of the Scriptures, yet notwithſtanding ſhe
hath innumerable errors. So thē we may
beléeue the ſame Sinagogue, whereby ſhe
ſaith, y• the Canonicall bookes haue ſprong
from ye ſpirit of God: & againe we may not
beléeue her, when ſhe reiecteth & caſteth away
the doctrine of Chriſt.Mat. 23. Therfore in y•
reſpect Chriſt ſaith:lbi. ve. 16. The Scribes & Phareſies
ſitting in Moſes chaire are to be heard,Mat. 16.
& yet notwithſtanding in another place he
reprehendeth & reproueth their traditions,
whereby wée ſée proued, that in one parte
they ought to be heard, & on the other not.
Wherfore their Minor is not true, & ſo the
conſequence cannot ſtand, becauſe there is
an error,Errour 
               Secundum fallaciam figurae dictionis.
And they reaſoning thus, we may well
bring thē to a great inconuenience, ſaying.
In the time of Tertulian the church did affirme,
               Abſurditie.
               that an oblation for birth daies was a
tradition receiued from the Apoſtles, but in
               
the time of the Nicēe coūſel, the church did
affirme, that oblation for birth daies was not
a tradition of the Apoſtles, as in his proper
place I haue proued: ergo if wee muſt in all
parts beleeue the Church, and in no parte
ſwarue from the Church, then muſt we beleeue
the things which are manifeſt oppoſit
& contarrie one to the other, the which is
impoſsible.
            Wherefore we may turne their obiection
vpon themſelues,Obiectiō returned. after this ſort, ſaying:
            
               Whoſoeuer affirmeth the ſcripture to be
the word of god the which we ought to beleeue:
& likewiſe affirmeth that traditions
not written are to be receiued, ſpeketh cō
                  traries.
But the Church of Rome affirmeth
the ſcriptures to be the word of god which
we ought to beleeue, & alſo affirmeth that
traditions not writtē are to be receiued. Ergo
the church of Rome affirmeth contraries,
& by force of the conſequent we muſt
beleeue hir in one part, & in another not, &
if this be of anie force, that we muſt beleue
the church in all parts, & ſwarue frō hir in
no part, thē this foloweth by their argumēt,
               Vnſolding of the former argument
               that the Church may not wel be called the
Church, For ye truth of the maior propoſition
is proued thus. If you did me belée
                  •
               e

the ſcriptures, truly I will beléeue yt there
is nothing to be added thervnto, becauſe yt
it is ſo commanded in them,Deut, 4 Pro. 30 as I haue in
diuers places of my booke proued: & therefore
this ſentence of Tertulian is highly to
be imbraced,Depreſcr. 
               Whē we beleeue (ſaith he) this
firſt we muſt beleeue, that there is nothing
els that we ought to beleue. Now if we wil
conſider the traditions of our aduerſaries,
we ſhal eaſily perceiue yt they are not only
added by inuentions, but alſo contrarie
to expreſſe places of ſcripture: ſo ye ſée, yt
we cannot beléeue the ſcriptures, & alſo the
traditions of our aduerſaries.
            And therefore we may amend the error
of the former obiection after this manner:
Sith we ought to beléeue God alone,Correction. then
moſt diligently ought we to take héede,
leaſt vnder the ſhew of pietie, we be ſeduced
into errour, and becauſe the name of
the Church is verie glorious, therefore, if
anie thing be propoſed vnto vs vnder the
title of the Church, we ought to giue attē
               tiue
diligence, whether it be ye voyce of the
true church or not, which we heare: & yt we
may be able ſo to doo, we muſt take counſell
with the word of God ſet foorth vnto
vs in the Scriptures, from the which, the

true church of God neuer ſwerneth: whē
therefore the Church affirmeth vnto vs,
that the ſcriptures are the word of God,
we acknowledge the ſame to be true, not
onely becauſe the church ſo affirmeth, but
becauſe of the inward efficacie of the ſpirite
of God, by the which the truth of the
ſcriptures is ſealed in our hearts: & lyke
as the church by the conduction of the ſpirite
of God, affirmeth vnto vs yt the ſcripture
is the word of God, ſo we by the conduction
of the ſame ſpirit, beléeue that that
is true, which the Church affirmeth yt our
faith may neuer reſt vpō men, but for euer
vpon God alone.
            The Apoſtles did adde vnto the lawe:
to wit the doctrine of the Goſpell: Ergo,16. obiec.
it is lawfull to adde vnto the worde of
God.
            To the antecedent I thus aunſwere.Anſvvere
Although the doctrine of the Goſpell bée
more full and fruitfull then the writing
of the olde Teſtament, yet notwithſtanding,
if ye well mark the matter: in ye new
and olde teſtament, the ſelfe ſame doctrine
of ſaluation is contained in them both, for
that is moſt true which Paule ſaith Acts,
26.Act. 26. that he taught no other thing, then that

which the prophets and Moſes had before
taught. And againe in the firſt to ye 
               Rom.
               Rom. 1.
he ſheweth yt the goſpel was before promiſed
by the Prophets, & therfore this is falſe
which they ſay, that the Apoſtles added to
the law: for it is one thing to adde to the
lawe, and another to erpound and referre
it to his owne proper ſcope and purpoſe.
For let ſome man bring forth an obligation
(that we may vſe this ſimilitude) and
the payment being made, he addeth at the
ende that the Obligation is ſatiſfied, I
pray you can he well be ſayd to adde any
thing to the ſame Obligation? So when
the Apoſtles gaue teſtimonie to the ſcriptures
that Chriſt by his cōming had fulfilled
both the lawe and the prophets, they
did not adde either to ye law, or writings
of the Prophets.
            Now, their conſequent,Errour. I denie: for héere
is an error, Secundum figuram dictionis,
as it is manifeſt by theſe things which I
haue alreadie ſpoken. Yea, alſo the argument
cannot well procéed from the Apoſtles
to other men: for graunt this, that
God would adde vnto his lawe, and that
it was done by the miniſterie of the Apoſtles,
which wrote by the influence & motion

of the ſpirit of God: yet truly héereby
can nothing happen, whereby it ſhoulde be
lawfull for other men to adde vnto ye ſame
word of God.
            Wherefore ſithen by the argumentation
of our aduerſaries, there would follow the
ouerthrowe of this moſt noble & excellent
doctrine, touching the ſimilitude of the old
and new Teſtament.
            Therefore we may well amend their error
by this moſt excellent ſaieng,Correctiō
                which is
extant in the workes of Iuſtinus Matyre,
In interg. & reſp. wher he aſketh this, and
ſaith, What is the Lawe? he aunſwereth &
ſaith: It is the Goſpell foreſhewed. Againe
he demaundeth, What is the Goſpell? he
aunſ wereth, The Lawe fulfilled. By which
words it is manifeſt, that the Goſpell is
not a newe doctrine added vnto the lawe,
but a new fulfilling of the olde promiſe.
And thus we ſuppoſe that we haue ſufficiently
diſputed touching the obiections
of our aduerſaries, which
they haue wreaſted out
of the worde of
God.
         
         
            
            The 5. Chapter.
            
               FOraſmuch as the aduerſaries
themſelues ſufficiently
knowe how weake & féeble
thoſe argumēts are which
they take out of ye ſcripturs
againſt the ſcriptures: then
at the laſt they flie to the teſtimonies of
the auncient Fathers: the which they very
diligently endeuour to beate into our
heads with Orations long and tedious,
to the ende that by the heape thereof, they
might ouer whelme vs. Wherefore it ſéemeth
conuenient in this part of our treatiſe,
to ſet downe ſome thing whereby not
onely the obiections of the Papiſts, but alſo
our aunſweres, may the more eaſier be
vnderſtood.
            Now therefore yt we maye gather moſt
true and infallible principles, let vs adde
ſome certaine rules to this our diſputation,That we may vſe profitablye the vvritings of the Fathers, certaine rules are 
                     〈◊〉
                   to be obſerued.
by whoſe helpe the mindes of the olde
Doctors may be expounded, and ſo by the
conduction of thoſe rules, as by a clue of
thred, we may both enter into the many &
variable writings of the Doctours, as

into a moſt daungerous Laborynth, and
there alſo kéepe our ſelues occupied moſt
ſafely and without hurt.
            
               Let this therefore be the
firſt Rule.
               THe writings of the auncient Doctors,The firſt rule
for the eſtabliſhing and confirmation of
our faith, are ſo farre foorth to be receiued,
as they agree with the holie and diuine
ſcriptures,
               Although this firſt rule be plain inough
of himſelfe,Cōfirmation of this rule. eſpecially to thoſe that knowe
the truth, yet will I for the confirmation
of the ſame,Gal. 1. 8. lay downe certaine proofes. If
anie preach vnto you otherwiſe, then that
which we haue preached vnto you, let him
be accurſſed, ſaith S. Paule. And againe,
Warne ſome that they teach no other doctrine.
And againe,1. Tim. 1. 
                  Marke them diligentlie,
which cauſe diuiſion and offences,
                  Rom. 16. 
                  contrarie
to the doctrine which ye haue learned, and
auoide them. And again,1. Tim. 6. 
                  If anie man teach
otherwiſe, he is puffed vp, and knoweth nothing.
And agayne, Be not carried about
with diuers and ſtraunge doctrines: with
many more places to this effect.Heb, 13.
               
               
                  
Yet leaſt happely our aduerſaries ſhoulde
ſay, that theſe places repeted are to be vnderſtood
of the word deliuered by tradition,
and not of the word written: leauing
thoſe things, which in the former parte of
this treatiſe are handeled copiouſly and at
large, I will aſke them this Queſtion:
whether they think ye Apoſtles to haue vttered
& ſpoken anie thing in their lectures
& ſermons, which doth diſagrée with thoſe
things which they haue committed to writing?
I am ſure they will in no wiſe confeſſe
it. Wherefore, mauger their heades,
they muſt agrée with vs, that this our firſt
Rule is infallible and moſt true: to wit,
that the writings of the auncient doctors,
are ſo far foorth to be receiued, as they doe
agrée with the ſacred Scripture. But if
they ſhall perceiue the auncient Doctours
themſelues to be of our mind: I hope then
(all doubt remooued) they will together
with vs agrée to our former rule.
               
                  This therefore is the minde of Origen:
It behooueth vs to bring the holie Scriptures
for witneſſes: for becauſe our ſenſes,1. Ierem.
and allegations, without the witneſſe of
them, are altogether voyde of credite.Mat. hom, 
                        •
                     5
               
               
                  And againe, Euen as there is not anie

golde ſanctified without the temple: ſo ther
is no ſence without the Scripture that is holie.
               Tertulian. What is there contrarie to vs
in our writings (hee ſpeaketh of the holye
Scriptures.)Do preſer. heret. Ibidem. 
                  And againe. The ſame that we
are, the ſame they be.
               Chriſoſtome,In Pſa. 95. If anie thing bee ſpoken
without the Scriptures, the minde of the
hearers is thereby brought into doubt.
               Hierome.In Pſa. 86 Whatſoeuer heereafter ſhall
be ſpoken beſides the Apoſtolicall writings,
let it be abrogated, of no value, & altogether
without credit.
               Aguſtine.In Epi. 48. ad 
                        ••
                     ncen. Doo thou not bring vs anie
cauelles from the writinges of the Biſhoppes,
as of Hillarie, or Ciprian, againſt
the infallible teſtimonie of the diuine ſcriptures.
Becauſe as it behooueth vs to put a
difference betweene that kinde of writing,
and the Scriptures of GOD: for,
the writings of men are not ſo to be read,
that it is not lawfull for vs to thinke the
contrarie, if at anie time they haue peraduenture
thought otherwiſe then the
truth requireth.
               
                  And againe,
                  De vnita. Eccl, ca, 10 wee muſt not agree to the
Catholyke Biſhoppes if at anie time they

are deceiued, taking opinion contrarie to
the canonical ſcriptures. And againe,
                  In Epi, ad Hiero. 19 Aug, cont. l. 11. I haue
learned to giue this honour and reuerence
onely to thoſe writinges which are called
Canonicall, that I faithfully beleeue the authours
of them, haue not in anie point at anie
time erred in their writings: but other
mens writings I doo ſo reade, that though
they excell in ſanctimonie or holyneſſe:
yet I doo not therefore thinke it true, becauſe
they ſo affirme, but becauſe they are
able to perſwade mee either by Canonicall
Scripture, or by probable reaſon thoſe
thinges which diſſent not from the truth:
Thus farre he.
               Theſe things haue our aduerſaries themſelues
recorded amongeſt their Decretalls,Can. Eg
                        •
                      ſolis, diſt. 
                        •
                     
                  
inſomuch that they maie not denie this firſt
rule: leaſt they ſeeme to denie their owne
Decretalls.
            
            
               The ſecond Rule.
               THE auncient Doctours doo oftentimes
by the name of Traditious, vnderſtand
the ſame doctrine that is cōtained in the Apoſtolical
writing. That this rule is true, it
ſhall appeare by that which followeth.
               
                  
Irenaeus (as it is reported by Euſebius)
doth ſaie,
                  
                     Confirmation. Hiſt. Eccl. l
                        •
                     . 4. ca. 14 That Policarpus taught theſe
things which he had learned of the Apoſtles:
which things both the Church deliuered,
and are onely to bee accounted true:
thus much he. He ſaith Tradit: the Church
doth deliuer: that is, doeth teach, namely
out of the writings of the Apoſtles. If hée
were not thus to be vnderſtood, how could
that ſtand which he hath ſayde? And thoſe
things are onely true: which thing is verie
eaſie to be gathered of the forenamed
Irenaeus, whoſe wordes are by Euſebius reported.
                  Li. 5. c. 20.
Policarpus (ſaith he) did report thoſe
things which he had heard of the Apoſtles,
altogether agreeable to the holy Scriptures.
And the ſaid Irenaeus ſaith in another place,Li. 3. ca. 3
The Church of Rome wrote to the Church
of Corinth, ſhewing them the ſame tradition
which they had receiued of the apoſtles:
to wit, that there was one God almightie: &
ſo conſequently the doctrine contained in
the bookes of Moſes.Cap. 4. 
                  And a little after he
ſaith: Manie of the vnlearned and barbarous
people, beeing ignoraunt of the Scriptures,
doo diligently keepe the olde & auncient
traditions, beleeuing in one God, & in
Ieſus Chriſt born of the virgin Marie.
               
                  
                  Tertulian. The Apoſtolicall doctrine doth
allow nothing contrarie to the rule of Gods
word,
                  Con. M
                        ••
                     , lib. 1. namely, thoſe things which the Apoſtles
haue taught and committed to writings.
            
            
               The third Rule.
               THE auncient Doctors do name that vnwritten
traditions, which in expreſſe
words are not found in the holy Scriptures:
but notwithſtanding if you diligently mark,
the effect thereof is contained in the Scriptures.
               So Baſil confeſſeth that he vſed certaine
tearmes againſt heretikes,
                     Confirmation. Tract. de pia & verafid. which are not
written, but yet notwithſtāding (faith he)
are not contrarie to the true ſence of the
Scriptures. And Nazianzenus refuteth the
Macidonians,
                  De Theol. or. 5. which did denie the deitie of
the holy Ghoſt, becauſe he is not tearmed
with plaine words in the holy Scriptures,
to be the third perſon in the deitie, ſaying:
y• ther are diuers things in the Scriptures
which are not plainly expreſſed: As for example.
If y• ſay twiſe,De Bapt. con. Dona▪ li. 4. ca. 23 two I will ſay (ſaith
he) y• thou ſaiſt foure. In like manner Auguſtine
doth proue, that the baptiſme of infants

is contained in holy Scriptures, and
that they ſhoulde not be rebaptiſed.Ibid lib. 2 cap. 14. The
like is to be ſayde of the word or tearme
[Omoouſion] the trinitie, & ſuch like, concerning
the which we haue ſpoken in the
former chapter.
            
            
               The 4. Rule.
               THE auncient Doctors vnder the name
of traditions, do not meane anie certaine
grounded opinion touching religion, but eccleſiaſticall
ceremonies: and to the end they
may the more beautifie and ſet foorth the
order of the Church, they commonly aſcribe
the ſayde ceremonies to the Apoſtles
as if they were the principall authours
of the ſame.
               Now many and diuers ye rites and ceremonies
of the Church haue béene,Confirmation. & with
what ſtudie and diligence the auncient fathers
haue ſet foorth the ſame, that by all
meanes poſſible they might ſtoppe Schiſmes
and diuiſions in the Church: It néedeth
not héere perticularlye to declare,
ſith the volumes of the Fathers doo euerie
where abound with thoſe things, wherfore
let the readers conſider what Auguſtine
                  
hath written in two Epiſtles to Ianuarius.
                  Epiſt. 118. & 119.
                  Hierome hath thus ſet forth the
order and ceremonies of the Church.Ad Luciū. 
                  Let
each Prouince (ſayeth he) haue authōtrie
to determine touching the Inſtitutions
of the elders, and traditions of the Apoſtles:
which words of Hierome are diuerſly
to be conſidered: And that manye and
ſundrie orders and inſtitutions of the ancient
Fathers, are to bée altered and
chaunged by reaſon of many circumſtaunces,
euen our aduerſaries themſelues haue
not denyed, neither were it méete in this
behalfe, that the Eccleſiaſticall ceremonies
ſhoulde be made equall to the grounded
doctrine of Religion. And therefore
hath Tertulian ſaid: That the onely lawe
of ſayth doth remaine immutable. And
Hierome himſelfe doeth giue counſell,Ad Luciū. that
ſuch orders and cuſtomes of the church, are
to be kept: which (ſaith he) doo not hinder or
hurt our faith.
            
            
               The 5. Rule.
               SOme of the olde Fathers (hauing theyr
faultes) did ouermuch fauour theſe vnwritten
traditions, and therfore did ſometime

true conſent to heretikes.
               We haue heard afore out of Irenaeus,
                  Confirmation.
that the auncient heretiks did defend their
hereſies by vnwritten traditions. And
Euſebius maketh mention of one Papias,
                  Li. 3. Hiſt. Eccl, ca. vl.
which brought in certaine ſtraunge doctrine
into the Church, affirming the ſame
to be deliuered, as comming from the Apoſtles
by tradition. The like errour there
was of the Chiliaſtians, into y• which error
Tertulian & Iuſtinus Martire, & others haue
fallen. And therfore the works of the auncient
Fathers are not to be read without
great iudgement.
            
            
               The 6. Rule.
               MAnie and diuerſe bookes haue beene
put forth vnder the name and title of
the ancient Fathers, which notwithſtanding
are counterfait.
               It hath come to paſſe through the fault
of thoſe who haue ben the writers & printers
of bookes:Confirmation. ye diuerſe bookes haue falſely
borne the name of thoſe auncient Doctors,
which antiquitie hath commended. As for
erāple, the bookes intituled Rapſodiae, were
attributed to Clement S. Paules Diſciple,

and alſo the booke of the Reuelation of S.
Iohn Baptiſt his head, is authoriſed vnder
the name of Ciprian: when notwithſtanding
there is mention made of Pipin king
of Fraunce: and to conclude, there are diuerſe
volumes vnder the title and name of
Auguſtine, in the which the opinion of Auguſtine
is refuted. I néed not to make mē
                  tion
of an infinit number like vnto theſe.
Wherefore that which Hierome did ſomtune
ſpeake of the bookes Apocripha,
                  Ad Laetam may
verie fitly bée ſpoken of the writinges of
the olde Fathers: Let a man take heede
(ſayth hée) of the bookes Apocripha, and if
at anie time he bee diſpoſed to read them,
not for triall of truth, but for examples ſake
of good manners, let him knowe they are
not bookes of them whoſe titles and names
they beare, but that there are manie corrupt
things mixed in them, and therefore
it is great wiſdome how to chooſe out gold
amongeſt dirt and claie: thus much Hierome.
Now theſe foundations béeing laid,
it behooueth vs a little to ſearch and ſifte
the obiections of our aduerſaries, which
they take from the olde and auncient doctors.
               Clemens Alexandrinus.1. obiectiō. The workeman

that is ſent foorth into the Harueſt of
the Lord,Li. 1. ſtro. hath a double husbandrie: to wit,
the vnwritten and the written.lbid, lib. 5 Againe, As
the Philoſophers had certain ſecrets touching
their opinions, which they deliuered by
traditions: ſo likewiſe the Apoſtles. And
therefore Paule ſaith,1, Gor. 2 We ſpeake wiſedome
amongſt thoſe that are perfect.
               To this I aunſwere thus: Firſt,Anſwere. that
this Author hath not handled the queſtion
ſincerely and purely: and this fault is
eaſely to be found, euen by the authoritie
of ye ſcriptures: for Chriſt ſaith thus, What
ſoeuer I ſpeak vnto you in ſecret,
                  Mat. 12 
                  that ſpeak
openly, & that you heard in the eare, that
preach vpon the houſe top, &c. Wherefore
Alexandrinus is plainly deceiued when he
goeth about to mixe the myſterie of Chriſtian
religion,Lib. 3. cap. 2 de pre. with the hid ſecrets of philoſophie.
And Irenaeus and Tertulian doo
both witneſſe and teſtifie that the olde heretikes
were of that minde, which heere
Alexandrinus doth hold: and therefore abuſed
thoſe words of Paul,
                  Ibidem. ſaieng: I ſpeake
wiſdome amongſt thoſe that are perfect: as
Irenaeus as I haue before ſaid doth affirm.
And Clemens doubted not to ſay, ye euen ye
                  Grecians were ſaued by Philoſophy:Lib. 6 ſtrō
                   wher

and ceremonies, amongſt the which, hée

                     •••
                  koneth vp that moſt auncient cuſtome,
whereby the Chriſtians did alwaies ſtan
                     •
                  
when they did praye, from the time of Easter
vntill Whitſontide. In this diſputation
therefore Baſil doubteth not to propone
that which was commonlye ſpoken
touching the Apoſtolike myſteries: and
this is it that our aduerſaries ſo greatlye
triumph againſt vs out of the wordes of
Baſil: but truly as with all my heart, I
doo acknowledge the goodneſſe of the cauſe
wherevpon Baſil then ſtood, when he affirmed
the holy ghoſt to be god, yet not withſtanding
(without offence of Baſil be it ſpoken)
me thinketh hée did too curiouſtye
ſéeke for ſtraunge Argumentes, when as
that matter might be prooued by playne,
proper, and true groundes of Scriptures.
               The Deitie of the holye Ghoſt is in
diuers places of the holye Scriptures to
bée prooued: to what ende then ſho
                     ••
                  d the
Apoſtles delyuer by Tradition, certaine
ſecrete formes touching that matter:
and as it were (as Baſil ſayeth) whiſper
it into the eares of certayne men?
I praye you, was there any thing to

be kept cloſe in this point of doctrine, that
behooued the Chriſtians, eſpecially to know
and profeſſe? Furthermore, to call that
thing ſecrete or hidde, which was then
publikelye taught almoſt in the whole
worlde, I knowe not well how Baſil could
doe it. And inaſmuch as this fained Apoſtolike
myſteries was in times paſt the
verie grounde of hereſies, as before it is
ſhewed: neyther furtherod the cauſe of
Baſil, which otherwiſe is to bée prooued
with moſt firme reaſons: I wiſh that
Baſil had reformed that kinde of Argument,
(if it bée worthie to bee called an
argument) eſpecially ſith the olde Fathers
verie wiſely haue warned vs to foreſée,
that many labours ſhuld not grow of one.
But howſoeuer the matter goeth, our aduerſaries
haue nothing heere wherof they
maye glorie or boaſt, for when Baſil affirmeth
this hind of ſpeaking of ye holy ghoſt,
That it hath ſprong from the Apoſtles tradition.
By the name of Tradition, héere hée
vnderſtandeth that which although not in
manifeſt and flat words remaineth in the
Scripture: yet notwithſtanding the ſum
and matter it ſelfe is there contained, touching
the which reade our third Rule.

What if our aduerſaries themſelues long
time ſince, haue not obſerued and kept
this kinde of ſpeaking in their Churches?
And that I maye not vrge that, that ſame
cuſtome is now growen out of vſe & forgotten
amongſt them, whereby they héeretofore
did ſtand when they did praye betwéene
Eaſter and Whitſontide, as is before
ſayd. Wherefore let our aduerſaries
conſider how properly they expounde the
words of Baſil, which are theſe: Which
both are of like force & effect to godlines,
and how well they agrée with Baſil himſelfe.
               Chriſoſtome.5. obiectī. Heere it is manifeſt that
they deliuered not all things by writing: but
manie things by tradition,In 2. Theſ. hom. 4 ldem Damaſcen. de orth. fid. li. 4. cap. 17. 2. Theſ. 2. without writing:
and theſe are as worthie to bee beleeued, as
thoſe which are written. Therfore we think
the traditions of the Church worthie to be
beleeued. It is a tradition: therefore ſearch
no farther for the matter.
               Chriſoſtome intreating of theſe wordes
of Paule written to the Theſſalonians the
ſecond Epiſtle and ſecond chapter,
                  Anſvvere 
                  ſaieng:
Holde faſt the Traditions, which you haue
learned, either by word or by Epiſtle. Hée
gathereth that not only Paule, but alſo the
                  
reſt of the Apoſtles did not deliuer & commit
all things to writings, the which how
sure an argument it is, wée haue declared
in our former chapter: But to let this thing
paſſe leaſt wée ſhoulde ſéeme to make a
nèedleſſe repetition: I therefore ſaye, that
Chriſoſtome doeth ſpeake touching thoſe
traditions, which although they are not
expreſſed by word in the holy Scriptures,
yet in ſubſtance are there contained: for
otherwiſe theſe wordes of Chriſoſtome
could not ſtand, ſaying: It is a tradition, thou
maiſt ſeeke no farther thereof
                        •
                     . For then it
ſhould followe, that wée ſhoulde no more
ſearch in holy Scriptures, the which God
forbid that it ſhould come in the minde of
ſo godly a Father, who doeth moſt often
inculcate and beat into the minde the reading
of the holy Scriptures: Therefore I
ſuppoſe by this worde, Tradition of the
Church, by Chriſoſtome is meant that doctrine
the which the Church (being inſtructed
by the writings of the Prophets & Apoſtles)
doth deliuer ouer vnto the church:
that is to ſaie, doeth teach & inſtruct whatſoeuer
ſhe hath drawne out of ye moſt pure
fountaine of ye Scriptures, touching which
matter ſéeke the ſecond rule.
               
                  
Nazianzene. The doctrine of the Goſpell
is more excellent through the figures
of the Church:6. obiecti, In lulian or. 1 which beeing receiued by
tradition, wee haue kept euen vntill this
time.
               I expound this place as I did the other
afore going,Anſvvere to wit, that, hée ſpeaketh of
thoſe traditions which maye bée prooued
by the ſcriptures, of the which ſée the ſecond
and third rules; for if that our aduerſaryes
ſhall ſay, that the Goſpell is made the better
through their holie water, and through
ſuch like trumper
                     •
                  es appertaining to their
Maſſe, they would make men laugh, nay
rather I ſhould ſaie, wéepe, who reuerently
thinke, and are well affctioned toward
the true worſhipping of God.
               Epiphanius, Wee muſt alſo vſe traditions,7. obiect. Heraſ. 61 75. aduer. Arianos.
for all thinges cannot bee taken from
the holy Scripture. Wherefore ſome things
the holy Apoſtles deliuered, vnto vs by the
Scriptures, and ſome thing by Tradition.
               Héere Epiphanius diſputeth touching
certaine rites and ceremonies,Anſvvere which the
chriſtians in tunes paſt did obſerue (as in
the fourth rule we haue ſpoken) & alſo reckoneth
vp many more rites & ceremonies,

all the which long time ſince haue ben out
of vſe, euen in the Church of Rome. So
that héerein, our aduerſaries doo not onely
contend with vs, but euen with Epiphanius
himſelfe, and with other, whoſe obiections
they vſe againſt vs. For if thoſe olde
rytes and ceremonies be traditions of the
Apoſtles, or if they haue like force with
the ſcripture, or if they be worthie of the
like credite together with the ſcripture. If
alſo ſith they be traditions, and therefore
we muſt ſéeke no farther: if faith ought
to be the obſeruer and kéeper of theſe traditions,
as the olde and auncient Doctors
ſaye, whom our aduerſaries bring for the
maintenaunce of their cauſe, what impudent
boldneſſe were this then, not onelye
to neglect thoſe traditions, but alſo nowe
that they haue bene theſe many yeres put
cleane off from the Church; and growen
out of the memorie of man: béeing forlorne
with time, ſo that they ſéeme to be
altogether mouldie and couered with hoarineſſe?
What ſhall they then which are
aduerſaries of traditions doo, if they dare
doo theſe things themſelues, which are the
great defenders of traditions.
               Hierome.8. Obiection. Doo you demaund where

it is written? I aunſwere, in the Acts of the
Apoſtles: yea,Aduerſu
                        •
                     s Lucifer. alſo if it had no authoritie
of Scripture, yet the conſent of the whole
worlde in this parte obtaineth the like authoritie
as a precept: for many other things
which are obſerued and kept in the Church
by tradition, take vnto themſelues the like
authoritie, as hath the lawe written, as in
baptiſme three times to dippe the head vnder
water, of the taſting of Milke and honnie,
&c.
               Héere Hierome diſputed of the unpoſition
of handes after Baptiſme,Anſvvere and of
other rites and ceremonies, touching the
which thing we haue ſpoken in our fourth
rule: but we doo diſpute now and in this
place of thoſe things which are neceſſarie
and doo appertaine vnto faith and ſaluation,
among the which if you will number
v
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  hose rites and ceremonies: what will
our aduerſaries aunſwere, which admit &
vſe not the taſting of milke and honnie,
which Hierome héere maketh mention of,
And alſo Hierome witneſſeth, that y• was
confirmed by the conſent of the whole
world, which is now reiected by the like.
               Auguſtine. Touching thoſe things wherof
the Scripture hath not determined,9. Obiect. therin

the cuſtome of the people and ordinance
of our fathers,Ad Caſul. Epiſt. 86 are to be obſerued in ſteede
of a lawe. And againe, Thoſe things which
are not vvritten,Ad Ianua. Epiſt. 118. but are kept by tradition,
vvhich are obſerued throughout the vvhole
vvorld: it appeareth by the authoritie either
of the Apoſtles or generall counſells,
vvhoſe authoritie in the Church is moſt
profitable, that thoſe things ordained and
conſtituted, are to be kept and obſerued as
the paſsion of our Lord and his reſurrection,
&c.
               Auguſtine héere diſputeth not touching
principles of faith,Anſvvere but of Eccleſiaſticall
rytes and ceremonies, touching the which
we haue ſpoken in the fourth rule. And
truly ſith Auguſtine is lead onely by coniecture,
thereby it ſufficientlye appeareth
that he intreateth not of things neceſſarye
to faith. But the ſelfe ſame Auguſtine
in his Epiſtle following, doth greatly lament
the cauſe that the Scriptures being
neglected, all the whole world was full of
ſuppoſitions, and giueth vs admoniſhment
to ſubmit our ſelues vnto the eaſie yoake
of Chriſt. I beſéech you what wold he thē
haue ſaide if he had ſéene that huge Chaos
and mountaine of ceremonies and traditions,

a burden more gréeuous and heauier
than Aetna hill, wherewith the Biſhoppes
of Rome long time ſince haue oppreſſed
the Church? And peraduenture
many other moe ſuch like examples as
theſe, may be taken out of the old fathers
and alleadged: but the ſolution of them
may eaſily be gathered & had from the anſweres
which I haue alreadie ſet downe.
And leſt the defenders of traditions, ſhuld
thinke that the auncient Doctours did ſo
commend Traditions, that thereby they
would derogate the authoritie of the ſcriptures:
behold euen the old Doctors themſelues
as witneſſes in this matter, and
ſhall declare their owne mindes what
they thinke touching the Scriptures, and
touching traditions not written, and wée
our ſelues will ſay nothing. And that the
wound which by their former obiections,
they ſéeme to giue vs, be euen by their
owne handes healed vp againe: That we
maye lawfully affirme it much better to
followe the Doctours with the Scriptures,
then the ſame Doctours wandering
without the Scripture: (if it ſo
happen at anie time) and ſo to be carried
from the truth: which thing indeede

doth rather deſerue pardon thē fooliſh imitation.
But nowe let vs heare the Doctours
themſelues.
            
         
         
            The ſixt Chapter.
            
               IRenaeus. Firſt the Apoſtles
did preach the word of God,Aduer. haeret. lib. 3 cap. 1.
and afterward by the will of
God committed it to writings,
and deliuered it to vs,
that the ſame Goſpell ſo
written, ſhould be the foundation and piller
of our faith.Lib. 5. 
               Againe, It behooueth vs to flie
vnto the Church, and to be foſtered in her
boſome, and nouriſhed by the word of God
written. The paradiſe of the Church is planted
heere in this worlde, thou maiſt eate of
the tree of the Paradiſe ſaith the ſpirit of
God: that is, feede you of euerie Scripture
of God.
            Tertulian. Take awaie from the heretikes
thoſe things wherein they agree with the
Ethnikes,De reſur. carnis. that they may ground their queſtions
vppon the holye Scriptures alone, &
then they cannot preuaile.
            Thus did Tertulian in times paſt confute
the Heretikes, but nowe they are

accounted Heretikes of the Biſhoppes
of the Romiſh Church, which woulde
confirme their opinions by the Scriptures.
            
               And againe the ſayde Tertulian:De proſ. We
ought not to bee curious nowe after the
comming of Chriſt Ieſus, neither ought
wee to bee inquiſitiue after the manifeſtation
of the Goſpell. When we doo beleeue,
wee deſire nothing elſe to beleeue: for this
firſt wee doo beleeue, that there is nothing
elſe that wee ought to beleeue, but onelye
faith. And againe,
               Aduerſus Hermog. Let Hermogenes ſee that
he teach that which is written: but if it be
not written, let him feare that curſe which
is prepared for thoſe that either adde too,
or diminiſh anie thing from the holy Scriptures.
            Origen. Wee muſt of neceſsitie call the
holy Scriptures for witneſſe,In hier. for as well our
ſenſes as alſo our interpretations, without
the witneſſe of the Scriptures are worthy of
no credit.
            Iuſtinus Martyre.In Tryph. Iuſtinus did flye
vnto the holye Scriptures, that hee might
bee ſafe in all things.
            Athanaſius.Con. Idol. The holie and diuine
Scriptures of GOD, are ſufficient to

the declaration and manifeſtation of the
truth.
            Hilarie. It is ſufficient for vs,De Trini. lib 3. that we bee
contented with the Scriptures.
            Cyril. All thinges which Chriſt did are
not written:In loan li. 22. c. 68 but what thinges the writers
thought ſufficient both for manners & doctrine,
are written.
            Chriſoſtome.In Tim. hom. 9. If wee haue neede either
to learne or to forſake anie thing, let vs
learne it in the holy Scriptures. Againe, If
anie of thoſe men vvhich are reported to
haue the holie ſpirit of God,De ſancto & ado. stir. doo ſaie anie
thing of himſelfe vvhich may not be proued
by the holie Scriptures, beleeue him
not. Doth Manes the Heretike ſay, that the
ſumme or the monie worke anie thing of
themſelues: Where haſt thou read this? If
he haue not read it in the Scriptures, but
ſpeaketh it of himſelfe, it is manifeſt that he
hath not the ſpirit of God. And againe,
thoſe that are true Chriſtians,Mat. hom. 49. let them betake
themſelues to the Scriptures, becauſe
there canne be no other proofe of true chriſtianitie,
then the diuine and holy Scriptures.
            Baſil. It is a manifeſt Argument of infidelitie,Tract. de vera &
a flat ſigne of pride, if anie man

will reiect anie of thoſe thinges which are
not vvritten,pia fid. or bring into the Church anie
of thoſe things vvhich are not vvritten,
ſith the Lord himſelfe ſayth: My ſheep
heare my voyce, and follovve not a ſtraunger.
            
               Againe, Whatſoeuer vve ſpeake or doo,In morae 
                     •
                  i. Reg. 26
that ought to be confirmed by the teſtimonie
of the holie Scriptures. Alſo the Apoſtle
taking the example from men,Tract de ver. & pi. fid. (Gal. 3.)
doth moſt vehemently forbid that anie of
thoſe thinges which are in the holy Scripture
ſhould be put out: or elſe (vvhich God
forbid) that anie thing ſhould be added. Againe,
               In moral. Reg. 8
                     •
                  
               
If vvhatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne,
and faith commeth by hearing, and hearing
by the vvorde of GOD: Then vvithout
doubt, ſith vvhatſoeuer is vvithout the ſcriptures,
is not of faith, the ſame is ſinne. And
in another place:Epiſt. 80 Let vs ſtande to the
iudgement of the holy Scriptures proceeding
from GOD, and vvith vvhome ſo
euer are founde pointes of religion agreeing
to the holie Scriptures, to them let
the vvhole opinion of truth bee alotted.
Againe, of all thoſe things vvhich vve
haue in vſe both of vvords and deeds,In Reg. br
                     •
                  
                  uior inte, 
                     •
                  
                ſome
are diſtinctly ſet dovvne in the Scriptures,

ſome omitted, but thoſe things which are
contained in the ſcriptures, by no meanes
muſt be omitted: but of thoſe things which
are not found in the ſcriptures, we haue a flat
rule deliuered vnto vs by Paule, All things
are lawful: but all things are not neceſſarie.
            Hierome.Hierom in Mic. lib. 1. cap. 1. The vniuerſall Church of
Chriſt hauing in poſſeſsion all the Churches
in the world: is vnited together by the vnitie
of the ſpirit, and hath the words of the
Lawe, of the Prophets, of the Goſpell, and
of the Apoſtles: and ſhe may not paſſe hir
bounds, that is, from the holie Scriptures. Againe,
               In Agge cap. 1.
Thoſe things which men faine with
out authoritie of Scripture, as comming frō
the Apoſtles by Tradition, the ſworde of
God (which is his word) doth cut away.In Mat. cap. 23. And
alſo that which hath not the authoritie of
the Scriptures, is with the ſame facilitie
contemned, with the which it was allowed.
            Auguſtine. Neither ought I to alleadge
the Nicene counſell,Con. Max. C. 3. c. 14 neither thou the counſell
of Aremineus, as though we would determine
cauſes therewith: for neither I am
boūd vnto the authoritie of the one, neither
thou of the other: but let each thing with
other: & each cauſe with cauſe: & reaſon

with reaſon be tried by the authoritie of the
ſcriptures. And again,
               Con. Creſe, gram. li. 2 Ther is cōſtituted &
ordained one eccleſiaſticall cannon or rule,
vnto the which belongeth the bokes of the
Prophets and Apoſtles, by whoſe writings
we ought to iudge touching the writings of
others, whether they be faithfull or vnfaithfull.
Againe,
               Con. Fauſt. Our Lord wold that we ſhuld
beleeue nothing againſt the confirmed authoritie
of the Scriptures. Againe,
               Mam. l. 13 c. 5. Let vs
bring foorth the diuine Ballaunce of the
holie Scriptures, and let vs weigh in them
what ſo euer is of anie waight or value.
            Damaſcene.De Bapt. con. Dona. lib. 2. De orth fid. li. 4. c. 18 As a tree planted by the
riuers of waters, euen ſo doth the ſoule of
man, which is moiſtened by the heauenlie
ſcriptures bring foorth timelie fruite, which
is true and perfect faith. And againe, Let
vs receiue,Ib. li. 1. c. 1 acknowledge, and reuerence all
thoſe things which are deliuered vnto vs by
the Lawe, Prophets, Apoſtles, and Euangeliſts,
ſeeking nothing which is not contained
in them.
            And leaſt we ſhould ſeeme altogether to
neglect and deſpiſe the Schoolemen, heare
what Scotus ſaith.
            It is moſt manifeſt that the ScripturesIn prol. lomb. q. 
                     •
                  
               
ſufficiently doo containe all doctrine neceſſarie

to the pilgrime that trauaileth heere
in the world.
            Peter Stelliaco.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   prin. 4. ſent. Wee muſt runne vnto
the ſcriptures alone, that we may attain eternall
life.
            And Gracianus in his decrees,Can. Ego 
                     〈◊〉
                  . diſt, 9 doeth repeat
that ſentence of Auguſtine, which wee
haue before reherſed. And many more may
be recited vnto the like effect, but heere we
ceaſe becauſe wee will wander no farther.
            That we may now therefore make an
ende of the obiections of our aduerſaries,
which they gather from ye writings of the
Doctors, we will comprehend the effect of
all thoſe their obiections, which they haue
or can bring forth in an argument, which
is thus.
            The Doctors of the Church haue thought
that beſides the holie Scriptures,The con
                  
                     •
                  luſion of the obiections out of y• aunciēt Doctors. traditions
not written ought alſo to be receiued.
            Ergo all thoſe things which are neceſſarie
vnto faith and ſaluation are not contained in
the Scriptures.
            Let vs now trie their antecedent.Anſvvere It
is manifeſt by ye teſtimonies of the ancient
Fathers, which before wée haue alleadged,
yt thoſe auncient fathers haue not written
all alike touching traditions: for firſt

it behooued to knowe the minde and opinion
of the olde Doctors before they obiect
them to vs. But let this be the full ſumme
of all thoſe things which the auncient doctors
who are moſt to be accounted of, haue
written touching Traditions. All thoſe
things which are deliuered, either appertaine
to the principles of religion and conſtitution
of manners, or elſe vnto eccleſiaſticall
rites and orders of the Church, but
thoſe thinges which appertaine to principles
of faith and manners, are moſt ſurely
contained in the Scriptures, neither is
it anie hinderāce if certaine kinds of ſpéech
to the eaſie explication of doctrine & principles
of religion, be not found by expreſſe
words in the holy Scriptures, ſo that the
matter it ſelfe, & the ſence ſignified by theſe
tearms be extant in the ſcriptures: But as
touching thoſe things which appertain vnto
rites & eccleſiaſticall order if they agrée
with the Scriptures, and ſerue to the edification
of the Church: Yea, finally, if they
be receiued with the common conſent of
the whole Church, then are they with
greate reuerence to be receiued, and that
this was the opinion and minde, of
the auncient Fathers, I thinke it is

ſufficiently made manifeſt by theſe things
which haue bene alleadged before: whereby
we may ſée, that the ground and matter
of our aduerſaries is falſe.
            Now therfore I denie their conſequent:The error of the former obiection
for the errour is in forme of reaſoning:
the Argument is grounded vpon the miſvnderſtanding
of the fathers. Another errour
is this: for that they take that to bée
graunted; which lyeth betwéene vs in controuerſie.
For thus ſtandeth the caſe betwéene
vs, whether in confirming principles
of faith, the ſcriptures alone be to bée
harde, yea or nay. But our aduerſaries
ſtraight waies propone to vs the opinion
of Doctours, and thereby they by and by
conclude, that the Scriptures alone are
not to be heard, to wit, being vnmindful,
that this ſelfe ſame thing is a controuerſie
betwéene vs. For if this opinion touching
the which we doo diſpute, may be determined
by the writings of the Doctors, then
it followeth, that the ſcriptures alone are
not to be heard in eſtabliſhing articles of
faith. Wherefore our aduerſaries doo not
rightly diſpute, their firſt principle béeing
not rightly applyed.
            Wherefore the errour of their former

concluſion, is thus to be corrected: In aſmuch
as the writings of all the Doctors,Correcting of ye former obiection
muſt be brought vnto the rule of the holy
ſcriptures, both the word of God ſo commaunding
it, and alſo the Doctors themſelues
conſenting therevnto: and the olde
Doctors of the Church themſelues, haue
taught that euery article of our faith muſt
be grounded vpon the ſcriptures only: furthermore
Eccleſiaſtical rytes and ceremonies
if they agrée with the ſcriptures, if
they ſerue to the edification of the church:
yea, finally, if they be receiued with common
conſent of the whole Church, that
then they are to be receiued with great reuerence:
Now héere we muſt diligently
ſearch out, whether that this opinion of the
Doctours, be agréeable to the word of god,
ſo that ſo farre it is to be receiued, as it
hath his confirmation by the Scriptures.
And becauſe our whole Diſputation is
heere had onely touching principles of doctrine
neceſſarie to faith and ſaluation, that
we may not ſeeme to wander from our
propoſed queſtion, we héere ceaſe: neyther
will we take vppon vs the diſputation of
eccleſiaſticall rites and ceremonies, which
diſputatio
                  •
                if the matter ſo require, and

God ſo permit vs, we will take in hand:
But nowe we defer it vnto another time.
            Thus haue I 
                  ••••
               ding to the methode
propoſed, to wit, d
                  •••
               ely and ſchoolelike,The concluſion of ye whole diſputation.
by the authoritie 
                  〈◊〉
                moſt learned Fathers
diſputed in defence of the word written,
againſt the traditions of men. Whereby
the truth of our cauſe appeareth, and
the obſcure deceipts and errors of our aduerſaries,
are brought into open ſhow: for
in ſuch ſort haue we ſet down, opened, and
confirmed our minde and iudgement, and
ſo confuted and diſſolued the errours and
arguments of our aduerſaries, both by the
holy ſcriptures and alſo by the writings of
the auncient fathers, that euerie man may
eaſily ſée, this doctrine which our reformed
church by the word of God (which is therfore
the true Catholike Church) doth hold
and profeſſe, is moſt true, which is: That
All doctrine neceſſarie to our Chriſtian
faith and Religion is contained
in the holie Scriptures.
            
            Laus Deo.
            
         
      
   