
      
         
            
            
               
THE ANATOMIE OF THE ROMANE CLERGIE: OR, A DISCOVERIE OF THE ABVSES THEREOF.
            Written in Latine by ſundrie Authors of their owne profeſſion.
            
               And Tranſlated into Engliſh verſe by G. L. Roma diu titubans, longis erroribus acta Corruet: & mundi deſinet eſſe caput.
            
               LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be ſold at the great South doore of Pauls. 1623.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND WORTHIE Lady Elizabeth Viſcounteſſe Anan, Lady Loghmaben, with all her other good graces, and vertuouſly deſerued titles and honours.
            
               MADAME,
            
            
               THough the conſcience of my owne vnworthineſſe might haue ſufficiently deterred me from this boldneſſe, of offering theſe first & friuolous fruits of my muſes labours at the ſhrine of your Ladiſhips diuine perfections, yet the hope of your gracious acceptance baniſhing my feares, did incourage me with this aſſurāce, that as no darknes can remaine at the approch of the Sunne, ſo no erronious faults can be found or ſeene in thoſe lines your Ladiſhips honourable eyes haue once ouerſhined: whereby I ſhall ſleight the cenſures of carping Critickes, and laugh at the malice of malignant Momus, ſhadowed vnder the wings of your fauourable protection. In which ſecuritie, my greateſt happineſſe I ſhall hold to be in your Ladiſhips honourable employment, which I ſhall ſtudy to deſerue by ſome greater worke, till when I remaine,
            
               Your Ladiſhips moſt deuotely affected, G. L.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE ROMANE Catholicke Readers.
            
               GEntle Readers, let it not offend you, that I haue put forth in our Countrie language thoſe things which long ago were publiſhed by men of your owne Religion and ſocietie: It is not vnknowne to you what Arioſto that famous writer and learned Poet, borne in Lombardie, hath written in his Satires of the Court and Clergie of Rome, being familiar ſeruant for the time to Pope Leo the tenth: likewiſe Francis Petrarch Arch-Deacon of Parma a Florentine borne, who liued in the time of Benedict the twelfth, and being greatly eſteemed in his Court, was earneſtly ſollicited by the ſaid Pope, who offered to giue him a Cardinals Hat, if he would perſwade his ſiſter, a very faire young woman, dwelling in Auignion to proſtitute her bodie to his

deſire, who was deſperately in loue with her, the honeſt man abhorring his deſire and the offer, made anſwer, that ſuch a filthie Hat was not to be receiued vpon ſuch an vnhoneſt condition; and if it were not for the reuerence he bore to the Sea of Rome, he would make his penne paint forth his knauerie. After that being deſired by ſome of his friends (who had left the Citie) to let them vnderſtand the eſtate of the Towne there, he did write certaine Epiſtles ſine titulo, not daring either name the writer, or to whom he wrote; out of which I haue gathered the moſt remarkable things, and put forth to your reading in the beſt ſort I could, as likewiſe the order of the Friers, written according to Virgils verſe in forme of a Cento by Lelius Capilupus a Catholicke Romane: ſundrie other verſes are tranſlated out of your owne Poets, ſuch as Mantuanus and Palingenius, both famous men of your owne Religion. Now ſeeing I giue you no inuention, made either by my ſelfe or any other of your aduerſaries, but that which was written many yeares ſince by men of your owne profeſſion, moſt highly addicted to your Religion,

I doubt not but you will excuſe me, who lets you ſee by your owne writers, what abuſes haue euer bene in that Church from the beginning, and daily do increaſe. Conſider therefore with your ſelues, how miſerably you are blinded by that Romane Antichriſt, and pray to God to giue you the light of his Spirit, that you may ſee all thoſe filthy errors, & turne to his true worſhip. Farewell.
            
               Your wellwiller and friend, G. L.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ORDER OF THE Friers, written by Lelius Capilupus in Latine verſe, and tranſlated into Engliſh.
            
            
               
                  I Am the man when others died for loue, Ille ego qui quondam dum gallus amore periret, &c.
               
               Who in the woods my verſes did endite
               In Countrie rymes, which trifles then did proue:
               But now reſolu'd a greater worke to write,
               Yet not ſuch lyes as Virgill did inuent,
               Of Didoes death, and blam'd Anchiſes ſonne:
               My ſong ſhall be of Friers multipotent,
               Who harbour grauitie within a gowne:
               Couragious men, yong, luſtie, ſtrong, and ſtout,
               Whoſe hearts and minds are from all labour free;
               This will I ſing, their prayſes all (no doubt)
               By Mantoes helpe and pleaſant harmony.
            
            
               Their firſt beginning.
               THeir race firſt came from Iupiter aboue, 
                     Capil. Ab Ioue principium generis, &c.
               
               If herein we may Hiſtories beleeue:
               Yet not the leſſe their conſtancie to proue,
               They were conſtrain'd like Hermites poore to liue
               In dens and caues, through woods and wilderneſſe:
               No houſe they had, no reſting place at all,
               But wandring to and fro in great diſtreſſe,
               Did eate ſuch fruite as from the trees did fall.
               
                  
Faire fountaine ſtreames did ſerue to be their drinke:
               No wine was found amongſt that companie,
               Of daintie fare they neuer once did thinke,
               Nor of ſuch things as tempt to lecherie:
               All ſober men, religious, chaſt, vpright.
               But who (alas) can chuſe but theſe times rue,
               If he be pleaſed but to take a ſight,
               And marke the new-brood of Friers holy crue.
            
            
               Their firſt Authour Saint Francis.
               DOwne from the skies a Saint came ſuddenly,
               Who did conuent this multitude moſt pure, 
                     Capil. Vnus qui nobis Deus oethere miſſus ab alto, &c.
               
               Charging them all from wilderneſſe to flie
               To ciuill Townes, where they might liue ſecure.
               Then like a raging torrent they ore ran
               All Europe, Aſia, Affricke, and Indie,
               Poſſeſſing all this vniuerſe, which then
               Seem'd inſufficient them to ſatisfie.
               Thus changing deſart woods, and flourie fields,
               For golden cloyſters, Pallaces moſt faire,
               The youth enur'd to paine, to pleaſure yeelds,
               When as they came where companie repaire:
               And caſting off the wonted grauitie,
               Which their forefathers in the daies of old
               So much had vſde, clad with impietie,
               With open face grew impudently bold.
            
            
               Their eaſe.
               THeir chiefe care now is for to make good cheare, 
                     Capil. Ergo omni ſtudio laeti conuiuia curant, &c.
               
               And by the fire to ſit each winter night:
               
                  
And in the Sommer when the heauens looke cleare,
               Prouide a ſhadow from Apollos ſight.
               In gownes they go, to keepe them from the cold,
               (Or elſe to cloake their knaueries from being known)
               And with a cowle or cap ſow'd twenty fold,
               They arme themſelues againſt the gout and ſtone.
            
            
               The late off ſpring.
               THis race (immortall ſtudies to maintaine 
                     Capil. At genus immortale, &c.
               
               The honour which their Predeceſſors wonne)
               Rare document, and orders did ordaine,
               With offices and roomes for euery one,
               Like magiſtrates who rule a ciuill Towne:
               Some are prefer'd to guide the holy band,
               Some for the Church and ſeruice vp and downe:
               Some with the Prieſt muſt at the Altar ſtand,
               One, muſt receipt of gifts officiate,
               Another for to dreſſe their gardens well.
               One muſt be porter of the cloyſter gate,
               To keepe them in from Nuns, if fleſh rebell:
               They are all ſhorne, both on the pate and chin.
               Bigge bellied, bacon backt, as fat as ſwine,
               With daintie cates they gorge their guts within,
               All noſde like turkie-cocks with drinking wine.
            
            
               Their Orders.
               BVt though I had an hundred tongues and moe, 
                     Capil. Sed neque quam multae ſpecies, &c.
               
               I could not tell how many ſorts there be,
               Nor ſhew the names and orders which do flow
               From this waſt Sea in their poſteritie.
            
            
               
               Their Mattins.
               WHen this vile crew hath ſoundly ſlept all night
               From beds of ſofteſt downe then vp they riſe, 
                     Capil. Omne adeo genus in terris, &c.
               
               At ſound of ſacred bels when day growes light,
               And go to Church where each rare Relique lies:
               With great denotion when they Mattins ſing,
               The Prieſt begins all clad in pureſt white,
               Whoſe roaring voice, makes all the Church to ring:
               The reſt to anſwer him againe delight.
               This being done he to the Altar goes,
               And reckons vp a thouſand Saints at once:
               From his hoarſe throate, & ſpeaking through his noſe
               Thriſe crying loud with many fained grones,
               We be the cauſe of all our miſerie,
               Oh holy Sire whom no place can containe,
               Thy glorious name be praiſd eternallie:
               Let vs once ſee thy countenance againe,
               Since we thy holy iſſue are indeed,
               And our firſt fathers from the heauens deſcended,
               Be alway preſent with vs in our need,
               And take vs to thee when this life is ended.
            
            
               Their Maſſe.
               HEre are the reliques Lord, which that laſt night, 
                     Capil. Stant aras circum puraque in veſteſacerdos, &c.
               
               Thou left behind, when men thy death decreed:
               Here is that Altar euer in our ſight,
               Vpon the which we breake the holy bread.
               O Sonne of God, why ſee I now thy face,
               With bloudie wounds deformed all about:
               And skin ſo rent with ſcarres in euery place,
               
                  
From helliſh fire to hold thy ſeruants out.
               The damned fiends do tremble at thy ſight,
               And all the hoſt of that infernall pit.
               Thou with thy Father mak'ſt our ſuite go right,
               And we with God himſelfe at banquets ſit.
               Oh heare our cries and to our plaints giue eare,
               Moſt holy Virgine, vndefil'd and chaſte,
               Mother of grace, requeſt thy Sonne to heare
               Our prayers, and on earth let vs haue reſt.
               This being done, the bread he takes in hand,
               And turnes it vp and downe with apiſh toyes,
               And that he ſayes no man can vnderſtand,
               His mind is ſo bereft with ſudden ioyes.
               At laſt the holy Hoſt he breakes in peeces,
               And ſwallowes it all greedily at once:
               Which time, to beate his breaſt he neuer ceaſſes,
               And ſadly ſigheth forth his forged grones.
               The Calix next he ſighing holdeth vp,
               While all the people bowing downe their heads,
               Sit muttering (what, they know not) to the cup
               And pray out all the number of their beads.
               When in his ſwagging belly he doth put
               (As he affirmes) the bodie of his God,
               The cup he empties in his faſting gut,
               At which, the ſtupid multitude doth nod.
               At laſt he ſprinkles all about the Altar,
               And on the people, as they ſit and pray,
               His diuel-driuing coniur'd holy water:
               This done, bids them depart and go away.
            
            
               
               The Friers preaching.
               AN aged Frier, or old Father goes 
                     Capil. Conſurgit ſenior diuoſque in vota voca. mit, &c.
               
               Vp to the pulpit in a Reuerent pace,
               Where while he ſtands (all white with yeares) he ſhowes,
               As if he were the mirrour of all grace:
               And there declares the torments of the hels,
               And how th' Aſſyrians tower did ayme at heauen.
               Of miracles a thouſand ieſts he tels,
               With ſome true tales, to make his lyes go euen.
               He threatens then the ruſticke people all,
               With plagues and ſickneſſe which will them infeſt,
               With tempeſts, raine, which on them hee'le make fall:
               And that with famine they ſhall be oppreſt.
               What ſhall they do, the ſillie people crie,
               And keepe a wofull murmur in the place,
               The women proſtrate on their faces lie,
               And earneſtly intreate the Saints for grace.
               He reſts a ſpace, and then begins againe,
               More ſoberly, and ſtretching forth his arme,
               Holds vp a rod, whoſe vertues he doth faine,
               To be moſtrare, gainſt ſorceries and charmes.
               With this (ſaies he) the ſoules I can recall,
               That are condemn'd to Purgatorie fiers.
               Downe at his feete the people kneeling fall,
               Suing for pardon to their buried ſiers.
               Then he begins with euery one apart,
               To heare Confeſſion how they led their liues,
               And they declare the ſecrets of their heart,
               As he demands, both children, men and wiues.
               Such as bring gifts of ſiluer or of gold,
               
                  
Or other things to ſerue their appetite,
               He them abſolues from all miſdeeds of old;
               And pardons freely all their errours quite.
               But they frō whom (poore ſoules) he nought receiues
               To Purgatorie muſt, with woe and ſhame,
               And to the diuell their ſoules he careleſſe leaues,
               To be tormented in that purging flame.
            
            
               Their Dinner.
               THis Sermon done, to Cloiſter he retires, 
                     Capil. Ordine ahoena locant alij flammaſque miniſtrant, &c.
               
               Where all the reſt for dinner do attend.
               Great worke is made to fill the hungrie Friers:
               They euery man to ſeuerall office ſend.
               Some in the kitchin turning ſpits are ſet,
               Well graniſhed with ſtore of daintie fare,
               Some from the Butler do the Naprie get:
               Each to diſcharge his dutie hath a care.
               Meane while the gourmonds ſtand with greedie eyes,
               Readie to eate vp very boords and all,
               In expectation till their Prior riſe,
               And from his cabin ſhewes himſelfe i'th hall.
               At laſt he comes, Lord of that rabling rout, 
                     Capil. Tum pater omnipotens, &c.
               
               Attended on with ſtore of companie,
               A foule fat monſtrous Lubber, full o'th gout:
               Whoſe length and breadth of one dimenſion be.
               His backe and bellie both of equall roundneſſe,
               He tumbleth forward like an emptie tunne,
               Whoſe vaſt concauitie doth ſound profoundneſſe,
               Not to be fill'd before the euenings Sunne.
               Him all admire, and ſtand about his ſeate, 
                     Capil. Illeregit dictis animos, &c.
               
               He charges them to peace when falne at ſtrife.
               
                  
If any proue offending, he doth threat,
               Perpetuall priſon ſhall conſume their life.
               Remember (ſaies he) wonted miſerie
               In former time, your hunger thirſt and cold,
               And how ye now ſwim in felicitie,
               In eaſe and pleaſure, health, wealth, full of gold.
               This is the way to heauen which we now leade:
               Go to, then all, and thanke the God aboue,
               Who makes you now vpon theſe meates to feed.
               Then to their roomes all inſtantly remoue,
               Each one makes haſte that he may firſt ſit downe,
               And who ſhall haue his hand firſt in the diſh,
               Belching like baſeſt Hinde and rudeſt clowne,
               Throughout the houſe, and ſtill for more they wiſh.
               Some picke the bones, ſome licke the fallen crummes,
               Some ſit carouſing in the German ſort.
               When all is done, and no more victuall comes,
               This graceleſſe band ith fields themſelues diſport.
            
            
               Their paſtime.
               THere they begin to wantonnize and play,
               Among the woods and pleaſant running ſprings, 
                     Capil. Ceu quondam niuei liquida inter flumina, &c.
               
               With ſundrie exerciſes all the day,
               And euery man his inſtrument forth brings.
               Some for to fiſh with nets, and lines layed out,
               Others to hunt, bring grayhounds for the Hare,
               Some ſet their ſnares for fowles that flie about,
               And others to the flowrie meades repaire.
               Whereas they iumpe, and dance, and loudly ſing,
               Laugh, tumble, ſport, and liue in iollitie,
               That all the neighbouring woods with ecchoes ring:
               
                  
Filled with the clamors of that companie.
               But if it chance that any man of fame,
               Should come to ſee their merrie exerciſe,
               Then all the troupe do hide themſelues for ſhame,
               And backe into the Cloyſters each man flies.
            
            
               The begging Friers.
               OVt of the towne the begging Friers flie,
               The Countries charitie and helpe to craue, 
                     Capil. Diſcurrunt alij ad portas. &c.
               
               Who with their lies and gloſing flatterie,
               Get ſtore of meate, ſuch as the people haue.
               Both bread, meale, butter, oyle, and fruite, and cheeſe,
               Which they lay vp in ſtore for winters night:
               And thus they worke like waſpes, not hony bees,
               From Phoebus riſe, till Cynthia ſhewes her ſight.
            
            
               Funerals.
               TO funerals when they are charg'd to go, 
                     Capil. Iampridem reſides aegriſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      effuſa iuuontus, &c.
               
               This wanton flocke is readie at command,
               And there they march along two in a row,
               With each a burning taper in his hand.
               What ſort of creatures may we deeme this kind,
               Who ſing for ioy, when all the reſt ſo weepe?
               When others ſigh, they haue content of mind,
               And for their gaine, ſtill wiſh moe thus to ſleepe.
            
            
               Their Supper.
               WHen this is done, to Cloyſter they returne, 
                     Capil. Deuexo interea propior fit rerper olympo, &c.
               
               There ſtay a while, till ſuppers on the boord,
               
                  
Their halls all ſtor'd with lights that flaming burne,
               And eu'ry gallerie with lampes decor'd,
               They make good cheare, & drink good beere & wine
               Of diuerſe ſorts, the beſt the countrey yeelds.
               Which done, the elder to their neſts incline,
               The younger ſaine a walking to the fields:
               But when o'recome with heauie ſleepe and wine,
               Their holie fathers ſlumber out the night,
               The Youngſters and the Siſters ſo diuine,
               Haue ſecret meetings for their youths delight.
            
            
               The Nuns.
               THe holy Nuns, like Danae in her Tower, 
                     Capil. Pectora maerentem tenebru & carcere caeco, &c.
               
               With hundred doores and barres are ſhut vp faſt,
               Garded with Beldames, yet there comes a ſhowre
               Of luſtie gallants ſcales the fort at laſt.
               Some much haue wondred, and indeed they may,
               How Cloyſtred virgins, from the world exil'd,
               Who neuer ceaſſe, nor day nor night to pray,
               Should with the wind, conceiue and haue a child:
               Where of a ſacred ſeed doth ſpring (no doubt)
               And ouerflowes earths ſpacious face we ſee:
               For from the vaults of Cloyſters there comes out
               A race moſt rare, conceiu'd moſt wondrouſly.
            
            
               The Authors farewell to all the Orders.
               NOw fare you well, with all your ſeuerall ſects,
               Who thus abound in all proſperitie: 
                     Capil. Salut vera Ioun proles, &c.
               
               You are the Saints, whom euery man reſpects,
               And honours moſt throughout all Italie.
               
                  
In doubtfull things your counſell they do craue,
               As from the Delphian Oracle of old,
               And gladly your reſponſes do receiue,
               Truſting as truth it ſelfe what you haue told.
               Your care is all in Cloyſters cloſe to lie,
               And keepe the Saints from all corruption ſure,
               When we in armes (I do you not enuie)
               Muſt watch all night, that you may ſleepe ſecure.
               Would I were but the meaneſt of your traine,
               To keepe your gate, or ſweepe your ſacred floores,
               Where I in ſafetie henceforth might remaine,
               Within the compaſſe of your walles and doores.
               Moſt happie, ye, the ſonnes of mightie Ioue,
               
               Who liue in mirth, while other men do mourne,
               We muſt be gone, where raging Mars doth roue,
               Whoſe eyes ſhoote lightning, all the world to burne:
               So great diſſention riſes euery day,
               Among the Kings and Princes of this age,
               That Europe quakes in this moſt fearefull fray,
               To ſee the terror of Bellonas rage.
               The misbeleeuing ſonne of Gog Magog, 
                  The great Turke.
               
               With troupes paſt number boaſts to tread vs downe,
               And all the followers of that faithleſſe dog,
               Vow to o're runne vs with their horned moone:
               But you his awfull threats do neuer feare,
               Nor are you mou'd, but liue at quiet eaſe,
               And bid your Nuns ſleep ſound, & make good cheare
               With open gates, at midnight if they pleaſe.
               O bleſt are you, how euer matters go
               Throughout the world, your wealth and honors laſt,
               Your worthie praiſes I will euer ſhow,
               And ſing your orders equall to the beſt.
            
            
               
               An addition by the Tranſlator.
               THere is a monſter ſtrange begot of late,
               Betwixt a begging Frier and a Nun,
               Whoſe ſubtiltie hath troubled Europes ſtate,
               And ſowing iarres, all Princes hath vndone.
               His ſhaueling followers do him deifie,
               As he were God, and Lord of ſea and land:
               For he (but ſtay there) moſt impetuouſly,
               For ſupreme power and higheſt ſeate doth ſtand.
               Of this vile ſtocke a filthy race is ſprong,
               Which ouer-rules the land of Italy,
               
               And in new Rome hath ſway'd the Scepter long,
               By witchcraft, inceſt, and foule Sodomie.
               Some call him Pope, ſome father of the Saints,
               Some ſay he is Chriſts Vicar, left behind:
               The knaue himſelfe moſt arrogantly vaunts,
               That he in heauen can looſe, in hell can bind.
               Such is the power he hath the world throughout,
               With triple crowne when he in chaire doth ſit,
               Kings, Emperours, and great Monarkes all about,
               Moſt humbly come, to kiſſe his foote, as fit.
               This monſter now in Europe doth command,
               And to the Inds his putent power's extended,
               So that no King, nor Prince dare once withſtand
               The torrent of his wrath when he's offended,
               This Prelates pride I cannot all declare,
               Nor gorgeous pompe, which daily doth increaſe
               With Cardinals, who Kings companions are,
               Whom to enrich, poore Princes ſtates decreaſe.
               When hels great Monarch ended hath his life,
               The Cardinals conuent to chuſe another,
               
                  
Whoſe holy meetings oft are mar'd with ſtrife,
               Which to appeaſe, they take ſome Frier brother.
               This done, they carrie him through all the Towne,
               High mounted on Prieſts ſhoulders magnifi'd,
               Then in a chaire vnbottom'd ſet him downe,
               Where his humanitie is ſearch'd and tride,
               Becauſe an Engliſh wench them once beguild, Platina de vitis Pontific. Roman &c.
               
               Who in diſguiſe vnto the Popedome came,
               And with a Frier the holy See defil'd:
               Hauing a child to Romes eternall ſhame.
               On ſolemne dayes, when he his Maſſe would make,
               Two Cardinals do carrie vp his traine,
               The multitude attends him at the backe,
               Till he be ſet in ſtate, they throng amaine,
               And while in pompe he ſitteth in his chaire,
               They bring him wine and conſecrated bread:
               Such is, his pride, he will not do it bare,
               Leſt ſome miſchance befall his mitred head.
               Many ſtrange tricks this hell-hound he deuiſes,
               Setting his neighbours all at great debate.
               To warre and Armes all Princes he entices,
               That he may liue in a more quiet ſtate.
               If any Prince this demidiuell offend,
               Or wrong his ſeruants in the lighteſt ſort, Witneſſe the two laſt kings of France.
               
               Incontinent his bloud-hounds he will ſend,
               Friers diſguiſ'd, and make his life pay for't.
               And then giue pardon to the murderer,
               And as a Saint him canoniſe, as right:
               Men muſt adore the bloudie furtherer
               Of his damn'd plots, which euen his ſoule Witnes the tapiſtry hangings in his parlour at Rome, wherin the deſcriptiō of the maſſacre at Paris is gorgeouſly ſet out. delight.
               What ſhall we ſay, but pray the God of peace,
               Soone to confound this Antichriſt of Rome,
               
                  
Whoſe rage and miſchiefe is not like to ceaſſe,
               Againſt th'annointed, till he get his doome,
               To go to hell with all his companie,
               There to remaine in that abhorred place,
               And ſuffer tortures euerlaſtingly,
               Without all future hope of after grace.
            
         
         
            
            CERTAINE VERSES TAKEN OVT OF THE EPISTLES of Francis Petrarch, Archdeacon of Parma, which were ſine titulo, written to his friend whom he might not name for feare of the Romane Clergie.
            
               
                  MY friend, you craue to vnderſtand Epiſt. 8.
               
               New Romes eſtate in this our Land:
               My pen cannot ſuch skill obtaine,
               Nor Cicero, if liue againe,
               Of that great Court t'expreſſe the glory
               Vnparallel'd by any ſtorie.
               For, what you ere haue read of old,
               Or by report hath bene you told,
               Of Babylon that Towre of pride,
               Where the Caldeans did abide,
               Or of the vncouth Labyrinthes foure,
               Poſſeſſed by the Minotaure,
               Or of Auernus filthie floud,
               Or of the Lake where Sodome ſtood,
               Compar'd with this, they are but fables,
               Reported by ſome fooles at tables.
               Here is blaſpheming Nimrod ſeene,
               Here is Semyramis the Queene:
               Here Minos ſits as Iudge moſt fell,
               And Radamantus ſcourge of hell:
               Foule Cerberus the gate doth keepe,
               
                  
                  Paſiphae with the Bull muſt ſleepe,
               Whereof proceeds a monſtrous race,
               Where Minotaurus keepes the place.
               So to be ſhort, in former time,
               What Poets haue ſet forth in ryme,
               Of monſters which before came out,
               In it are ſeene to go about.
               Thy vertue brought thee to renowne,
               Moſt happie thou that left'ſt the Towne.
               If you ſuppoſe the Citie be
               In the ſame forme you did it ſee,
               You are deceiu'd much in that caſe,
               Although it ſtands in that ſame place.
               Of old it did abound with euils,
               But now it is a den of diuels,
               A ſinke of ſinne, a gulfe of paine,
               For thoſe that ſtill in it remaine.
               Ceaſſe to admire, when as I call
               This Babylon the chiefe of all:
               Where can that Tower be placed beſt, Epiſt. 10.
               
               But in the quarters of the Weſt,
               Inhabited as we now ſee,
               By people full of villanie?
               Beleeue me well, here in it dwels
               A Tyrant who in pride excels,
               More cruell then Cambyſes King,
               Or the great Turke, whoſe wrath doth ring.
               Here are ſtrange labrinthes in great ſtore,
               Mens ſoules in darkneſſe to deflore.
               Here Venus with her wanton toyes,
               Is honour'd with baſe bauds and boyes:
               Adultrie, whoredome and inceſt,
               
                  
Is honour'd here among the beſt.
               And counted but for ſports and playes,
               Euen with our Prelats of theſe dayes.
               The wife is rauiſh'd from her ſpouſe,
               And to the Papall ſeate ſhe bowes.
               The poore good man muſt leaue the Towne,
               Such ordinances are ſet downe:
               And when her bellie riſeth hie,
               By Cardinals who with her lye,
               The husband muſt not dare complaine,
               But take his wife with child againe.
               All vertue is trod vnder foote,
               And out of doores all truth is ſhut:
               Where one mans fauour is ſo ſought,
               And with ſuch flatterie dearely bought:
               Where bad men are eſteemed beſt,
               And the poore iuſt man ſore oppreſt:
               The God of heauen is chac't away,
               And gold and ſiluer beare the ſway.
               Gold is the ſalue for euery ſore,
               It makes proud kings to bragge no more.
               By gold heau'n gates are open ſet,
               And who giues moſt, doth pardon get.
               Euen Chriſt himſelfe for gold is ſold,
               And miracles wrought manifold.
               Came Iudas to this Court moſt trimme, Epiſt. 17:
               
               Bringing his thirtie pence with him,
               He'le be more welcome by Saint Steuen,
               
               Then all the Saints that are in heauen.
               The Church of Chriſt, which was the place
               From whence did flow all health and grace,
               To tell the truth my heart it grieues,
               
                  
Its now become a den of theeues.
               Our Epicures with ducking nods,
               Do mocke Religion, ſcorne the Gods.
               Of heauenly ioyes when they heare tell,
               And of the paines that are in hell,
               They thinke it but a merrie ieſt,
               Deuiſed by ſome idle Prieſt.
               The reſurrection of the dead,
               And to be iudg'd by Chriſt our head,
               They hold them but as fained viſions,
               Dreames of old wiues or apparitions.
               If God of heauen do not preuent Epiſt. 11 & 13.
               
               The perils which are imminent,
               His houſe ſhall be in danger brought,
               And all his worſhip turnd to nought:
               I plainly ſee, I dare not ſay,
               What trechrous meanes and ſubtill way,
               This Dionyſius hath in heart,
               Our Syracuſa to ſubuert:
               And what a miter made of lead,
               
                  Semyramis puts on her head,
               For to enchant her louers ſo,
               That to her vile embracements go,
               Whereby all men of honeſt hearts,
               Are fled and baniſht from theſe parts.
               The Romans vſed of old t'eſchue
               Such places where moſt pleaſure grew:
               So bent they were in all degree,
               To traine their youth vp vertuouſlie.
               Since ſo it is, who will not then
               Flie farre from Babylon, that den,
               Where miſchiefe and all infamie
               
                  
Doth reigne and rage continually.
               I ſpeake of things ſeene with mine eyes,
               Not heard by eares, nor tales, nor lyes.
               Thus farre I briefly haue ſet downe,
               The Court of Rome, ſtate of our Towne, Epiſt. 18.
               
               To you my friend, though not ſo plaine,
               As by mens liues that heare remaine
               You might diſcerne and plainly ſee
               The whole abuſe of this Citie.
               Wherefore in end I you exhort,
               Take this for truth which I report;
               If of thy ſoule thou haſt a care,
               Let not thy mind thinke to come there
               Where neuer man could learne or ſee
               True vertue no nor pietie.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            EPITAPHES AND EPIGRAMS of Popes, Monkes, and Friers, tranſlated out of diuerſe Authours.
            
               THE EPITAPH OF POPE CLEment the ſeuenth, fixed on his tombe at Rome.
               THe fatall ſiſters now you ſee, Sylua quae reg no bapiſtico Thomae Naogeorgi acceſſit
               
               Haue taken from this life
               Pope Clement who by periurie,
               Was authour of great ſtrife.
               Therefore reioyce all liuing wights, Clementemeripuit nobis clemētia fati, &c.
               
               For this was eu'n the man
               Who did deceiue the Towne by ſleights,
               And all the world o'reran.
               This was the man no word could keepe,
               To Princes nor to Kings,
               Although he had ſworne ner'e ſo deepe,
               And promiſed great things.
               This was the man who vex'd the Land
               With taxes, tributes ſore,
               And gathered vp with greedie hand
               The Countrie goods in ſtore.
               This was the man who ran about,
               And rag'd with warre and bloud,
               Putting his owne eſtate in doubt,
               to gaine vncertaine good.
               This was the man who would not ſpare
               
                  
To ſet his houſe on fire,
               If that by murdering here and there,
               He might haue his deſire.
               This was the man that ſpoil'd the Towne,
               And many widdowes made,
               By ſhedding bloud both vp and downe,
               Of thoſe that in it ſtayed.
               This was the man with ſword that chac't
               The Duke of Vrbin ſo,
               And tooke his houſe, and lands defac'd,
               And made him hence to go.
               This was the man without all cauſe,
               O Rome that brought to thee,
               Both ſword and plague, and cruell lawes,
               Such was his courteſie.
               This was the man that foſtred bauds,
               And brothels firſt ſet downe:
               Who brought in boyes and handſome lads,
               A filthie thing in Towne.
               Euen this was he who in his life,
               Into the world brought ſhame,
               And euery yeare did ſtirre vp ſtrife,
               With ignominious name.
               Scorned was God by this vile Lowne,
               Who had nor faith nor troth:
               All pollicie he wreſted downe,
               And did all goodneſſe loath.
               Whiles he did liue all things were deare
               throughout all Italie:
               
               Yet for all that he would not heare
               The peoples miſerie.
               The famine that in Rome was then,
               
                  
He counted his beſt gaine:
               And ſeemed pleaſd (vnhappie man)
               With his owne ſubiects paine.
               Infortunate he thought himſelfe,
               That he could not deſtroy
               The world, and ſcrape all worldly pelfe,
               Which was his chiefeſt ioy.
               Thus liuing in a tedious life,
               By ſickneſſe ſore agaſt,
               He lay with the Phyſitians ſtrife
               To helpe his dayes to laſt.
               Oft times he wiſhed death to ſee:
               The deſtinies ſaid no:
               They tooke delight moſt cruelly
               More to torment him ſo.
               For his reward he knew, in hell
               A thouſand ſtripes to get:
               What he did merit to him fell,
               Like end a like life met.
               At laſt the Tyrant left this light,
               Now Citizens go caſt
               His filthie carkaſſe out of ſight,
               Let Rauens deuour't at laſt.
               Be blith, the happie day is ſeene,
               Long wiſhed for before:
               Make ſports and plaies both morne and euen,
               And ſorrow now no more.
               Let this be counted as a day
               moſt holy euery yeare,
               That your poſteritie may ſay,
               Now we may no more feare.
               As Kings were baniſhed of old,
               
                  
By conſuls from this place:
               So now we ſhall no more behold
               This cruell Neroes face.
            
            
               FINIS.
            
            
               The Epitaph of Alexander the third, by Sanazer.
               STay paſſenger a ſpace, thy wearied limbes to eaſe, Fortaſſe neſcicuius hic tumulus fiet, adſta viator, &c.
               
               Perhaps thou know'ſt not who lies here intomb'd, ſtay if you pleaſe:
               Tis not great Philips ſonne, that all the world ſubdu'd,
               But Alexander filthie Pope, in bloudſhed all embru'd.
               Great Kingdomes he o'rethrew, and Cities turn'd to nought,
               All to aduance his baſtard brood, a world of miſchiefe brought.
               This Land with fire and ſword he vtterly deſtroid:
               And to ſubuert Gods Lawes and mans, his care he all employ'd:
               That he more freely might (ô filthie to be told)
               Inceſtuouſly enioy the child his luſt begot of old.
               Yet he for all this ſate & rul'd proudly the papall Sea
               Eleu'n yeares, as great Pope and head in ſole ſupremacie.
               Speake not of cruell Kings, old tyrants do not name,
               
                  Caligula came ſhort of him, and Heliogablus ſhame.
               The reſt for modeſtie I cannot well declare,
               Suppoſe the worſt, ſet on thy way, I wiſh thee well to fare.
            
            
               
               The Epitaph of Paule the fourth.
               HEre lyes vnhappie Carrafa, abhor'd of God and Paſquill. man,
               His ſoule I feare to hell, his corps to graue faſt ranne.
               No peace on earth he could abide, no honour done to God:
               The people and the Cleargie both, he vext at home, abroad.
               To enemies he yeelded ſoon, his friends helou'd in ieſt
               What would ye more? he was a Pope as falſe as all the reſt.
            
            
               Epitaph of Pius the ſecond.
               HEre do the bones of talking Pius lye, 
                     Kliberius. Frigida membra Pij retinet lapis iſte, &c.
               
               Who by his death brought peace to Italie:
               
               Nations he ſold, and many crymes vnfit,
               He vnder ſhew of vertue did commit.
            
            
               10. Sapidus in Sixtum.
               HEre Sixtus lyes, the bauds lament his fall,
               Whores, dice, and wine, haue loſt a father all. Sixte facet tā
                     dem deſlent tua buſta cynaedi. Hoc iacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, ſed re Thais, &c. Papa Pius quintus moritur, &c.
               
            
            
               Epitaph of Lucrece Pontanus.
               
                  LVcrece by name, Thais indeed, lyes vnderneath this ſtone,
               Pope Alexanders daughter faire, his ſonnes wife, and his owne.
            
            
               Epitaph of Pius the fifth.
               
                  Plus the fifth is dead, how wondrous iſt to heare?
               That onely fiue 'mongſt ſuch a crue, th' Almightie God did feare?
            
            
               
                  EPIGRAMES. Mantuanus of Sixtus 4. in hell.
               BAld pated reſcall thou, who liued'ſt onely At tu Impluine caput cui tanta licentia, &c.
               
               To ſurfet in thy filthie lecherie,
               Thinkſt thou thy myter can thy doings couer,
               Or make vs now to be theirs or thy louer?
            
            
               
               Pope Ioane being with child coniuring the diuell had this anſwer.
               THou mother of Popes bring forth this popiſh Papa pater patrū papiſſe pandito partū, &c. birth,
               And then Ile freely tell thee, when Ile come forth on earth.
            
            
               Marullus in Innoc. 8.
               VVHat need this toyle, to trie this Pope a man, Quid quaeritu teſtes ſit mas an faemina, &c.
               
               Behold his of-ſpring clearely if ye can:
               Eight ſonnes, as many daughters he begat,
               
                  Rome needs not doubt, his ſect wer't but for that.
            
            
               Pontanus of Alexander 6.
               POpe Alexander ſold the Altars, Chriſt and croſſes, Vendit Alexander cruces altarea, &c.
               
               Why not, he bought them all before; t'was to make vp his loſſes.
            
            
               Albericus de Roſata.
               THe Court of Rome, diſdaines a ſheepe without the Curia Romana nō capit ouens ſine lana, &c. skin,
               All they that bring are welcome gueſts, who bring nought come not in.
            
            
               Conradus Grebelius of Iulius 2.
               CAn he be good, that was ſonne to a Genoweys, Genua cui patrem, &c.
               
               Begot vpon a Grecian dame, and borne i'th raging ſeas?
               Ligurians are all falſe, Greeks all men liers call,
               The Seas inconſtant: Iulio, in thee we ſee them all.
            
            
               Paſquillus.
               VVIth bauds and whores Pope Iulius & Sextus both were led,
               And Leo with foule Sodomies deſil'd his loathed bed.
               
                  
                  Clement with furies vexed was, for filthy gotten gaine: Clementem furiae vexant, &c.
               
               What hope of any good in thee? Paul ſhall with vs remaine.
            
            
               Mantuanus of the Citie.
               IF thou wouldſt liue a godly life, from Rome flie farre Viuere qui ſancte cupitis diſcedit Roma, &c. away,
               All villany in it is vſed, here goodneſſe hath no ſway.
               Nothing is here now to be found, but fained lies and mockes,
               For which they daily bring in gold, to fill the Churches boxe.
               Vertue is baniſht frō this Towne, all honeſtie is gone:
               And wickedneſſe and vices now poſſeſſe the Romane throne.
            
            
               Paſquillus of Paule 4.
               What furie moues thee to take armes, in thy declining yeares?
               Old Carrafa thou'rt aged now, & age is full of feares.
               The campe thou doſt not know ſo well, as Cloyſters exerciſe,
               Thou wantſt the nerues of warre, that's gold, to make the ſouldiers riſe.
               Why putſt thou on thy head and backe, ſuch heauie armes as thoſe
               Which thy weake bodie cannot beare, being vſde to better clothes?
               Why troubleſt thou this wofull land, with wounds yet groning ſore?
               And doſt appall the God of warre, to proue his valor more?
               Giue reſt we pray thee to thy flockes, and let vs liue in peace,
               Our holy father if thou be, and from thy battels ceaſſe.
               
                  
Lay off thy weighty loade of armes, remember Chriſt his word,
               Which he vnto Saint Peter ſpake, when he did vſe his ſword.
            
            
               The Popes anſwer.
               THe words which Chriſt to Peter ſpoke, are no wayes ſaid to me,
               You do miſtake (by Peters leaue) you are deceiu'd, I ſee
               For why, I no way do ſucceed to Peter in that caſe,
               As many in the world haue thought, ſince I vſurpt his place.
               The name of Paul I haue tane on, his armour with his name,
               And follow him in euery thing, ere his cōuerſiō came.
               Chriſts words I do remember well, to me they nothing are,
               I came into the world in peace, but for to ſtir vp war.
            
            
               Gilberti Ducerij Epigram de Iul. 2.
               WHen holy Iulius to the field did go, Cum contra Gallos, &c.
               
               Againſt the Gaules, as old reports do ſhow:
               Each day the Citie ſounding loud alarmes,
               He muſtred forth great troupes in gliſtring armes,
               And in a rage before the peoples eyes,
               In Tibers ſtreames did throw the holy keyes:
               Then pulling out his ſword, he madly ſayes,
               Againſt the French my foes, ſince now adayes
               Saint Peters keyes cannot ſecure my ſtate,
               
                  Pauls ſword all controuerſies ſhall debate.
            
            
               Io. Pannomus.
               ONce in thy Church, S. Peter, as we reade, Foemina Petretua quondam auſa ſedere Cathedra, &c.
               
               A woman rul'd, and did poſſeſſe thy chaire,
               Vntill a Frier her holineſſe did leade
               Into the Conclaue to the euening prayer:
               
                  
But her deuotion turnd to youthfull pleaſure,
               All are not Saints that outwardly ſeeme holy,
               She in the ſport did ioy beyond all meaſure,
               Till time made vp the fruites of louing follie.
               Then what a griefe procur'd the great diſgrace,
               To all who thought her father of the Saints?
               She ſhamefully was hurled from the place,
               And euer ſince Romes policie preuents
               The like miſhap; they now the Pope do place
               In a rich chaire, hollow and bottomleſſe,
               Where priuately (to ſhun future diſgrace)
               By natures marks his manhood they expreſſe.
               But ſome to cleare the doubt and ſhun ſuſpects,
               Before they come to climbe the Papall throne,
               Giue full aſſurance of their manly ſexe,
               And make themſelues firſt father of a ſonne.
            
            
               Cordus lib. 2. Epigram in Iul. 2.
               WHen Iulius ended here this mortall life, Mortuus ad ſuperum, &c.
               
               To heauē (tis ſaid he went) but came too late,
               Two keyes he had, with which he kept a ſtrife,
               To trie if thoſe could ope the ſacred gate:
               But all in vaine, the locke did it withſtand,
               Nor would acknowledge his ſupremacie.
               Saint Peter hearing him, came to demand
               What ſinfull mortall knockt ſo ſaucily.
               The Pope ſaid, Peter, knoweſt thou not my name?
               Looke on my crowne and ſlippers all of gold.
               Begone ſayes Peter, you are much too blame,
               To claime a title in the thing you ſold.
            
            
               
               Stigelius in Sylua.
               AMonke there was who in a night did beare, Per lunam monachui gradu citato, &c.
               
               By Moone-ſhine light a Leman to his bed,
               Vnder his gowne, and no ſuſpect did feare,
               He thought ſhe was ſo cloſely couered.
               By chance a Frier meets him in the way,
               Whoſe iealous eyes diſcries the wenches feete,
               He to the Monke in merrineſſe did ſay,
               What load is that which makes you ſo to ſweat?
               He anſwers, tis a ſaddle I did borrow,
               From one of my acquaintance dwels hard by,
               For I muſt ride a little way to morrow,
               Of ſome reports the certaintie to trie.
               The Frier hearing what a fine excuſe
               The youth had forg'd, ſtreight replies againe,
               A little of my counſell prethie vſe
               Before thou go'ſt, it ſhall not be in vaine.
               Let no man ſee what carriage you haue there,
               Nor know what furniture you do prouide,
               Leſt ſome of your companions do prepare
               Themſelues with you vpon your mare to ride.
            
            
               Cordus lib. 6. Epigram.
               SIxe Monkes together ſitting on a draught, Sex vna monachi dum conſidere, &c.
               
               Began to thinke vpon their miſeries,
               And how the world at all their Orders laught,
               Scoffing their perſons, ſlighting their Decrees.
               Mong'ſt whom was one that ſeem'd to rule the reſt,
               An aged father, whoſe old ioynts did ſhake,
               He from the bottome of his grieued breaſt,
               Fetching a ſigh, thus to his brethren ſpake.
               
                  
What though our ſtubburne flockes do run aſtray,
               And for a time their ſhepheards do forſake,
               Yet let vs neuer ceaſſe to God to pray,
               That he ſome pittie of our ſtate may take.
               For ſince the Lord doth ſee his ſeruants wrong,
               And will prouide to keepe them free from hurt,
               Heele take vs vp to heauen e're it be long,
               And drowne the heretickes into this durt.
               This hauing ſaid, the boords began to cracke,
               The rotten floares fall from the walls and ſtaires,
               The Monks all tumbling downe lie on their backs,
               And ſtriue in vaine, ſo heauen had heard their prayers.
            
            
               Cordus lib. 6. Epigram.
               A Countrie wench confeſſing once her ſins,
               In time of Lent vnto a Cordelier, Funigero peccata fatens virguncula fratri, &c.
               
               And from a long concealed thought begins,
               To ſpeake, but hardly could ſhe ſpeake for feare:
               He ſtill exhorted her for to diſcouer
               The ſecret ſecrecie of all her thought,
               Affirming plainly, if ſhe ſtroue to ſmother
               The leaſt offence, it would to light be brought.
               The wench amazd, at laſt begins to ſay,
               Laſt night, good Sir, at midnight I eſpi'd
               One of your brothers as aſleepe he lay,
               A bed ſtretcht cloſe downe by my miſtris ſide.
               The Frier mad to heare her ſpeake ſo plaine,
               Sayes, filthy hypocrite, dar'ſt thou this ſay,
               Thy miſtris reputation thus to ſtaine,
               It was S. Francis t'whom ſhe then did pray,
               He that makes all our ſuits in heauen go right,
               
                  
Of whom we haue our Order and our name,
               Who heares our cries by day, and ſighes by night,
               T'was he that in my brothers habit came.
               The wench replied, then be what Saint he will,
               He left his hoſe behind him in the place:
               If Saints of heauen weare clothes, I haue no skill,
               I'm but an ignorant in ſuch a caſe.
               Take heed (the Frier ſaies) thou do not touch
               Thoſe holy things, which relickes we do call,
               And do pertaine but onely vnto ſuch
               As are confirmed in the Orders all.
               Tomorrow to the Church they ſhall be carried,
               As ſacred relickes ſtill to be adored,
               By all ſuch fruitleſſe women as be married,
               And haue no iſſue, then they ſhall be ſtored.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            The Tranſlators farewell to thoſe of the Church of Rome.
            
               THus in the rudeneſſe of our vulgar phraſe,
               My rurall Muſe theſe lines hath harſhly ſung:
               Neither for enuie, gaine, nor hope of praiſe,
               As ſome perhaps may thinke, who do me wrong.
               For I proteſt my heart was euer free,
               I malice no man nor affect no name,
               The heauens that know my thoughts my witneſſe be,
               I neuer hunted ſo much after fame.
               What herein I haue ſaid, was ſaid before,
               By thoſe who members of your Church did liue,
               
                  
And ſuch whoſe learning made the times adore
               Their worth, and due reſpects vnto them giue.
               There's nothing here which you can ſay I picke
               From out the railing libels (as you ſtile them)
               Or poyſoned writings of an hereticke,
               Whom you ſo hate, and furiouſly reuile them.
               Then gently pardon, all that I haue done
               Your Churches deareſt nurſlings haue approued,
               Whoſe eyes enlightened by the trueſt Sunne,
               Oft wiſht thoſe clouds of errours were remoued.
               And that the Church, all darkneſſe ſwept away,
               At length, though late, might clearely ſee the day.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   