
      
         
            
            
            ¶An exhortation of holye Baſilius Magnus, to hys younge kynſemen, ſtyrrynge theym to the ſtudie of humaine lernynge, that they might thereby be the more apt to attayne to the knowlege of diuine litterature.
            ¶Tranſlated oute of Greke into Englyſhe, by Wyllyam Berker.
            Anno. M.D.L.VII.
         
         
            
            
            To the reader.
            
               TRue it is (gentle reader) that aboute the yeare of oure lorde, M.cccc.xcix. there aroſe thoroughoute the worlde, by the ſecret workmanſhyp of the heauens, and cruell conſtellation of the ſterres, diuiſions and factions of religion, not only amonge the Mahomites and Chriſtians, but alſo in the furtheſte and vnknowen partes of the earth, aſwell Eaſte as Weſte, where the people be ydolatoures, and honour for theyr Goddes monſtruouſe and fonde creatures: the greateſt effectes whereof was ſene in Perſia and Germania.
            
            
               Harduelle amonge the Perſians, a noble man borne, was the fyrſte that moued this newe religion amonge the Mahomites, and began to growe into ſuche reputation for the ſame, as vſſumcaſſane, the kynge of the countreye, toke hym to hys

               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſonne in lawe, and maried his doughter Marta vnto him, whōe he had by Deſpina the kynges doughter of Trabiſonda, a womā of CHRISTES beleife, and by couenaunt ſo contynuynge, brynging vp alſo hyr doughter in the ſame, whereby Iſmael, ſurnamed Sophi, hir ſonne, and his ſucceſſion, haue had Chriſtian men in honor, and do not abhorre their religion. This mariage was thoughte to be made rather for a feare that the kynge had of his eſtimatiō thē for any loue to his perſon, whiche afterwarde was well proued, whan the kinge, becauſe his ſonne in lawe had ſuche reſorte of people, and ſuche a fame for his newe doctryne, as he was able to defend it by forſe, pryuelye ſente men to kyll hym, he nothynge ſuſpectynge the ſame, and immediately diſpatched all them that were of hys opinion. Notwithſtandynge hys ſonne Hiſmael, and one of his ſcolers Techell,
               
ſcaped alyue. Hiſmael fled to Coraxam and Techell to the mountaynes of Armenia, where he lyued certayne yeares in contemplation hardelye, onelye of ſuch fruytes as the earth brought forth. Shepheardes were the fyrſte that perceyued hym, and after other countrey folke, whiche marueylynge at his ſharpe and holy lyfe, gaue hym thynges neceſſarye for his bodye. He lykewyſe geuynge ſuche aunſwere to them, as ſemed more then a man myght do, was firſt brought into the villages and after (as it ſemed) agaynſt hys wyll, into the cities, where euerye man wondered at hym, and receyued his doctrine. The ſumme wherof was this, that none of them that honoured Mahomete ſhoulde go to heauen after theyr death, excepte they folowed thoſe ceremonyes of the lawe, whiche Halie one of Mahometes ſcolers had wrytten and lefte behynde hym, the which were contrary

to the interpretations of the miſteries, whiche Homare, an other diſciple of Mahomete (and before receaued thoroughoute all Aſia and Affrica,) had with more certayntye and grauitie of the lawe declared to the people.
            
               Techel preuayled ſo muche, that of a prophete of religion, he became a captayne of legions, and kepte longe warre with the Turkes in Natelia, and his ſecte was called Cuſelbaſe, by a redde ſcarfe that they caryed vpon theyr great hattes.
            
               Hiſmael on the other ſyde, by publication of this new doctryne, wared a Lorde of ſo muche people, as he was hable to ouerthrow Aluante with his brother Maratcham, ſonnes and heyres to the kyngedome and ſtate of Perſia, and that he myght be thought to do all thynges by inſpyration, he ſurnamed hym ſelf Sophi, accordynge to the title of prynces there, beynge called Magis.
            
            
               Nowe for the tumultes and nouities that folowed in Alamania, not longe after this, I wyll omytte to tell, becauſe they be meatelye well knowen, and ſhoulde be to tediouſe to be told in this preface, only I wil ſaye that they proceded ſo farre, as they raunged from Duchelande to Englande, where was practiſed the lyke mater, but wanted the like effecte, onely by the myghty power of God, who preſerued the royall bloude, from the crueltye of this factious deuyce.
            Many opinions enſuynge of this ſect, one was more wycked among vs Chriſtians, then amonge the Mahomites: for wher as they were contente to haue one of the auncyent interpretours of the lawe, to be the ſtaye of the ſame, we wuld haue none at all, but that euerye manne ſhulde be a prophet at his pleaſure: by reaſon wherof folowed ye groſſe errour, that learnynge and knowledge

was not alonely not neceſſary and expediente, but alſo wycked and vnprofytable. Who ſo euer was reputed learned, he was abhorred lyke a ſerpent. The whiche blaſphemous deuice, made me practyſe with moſt profounde writers, amonge the whiche, I founde thys Homelye of ſo worthye a doctoure, and trauayled in it, both for latyn and Engliſhe, but neuer went any further, becauſe I truſted ſome other of greater knowledge, wulde haue ſet it forth, with greater auctoritie. And at that time, it had ben more expedient then nowe, becauſe it is to be hoped, that the chaunge of tyme, haue chaunged many mēs hartes. But becauſe I ſe ſome remayndre of that infection ſtyll left in the dominions of this kingdom, I do with no leſſe loue of my countreye, ſet forth this good leſſon to my countrey men, then Baſilius dyd to his kynſemen. For I am of thys

opinion, that the feruent loue whiche a man heareth earneſtly to hys countreye, is not inferioure to that which a father beareth to his chyldren. And as he was carefull that his yonge coſynnes ſhoulde be well inſtructe and furnyſhed with ſuche knowledge, as might brynge them to the hight of holye ſcripture: euen ſo, I as carefully do wyſſhe all my countrey men, as well younge as olde, to enbrace learnynge, to ſtudy for vnderſtandynge of Poetes and Philoſophers, that they may come the more able to go thorough with the aucthores of Scripture. Yf ye bare the ſcience of humanitie, ye bare all in effecte, yea, diuinitie to.
            Trueth it is, that amonge the Turkes is none other learnynge, than is left behynd in theyr Alcorane in ſo muche as the Grecians, that ſometyme were the floryſhyng people of the worlde, be nowe the moſt vyle and baſte, and all becauſe the

practiſe of learnyng is taken from them. Al the auncient Princes and ſtates, founded theim ſelues vpon religion. The Gentyles had theyr religion in oracles and ſacryfyces, whiche they kept ſo ſtraytelye that the people were moore afrayde of God then of the lawe of men. Is it not euidente that the Romaynes would kepe theyr othe whatſoeuer came of it? Regulus, Scipio, Torquatus, and many other teſtifye the ſame, whiche in daungerouſe tymes ſaued theyr countrey; and whan this ſtreyghte obſeruation waxed looſe amonge them, then theyr ſtate fell to ruyne. The Prynces and ſtates of Chryſtendome, that wyll maintayne them ſelues vncorrupt, muſt ſe religion duelye kepte: yf there be no learnynge, there can be no religion, yf there be no religion, there muſte nedes be barbarouſnes and confuſion. Therefore as this holye wryter Baſilius Magnus, a noble man

borne, wrote this aduertiſement in Greke to his nephewes, and they gladlye dyd accept it, ſo I praye my countrye men as wyllynglye to receaue the ſame in Engliſh, becauſe they that chiefly be entangled with ſuche errour as I haue tolde, know none other tounge but Englyſhe. And as the gentlemen of Ceſarea, in Cappadocia, receyued profyt by thys auctor. ſo may the tranſlation be profytable to all generallye of this region, the which God graunt. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ An Homelye of Baſilius Magnus.
            
            
               Howe yonge men oughte to reade Poetes and Oratoures.
               
                  I Am moued by diuers conſiderations, to geue you ſuche counſayle as I thynke ſhall do you good, yf you wyll folowe it. For beyng come to this age, and hauynge had thexperience of many matters, and felte the chaunge of tyme, that techeth al men to know them ſelues, it hathe made me ſo practyſed in the worlde, as to them that nowe begynne to frame theyr lyfe, I am able to ſhewe what way is beſt for thē to take. And becauſe I am by nature, next your parents mooſte nyghe vnto you, and beare you no leſſe good wyll then youre fathers in dede, I thynke that you

do not deſyre to be with theym, ſo longe as you maye be with me. If you therfore with wyllynge harte, receiue myne exhortation, you ſhal be conteyned in the ſecond degre of prayſe that Heſiodus geueth: yf not, I wyll ſpeake no reproche, for you knowe what he ſayth.
               
                  He is beſt, that of hym ſelfe, doth ſe what is his dewtye.
                  He is good, that beynge taughte, enbraſeth vertues beutye.
                  He that is not apte to take, nor fyrſt, nor laſt of theſe,
                  As all forlorne do hym awaye, no more thy labour leſe.
               
               Maruayle not althoughe I take vpon me, to fynde of my ſelfe a better way for you, than you maye gather of other, beynge daylye conuerſaunt with the beſte aucthores, and reſortynge to the moſt famous readers of the ſame. For this is euen the very cauſe, why I come to aduertyſe you, that you oughte not vtterly to betake the rule of youre myndes, as the ſterne of a ſhyppe,

to theſe men, to folowe where they wyll leade you, but onelye to take that whiche is profytable, and to refuſe the reſt. Therfore what they be, and how we may diſcerne them I wyll teache you. And thus I doo begynne.
            
            
               ¶Onelye the lyfe eternall is to be ſought for.
               WE, O childrē, do not eſteme this worldly lyfe at all, nor we doo not iudge or name anye thynge good, that is ſo muche deſyred for the commoditie it bryngeth vs, as nobilitie, ſtrength, beutye, dignitie, or the honoure of all men, or a kyngdome it ſelfe, or any thynge that amonge men is regarded. We do not thinke it worthy to be deſyred, nor we doo not paſſe of them that haue it. We pretende by hope to a greater matter, and make all oure purueyaunce for a further

lyfe, and whatſoeuer profyteth vs to this, we ſaye it ought to be enbraſed and deſired with all ſtudye & diligence, and whatſoeuer anayleth not to this, we muſte reiecte it as nothynge worth.
            
            
               ¶The difference of worldlye and heauenlye lyfe.
               WHat this lyfe is, and howe we may lyue it, is a greater matter than we wil at thys preſent take in hand, and requireth a greater audience than you be.
               This much ſhalbe ſufficient to ſay vnto you nowe: He that could comprehend in one tale, and gather together in one ſumme, all the felicitye that haue bene ſynce the world beganne, ſhall fynde it farre vnequall to the leaſte parte of the good thynge that we ſpeake of, and that all the glorye of this worlde, is leſſe to be comparyd wyth one of the ſmalleſte partes of thys, than

ſhadowes & dreames be to the thinges that they preſent. And to vſe a more playne example, as the ſoule in all degree is moore honourable than the bodye, ſo is the difference of theſe lyues.
            
            
               ¶Thynges of moralitie muſt fyrſt be learned, and than diuinite.
               TO this the holye wrytynges by ſecreate meanes do leade vs. And till we can for weaknes of age, attayne to the depenes of them, we be traned in other, not all together different from theſe, as in ſhadowes and myrroures mete for the eyes of the ſoule, folowynge theyr example that ſhal do any feat of armes, for they practyſe both hād and foote, that they maye in theyr matche, enioye the gayne of theyr ſtudye. We muſte thynke we haue an empryſe propounded to vs, paſſynge all other, aboute the whyche

we muſt employe all our diligence and trauaile. And for the furniture of this, we muſt practyſe with poetes, with hyſtorians, and oratours, and with all men, that we maye therby get ſome commoditie to our ſoule. And as the dier with certain arte prepareth the cloth to be coloured, and than layeth on his flower, whyther it be purple or other, euen ſo we to make the gloſſe of vertue durable, do taſt the outward ſhewe tyll we may approche to the ſecrete and ſacred miſteries. And as men accuſtomed to ſee the ſonne in water, be after the more apte to dyrecte our eyes to the cleare beames of the ſame.
            
            
               ¶Holy ſcrypture is bewtyfyed by humane learnyng, by thexample of Moyſes.
               IF in wrytynges there be a conſonaunce and an agrement, the knowledge of them is profitable

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to vs, yf not, the conference of both vtterynge the difference, anayleth muche to the knowledge of better. For the comparyſon of both to ſom indifferent thyng, do ſhew a ſhape of bothe. And as it is the lyuely vertue of the plante to be laden with ſeaſonable fruyte, and yet hath a beutye beſet with leaues and braū
                  ches. Euen ſo the natiue fruyte of the ſoule is verytye, and neuertheleſſe it is not vnpleaſaunt to hyr to be clad with externe ſapience, as with leaues, whiche is a couerture for the fruyte, and a delyghte to the eye. Moyſes (whoſe name for his wiſdome is ſo great with all men) dyd ſo furniſhe hys mynde with the ſcience of Egipt, as he thereby aſpyred to the contemplation of GOD.
               
               Lykewyſe of latter tyme, the ſage Daniell of Babilon, when he had learned the ſapience of the Caldees, came to the knoweledge of dyuyne letters.
            
            
               
               ¶The vſe and imitation of Poetes.
               WE haue ſhewed that extern wyſedome is profytable to the ſoule, nowe we wyll declare howe we ought to procede in it. And fyrſt to begyn with Poetes, becauſe they be diuers and of al ſortes, we maye not geue our myndes to thē a lyke. Whan they rehearſe the noble feates and wordes of notable men, then we ought to be enflamed in our hartes, and endeuour our ſelues to be the like. But when they vtter wicked men and theyr actes, then we ought to flee them, and to ſtoppe oure eares at them, as Vliſſes dyd at the Sirenes. For whye, euyl talke is the way to euyl dedes. Wherefore we muſt with all diligence take hede, leſte by laſciuious ſpeache, we ſuffer pryuylye ſome noughtye thinge to come vpon vs, as a poyſon tempered with honye. We ſhall not therfore eſteme thoſe

Poets, ye preſent vs with ſcolders & ſcoffers with louers & dronkerds and ſuche as meaſure felycytie by delicate fare and pleſant muſycke. And ſpecially thē that medle with Gods and bring them in with diſcorde and debate, ye brother againſt the brother; the father ſtryuynge with the chyldren and the chyldren makyng ſoden warre with the father, and whan they trete of there diſſolutenes and adulteries, and that of Iupiter, him ſelfe ther cheife GOD as they call him, in ſuch ſort, as withoute ſhame a man cannot report of brute Beaſts. Let vs leue this to ſtage players, and the like I ſaye of all other writeres, ſpeciallye whan they allure men to pleaſure.
            
            
               Howe Oratours are to be red.
               WE may not regard Orators whan they ſpeke to pleaſe ye hearer, for neyther at the

barre nor ells where, is it lawefull to vſe leſing for them that ſeke the righte and true way of lyfe, and by lawe be forbid to do amyſſe. But than ſhall we enbraſe them, whan they auaunce vertue and depreſſe vyce, and as all other, take pleſure onelye by the coloure and ſauoure of the flower, but the Bee picketh alſo hony out of ye very ſame, euē ſo may we gather out of thē not onelye pleaſaunt and ſwete matter to the eare, but alſo holſome doctrine to the ſoule and in euery thing we maye folowe the Bee. For they nether go confuſedly to euery flower nor when they come, bearethe all away. But taketh that ſerueth for there worke, and let the reſt alone. So muſt we iudge what is familyer and allied to vertue, and that admit, letting the other paſſe and as in a roſe buſhe we leue the thornes and take the flower ſo in ſuch wrytings we ought to take the good & leue the bad, & in euery doctrine we

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
conſider howe the beginning agreeth with the endyng, accordyng to the Doreanes prouerbe. The ſtone and the meaſure muſt agree.
            
            
               Poetes and Oratoures muſt be red for the vertue that they teache.
               AND becauſe a lyfe muſte be dyrected by vertue, we muſt learne of all Poetes, of all Orators, and Hiſtorians, yea and chefely of al Philoſophers, al theyr teachinges, that auayleth vs to the familiaritye of vertue, with whom and younge mennes myndes, wee muſt engrafte an aliance, for thinges that be lerned in tender age, do abyde the better, becauſe the tendernes of theyr myndes, receyueth the ſame to the verye botome.
               What ſhoulde we thynke Heſiodus mente by thoſe verſes that euerye man hath in hys mouth, but to excite

young men to vertue.
               
                  Ryght paynefull is the way, that leades to vertues gate.
                  And fewe ther be that can abyde, tyl they arryue therat.
                  But when they be once paſt, the hygh and werye hyll.
                  All is ſo playne and fayre to ſee, as theyr wyll dwell there ſtil.
                  Ryght pleſaunt is the way that draweth the mynd to vyce,
                  And moſt menne are contente to folowe that deuyce.
                  But when they ſee the ende, ſo fowle and full of payne,
                  They wayle theyr wofull ſtate, and would retourne agayne.
               
               I thynke he ment nothyng els, but to ſtyrre young mennes myndes to vertue, and to encorrage all good men to the ſame, that they ſhoulde for no labour geue ouer til the end.
               And whoſoeuer he be that exhorfeth vs to honeſtye, we maye well folowe hys counſel in that behalfe. I hard a man of great learnyng in Poetrye ſaye, that all Homers doctrine, was nothyng but a prayſe of

vertue, and that he gathered all to this purpoſe, except in ſome by matter. As when he bringeth in Vliſſes naked & al forlorne by ſhipwracke, as ſhamefaſtnes might haue folowed to be ſene naked of a Quene and alone, but vertue whyche was to hym as a garment, made him euen than, naked as he was, to be honorable, in ſo much as the Quene did hym reuerence fyrſte, and then all the Cuntrye, leuyng theyr banket, wher they feaſted, to behold hym, and ther was not one for the tyme, that rather deſired any thyng than to be Vliſſes, although he was naked and in ſhippewrake. That learned man, that I ſpeake of was wont to crye with hygh voyce at this place. Ofrendes lette vs embrace vertue, whiche in ſhypwracke ſwimmeth wyth vs, and maketh a man naked caſt vpon the ſhore to be more worſhipful, than the welthye Pheaceans.
               
               And ſurely ſo it is in dede, for all

other thynges, be no more one mannes then an other, euē as the chāce of the dye is vncertayne: onely vertue, both to quicke and dead, is ſtable and ſure poſſeſſiō, by the whiche reaſon I thynke Solon was moued, whan he ſpake to ryche men.
               
                  Our vertue, with your ryches, we wil in no wyſe batter.
                  For oure is ſure poſſeſſion, and youre vncertayne matter.
               
               The lyke ſayinge is of Theogius, whan he ſayth, that GOD doth hāg a balance dyuerſelye amonge men, for ſomtyme it floweth with riches and ſometyme it hath nothynge. The lyke is wrytten of Prodicus, the wyſe man concernynge vertue and vyce, and it ſhall becom vs to mark what he ſayth, for he is a worthye wryter. He affyrmeth in a place, the ſentence wherof I remēber, being writen in proſe, yt whē 
                  Hercules was a yonge man, & much of thage that you be now, and was muſing whiche waye he myght take, ether

the harde waye to vertue, or the eaſye waye to vyce, that there appeared two wemen vnto hym, that is to ſaye, vertue and vyce, whoſe diuerſitye of araye did declare their condicions. The one was ſet forth in all kynde of gorgyouſenes and brauerye, with the whiche, and hirlaſciuious talke, ſhe deuiſed to allure him to pleaſure, and to hyr purpoſe. The other, beynge ſober, and of ſymple chere, tolde hym a contrary tale: ſhe promyſed hym neyther pleaſure nor eaſe, but payne, peryl and trauayle both by ſea and land, but the rewarde of this ſhuld be, to be made a GOD. Whiche Hercules dyd choſe, & folow to his liues ende.
            
            
               ¶Phyloſophers be to be redde becauſe they ſet forth vertue.
               IN maner all that haue wrytten anye matter of grauytye, more or leſſe, to theyr power haue ſet

forth vertues prayſe, whome we muſt credyte, and do our deuour to ſhewe it in our lyues. For whoſoeuer expreſſeth by works, that other doo onelye by wordes, he is a wyſe man in dede, the other as ſhadows vanyſheth away. And as ye workman that paynteth, or graueth the ymage of a worthye man, and one that in lyfe expreſſethe the vertues of the ſame. But they that praiſeth vertue abroade, and ſette hyr forth with paynted wordes, and yet preferre pleaſure before temperaunce, and lucre before iuſtice, they be like the ſtage players, whiche many tymes appeare as Princes & Kynges, and be ſo farre frome the ſame, as perhaps they be vyllanes, & ſlaues borne. The muſitian if it be poſſyble, neuer ſuffreth the inſtrumente to be out of tune. The ſcolemaſter of daunſing, chafeth whan the fote faileth: and ſhal a man diſcord with hym ſelfe, and his lyfe be repugnāt

to his words? But the tounge dyd ſwere, the harte made none othe (quoth Euripidis) it is inough to ſem an honeſt mā. But this is the rote of all iniquitie, yf ye wyll beleue Plato, to appere honeſt, whan thou arte not ſoo.
            
            
               Reding of Poetes and Hiſtoryes, is profitable for examples.
               OF wordes and wrightinges of vertue, we muſt take profight after the way that we haue ſhewed. Nowe of the deedes of worthy auncient men, left to vs in memory by monuments of Poetes, we ought to receyue good by them after this ſort. A vile & leude felowe, rayled on the worthy Pericles, of Athenes, at the which he was neyther angry nor any thinge moued in his minde, the felowe lefte noo reproche vnſpoken, Pericles, as things not appertainynge to hym,

paſſed not of them. When it was night and darke, and yet the vyle iangler wold not departe, Pericles, cauſed his mā to waight vpon him home with torche lyghte, that he might enioy his longe contemplation in philiſophy. A certen man in his rage thretened to kyll Euclides, of Megara, and affirmed by oth that he woulde do it. Euclides, ſware the contrarye that he would ſo appeſe him, as he ſhould do him no hurt. It is very profitable to record ſome ſuche example to them that be in rage of anger, we may not beleue the Tragedie that ſaythe, ire doo arme the handes to fyght. For the beſt way is not to be angrye at al, but if that canne not be, to vſe reſonne as a bridle, and not ſuffer it to ſtrai to furre. But let vs returne to the factes of worthy menne.
               One dyd ſtryke Socrates on the face verye ſpyghtefullye, Socrates,

Socrates made no reſiſtaunce, but ſuffered hym ſo much as al hys face was ſwelled. And when the man had ſaciate hys rage, Socrates did nothyng els, but in his forehed wrote hys name that had beaten hym, as they be wont, that make pyctures.
               Suche a man dyd thys feate, and ſoughte none other reuengemente, and becauſe theſe agreith with our doctrine, I would we ſhould folow the example. The facte of Socrates, agreith wyth our ſcrypture whych mouiſheth vs that when we be ſtrykenne on the one cheke, we ſhould hold forth the other, none other reuengment is graunted vs, and the example of Pericles and Euclides, is lyke to oure precepte, that wylleth vs to ſuffer them that perſecute vs, and paciently to beare their anger, and to praye for our enemyes, wiſſhyng them none euyll, and he that is practiſed in theſe, will not diſcredite the other as thinges impoſſible

We may not here forget the feat of Alexander, who hauyng the daughters of Darius in captiuitye, and heryng marueylous reporte of theyre bewtye, woulde not ſuffer them to come in hys ſyghte, thynkyng it to be a ſhame, that a Conqueroure of men, ſhould be Conquered of women. This agreith wyth our learnyng, that whoſoeuer beholdeth a woman voluptuouſlye, althoughe he haue no companye with her, yet is not without ſinne, becauſe of the concupyſſence of the harte. The dede of Climas, Pythagoras frend, will hardly be beleued of vs, howſoeuer it be taken, who when he might by an othe, haue eſcaped the loſſe of .iij talentes, he rather payde it then he would ſweare, and yet ſhould haue ſworne trulye. But I thynke he had hard of our precepte, that forbiddeth vs to ſweare at all.
            
            
               
               ¶A choiſe in learning muſt be had, and our ſtudye directed to ſome ende.
               I Will returne to that I ſpake in the beginning, we may not take euery thyng, but onely good and profitable. For ſeing we wyll dilygentelye refuſe thoſe meates, that myghte hurte the bodye, it were a ſhame to haue no regard of doctrin, which is the fode of the ſoule. But lyke a raging ſtreme, to deuoure al that commeth without reſpecte.
               The ſhypmaſter ſuffereth not hys ſhyp to be borne wyth euery puffe, but ſtandeth at the helme, and directeth it to the porte, the Archer hath his eye to the pricke, the Carpenter and the Maſonne, hath an end and purpoſe of theyr arte, and ſhall we in the order of lyfe, be inferyour to artificers? It can not be, that the craftes manne hath an ende of hys worke, and we haue none of oure

lyfe, which they beholde, that ſeke the perfecte happie life, yf we with out all reaſon and ſtaye, be toſſed hither and thither in our life, what difference ſhall be betwene vs, and ſhippes that haue no ſternes: in the playes of muſike and manhod men do excerciſe themſelfes to that purpoſe, when a tryall of ſtrength ſhal be made, no man ſtudieth to be cunnynge at the Harpe or the Pype.
               Neyther Polidamus nor Milo dyd ſoo, but the one before the ſolemne day of Olimpe, practiſed renning Charettes, and the other, with armed ſhild ſtode to hys defence, as a thynge vnremoueable, wheras yf they hadde laboured the muſyke of Marſias or Olimpe, and lefte the duſte and the game place, theye hadde wonne no prayſe nor glorye, nor auoyded the deriſion of the people. Contraryewyſe Themiſtius did not leue his muſike, and trye his ſtrength, for than he had not gotten ſuche an excellencie in the ſame, as he paſſed al other

muſitians, who had ſo muche cunnyng that at hys pleaſure he coulde ſtyr any man to ire by vehemencye of hys arte, and bryng hym agayne to quiete, by the ſwete pleſauntnes of the ſame. When Alexander was at a feaſt, and he appoynted to play before hym by one kynde of muſike called Phrigian, he ſo ſtirred the king as he aroſe, to take his armure and fyght, and by the chaunging of his armonie, he made hym to returne agayne to the banquet, ſuch effects haue the practyſe aswell of muſike as of corage, whē they be exerciſed to the ſame ende.
            
            
               All thinges is purchaſed by labour the happye lyfe and all.
               BEcauſe we be entrid into this matter of Champions, and rewardes, Let vs procede a lytle further in it. Conſyder how many thouſand paines they take, how many ſtripes they bear in lernyng there ſenſe, what a thin dieat they kepe? Not as they wil but as there mayſters commaunde, and to be

brefe, in al other, their lyfe ledde before the day of profe, is a meditation to the ſame. In the ende, they come to the place of triall, where they fyghte with greate paine and perill, that they might be crowned with a garland of olyue, ſmallage perſlee, or ſome ſuche lyke, and to be proclaimed victorius of the harold, and ſhall we, to whom ſo meruelus rewardes of vertue be propounded, as theyr worthynes cannot be expreſſed, ſlepe on both ſides at oure pleaſure, and thynke to catche it by holdynge vppe one of oure handes? Than were ſlouthe much to be prayſed in our life, And Sardanapalus, might be noted ye moſt happye in the worlde, or Margites, who had no good condition in hym as Homer ſaith. And yf this be true of Homer, no leſſe true is it that Pittacus, affirmethe. All good thing to be hard. For after much paine and trauell, a man ſhall haue muche a do to be partaker of thoſe goodes, with which no thing in the worlde

may be compared, therfore we may not be idle, we may not forſake ſo great hope, for ſo ſmale a pleaſure, excepte we will ſuſteine reproche and abide blame, not here amonge men, (althoughe that is alſo to be regarded) but vnder the earthe, or ells where, whan the laſte iudgemente ſhalbe made. And he that of ignoraunce offendeth, maye happe find ſome pardon of God. But he that doeth euyll of purpoſe, hath none excuſe, but muſt nedes ſuffer gret and diuerſe puniſhement.
            
            
               ¶Howe we ought to vſe the body.
               WHat ſhall we doo than will ſome man ſaye, what elles, but haue regard of our ſoul al other things ſet apart. We may not ſerue the body furder than neceſſitie. But the ſoule we muſt noryſhe with all good fode, and delyuer her oute of priſon and the fetters of affections, by the helpe of Philoſophy, the body muſte be ſoo vſed, as it maye endure and ſubdue

paſſions and the bellye muſt be ſerued not for pleaſure, but for ſuſtenaunce. For they that haue ther delyght onely in banquetes & feſting, ſeking al the earth and ſea, to ſatiſfye there appetide, be burdened wt a miſerable bondage, payng a trybute to a ſharpe Lorde, in noo leſſe paine than they that be tormented in hell. Some to cut the fire, ſome to beare water in a ſiue, and ſoo to fyll a botomeles tubbe with oute anye ende of their laboure. To be curious in oure heare, or to make much a do aboute oure garmentes is the parte of them, that be miſers or miſcheuous, as Diogenes ſaythe. Wherfore to be trym in apparel is as euill as to be diſſolute or adulterus. What difference is there to a wyſe man, to were a fyne gowne, or a courſe cloke, ſo the body be defended from hete and colde, and ſo in other thinges not to be more preciſe than nedeth, not to puffe vp the body, but for the commoditie of the

ſoule. And it is nos leſſe ſhame to him that worthelye hath the name of a man, to be to carefull aboute his body, than to be ſubiect to anye vice out of kynde. Therefore to beſtowe all our ſtudy vpon the garniſhing of oure bodye, is the parte of him that knoweth not him ſelf nor do not vnderſtand thaduertiſment of the wiſe man that ſaieth. The thinge that is ſene is not the man. But a greater wiſedome is nedful to vs to knowe what we be.
            
            
               Pleaſure muſt be eſchewed.
               BVt it is more impoſſible to do this without a clere mind, thā to behold the ſonne with blere eyes, the clenſynge of the ſoule, to ſpeake it breifely, is nothyng elles but to deſpyſe the pleaſures of oure ſenſes, as the eies may not be fedde with vayne ſyghts, or ſuch ſhewes as leaueth a prouocation of pleaſur neyther maye the eares be entyſed with ſuch melody, as corrupte our myndes: for of ſuch muſyck, wantonnes

procedeth. We ought to receaue the muſick that Dauid the poete of holye verſes vſed, to deliuer kyng Saul from his madnes. Pithagoras chaūſed to ſe a company of yong men, renning about the town lyke dronkardes, he badde the minſtrell to chaunge his muſik, and play the ſad meaſure called Dorical, whiche dyd ſo reſtore them to their vnderſtanding, as they were aſhamed of theyr folly, and threwe away theyr garlandes, and their dronken garmentes. This is ſufficient to teach vs, that great reſpect is to be had in the muſik that we here. Wherfore I exhort you to beware of the muſick that is now in vſe, as of a thīge of great fylthines. As for ſauoures or ſmelles, or anoyntmentes, what ſhulde I nede to ſpeake? And as for pleaſures by touching and geſture, no man nede to doute, but if we be wel ware of them, they wil compel vs to be ſlaues to the body, as brute beaſtes.
            
            
               
               ¶The body muſt be ſubdued to reaſon.
               FYnally, the body muſt be vtterly ſubdued, excepte we will be drowned in the gore of pleſure and ſo much onely we may make of it, as it may ſerue for the miniſtery of Philoſophy, as Plato ſayth. And S. Paul in effect hath ye ſame wordes, when he biddeth, that no care ſhuld be had of the body for to prouoke pleaſure. For they ye ſet theyr hole care vpon the body, and do neglect the ſoule, whome it oughte to ſerue, differeth nothyng from them that with great diligence ſeketh for goodly toles, and care not for ye art wherfore they be made. We muſte do the contrary, and kepe downe ye body, as the fury of a wylde beaſte, and pul in the ſturdy head with the brydle of reaſō, which we may not let go at large, leſt the mynd be drawen headlong hyther and thyther, as the cart dryuer is pulled awaye with the violence of his wylde horſes.

We muſt remember Pythagoras who, when he ſawe one of his acquayntaunce, pampryng his bodye with wanton fare, he ſayde: Thys man goeth aboute to make his pryſon more heauy. Which inconuenience Plato forſeynge, chaunged the place of ſtudy, that the high complection of his bodye myght be cut of, as a vyne to luſty. And I haue hard phiſitions ſay, that to much health is daungerous. Seynge therefore that to much feadinge is peryllous for the body, and hyndraunce to the ſoule, it were verye madnes, to beſtowe inordinate laboure about it.
            
            
               ¶Ryches may not be deſyred.
               IF the bodye be contemned, and pleaſures deſpyſed, what nede haue we of ryches? Truely I ſee none, except ſome man hath delyte to watche, and kepe his mony hyd, as the fable maketh mention of ſerpentes. He that knoweth well to diſpyſe theſe, ſhall vtterly abhorre

from all dyſhoneſty, both in worde and dede. And all that is more than ſufficient, he wyll hate it, whatſoeuer pretence it hath. For ſufficiencye is not to be meaſured by pleaſure, but by neceſſite. For they that go beyonde the boundes of neceſſite be lyke to them that falleth headelonge, and can fynde no fotynge to ſtaye, but the more they haue, the more they deſyre, to ſatiſfye theyr luſt and pleaſure, according to that Solon ſayth.

                     Affection mens mindes do ſo blynde.
                     That of ryches no ſtaye they can fynde.
                  
And the leſſon of Theogius we ought to folowe.

                     I do not regarde, nor requyre ryches.
                     Content with a litle, to auoyd diſtreſſe.
                  
I can not but with good wyl remē
                  ber the ſayeng of Diogenes, that deſpiſed all worldly thynges, and yet thought hym ſelfe to be more riche, thā the moſt myghty kyng, becauſe a lytle ſerued hym. And we, excepte we haue ſo many talentes as Pythias, and ſo many acres of land, as we

can not wel nomber, and ſo muche cattell, as can not be tolde, we are not content. My opiniō is, that we neyther ought to deſyre riches whē we haue them not, nor to glorye in them, when we haue them, excepte we knowe howe to vſe them. Socrates ſpake well of a ryche man, that auaunced hym ſelfe for hys ryches: I wyl not (quoth he) eſteme the, except I knowe howe thou canſte vſe thy wealth. If Phidias, or Policletus, had gloryed in the golde, whereof the one made a ſtatue and image to the Ilianes of Iupiter, and the other to the Argiues of Iuno, forſakynge theyr arte and knowledge, whereby that golde was made moore precious, they had ben laughed to ſcorne, for chalenging a gloue that was none of theyrs. And ſhal we thynke vs to be worthy leſſe reprehention, beleuynge that vertue is not hable of hyr ſelfe to beutyfy vs ſufficiently.
            
            
               ¶Flattery and boaſtyng to be eſchewed.
               
                  SHall we forſake pleaſures, ſhal we deſpiſe ryches, and neuertheleſſe embraſe flatterye? and delyght in fayer wordes, and in the party for of Arclilocus? Truly there is nothynge more to be auoyded of a wyſe man, than to lyue after the common opinion, and by vayne wordes to fall into offentation.
               We oughte ſo earneſtelye to embraſe reaſon, the right guyde of life that if al men wuld cry out againſt vs, we woulde not forſake our iuſt quarel, for no infamie or daunger. For he that frameth his life otherwyſe, differith nothynge from the iugler of Egipt, who at his pleaſure could make him ſelfe a tree, a beſte fire or water, or any thing that he would. For if the company ſerueth he wil prayſe vertue, and yf the cō
                  pany be for the contrarie, he wyll praiſe vice. Euen as Polipus, that turnith his ſhape to ye color of euery thing he commeth to, ſo he wil chaunge his ſentence, at the pleaſure of euery audience.
            
            
               
               ¶Al thinges are to be ſought that may bring vs to the happy lyfe.
               THeſe matters may be more exactlye learned in mine other workes, at this preſente it is inough to deſcribe vertu, as in the ſhadowe of externe doctryne. For he that taketh profighte by euery thing although he do it by litle and litle, yet is it true, that many a litle maketh a gret, as a mighty flod, of a ſmale fountayne. For where the Poet ſaith, put a litle to a litle & do it oft, it is not to be vnderſtād only of thincreaſe of mony, but of euery ſciēce. Bias one of the vii. ſages, ſent his ſonne to Egipte, who axinge hys father, what he myght do to pleaſe him. He anſwerd, if thou canſt purchaſe ſuch ſpending mony, as may accompany the to thy age. He mēt vertue, by the name of conduct monye, and yet his limitation of vertue, was to ſtreyghte, to confine it, within the compaſſe of mans lyfe, for I ſaye if a man myghte liue the

yeares of Tithon, or of Arganthonius, or had the long liue of our Methuſalem, who liued .ix. hundred ſaue xxx. yere, or culd number all the ages of men, ſince the creatiō of the worlde I would ſmyle at it, as at a thinge of ſmale vnderſtanding, in the reſpect of the infinite time of vertue, the terme wherof no hart can comprehende, no more than the ſoule immortall. For the which, al dilygence is to be vſed, that we maye be ſo furniſhed, as ſhall redound to our commoditie.
            
            
               ¶Payne maye not wythdrawe vs from the ſtudye of Vertue.
               AND thoughe theſe thynges be harde and paynefull, wee maye not geue ouer, but we muſt remember the leſſon that biddeth vs take the beſt kynd of approued lyfe in hande, and thynke that vſe and practyſe, wyll make it eaſy vnto vs, it is a rebuke to leaue the preſent tyme for a litle ſloth, and after cal for it agayne in vaine, when

no thyng wyl be found, but ſorowe and greife. I haue tolde you, what I thynk moſt fyt for you preſently, and to the ſame, I will counſel you while I ſhall lyue. Ther be .iij. kindes of diſeaſes, of the wyich, one is incurable, into the whych I wolde be lothe that you ſhoulde fale, or to be ſycke in your mynd, as many be in theyr bodye. They that be a litle euel at eaſe goeth to the Phiſitions them ſelues, and they that be verie ſycke, ſendeth for the Phiſitions to them, but they that be paſt remedie by the rage of melancolye, neyther goo nor ſend to the Phiſitions, nor ſuffer them that do come to them to doo them anye good. My prayer is, that you do not fal into the lyke inconuenience, refuſynge all good counſayle.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   