
      
         
            
            
            The Pedegrewe of Heretiques. Wherein is truely and plainely ſet out, the first roote of Heretiques begon in the Church, ſince the time and paſsage of the Goſpell, together with an example of the ofſpring of the ſame.
            
               Eſay. 47.
               
               O Babylon ſapientia tua & ſcientia tua haec te decepit.
               O Babilon thy wiſdome and conning hath deceiued thée.
            
            
               Peruſed and alowed according to the order appoynted in the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions.
            
            
               HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
            
            
               Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harryſon. Anno. 1566.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, the Lorde Robert Dudley, Earle of Lecester, Baron of Dinghby, of the noble order of the Garter Knight, and one of the Queenes Maieſties most honourable priuy Councel, and maſter of hir Maieſties Horſſe. I. Barthlet, miniſter of the Lord Ieſus Christ his poore Church, wiſheth the zealous loue of God in Chriſt.
               
            
            
               IT thoroughe al ages hath ben a laudable Cuſtom (right honorable) that wryters, in dedicating their trauailes to ye worthies of their tyme, did thereby, not onely ſhield and ſuccour their cauſe, but alſo aduaunce their Patrones name, with high renoume, thorowout al poſteritie. Wherfore as it is lawfull for me, in this ſo good a cauſe, to vſe this benefite: ſo I eſpecially wiſhe to accompliſh

the ſame, by your honor, to whom as many good men holde themſelues diuerſly bounde: So there is not any that doth not commende the ſame: For hauing compaſſion on the diſtreſſed: for pardoning of your foes: for ſuccouring of the nedefull: for furthering poore ſuters: and amongſt other, your honours vertues (which I doe ouerpaſſe, leaſt I ſhoulde ſeeme to be ouer curious, eyther in rehearſing thoſe things that are moſt certaine to all men, or ſuch as your Lordſhippe liſteth rather to practize than to heare ſpeake of) for that you are a ſpecial Mecaenas, to euery ſtudēt. The which the Vniuerſitie of Oxforde, a nourcerie of good letters, flying to your protection, euidentely declareth: but eſpecially for that your Lordſhip is ſo fauorable and zelous a friend to the miniſterie:Hil. in Pſ 68.
                who ſtanding in the feruent zeale of their God & his church, in the indignation of a godly loue, are by the pieuiſhneſſe of many (that thinke they haue gotten aduantage at will) diuerſly moleſted. Goe forth my Lord (Zelo enim Dei iraſcitur,
               Idem in Pſal. 118. Zadik. 
               qui inſolentem in fratres miniſtroſque conſpexerit) for frō the zeale of God doth it proceede, to be diſpleaſed with thoſe that are malapert agaynſte the brethren, the miniſters of God. God ſhal make you a moſt redoubted and triumphante Gedeon ouer hys

enimies. Goe on therein amongſt the ſouldiers of zeale, and aſſure your ſelf, right honourable, that there is not, amongſt al the cauſes of perpetuall fame, any one more iuſt, or apte therfore, than a true report for doing well to the houſholde of fayth, and maintenaunce of the Churches right. And committe your name to the perpetuall memorie of Gods eternall Church, who doth already acknowledge your louing kindeneſſe towarde hir, and will not forgette the ſame. By reaſon whereof, when as it fyrſt came in my thought to ſeeke ſome ſhelter, frō the ſhowres of Zoilus, which are ye ſharper, in this age, for that they are leſſe ſhame leſſe, and from the iniuries of our time: your honor aboue other, was bruted moſt brimly amongſt them, as fitteſt for the ſame. To whome I do moſt humbly ſewe, to receyue this little treatiſe, wyth ye accuſtomed, and cheerefull countenaunce, which you were wonte to beſtowe on others: which if you, of your bountie doe, I dare boldly thinke, that it ſhall be ſufficiently cōſecrated to the church the mother of vs al. That aiger Eriphia ſhall be ſufficiently appalled. And that Momus ſhall moue laughter, but with Mydas long eares. If any man, ſhal thinke that it is not worthy for the baſeneſſe therof, to be dedicated to your honour, ſuch a one ſhall

ſeme an vnthriftie nigarde of your honors gentleneſſe, or elſe enuious of your fame, & of my vnfained good wil to your Lordſhip. For I graunt that (how vneaſy ſo euer my trauayle was in this froſen ſeas, no man hauing cut the yſe therein) it is now ſo ſimple, as I doubt not, but then, when I ſhall, by the luſtineſſe of other be conſtrayned, I my ſelfe ſhal not onely amende this, but ſet it forth with greater gayne, and increaſe: and therefore the better learned might not onely, haue done the ſame much more commendable, but amende thys, which I freely ſubmit to the controlement of euery winde. In the meane tyme, I recommend your honor to the tuitiō of almighty God, who increaſe in you his loue, and feruente zeale, in knowlege. Amen.
            
               Your Lordſhips humble Orator. Iohn Barthlet.
            
         
         
            
            L. G. Cantabrigienſis ad Lectorem. S. D.
            INcola qui coeli, viuis peregrinus in orbe:
            Et cupis ad patrios, tuto penetrare Penateis:
            Huc ades. Et quae monſtra viae ſuperanda ſuperſunt,
            Vt fluctumque regas, extra firmumque carinam,
            Hic tibi non magno, licet intueare libello.
            Hoc iter Herculeis, nequaquam viribus impar.
            Iure labor poterit, vel Iaſone dignus haberi.
            Quaerit Vliſſaeös animos, vireiſque viriles.
            Intus erunt Cicones, extra quoque pocula loti
            Dulcia, quae ſecum, reditus obliuia ducunt.
            Antiphates metuendus, & vno lumine Ciclops,
            Scylla cauenda tibi, Scyllaeque propinqua Charybdis,
            Caeteraque vt taceam, quibus eſt agitatus Vliſses,
            Et Sireneos cantus, iramque Deorum
            Euitare, tibi magnum eſt medicamina Circes.
            Monſtrorum quae terra tulit, pelagúſue profundum,
            Vna quidem nobis cenfebitur, haereſis inſtar,
            Quam tu quo melius fugias vt pocula Circes,
            Hoc tibi Moly dedit, noſter Cyllenius album:
            Quo retinere potes, vel ad huc reparare figuram.
            Tu modo iam dictis dicas contraria verbis.
            Quod ſi Sirenes metuas, tibi cera parata eſt.
            Et ſi Scylla ferum eſt, & inexpugnabile monſtrum,
            Cum monſtri vultum rabidi cognoris ad vnguem,
            Eſt fugiſſe ſalus, quando ſuperare negatur.
            Si ſis tutus ab his, facilè tibi caetera cedent:
            Tutus ab his fueris, haec tu modo mente recondas.
         
         
            
            Ad eundem Dicolon Tetastrophon.
            
            
               QVem non liuor edax, nec genius malus,
               Nec concepta prius, fallit opinio:
               Quam nullo minui, ferre poteſt modo,
               Solus iudicat integrè.
            
            
               Huius ſi liber hic, incidat in manus,
               Author vult operis, ponere iudicem.
               Si diſcutiat ſingula, calculum
               Addet ſpero laboribus.
            
            
               Nam, ſi magnanimi laus viget Herculis,
               Monſtrum vulneribus, quod domuit potēs
               Et naſcens toties, edocuit mori
               Speluncae face ſubdita.
            
            
               Cur non mōſtriferam, qui domat haereſim:
               Qua non Hydra malum fert numeroſius,
               Expectare poteſt iure probarier?
               Aequus ſi datur, arbiter.
            
            
               Alcidis labor, hoc non magis arduus.
               Et nobis labor hic, non minus vtilis.
               Ergo par ratio ſit: niſi forſitan
               Praeſens detur honeſtior.
            
            
               Succinctè Haereſeos cornua, commouet:
               Demonſtrat breuiter, quae retinenda ſunt:
               Papiſmi ſobolem prodit adulteram.
               Hanc prudens, niſi neſcias.
            
            
               Attentum faciat te, grauitas rei.
               Aras cauſa ſacras continet, & focos:
               Et quando pariter res agitur tua:
               His caeptis, etiam faue.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Pedegrewe of Popish Heretiques.
            
            
               AS no Trauayler doth departe from hys quiet home, but to ſome certayne place, & for profitable purpoſe: euen ſo writers (gentle Reader) haue alwayes ſome ende, wherefore they trauayle with ſuch payne: whiche euer is to be conſidered, and they credited, according to the ſame. And as the eſtate of priuate perſons, is muche inferiour to publique: ſo the cauſe of a common wealth is muche ſoner to be hearde, than a priuate or ſingular. Yea and among the cauſes common to vs all, there is none more excellente and publique, than thoſe of religion: which touching both God and man, chalenge of very right, eche mans ſtudy and whole power. In the which cauſe, the end ought to be, the tryal and defence of the truth: bycauſe the God of truth is not to be knowen but in truth. Vnto which end,The affectis on of writers. I woulde the writers in theſe our dayes had plight their paynes. Then ſhoulde we not haue iuſt cauſe to credite or eſtéeme of them, as Demades of Draco his lawes: Non atramento, ſed ſanguine eſse conſcriptas, That they are not written with ynke, but bloud. Some gaping for gayne, ſome peruerted by friendes or affection, deale in this pitiful cauſe of the Church (which concerneth all countreyes and kingdomes alike) after ſuch ſort, as the .30. Tirannes of Athens did eche of them for other, or alone for himſelfe, but none for the whole.Iustinus Libro. 5.
               
               
By meanes wherof, if in theſe our troubled dayes, any man moued with hope of the glory of God, purpoſe of ſetting forth the truth, and care of the common welth, publiſh his ſtudies, he ſhall haue an harder ſtoure (O malicious world) than euer Thraſibulus in thoſe dayes of Athens, agaynſt the ſame Tirannes, had: For that there is not thorowout the whole body of Diuinitie, any one cōmon place, that hath not a nūber ſuch ſorte of writers, that excéede the ſayde Tirannes, who will addreſſe themſelues to thencombraunce, both of the common cauſe and wealth therein. As in this matter of hereſies, by Hoſius, Shackelocke, Rurimondes Euans, Staphilus his Stapleton. &c. appeareth. Who being but tranſlaters of other mens trauayles, beſides that they do communicate with them in their ill purpoſe: thinking that not to ſuffiſe, for the heaping full of the meaſure of their wickedneſſe, colourably hyding their priuate caſe vnder publique titles, as of the betraying of the beaſtlineſse of Heretiques: and Hatchet of Heretiques, do only ſéeke their reuenge by thapplying of the publique titles, to their owne priuate and perſonal affaires, receding as it were from their originall writ, alter their firſt action. Wherfore thou oughteſt (gentle Reader) in ſcāning of the ſame, as a wiſe Iudge, ſeing which way they walke, rather ſcorningly to laughe at them, than to be occupied with ſuch lawleſſe Logique, or moued with ſuch reaſonleſſe Rhetorique as they vſe. What hath Hoſius being an alien, and ignoraunte of our Land,Folio. 68. Folio. 69.
                I pray you, to doe with Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge, among all other the Colledges there? yea and among all other Offices, with the Chappell Deane of the Diuinitie ſtudentes of that houſe? Forſoth it pleaſed M. Shacklocke, in tempring of his Hatchet,
               
to fordge Hoſius to his vſe: leaſt being tooleleſſe, as he is cauſeleſſe, he might in the hacking at this common wealth, ſéeme perſonleſſe. He ſaw pardie, by right at Common lawe, he could not conuent the Deane in an action of vnkindeneſſe: and therfore he would make Hoſius authour of his famous libels, vnder the Mayſterſhip of whoſe Cardinals Hat, he thought he might both ſatiſfie his ſtomacke, and pay his grudge without perill, both of Lavve Ciuil and Canon,
               c. Qui alterius. 5. q. 1. L. Diffamari. C. De Ing & Manumiſs. which woulde haue him whipped at a Cartes tayle. Surely I can not think, that Hoſius wanteth that wiſedome in him (who is a perſonable man as his counterfeict ſheweth) as to take in good part, that M. Shacklocke ſhoulde ſo abuſe him for his purpoſe: yea, beyonde all honeſtie, not regarding his reuerence: vnleſſe Hoſius by falſehode vnder fellowſhip, hauing like quarrell diuerſly mayntayned agaynſt the truth, is contented to hyre out his honeſtie to worke in M. Shacklocks husbandry. For Hoſius entreating of Hereſies, hath made the roote of ſuch trée & fruite, as he entreateth of, to be, Couetouſneſſe.
               Folio. 5.
                But M. Shacklocke being but a tranſlater, hath made (not withoute ſome ſuſpicion of controlling Hoſius) it Rayling: a thing cleane contrary to Couetouſneſse, Hoſius roote. And ſo he ſetteth it out, deceyuing the ſimple man, vnder ye name of Hoſius Hatchet: as that he ſhould ſtrike at that roote in his boke, who there talketh and meaneth of it neuer a worde. Whereby it is euident, that he adultereth and myſuſeth both Hoſius perſon and penne, to his purpoſe: and is to be puniſhed as a Falſarie, a corrupter, an abuſer, and a marrer of Hoſius, if a matter of it ſelf ſo yll, may be marred. Vndoubtedly (gentle Reader) it had bene the parte of M. Shacklocke, vpon the payne of ſhame, to ſet that in the

front of his boke, which Hoſius purſueth thorowout, and not to place Hoſius at another worke, than he lyſt himſelf to chooſe. Yea, with what face could he dedicate vnto the moſt learned Princeſse in al Europe,
               Impudency of Shackl. the ſame paynted out with one of S. Anthonies dreames, or a matter of like wayght? I pray thée reader, how mayſt thou perſuade thy ſelf of the truth, that M. Shacklocke dreameth (I meane) that the Diuell vvhipped Luther and Caluin, or that wearied came out of hel? Parhaps the raging humor which ſo much diſquieted him in the day, made a dreame of the Diuell in the night time: or elſe for ſuch a matter, ſo méete a counſailor made his apparition, to inſtruct him in his rime and trée. For otherwiſe I thinke he would not haue paſſed both modeſtie and pietie: eſpecially, toward the deade. The wiſe mans ſaying is true, in you M. Shacklocke: that a lyuing Dogge, is better than a dead Lion. For if M. Caluin had liued to ſee of you, this effect: I think it would haue happened much worſſe to you, than it did to Albertus Pighius: vvho as ſone as Caluin his aunſvvere came to his hande, caught ſuch a quaume at his heart, that he neuer threvve it of. But leauing for a while M. Shacklocke to a better aduiſement, let vs ſée howe Rurimondes Euans writeth of the Roote of Hereſie, in his betraying of the beaſtlyneſse of Heretiques: for I willingly ouerpaſſe his blaſtes, he blovveth agaynſt Heſton, for dishonor of his repulſe. Forſoth (he ſaith) it was fylthy luſt in Luther: in whome Hoſius ſayth, it was Couetouſneſse.
               Contradiction of writers. Which both diſagrée ſo one with the other, as they alſo doe with Shacklocke, who ſayth it is Rayling. By which vncertayntie for the Roote, it is euident, how they erre in the body, braunches, leaues, and fruites. Euery one of them labouring to ſet out

their peculiar deuiſe, of their brayne ſicke mindes, bewrayeth his cauſe, to be onely priuate and perſonall: and not religion common to vs al. Againſt the which, if any fact by Luther had bene done, it could not be, but they ſhuld haue agréed vpon the cauſe and circumſtances of the ſame: and not to haue lied, ſo lowdely on Luther, contrarye to the teſtimonie of the moſte credible Chronicles, that pourge him. In which ſeuerall deuiſe of euery of them, thou haſt a liuely pattren of the deceiueableneſſe of affection. For M. Shacklocke, ſtirred at the earneſt preaching of the Miniſters in Cambridge, bycauſe it toucheth the quicke, calleth it Railing, making it the roote of his tree: that vnder a publique title and cauſe, he might the ſtylier ſhoote out the poyſon of his tong. And in the ſame blindeneſſe of affection, he falleth into an abſurditie of his deuiſe. For be it that I graunt,Shacklock his follie. (which thing Hoſius & Euans doe not) that rayling is the roote, and that that roote bringeth foorth Rebellion, the trunke or ſtocke: and Rebellion, bloudshed the braunches, (which haply it may do:) yet, howe can ſuch braunches bring forth for leaues, lyes in Religion: whiche ſyth it is not conſequent, his Klimax is there broken, and fayleth: and entreth into an abſurditie, or non ſequitur. But this thing is proper to that ſorte of writers: bycauſe they ſtande vpon a wrong ground or principle, as both Hoſius and Staphilus do: perſuading the people, that vntil theſe .40. yeares, there was no queſtion, but ſilence of Religion. Hoſius ſpeaketh thus: Before theſe .40. yeares laſt paſt,
               Folio. 1.
                
               ſuche vvas the ſtate of the vvhole vvorld,
               Falſe groūd of Papistes. 
               ſo far as Chriſtian fayth toke anye force, that the ſentence vvhich vve reade in Geneſis, myght vvell, be reported of it. It vvas a land of one lippe. The which thing they ymagine (as truth

ſhall in the ende of this boke declare, the contrarye to haue bene thoroweout euery ſeculum or age) onely bycauſe they would bring Luther into hatred with al mē,A wicked purpoſe. as a peace breaker, who in déede did take that quarrell in hand, which other had iuſtly begonne: but is more renowmed, than they his predeceſſours, for that he continued longer in the field than other: and God garded him in his time, with the ayde of temporall Magiſtrates, whoſe heartes, by his ſpirite, he lightened and inclined towarde the truth. Which continuance & ayde, ſyth the former writers wanted, their laboures in thys cauſe abridged, are partly as ſmothered, & raked vp in the heape and multitude of yeares, partely forgotten & hydden, till néede cauſed the olde wife to trot, and rake the heape a downe, that ſhe might finde the quietneſſe of conſcience (vvhich is true peace) in the knowledge of God, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. But ſuch a continuall or vniuerſall conſent as they ſurmize, was neuer. I excepte dreaming Endymion with his like, and the dayes of the generall Apoſtaſie, wherof Paule ſpeaketh, wherein the end being proper and agreing to our infirmitie (being a departing from God) concorde therin may ſoone be had. As in the dayes of Noah it was, when as the olde worlde agréed in wickedneſſe, ſauing poore Noah and his ſmall familie:The true Church not of one lippe. and therefore was derided. Surely if thou wouldeſt conſider the time of our ſauiour Chriſt, and after him, the eſtate of the primitiue Church, thou wouldeſt conclude, that euen the very Church was not of one lippe. And not to remembre the time of the Apoſtles Nouiceſhip vnder Chriſt: Conſider Paule his encoūtring with Peter, in a matter of no ſmall wayght, which doth teſtifie, that as the elect children of God did increaſe, by the vſe of the worde in

knowledge, ſo they diſagréed in opinion the one from the other: as eche abounded in vnderſtanding aboue other: yea, and if thou wilte enter further into this matter, thou ſhalt ſée the like frō time to time: to wéete betwéene the Eaſt and Weaſt Churches. Alſo aboute Anno. 200. betwene Irenaeus and Pope Victor, and ſo forth on, the déeper thou draweſt, thou findeſt the more. And all (though in loue) for Religion. So that, partely bycauſe of ſuch diſcord betwene the religious and godly Byſhops: and partly, for the varietie of Heretiques calling themſelues Chriſtians:Blindeneſse bredeth cō
                  ſent. the Ievves & Ethniques (as Clemens ſayth) defamed Chriſtian religion: ſaying it was not of God. Which thing to be otherwiſe in any congregation, it remayning the Church of God, were great maruell: for that the holy ſpirit of God, ye very light and kindler of their heartes, the increaſer of knowledge, and mayntayner of prophecying, interpretation, & queſtioning vpon the Scripture, is not quenched, but kindled: and on the growing hande. Wherefore Hoſius in ſaying, that their Church agréed & was of one lippe, doth openly confeſſe, that to be in it, was not to be in Chriſtes Church, as before is manifeſt.Popes Church no Church of Christ. And ſo the conſequent that muſt followe, is, that Chriſtes Church and theirs are twayne. The cauſe of which vniuerſall quietneſſe in their Church, muſt be, want of interpretation, that bréedeth argument, which cōmeth of the want of knowledge: which procéedeth of ye lacke of the ſpirit of God, who is the very light of our heartes. This onely, the Iſraelites haue in Gozan a corner of Egypt: and vvalke, and ſtirre vp and dovvne in the ſame. The whole countrey of the Egyptians beſydes, for wante of lyght, walke not, but ſytte quietly in their chaires, not without feare.
            
               
               Popiſh conſente.Returning then, it is euident, what conſent or concorde Luther brake: namely, their dreaming ſléepe, wherin the wealth of the world, and ignorance of God lullied them, and not the concorde of truth and knowledge of God. Wherefore they are much to be blamed, that ſo arrogantely dare defame ſo worthy an inſtrument of Gods glory, as to make him authour of Heretiques. And thou, gentle reader (let me be bolde to tell thée the playne truth) if that thou wilt credite them, art not faultleſſe: for that it is not matter, but affection, that ſo ſubdueth thy reaſon. From which thou ſeuereſt thy ſelfe the further, the néerer that thou approcheſt to conſente with them, who haue not determined among themſelues to ioyne in concord. And certaynly if folie cauſe thee of thoſe dyſagreing opinions, to fantaſie any one, let the other contrary to it call thee backe. If the deuiſe of the betrayer Euans, who ſayth that luſt is the roote of Hereſie, like thée, let Hoſius & Shacklock cauſe it miſlike thée, who ſaye the contrary. If that rayling M. Shacklocks roote pleaſe thée, let Euans and Hoſius alter thée. Finallye, be not pleaſed in them: for that, they are not pleaſed among themſelues: as their ſundry deuiſes contrary to eche others, declare.
            
               In Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 15. Cap. 1.
               If not other, yet S. Auguſtine Byshop of Hippon, ought to be the Methode teacher to him, that will perfectly entreate of the Church malignante. Who conſidering that euer ſithens, that God by Adams creatiō, had manifeſted his Churche among earthly creatures, the Diuel alſo (hauing no Church of his own creation) did peruert ſo in the beginning Gods creature, as euer ſithens, thoroweout all ages, his Chappell hath ietted chéeke by chéeke, and yet doth with the ſame: rayſeth ye building of that Church at Cain, who was in the firſt

beginning of the worlde, and ſo procéedeth on vntyll this time. Wherefore, I thinke it labour worth, that I (meaning to diſplay ye heretical church in our dayes) beginne onely at thoſe, that in Chriſtes time, and afterwarde in the Apoſtles, did firſt ſéeke the ouerthrowe of the Church. As at ſuch whome the Diuel in that time firſt planted for roote, euen as Irenaeus and Tertullian haue done, vpon the like Theame or matter. So that thou, hauing the roote and ofſpring of the olde Heretiques, mayſt thereby, better knowe their poſteritie in our dayes. In which déede I ſhall both auoyd the vice Kakozelon. 1. euyll affection, that hath ledde thoſe men beſides all iudgement, to ayme their force at ſpeciall perſons, and deſerue of thée (gentle Reader) thy further pacient paſſage herein with credite:True Roote of Hereſie. as alſo iuſtly call them Heretiques, that by proufe ſhal be found to haue deſerued the name: and agrée, after a ſort, with Hoſius, who ſaith that Couetouſneſse is the rote or cauſe of departing from the Church. Wherein, if I, as ſatiſfied ſhould ſtaye, thou mighteſt iuſtely thinke, that I lefte out in the rayſing of this ſcite, one of the principalles, whereon the malignant Church ſtayeth, who is built vpon ſelfe loue, which is directe contrary to charitie, whereon Chriſtes Church is ſet: and therefore is roote or cauſe of another effecte or braunch, namely Ambition, which is an inordinate deſire of honour vndeſerued, ſought onely, for a mans owne ſake, and not for Gods glory. But bicauſe that Couetouſneſse and Ambition, are rather by ymagination to be vnderſtode of the learned, than by viewe of the ſimple (who are to bée ſatiſfied) apperceyued, as eſpecially, for the truth & modeſtie afore ſpoken of, I muſt in the roote, for Ambition ſet Simon Magus: for Couetouſneſse, Iudas.
            
            
               
               Iudas what
               Iudas Iſcariot, that traytoure, was ſonne of one Simon, as S. Iohns Goſpell witneſſeth. But whether, he was called Iſcariot, eyther of the tribe of Iſachar, or of the towne, where he was borne, or elſe of the treaſon, it doth not well appeare. And no leſſe vncertayne, is the truth, of his maner of liuing, and condition, before his calling,An Apoſtle. to the office of Apoſtleship, and number of the twelue. The which was, the chiefeſt, and néereſt office, among thoſe that were with Chriſt: and were to be accepted as his deare friends, dayly taught and trayned vp vnder Chriſtes owne hand, in the knowledge of the true doctrine of the kingdome of God: and heartened by the dayly ſight and vſe of our Sauiors miracles, to worke the like, by the power of his worde: as well in the dayes of the ſame our Sauiors preſence and abode among them: as alſo after his departure from them, & aſcention to his father. The which companie of the Apoſtles, is of more eſtimation: bycauſe that the nūber is not onely ſmal, but alſo for that they therof, are choſen, and ſpeciall perſones. And as touching Iudas him ſelfe (being of that company as is ſayd, one) his eſtimation was (by ye meanes of his office) equall with theirs. And in regarde of his ſtewardſhip (for he was Treaſurer of the Lordes temporall thinges) I geſſe,Iudas Chriſtes ſteward he was among the vulgare people, yea, and of other, not of the leſſe eſtimation: as he that aboue the reſt was credited with that, which the world eſtéemeth chiefeſt of al, and for it, termeth euery man, Maiſter. But notwithſtanding the eſtimatiō, that Iudas, by the ſame his ſpirituall and temporall charge had, he hauing by experience tried the trauayles and paynefulneſſe, of his ſpirituall office, to fall out much otherwiſe, than his expectation of the earthly, ſenſuall kingdome, that he & the Iewes

dreamed to obtaine, by the Meſsias comming, was:Iewes Alſe opinion. did (ita vt ingenium eſt omnium hominum a labore procliue ad libidinem) after payne ſeeke pleaſure, after labour, loytering, and after righteouſneſſe, riches. For caſting his eyes to Chriſts purſe, was caught, & ſought for temporalties, by what meanes ſo euer he might: & ſpared not, as he conueniently, might accompliſhe his deſire, for price, to plight his Maſters bloud, by a trayterous kiſſe, deliuered his Lord. So that in him,Iudas what pattren. is the ymage and paterne, of al thoſe, that neglect, or giue ouer the truth, and ſinceritie of Ieſus Chriſtes Goſpel, for temporall gayne: doe they it in part, or in all. For euen as Iudas, by betraying Chriſt for thirty Pens, ouerthrewe the Church, ſtriking the ſhephearde, brake the folde, and chaſed the flocke: euen ſo, euer ſithens our Sauiors time, haue Heretiques for the like cauſe, dealte with the Church, after the ſame ſorte: like as Iudas in his déede towards Chriſt, did in him our head foreſhew, what we ought to looke for, towards his mē
               bers. The Church was then, and ſo ſithens ouerthrowen, by, Quid vultis mihi dare, & tradā illum vobis? What wil you giue me, and I wil deliuer him to you? And he agréeth with Simon, in that, they were both,
                  Simō Magꝰ Irenaeus li. 1. cap. 20.
                  
                  Epiphanius li. 1. to. 2. c. 21
                  
                gréedily giuen to gayne: onely differing from him, in that, Simon was ſtriken with ambition of knowledge, and of doing miracles, whereby he thought to clime to the reuerence and honor of a God: the other contented with a temporall dignitie.What pattren Simon is. And therfore Simon puffed vp by ſcience, is the example or forme of ſuch, as chalenge to themſelues muche learning: ambiciouſly coueting to be aduaunced vnto godly honour, arrogate the authoritie of yoking religion and ſuperſtition togither: framing one ſect, more monſtrous than all. For

being borne in the towne (as Iuſtinus ſaith) called Triton,
               His cuntrie or as Euſebius ſayth, Gitton, in the countreye of Samaria, was ſeaſoned with that madde medley of hys Nation, being a mixture of the Perſians Ethniſme, brought from Chus: and of the religion of the Ievves proper people of Samaria, (as Ioſephus declareth) he growing in yeares, increaſed both in vnderſtanding, and practiſing al maner of Philoſophie and Artes, ſubtile in Logique, and in Rethorique mighty. Whereby he deſerued the name of Magus. But at laſte by meanes of Philip the Deacon, who by Saules perſecution, was driuen into Samaria,
               Simon a falſe Chriſtian. he became a Chriſtian, and was baptized, ye rather, for that the miracles wrought by the ſame Philip, and the Apoſtles, Peter and Iohn, enticed him thereto, ſuppoſing the ſame to be done by Magique, as yet, by him not learned, offred money for the ſpirit of grace: to the intent that he might mayntayne thereby his name and eſtimation, which he before their comming had. For ſmall and great had him in much reuerence, naming him the povver of God vvhich is mighty. But when as he perceyued that hys decayed, and Ieſus name began to be renowmed, and the Apoſtles, the workers and inſtruments of our Sauiours glory, began to be receyued. Alſo, that neyther by grace he coulde obtayne,Wicked pollicie. Fruite of Ambition. Tertulli. de preſcripti. Hereticorū. Epiph. to. 2.1. lib. c. 21.
                nor for price bye the ſame power of working miracles: paſte all hope of further thriuing there, practiſeth pollicie, to apply the Euangelicall doctrine of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt (wherin he was a Nouice) and of mans ſaluation, to his purpoſe: but not without diſcretion. For he that before among the Samaritans called himſelf God, now among the Ievves calleth himſelf the Sonne: and among the Gentiles, the holy Spirite. With whiche deuice this Pilgrime

paſſeth (daunted by Peter) thence: as out of daunger of ſhot to Rome, where in ſhorte time he attayned,Irenaeus vt ſupra. if not to more, yet to as muche godly reuerence, as he before had: to whom the Religious Romanes conſecrated an Image with this inſcription, Simoni Deo ſancto,
               Romiſh ſuperstition. to Simon the holy God. In all this ruffe, it happened (as Nicephorus ſayth) that Peter came to Rome, wher this Runagate ſettling himſelfe to ſtande to his tackle,Nicephor. lib. 2. c. 36.
                determined to play the prety man, gaged the fielde, and gaue his gloue to the Apoſtle, contending by miracles and other his ſkill with him for godly honor and reuerence. And this is he that before all other, ſoughte by Hereſie, to ſtayne the true religion of Ieſus Chriſt,Nicephorus ibidem. & iuſtely, is to be placed in the roote with Iudas: as both deſtroyers of the common wealth of the Churche, peruerters of gods order, and breeders of the vvicked tree as Ireneus ſayth: Ex eo omnes ſubſtiterunt Hereſes, that all Hereſies are grounded on him. Thence commeth Menander, thence commeth Valentine, Elimas,
               Ofspring of Heretiques. 
               Manes, Tatian, Donatus, Montanus, Pelagius, Marcion, Carpocrates, with the reſt in this Treatiſe to be ſpoken of, and an infinite number ouerpaſſed: ſome holding Hereſies of one man, ſome compoſed by manie. This is the Bore, theſe are the Foxes, that to their power deſtroy the Lordes vineyarde, & make hauocke both of ſoyle and ſoules. He is the roote, theſe are ſtock and trunck to the ſame. Before the dayes of their father the Sorcerer, the Church was a people not of one lippe, but heart, as S. Luke teſtifieth,Act. 2.
                abyding in the ſincere truth and obedience of Chriſtes Goſpell onely▪ Then factions were not knowen, ſciſmes not practized, lies and Hereſies not embraced, defended or out faced. Then the will of man not eſteemed, and Gods

neglected. This vnhappy man hath begonne all. This body of Heretiques, hath continued the ſame hitherto.
            But for as much, as the Church in thoſe dayes, was ſtored with valiant ſouldiours, in the vaward, & in the front,Victorie of the old Fathers. of euery battayle, that couragiouſly did handle ye 
               ſvvorde of truth, they little preuayled. For as Peter agaynſt Simon, ſo Irenaeus, Clemens, Epiphanius, Auguſtinus (euery one in his time) agaynſt the reſte, haue lefte learned Volumes, monumentes of their triumphes. The which thing, the ſubtile Serpent apperceyuing, durſt not afterward, openly aſſayle the Church, with proclaymed warre:The ſubtiltie of the Diuell. but tranſforming himſelf into an Aungell of light, vnder colour of deuotion, thorowe hipocriſie entred the ſame. As Dame Artemiſia Quéene of Caria did Latmù: who minding to get the ſame Citie (layd in embuſh) hir army vnder the couert, nigh therto. She hir ſelf, accompanied with Maydens, Women & Eunuches, with all kinde of minſtrelſie (as Pipes, Tabers, Timbrels, & ſuch like) opēly, in the face of the Citie, entred ye Wood dedicated to Berecinthia, ye mother of the Goddeſſe,Hipocriſie bringeth in hereſies. after the maner of religiō, and deuotion (than ye which there is no meane more ſure to deceyue the ignorant & blinde zeale) to ſacrifice. Wher with the Latinians (deſirous to ſée hir new kinde of ſeruing the Goddeſſe) deceyued, yſſued out. The fenceleſſe citie and careleſſe people, were by the lurking armie, taken. So that vnder countenance and cloke of religion, Artemiſia atchieued the victorie, which by all likelyhode, in open war, ſhe might haue myſſed. After the like maner, the enimie hath behaued himſelfe: For he did ſette aſide, the vſe of the olde Heretiques his, vowed ſouldiours, odible to the Church through all ages, the bare names of whome, were a ſufficient All Arme

for Chriſts Knights, to take ſpeare and ſhield in hand:
               The Popes Geldings. and hath vnder a Vayle, a Coule, a Cardinals hat, & a triple Crowne (as an Artemiſia & her rout) deceyued ye world, & poſſeſſed their heartes and conſciences (which ſhould be the ſeate and citie of God) vnder the name of Gods ſeruice and deuotion, in déede, with Hereſie. It ſprang in Samaria, and flowed into Paleſtine, but is at Rome, gathered togither into one lake, more perillous and noiſom, than Aſphaltis.
               Asphaltis is the noyſō lake of Sodome. With the ſtreames wherof, al Chriſtendome is infected.
            But to ſpeake of the ſtocke, or body of this our trée, occaſion requireth: for thou parhaps mayſt muſe, why I place Gratian with his brother Peter Lombard ther, they being ſo long, after Simon Magus his dayes. Forſoth, that thou mayſt know, that although the Church had gotten for a while, an honorable peace, and valiant conqueſte (as I before declared) yet notwithſtanding, the Diuell, that neuer ceaſſed to prophane the Church of Chriſt, with Hereſies, deuiſing to build his Babilon, in the Church, by hipocriſie, ſtirred theſe two perſons, brethren, to followe the maner of the olde Heretiques. Who alwayes ſéeking, to haue a cloke for their follie,The propertie of Heretiques to eſchewe the writtē word & manifeſt errors, vſed (for that they durſt not ſtand, to ye fier of the Canonicall Scriptures) to haue certaine Apocrypha, or faythleſſe writtes of mens deuiſe, to bolſter and face out the ſame: the which they paynted out with certayne glorious titles: as,To vſe falſe Scriptures. 
               the Goſpell of the Hebrevves, the Goſpell of Eue, the Goſpell of Philip, the Goſpel of Nicodemꝰ, the Goſpel of perfection, the Queſtions of our Lady, the more & the leſſe, the Reuelation of Adam, the ſtocke of our Lady, &c. Of which ſort Marcion his ſchollers, had an innumerable many. Theſe thei vſed to ſet out, with ſuch faire titles, not only

to the ende aforeſayde, but alſo that they mighte ſequeſter the ſimple ſoules, from the certayne ſure and liuely worde of God.Epiph. lib. 3. tom. 1. c. 46. Euſeb. hiſto. lib. 4. ca. 28. A mark of Heretiques. For ſo alſo Tatian, not pleaſed with the foure Canonicall Euangeliſts, compoſed out thereof his Diateſseron as a Quinteſsence of the ſame, whereby they are ſurely conuinced to be Heretiques, that chooſe to defende their cauſe, or edifie themſelues with any tradition or doctrine of men. For the true marke of the Churche, is the open and onely vſe of the worde, only wherevnto they haue recourſe in the time of néede, for their owne ſuccour and tryal of other. But the Church of Rome, hauing gotten greate poſſeſſions and wealth, as well by the Donation of Conſtantine, (ſo claime they it for thēſelues) about Anno. 320. as of one Lucinia,
               Prímo tomo Conciliorij. welth weareth out true religiō. a very rich damoſel (as Polidorus noteth) hauing long before that, begonne to pranke hir ſelf vp in hir ceremonies, which yet, were but as ragged cloutes: then as richlier marted, did aboue all modeſty and ſimpleneſſe of the Goſpell, attire hirſelf with the vayne pomp and outragious preciouſneſſe of Iew & Gentile, to whome ſhe is not inferior. And being thus ſet a loft, forgetting the breade and water of affliction, wherein her heart remained chaſt and true in loue to Chriſt hir ſpouſe, followed the ſteppes of Simon, of Iudas and al other Heretiques: forſoke the paynes of the Croſſe, for pleaſure of the world, and honor of the ſame: and hath thenceforth begon (for after pride followeth Leacherie) to make hirſelf common to the deuice of all men. The which chiefly ſhe accōpliſhed,The Charters of Apoſtaſie. Metr. Krāt. lib. 4. c. 6.
                when the charters thereof were drawen out by the ſame Gratian, a Monke of Bononie, Anno. 1120. or thereabout, who collected the decrées of men (before his dayes little or nothing eſtéemed) and Peter Lombarde his brother, who deuiſed the

ſchole Diuinitie about .xx. yeares after. For when as ye youth beganne whollye to ſtudye the decréed lawes of Rome, Peter Lombard, moued with themulation therof, deuiſed the ſchole Diuinitie: leſt his brother ſhuld in honor of that trauayle, ouer runne him, whome in honour of birth he had ouertaken. Whoſe baſe progenie I willingly ouerpaſſe. But ſurely it ſéemeth, that Peter Lombards trauayle was nothing ſo eſtéemed, as Gratians was: which doth moſt of all eſtabliſh ye Pope, defende him, & make for his purpoſe. As a thing wherin they are iudged by themſelues. And little Diuinitie would ſerue them, yea, although it were very homely.The ende of Popiſp Diuinitie. For ſurely if it were not for mayntenaunce of Purgatorie, Auricular confeſſion, and ſuche like other geare gaynfull to them, they would not onely haue vtterly condemned Lombarde, as in ſome poyntes here after mencioned, they already haue, but alſo haue vtterlye forgotten the name of Diuinitie. If the ſucceſſours of Lombarde had as ſeuerely followed him, as Gratians ympes did their captayne, their ſchole would haue bene cleaner from error, than it is, euen as now the Popes conſiſtories abound with wickedneſſe.
            In the naming of Lombarde and Gratian, I hope (gentle Reader) thou art not ſo groſſe, as to thinke that I meane their perſones, but volumes and doctrines.What the authour meaneth by decrees. Cardinalis Alexandr. distinct. 10. c. Certum: Et Doctores ibidem. And when I ſpeake of the Decrées, which otherwiſe are called Cannons, I meane a Law of ſo ſoueraigne price to the Popiſtes, as that, that they count hym an Heretique, that knoweth not the ſame. And the breaker therof (dicitur blaſphemare Spiritum ſanctum) is ſayd to blaſpheme the holy Ghoſt. And vnder the name of the Cannons, I compriſe Decretall Epiſtles, Sextes, Clementines, Extrauagantes, &c. and ſuche like. The

whiche Decretall Epiſtles,
               Dist. 19. c. in Canonicis. are eſtéemed Canonicall Scripture, although Chriſt & his Apoſtles neuer ſpake the ſame. But euen as the ſtock or Trunck of the trée, continueth and coupleth the vpper parte and Roote togither:The commodity of Cannon Lawe. likewiſe hereſies of the olde Heretiques, are cō
               tinued & taught in the Church of Rome, by thoſe two doctrines and gloſſes on the ſame, as in paſſage thorowe this boke, thou ſhalt in parte apperceyue. If once it pleaſe God to hewe this ſtocke away, the whole trée beſide would decay and periſh. If in their Conſiſtories they rule any caſe ouer, be it for life or death, for truth or iudgement, it muſt be (as they cry) the law, the law, which is onely in déede the Cannone lawe. If they perſuade any man to come to their Churche, they deale as Cardinall Iulian did with Procopius and the other Embaſſadours of Bohemia, perſuading to giue no leſſe credit to the Councels & Decrees, than to the Goſpell. If they determine any thing in their Coūcels, it muſt be fyrſt concluded on, by the Canoniſtes and Sententiaries: althoughe this latter name is almoſte worne away, and eaten out, with the Thomiſtes, Occamiſtes, and ſuch like. Wherefore ſith it is euident, that their Councels and Conſiſtories are onely thus gouerned, & al men perſuaded to credite mans lawe and order, and not onely Gods worde and truth: ſith in their doings they faſhion themſelues to the conformity of mans decrées: ſyth they obtrude and thruſt into the conſcience of all men, reuerence and religion of mans authority, and not of Ieſus Chriſt our onely Prophete: that they followe the ſteppes of the olde Heretiques, and pollicie of the Diuell in them: thereby to ſequeſter the ſoules of men from God (as is beforeſayde) vnder the title of Councels and Fathers. Vndoubtedly (gentle Reader,)

it differeth not whether we haue any of the Apocrypha writings aforeſayde,The Cannons and Heretique Apocrypha all one. or in ſteade of them the Canons and Sentences of Lombarde. For as the common ſaying is: In neyther barrell is the better Herring. The Apocrypha writings teach errors: the Canons & Sentences doe ſo: as before this boke ende, thou ſhalte confeſſe. The Apocrypha ſerue to entice men from the onely worde of God: the Canons and Sentences do ſo: For who hath not in times paſt bene counted an Heretique, for reading of Scripture. The Apocrypha are contrary to their ſelues, variable, fooliſhe, and not to edification: the Canons and Sentences are alſo ſuch. And leaſt I ſhould ſéeme a defamer, beholde, I yelde thée here certayne errors and contrarieties out of the Decrees or Canons.
            
            
               Error.
               
                  DIſt. 13. Parag. 1. Gratian ſayth, that if a man be ſet in the brakes of .ij. euyls, he may chooſe, & do the leſſer. By which doctrine Origene his fall is allowed: who being commaunded eyther to offer his body to the luſt of a Verlet, or elſe to burne incenſe before an Idoll, did commit the latter, for auoyding of the fyrſte: which were a doctrine more licentious, than any of the Cynicks.
               
            
            
               Error.
               
                  QVeſt. 16. Paragr. 3. Poteſt etiam alter. Poſt. c. Dilectio. Gratian there talking of preſcription, ſayth to this ſenſe: That when a man doth purchas a

chattell reall, or any other goods, moueable or vnmoueable, and at the time of purchaſing thereof, ſuppoſe ye ſame by lawfull title conueyed to him, the which notwithſtanding afterwards, he vnderſtandeth & beleueth to be otherwiſe: may, for all that iuſte information of his conſcience, procede forth on in his poſſeſſion and title, vnto time preſcriptible: which is a doctrine contrary to all reaſon and conſcience.
            
            
               Error and Follie.
               
                  2. QVeſt. Sepe contingit. Where he ſayth, that if theft be committed or done in a monaſterie, the doer wherof is vnknowen: the purgation muſt be done in this ſorte: that at Maſſe all muſt communicate vnder this obteſtation: the body of our Lorde be this day in triall agaynſt thee. Oh abuſe and tempting of God. I could recite falſe allegation of Scripture: and horrible expoſition of the ſame. Falſe fathering on the fathers. Which thinges I omit, vntill my next labours. &c. bycauſe my purpoſe is to be only ſummarie and briefe at this time.
            
            
               Contrarieties.
               
                  DIſt. 4. C. Statuimus, cum duobus ſequent. There Gratian entreating of Faſt in Lent, doth ſay, that the cleargy ought to beginne the ſame, ſtraight vpon Sexageſima, according to the ordinaunce of the Elders. Contrary thereto is the Cuſtome. And yet the Cleargy is not ſayd to ſinne, as appeareth in the ſame

                  Diſt. Paragr. vlt. Diſtinct. 23. c. In nomine. Nicholas the Pope ordayned by that Decrée, that the Popes holineſse, ſhould be choſen not onely by the Cardinalles, but alſo by other religious Clearkes. But contrary to it, the ſame election is onely done by the Cardinals: as appeareth Tit. de elect. per totum. &c. Vbi periculū Diſt. 63. c. Obeuntibus. Pope Innocent did appoynt in a Councell holden at Rome, that Byſhops ſhoulde be choſen, not only by the Chanons of the mother church, but alſo by other religious Clearkes: but nowe contrary to the ſame, the Popes reſerue the prouiſion of ye dignities: as of Byſhops, Archbyſhops, Patriarches, Abbots, and ſuch like, to himſelfe. The age of perſons that receyue orders now a dayes in the Popes Church, althoughe it be done according to the will of the title, De aetate & qualitate ordinandorum in Clement, yet is contrary to the .77. & .78. Diſt. Let this as touching the Chanons, ſuffiſe, for briefeneſſe ſake, whiche I in this behalfe buſily endeuour. Is this the boke that we muſt beleue as the Goſpel? Be theſe the mates to Canonicall Scriptures? Is not this to be repugned that repugneth it ſelfe? Or is it to be eſtéemed or credited,Distinct. 19 c. Sic omnes as if it were ſpoken of Peters owne mouth? As they for their ſelues craue credite? Vndoubtedly if Peters ſermons or epiſtles had bene as various and contrary, as Hereticall, and hypocritical: as lewde and licentious, as the contentes of theſe Decrées manifeſtly are, the fathers would neuer haue receyued the ſame as Canonicall, but reconed them among the Apocrypha. And yet dare the Popiſtes preſume to count them Canonicall, and of as greate force, as the wordes of Peter.
                  The change ling brother to the goſpel And theſe doe they thruſt into heartes and conſciences of men, vnder the glorious names of Church, Fathers

Councels,Why Popiſtes flie to Cannons. 
                  Peter, Paule, and ſpirite of God: onely to the intente that they may throng in after, and wring in with their errors, ſuperſticions, and myſſegouernement. To this end hath Gratian bene occupied in their Church. To this ende hath before him, the Heretiques deuiſers of the elder Apocrypha writings, ben of their father the Diuell vſed. Wherefore he is their Ape or ſonne, that can ſo handſomely imitate and folow them. Therefore I pray thée gentle Reader, let him attayne to equall honour with the reſt of that preaſſe.
               And as for Peter his brother, authour of the foure bokes of the ſentences: and therfore commonly called by the name of Maſter of Sentences, he hath many faultes, as they themſelues confeſſe, and haue condemned at Paris. To wéete, in his firſte boke 4. In the ſecond as many: and .3. in the third: but in the fourth .15. Which in all make .26. What they are, I ouerpaſſe: bycauſe there is none that is ſtudious, but knoweth the ſame. And ſurely howe bad ſo euer Peter Lombarde his Diuinitie is (as it is bad inough in many places more) yet it is much beter than the fruite of Gratians trauayle: for that it preacheth Iuſtification in Ieſus Chriſt, by faith and obedience to the Goſpel. So that it is no maruell, that in iudgements and opinions of the Popiſtes among themſelues, in Councels general, in writings, volumes & ſcholes, they are ſo deuided and at ſquare: for thoſe braunches muſt brawle, that borne are vpon ſuch a brawling body.
               If M. Stapleton hath reaſon or authoritie to ſaye, that a Calfe ſignifieth Luther, I do (better) ſay that this monſter in the ſcutchion of this trée doth ſignifie Gratian and Lombardes works, perſons, and Hell hound harmonte. Of whiche monſter before I doe ſpeake.

In theſe foure lines I aunſwere Staphilus, that hys Calfe ſignified their Calues of Rome.
               
               
                  A Cowle for a Calfe.
                  The Calfe borne in cowle, it caried to his graue
                  Then Luther is no Calfe that cast the cowle away.
                  For the Calfe in the cowle must ſignifie euer
                  Such Calfe and ſuch cowle as goe both together.
               
               
                  Peter Lombarde came to the pride of his eſtimation 20. yeares after his brother Gratian: who (as before I ſayd) was in his ruffe Anno. 1120. The which two twē
                  ties put together, make .1140. In the meane ſeaſō, that theſe two men thus flouriſhed with their works, there happened to be borne in the Countrey of Albania, Anno. 1126. of a baſe woman, thys monſter: the which is a man childe, and a dogs whelpe, wholly furniſhed with all their members growing togither by their backes, whoſe faces ſtande cleane contrary wayes. The application whereof I will not ſtand now on, leſt I ſhould ſéeme enuious agaynſt thē, or vayne in preaching that to thée, which thou gentle Reader, being a childe and ſcholler, brought vp in Natures ſchole, long ſince haſt learned, canſt confirme by experience of the like, & by the caſe preſent apply. Therfore I paſſe frō this that thou art more perfect in, to the braunches which thine expectation and attentiueneſſe do iuſtly call for. Wherein regarde two things: Hereſies, of their aunceſtors, the elder Heretiques, & of their owne proper deuiſing.
            
            
               
               Sacramentarie Donatiſtes.
               
                  Anno. 331.
                  
                  THe Hereſie of the Donatiſtes, hath had two ſpeciall maintayners and nouriſhers of the ſame, called by the name of Donatus.
                  Aug. lib. 2. con. Creſc. c. 1. tom. 7. August. de here. Hae. 69 to .6.
                   The latter, had to ſyrname A caſis nigris: he was the moſte contentious and ſterneſt in this cauſe. For the firſt was a Numidian, as the ſame authour declareth, who at the beginning moued this contention and ſciſme, in the Church at Carthage, agaynſt Caecilianus, choſen, maugre his will, Byſhop. But at the laſte, this enuious and ambitious quarrell, turned to an Hereſie, (for commonly ſuch broyles are not without part takings) and to diuers perillous ſectes and phanatical factions: which among other lores (for they had not one onely as Auguſtine noteth) taught.
               
                  De Baptiſ. contra Dona. li. 4. c. 20 De vnico Baptiſm. c. 14. contra Petill. liter. li. 1. c. 1.2.3.
                  
                  That a good Miniſter conſecrateth and maketh a good and profitable Sacrament, and an euill Miniſter a naughty vnholy Sacrament, and vnprofitable to the receyuer.
               
               All which happened about the raignes (as Hierom noteth) of Conſtant and Conſtantine the Emperours, to wéete, Anno Domini. 331. or there about: ſome ſay after.
               I meane not, that it ſo then began, as that nowe it ſhould be ended. For that deuotion, which hath alwayes receyued the erroures of euery age, with other filthineſſe alſo dronke the ſame: or elſe howe coulde Babylon be a cage of foule ſpirites?Apoca. 18.
                   And doth expreſſely teache it, to thoſe that will viewe and marke their doctrine, if but lightly. For Gratian teſtifieth in

the Decrées that Pope Gregorie hath written to all Churches in the kingdome of Italie and Dutche lande,Popiſh Donatiſme. Diſt. 81. c. Si qui presbiteri. on this wiſe. Si qui Presbyteri ſunt Diaconi vel Subdiaconi, qui in crimine fornicationis iaceant, Interdicimus eis, ex parte Dei omnipotentis, & ſancti Petri authoritate, Eccleſiae introitū, vſque dum peniteant & emendent. Si verò in peccato ſuo perſeuerare maluerint: nullus veſtrum eorum praeſumat audire officiū: quia benedictio eorum vertetur in maledictionem: & oratio in peccatum. &c. The which to interprete, meaneth thus.
               If any Prieſt, Deacon, or Subdeacon, doth reſt in fornication, we on the behalfe of almighty God, & by the authoritie of Sainct Peter, forbid ſuch the entrance into the Church, vntill they repent and amende. But if cōtrarywiſe they had rather abide in this their ſinne, then, loke that none of you preſume to heare any ſuche mans ſeruice: for their bleſſing wil turne to a curſſe, & their prayer to ſinne. &c. In which words it is euident, howe playnely they conclude with their predeceſſours Donatiſtes, perſuading as the other Donatiſtes doe, that prayers, ſeruice, ſacramentes, yea and bleſſings, which in their owne nature be otherwiſe good, for wāt of a good Miniſter, léeſe not onely their effecte, but alſo are hurtfull to the receyuer.
               The reaſon why this doctrine of the Donatiſtes, is of the olde fathers condemned for an hereſie is (to let other paſſe) Quia ſpem baptizādorum auferunt a Domino Deo, & in homine ponendam eſſe perſuadent.
                  Auguſtinꝰ contra liter. Petilian. lib. 1. c. 3.
                   
                  Vnde fit omnino, vt non incerta, ſed prorſus nulla ſit ſalus. That is: Bycauſe they take away the hope of ſuche as are baptized, from the Lorde God: and perſuade to beſtowe the ſame vpon man. Wherof it commeth,

that not onely our ſaluation is vncertayne, but alſo none at all.
               
                  Epiſtola. 48.
                  And agayne Auguſtine in another place ſayth, Quid enim aliud & vos, quam veſtram iuſticiam vultis conſtituere, quando non dicitis iuſtificari, niſi eos qui a vobis potuerunt baptizari. Which interpreted, meaneth: And what elſe doe you (O Donatiſts) but aduaunce your owne righteouſneſſe: when as you ſaye, none are (that is) profited by the ſacrament. iuſtified, but ſuche as haue bene baptized of you. The olde Donatiſtes therefore, whiles they brag themſelues, to be onely the Church, and therefore holier than the reſt (for that was the only cauſe, why they ſayd, the ſacraments were better with them) aduaunce themſelues, & ſaying that the ſacrament worketh with them bicauſe they are of the Church, & not with thoſe ye are out of the Churche, take from God the fayth due to him, and by the Sacramente ought to be applyed to him, are therefore Heretiques. And the Popiſtes conſequently, doing the like, are alſo ſuch.
               
                  Obiection.But they alwayes ready (as Cain) to pourge themſelues, will happly ſay, the Donatiſtes were worthyly condemned for heretiques, in hauing ſuche opinion of their Sacramentes, not being of the Church.
               
                  Aunſwere.Graunt we (for argumentes ſake) that the Popiſts are of the Church, yet, in that, that they thinke, the ſacramentes are the holier, bycauſe that they of the Church miniſtred them, they departe from Chriſtes Church, and are Donatiſtes. For it is all one, whether a Catholique or a Donatiſt ſay, they make an effectual Sacrament, for that, that they are of the Church. And ſuch ſaying is cleane contrary to the nature and inſtitution of a Sacrament, which is alwayes holy, and is therfore a meane or medicine to make vs holy: as baptiſme

in opening the Church to vs, and the Lords ſupper, in applying Chriſt to vs by fayth.Diſtin. 32. c. Praeter hoc. Parag. Ad hoc. Wherefore I maruel the Romaniſts would ſay, as Gregorie in the aforeſayde Chapter hath ſayd: conſidering they all conclude, it maketh the receyuer holy, and eſpecially Cardinalis Alexandrinus ſayth, that baptiſme ſo iuſtifieth a man, that if he died immediatlie therevpon, he ſhall be quite from all puniſhment. It is therefore agaynſt the truth and naturall reaſon, that the thing of ſuche force, ſhoulde ſo by the euyll Miniſter, ſometime hys ſubiect, or pacient be marred. Yea and it differeth not to ſay, that an Heretique defileth the Sacrament, and maketh it hurtfull: or that malus Catholicus (I vſe the wordes of D. Bellam.) a naughty and euyll Catholique doth euen ſo: for both conclude that the holy inſtitution ordayned to a holeſome end, is become vnholeſome, yea, hurtful, which is the Goſpel of the Donatiſts their predeceſſors. I pray thee gentle Reader,☜ Nota. vnderſtand my meaning. I entreate of the ſacraments which Heretiques or naughty Chriſtians miniſter in the forme of ye Church, and ſacramentall maner of Chriſtes inſtitution. For if they that are wythout, (whoſe Church alwayes is the Ape of Chriſtes ſpouſe, cōunterfaicting hir, as a light perſon doth an honeſt matrone) miniſter not according to that inſtitution & ſacramental forme, it is not to be called a Sacrament. But I reaſon wyth the cleargie of Rome, as Auguſtine doth with the Donatiſts cleargie: And that only ſo farre as their church retaineth Chriſtes inſtitution and ſacramental forme, and no further (for otherwiſe I were in another predicament) which ſith I may not departe fro. I leaue to entreate of their Sacramentes, vntill a place more fit and méete therefore.
               
                  
                  Diſtinc. 32.
                  Some poſſible will thinke to ſtoppe a gappe with the Decrée of Alexander, (Gratian ſayth the ſeconde) praeter hoc autem praecipiendo.
                  Popes brawle. 
                  &c. and ſette him againſt Gregorie in the aforeſayde Chapter. But Gregorie is too well ayded, for he hath Pope Leo in the Chapter Manifeſtum. Pope Martine in the Chapter Non liceat:
                  
                     1. Queſt. 1. Ibidem. and many other Canones. I maruel with what ſpirite theſe Popes ſpeake, that thus iarre. Is this the Harmonie? Surely if eyther I were of mind or purpoſe to pricke their Muſicke out, thou wouldeſt thinke it were a blacke chauntes, or a concorde of Diuels. But yt their ſentence, opinion, & agréement with the Donatiſtes,
                  Diſt. 32. c. Preter hoc. Par. ad hoc. may out of this barking better appere, mark what Cardinalis Alexandrinus recounteth of D. Bellem, who ſeruing in place of a bad minſtrell, after much and long tempring and tuning, playeth this bad brawle.Concorde of the various Canons. 
                  If the queſtion be asked (ſayth he) touching the miniſter of the Sacrament, then muſt you marke tvvo kindes of them: namely, he is eyther an Heretique, or elſe a naughty Catholique, that maketh and conſecrateth the ſame. Then ſuch perſons haue no effect of the Sacrament as touching themſelues: for as the Heretique vvanteth the ſame, ſo in like manner the naughty Catholike, (be he tollerated by the Church or not) hath no effecte thereof ſo long as he is in deadly ſinne: as al ſuche offenders intermedling vvith holy thinges are. But if the queſtion be asked, for the behalfe of the receyuer, then thus deſtinguishe the ſame. Eyther he receyueth the Sacrament of an Heretique, Sciſmatique, or naughty Catholike. If of the hand of an Heretique, then anſvvere that it is done either knovvingly, or ignorantly. If ignorantly, then, bycauſe he vvas probably ignorant, that the miniſter vvas an Heretique, he

doth enioy the vertue of the Sacrament by fayth. If he receue the ſame of an Heretike vvittingly, in the time of neceſsitie, bycauſe there is no other, & peril of death is at hande, then the Sacrament of Baptiſme can onely be receyued of him: and he miniſtreth both Sacrament and effecte. And ſo muſt the aforeſayde chapter of Alexand. Praeter hoc, be vnderſtode in the ende. But if there be no neceſsity, then no Sacramente muſte be receyued of him. For vvho ſo receyueth, ſinneth, & hath no auayle nor effecte thereof. If the queſtion be asked of a Sciſmatique or naughty Catholique, thē anſvvere according to the diſtinction aboueſayd. &c. Here, thou mayſt gather the ſumme of the doctrine and minde of the olde Canons, as touching this their error. Wherefore none can denye, but the Popes cleargie agréeth with the Donatiſtes, as this harmonie of Bellamere, declareth. Then, as the olde Donatiſtes, deuiſing that the Sacrament did depende on the ſoundeneſſe and holyneſſe of the miniſter, doe therby conclude, that he was the roote of the grace (I allude to their ignorance) therein giuen: So alſo the Popes cleargy, in teaching thoſe to be boyde of the effect of the Sacrament, that receiue the ſame of the hande of him that is knowen to bée naught, or an Heretique, doe the like. Agaynſte the which, and alſo that doctrine, which ſayth the effect of the Sacrament of Baptiſme is receyued of the Heretique or naughty man, which is vnknowē, bicauſe fayth then in ignorance worketh deſerte, heare Auguſtine.
                  Contra. lit. Petiliani. li. 1. c. 1.
                   
                  Ait enim (Petilianꝰ) conſcientia namque dantis attenditur, qui abluat accipiētis. Quid ſi lateat dantis cōſcientia, & fortaſse maculoſa ſit?
                  Auguſtine agaynſt the Popistes. 
                  quomodo poterit accipientis abluere conſcientiam? Si quemadmodum dicit conſcientia dantis attenditur, qui abluat accipientis?

Si enim dixerit ad accipiētem non pertinere, quicquid mali latuerit in conſcientia dantis, ad hoc fortaſse valebit illa ignorantia, vt de conſcientia baptizatoris ſui non poſsit neſciens maculari. Sufficiat ergo vt alterius cōſcientia maculoſa cum ignoratur, non maculat, nunquid etiam abluere poteſt?
                  Ibidem. c. 2.
                   
                  Vnde igitur abluendus eſt qui accipit Baptiſmum, cum dantis polluta conſcientia eſt, & hoc ille qui accepturus eſt ignoret, praeſertim cum addat & dicat. Nam qui fidem a perfido ſumpſerit, non fidem percipit ſed reatum. Ecce ſlat perfidus baptizaturus, at ille qui baptizandus eſt, perfidiam eius ignorat, quid eum accepturum eſse arbitraris, vtrum fidem, an reatum? ſi dixeris fidem, concedes poſſe fieri, vt a perfide fidem quiſque percipit, non reatū, & falſum erit illud quod dictum eſt: qui fidem a perfido ſumpſerit, non fidē recipit ſed reatum. Inuenimus enim fieri poſse, vt etiam à perfido, fidem quis accipiat, ſi perfidiam dantis ignorat. Non enim ait: qui fidem à perfido manifeſto vel cognito ſumpſerit, ſed qui fidem inquit à perfido ſumpſerit, non fidem percipit ſed reatum, quod vtique falſum eſt, quando quis à latente perfido baptizatur. Si autem dixerit, etiam cum baptizator perfidus latet, non ab eo fidem percipit, ſed reatum: rebaptizent ergo illos, quos ab eo baptizatos eſse conſtiterit, qui diu apud ipſos cum ſcaelerati latuerint,
                  Ibidem. c. 3.
                   
                  & poſtea proditi conuictique damnati ſunt. Eo quippe tempore quo latebant, quoſcunque baptizauerunt, non eis potuerunt fidem tradere, ſed reatum, ſi quiſquis fidem à perfido ſumpſerit, non fidem percipit ſed reatum, ergo baptizentur à bonis, vt poſsint fidem percipere non reatum. &c.
               
               
                  So ſayth Bellem.The ſenſe wherof is. For regarde is had (ſayth Petilian) to the conſcience of ye miniſter, that muſt purge

or make cleane the receyuers. But what if the conſcience of the miniſter be ſecret, and yet perhaps vnpure, howe can he waſh cleane the receyuers conſcience? It being (as Petilian ſayth) the conſcience of the miniſter that muſt purge the receyuers, is to be regarded.So ſayth Bellem. But if he will ſay, that the euyl what ſo euer is hidde in the miniſter his conſcience, toucheth not the receiuer: then perchaunce to this, is that ignoraunce auayleable, that thereby ſuch an ignorant perſon cannot be defyled by the baptizers euyll conſcience. May it therefore onely ſuffiſe, that the defiled conſcience, when it is vnknowē, ſtayneth not, or doth it not alſo clenſe? Whence is he to be cleanſed that receyueth Baptiſme, when as the miniſters conſcience is vnpure? And it is vnknowen to the receyuer, the rather,So concludeth Bellem for that Petilian addeth & ſayth: For he that receyueth Baptiſme at a dyſloyall hande, receyueth not the Sacrament, but hurt. Put the caſe. Here ſtandeth a naughty perſon, ready to baptize: but he that is ready to be baptized, knoweth not the ſame, what iudgeſte thou he ſhall receyue at that miniſters hand? the ſacraments effect, or iudgement? If thou doſt ſay that he receyueth the ſacrament, then is it graunted a man may receyue it, and no euill, of a naughty miniſter: and ſo ſhall that be falſe, which is ſayde: For he that receyueth Baptiſme at a dyſloyall hande, receyueth not the Sacrament but hurte.
                  Againſt Bellem. So ſayth Bellem. We haue found forſooth (ſayth Auguſtine) that it is poſſible for a man to receyue the effecte of the Sacramente at a naughty mans hand, ſo that he be probably ignoraunt thereof: for Petilian ſayth not, he that receyueth the Sacrament of an open and manifeſte naughty perſon, but ſimply, he ſayth, he that receyueth the Sacramente of a naughty man, receyueth not the effecte, but hurt.
                  
Which muſte algates be falſe, when the naughtineſſe of the miniſter is not knowen. But if he will ſay, that when the baptizers naughtineſſe is vnknowen, he thē alſo receyueth not the Sacrament, but hurte: then let them baptiſe thoſe agayne, which were baptized of the naughty miniſter, whoſe ſecrete naughtyneſſe at laſte brake out, and was thereof conuicte and condemned. For in that time, in the which their naughtyneſſe was ſecrete, they coulde baptize none, bycauſe they were naught, though ſecrete, (if it be true, that he whiche is baptized of the naughty, receyueth not the Sacrament but hurt) therfore let them be nowe baptized of ſuch as are good, that they may receyue the Sacramente, and no hurt.
               Hitherto Auguſtine agaynſt the Donatiſtes: who doth therin ſo playnly reaſon agaynſt Pope Gregorie, Alexand. the other Popiſhe Canons, and D. Bellem, that they are condemned by his iudgement, for Heretiques. And that the more manifeſt of the twayne. For whereas the Popiſtes will teache when the holy miniſter doth make an holy ſacrament, or the contrary, they will ſéeme to do it, not as Donatiſtes: and yet they do it more playnely than they, ſo that the prouerbe is true in them: Sorex perit ſuo ſtrepitu: the Rat is bewrayed by his owne noyſe. In that they by Bellams diſtinction graunt, that which Auguſtine is fayne by drifte & purſute of argument, to driue the elder Donatiſtes vnto. For vpon their generall propoſition, their field was ſo large, that they might diſtinguiſh and limite as they lyſt. But Auguſtine chaſeth them ſo harde to the wall, that they are berefte of that ſcope. For in theſe his former words, he driueth this yſſue, that they muſt graūt eyther none to be baptized within their Church, or elſe

that ſuch as are baptized of ye ſecrete naughty miniſter,The Popiſts manifeſt Donatiſtes. They graūt thumaior. are notwithſtanding his naughtineſſe baptized, & haue the effect of the ſacrament, not hindred therby. Thus in ſum, he proueth their reaſon falſe, & opinion hereſy. No naughty perſon cā miniſter ye ſacrament wc effect: But euery miniſter is a naughty perſon, Ergo no miniſter can giue ye ſacrament with effect. Then muſt both theſe Donatiſts ſaue their cauſe, by diſtinguiſhing their quid dity, of an open naughty man, & ſecret naughty man: ye which the Popiſts do to Aug. hand, & therfore are more manifeſte. Then he replyeth thus. But euery ſecrete naughty miniſter, can miniſter the ſacrament & effect, though he be naught (for ſecretneſſe purgeth no mans conſcience) ergo, a naughty Prieſt may miniſter the ſacrament & the effect, by your own ſaying.The Canoniſtes boxed at Auguſt. hande. Thus the Canoniſts receiue the foyle, & are at Aug. hands boxed together with the elder heretique Donatiſtes: for he proueth, yt the ſacrament & the effect therof worketh, cauſed by God, & not by the miniſter. That the which doctrine of Auguſtine may ſtand aſſiſted by another, heare the teſtimony of Optatus Mileuit. Epiſcop. who flouriſhed as Hierom ſaith,Hierome. in Catalog. in the raignes of Valentinian & Valent. which was about the yeare of grace .368. who was alſo in that time an earneſte enimie to Parmenian, an Archdonatiſt, as his .6. bokes declare. In which works (talking of the effects of baptiſme) he ſayth:Mileuitan. lib. 5.
                   
                  Has res vnicuique, non eiuſdem rei operarius, ſed credentis fides & Trinitas praeſtat: that is, the which things (to wéete, the effectes of Baptiſme) are done therein, by the holie Trinitie, and the fayth of the receyuer, and not by the miniſter of the Sacrament. S. Chriſoſtome is not here to be omitted, whoſe authoritie & iudgement alſo ſhall ouerthrowe theſe Donatiſtes, & driue backe the iudgement of the forſayde reuerende Fathers: who anſwereth

as it were to a ſecret obiection of the people of Conſtantinople, made as touching ſuch as were baptized,Homelia de regreſsu ex Aſia. in ye time of the diſordred eſtate of their church, during his exile in Aſia, in this maner. Sed multi inquiunt, te abſente baptizati ſunt: & quid tum? Nihil minus habet gratia, non claudicat donum Dei, praeſente me baptizati non ſunt: ſed praeſente Chriſto baptizati ſunt. Nūquid homo eſt qui baptizat? Homo dexteram porrigit, ſed Deus dexteram gubernat. Noli de gratia dubitare chariſsime, quia donum Dei eſt. Attē
                     de diligenter quae dicuntur. Si forte aliqua cauſa ſacra explicāda eſt. Cum obtuleris preces & ſubſcriptā acceperis ſacrā, non requiris quali calamo ſubſcripſerit rex, neque in quali charta, neque quali quòue attramento, ſed vnum ſolummodo quaeris, ſi rex ſubſcripſerit. Sic in Baptiſmo: charta conſcientia eſt, calamus lingua ſacerdotis, manus gratia eſt ſpiritus ſancti. &c. that is: But ſay they, many haue bene baptized ſince thy departure. And what then? the grace is not diminiſhed: the gifte of God is not maymed, they are baptized, not in my preſence, but in the preſence of Chriſt: is it man that baptizeth? The man in dede reacheth oute his hand, but God gouerneth the ſame. Doubt not dearly beloued of the grace, for it is the gifte of God. Marke what is ſpoken. If perhaps any holy Scripture is expounded. When thou ſhalt offer thy ſupplication to the Prince, and receiueſt it agayne ſubſcribed: thou aſkeſt not, with what penne the Prince ſubſcribed the ſame, neyther in what parchimente, nor doeſt thou alſo enquire of the yncke: but this thou onely demaundeſt, whether ye Prince hath ſubſcribed or not. So is it likewiſe in Baptiſme: the conſcience is the paper, the miniſters tong is the penne, the grace of the holy Ghoſt,

is the Princes hande. Theſe fathers alſo haue on their ſides the ſacred Scriptures, to proue God onely to be ye worker of the effecte in all meanes vſed, both for planting and increaſing of the Church, be it eyther in dyſpenſation of worde or ſacramentes. As Paule ſayth to the Corinthians: Ego plantaui, Apollo rigauit. &c.
                  1. Cor. 3. I Paule haue planted, Apollo hath watered, but God doth giue the increaſe: neyther is he then any thing that planteth, neyther he that watereth, but God that giueth the increaſe, he that planteth, & he that watereth is all one. &c. Where now is their truth, where is their brag of the perfect fayth, & boaſt of their holy Church, yt erreth neuer. If Auguſtine be of the true Church, the Popiſtes are Apoſtataes. If Optatus and Chriſoſtom be true teachers, then they are Heretiques: if ye ſcriptures are true, then are theſe Popiſts falſe. Yea where is alſo their harmonie, their fayned agréement and cō
                  cord? Is it that the Canons of Alexand. Leo, Gregorie and Martine their Popes, thus brawle and diſagre not onely eche with other, but alſo with the truth? For if they agrée, it is as Donatiſts. If they teach any thing in this behalf, it is as the Donatiſts. Yea if they know their roote, it muſt be of the Donatiſts.
                  Biel lib. 4. diſt. 5. con. 2. & ibidem. Neyther can it preuayle, for the purgation of their Churche to bring Biell, Beatus Thomas, Duraud, Richardus, Scotus, & P. de Palu. of opinion, contrary to the Canoniſts and other of their Diuines,Peter Lomb a Donatiſt. whome Biell alleageth in .4. li. No not though they brought the whole Vniuerſitie of Paris, condemning Peter Lombard for an Heretique, being of opinion with Bellem,
                  Lomba. lib. 4. Diſt. 13. Sic illi vero. C and Cardinall Alexandrinus, writing thus. Illi vero qui excommunicati ſunt, vel de Haereſi manifeſte notati, non videntur hoc Sacramentum poſse conficere, licet Sacerdotes ſint. &c.
                  
That is: but it ſéemeth that ſuch as are excommunicated, or manifeſtly noted of Hereſie, can not conſecrate this ſacramēt (that is the Euchariſte) yea, although they are Prieſts. &c. For that wil make rather to their open ſhame, ſith thoſe Diuines and Canoniſtes, thus ſtanding in the hereſie of the Donatiſts, bene Papiſts (not Proteſtantes) birdes of their owne neſtes.
               Wherfore they muſt firſt proue (if they will purge them ſelues of Hereſie and diſcord) that they agrée with the Scriptures and fathers, and alſo among themſelues in the truth, or elſe muſt they denie their Doctors: that is, that Peter Lombarde is none of their Church, that Bellem. is none of their Churche, that Cardinalis Alexandrinus is none of their Church, that the Popes Leo, Gregorie, and Martine were not poſſeſſoures of Peters perfect chaire: or at the leaſt accuſe Gratian for falſelye fathering the Decrées on them: which if they them ſelues do, who ſhall afterward credite the ſame? not I.
            
            
               Matrimonie Tatians.
               
                  Anno. 175.177. in Catalog.
                  IN the time of the raygnes of the Emperours Marcus Antonius verus and L. Au. Commodus (as Hierome ſaith) ruffled one Tatian, a Sirian borne. Euſebius ſaith in the .xij. yeare of the raygne of the ſame Antonius Verus, which was about the yeare of our Lorde .175. Some other write that it was in the .14.02.15. yeare of the ſame Emperours raigne, which is of the yeare of our Lord .177.
                  
or there aboutes. This man being firſt a profeſſour of Rhetorique, gayned thereby no ſmall glory.Euſe. eccleſ. hiſtoria. li. 4 cap. 28.
                   The acquaintaunce of Iuſtine the martyr (whoſe ſcholler in Chriſtian Philoſophie it ſéemeth he was) ſtode him in good ſteade. For ſo long as he liued, he flouriſhed in Chriſtes Church, as a ſound Chriſtian: But after his death, of a membre of Chriſt, he became a rottē branch and an Apoſtatate. So that we may ſay of him, though in this world he ſuruiued Iuſtine, yet that he liued and died with him. For immediatly vpon his death, puffed vp with pride of his eloquence, he broke credite wyth the Church, & became an Archeheretique and father of the ſecte called Encratitôn, that is Abſtayners, a poyſon, Irenaeus ſayth,Li. 1. c. 30.31.
                   drawen partly from the Valentinians, partly from the Gnoſtiques, partly from the Martioniſtes.
               
               The Hereſie of the Encratiſtes, after the death of their firſt founder Tatianus,
                  In Catalog. In eccl. hiſt. li. 4. c. penu. was by one Seuerus well ſettled and ſo furthered, that after him alſo, they are called as Hierom ſayth, Seueriani. A part of the Hereſie was this, as Euſebius recounteth oute of Irenaeus. Vitandas nuptias praedicarunt,
                  The doctrine. 
                  antiquam Dei formationem reprobantes, & ſenſim eum repraehendentes, qui maris & foemellae generationem fecit. that is, They taught the ſhunning or eſchewing of mariages, dyſalowing Gods auncient faſhioning of man, and priuyly therein rebuking him, that appoynted the generatiō of man and woman. Auguſtine addeth:Hareſ. 25.
                   
                  Nec recipiunt in ſuorum numerum, comugio vtentem, ſiue marem, ſiue foeminā. They admitted none to be of their number, that vſed mariage, be he man or woman. Nuptias damnant, & omnino eas pares fornicationibus, aliiſque corruptionibus faciunt: For they ſlaunder Mariage:

making it equall with fornication and other fylthyneſſe.In Galat. li. 3. cap. 6.
                   
                  Hierome noteth, that to confirme this their doctrine (Omnem coniunctionem maris & foeminae immundam eſse. All copulation of man and woman vncleane) they vſed to alleage theſe wordes out of Paule: He that ſoweth in the fleſhe, ſhall thereof reape corruption.
               
                  The ſumme of Tatian.This doctrine of Tatiane (which in effecte is, that they are cleaner, holier, and perfecter, that abſtayne from mariage, than the reſte that vſe the ſame, and therefore commende the vowed and ſingle life, aboue the natural couplement, teaching as I noted oute of Hierome, Omnem maris & foeminae coniunctionem immundam eſse. That al copulation of man and woman is vncleane,) is by the Church of Chriſt, for two ſpeciall cauſes that follow and depend of the ſame doctrine,The reaſons why it is an Hereſie. condemned. Firſte, for that they that ſo blame and diſcommend that holy inſtitution of Matrimony, which God alone hath ordayned and commaunded in Paradice before mans fall, and Chriſt hath in Cana of Galile honoured with his fyrſt miracle and preſence, doe ſet God to ſchole, Senſim cum repraehendentes qui maris. &c. Secretely finding fault with him, that appoynted the copulation of man and woman.
               Secondly, bycauſe they make God not the author thereof, but the Diuell: which they do plainely but on this wiſe. Whatſoeuer God commaundeth, yea if it be to kyll man, woman and childe: yea if to robbe the Egyptians of their proper goodes, yet he that perfourmeth his wyll and order, doth not ſinne or commit vncleaneneſſe, but worketh vertue and holyneſſe, for that our vertue and holyneſſe conſiſteth in obeying of him: and whatſoeuer we doe contrary or beſides, is no vertue.

But ſyth they ſay to marry, and man and woman therein to ioyne, is to cōmit vncleaneneſſe: which if it were vnpure in nature, yet, for that God hath inſtituted the ſame, it is then ſanctified: therefore the fathers conclude, that the Tatianiſts deny God (whoſe wil can not be vncleane) to be the authour therof, and ſay it is of the Diuell, who is the roote of all impureneſſe. For Clemens Alexandrinus taketh it ſo: who aunſwering to a parte of Tatians worke entituled,Clemens. 3. Stromat. 
                  De perfectione ſecundum ſeruatorem writeth thus: Nam cum rurſus permiſit ſimul conuenire propter Satanam & intemperantiam, pronunciat eum qui pariturus erit, ſeruiturum duobus Dominis: per conſenſum quidem Deo, per diſsentionem autem intemperantiae, & fornicationi, & Diabolo: For when he (that is Paule) licenceth man and woman after ſeperation for Prayer, eftſones to méete together, for feare of Sathan and incontinē
                  cie, he therein declareth, that they whiche ſhall ſo obey his doctrine and counſell, ſhall ſerue two maſters. By their conſent, in the ſame ſeperation and continence, God: & by the breaking of that conſent,Ibidem. intemperance and the Diuell. Thus far Tatian. To the which Clemens. Haec autem dicit Apoſtolū exponens, ſophiſticè autem eludit veritatem, per verum falſū confirmans: intemperantiam enim & fornicationem diabolica vitia, & affectionē quoque nos confitemur. Theſe things Tatian writeth, expounding the Apoſtle: but he doth ſubtilely ſcoffe the truth, and confirmeth by a lie, that which is ſounde. For we graunt that intemperaunce and fornication are Diabolicall vices, and naughty affections. &c. In this diſcourſe of Clement and Tatian, it is euident, that the fathers, when they ſay that Tatian teacheth that matrimonie is of the Diuell, meane

it, bycauſe he ſayth, that therein incontinency and fornication is commaunded: which are the wil of the Diuell, for elſe I think Clemens, hauing ſo good occaſion agaynſt him, woulde haue reaſoned more ſtrictely, as touching theſe wordes: per diſsentionem autem, intē
                     perantiae & fornicationi & Diabolo. &c. By breaking their conſent of continencie, they ſerue intemperance, fornication and the Diuell. For he had therein great occaſion to note, that they thereby obey God, & not the Diuell, & that therfore matrimonie differeth from fornication, which is the inſtitution of the Diuel.
               
                  The Popiſts doctrine.It enſueth now to conſider, whether the Popiſhe Donatiſts are infected alſo with this hereſie of Tatian, or no: which I will briefly (in one worde as it were) declare. The Popes angelical doctor, if the additions in the ſupplement of his third part be gathered out of his owne works (as it is noted) Thomas Aquinas, canonized (for his good demerites) a Sainct, teacheth: that Matrimonie is vncleane, & that for the vnpureneſſe thereof, the miniſter in holy orders, ought by abſtayning from a wife, to kepe him holy & cleane. Theſe are his wordes.In add. 3. partem. q. 53. ar. 3.
                   
                  Sacer ordo de ſui ratione, habet ex quadam congruētia, quod matrimonium impedire debeat: quia in ſacris ordinibus conſtituti, ſacra vaſa & ſacramenta tractant. Et ideo decens eſt, vt munditiem corporalem per continentiam ſeruent. &c. that is: There is in holy orders, that of their ſpeciall nature and requiſiteneſſe therevnto due, ought to hinder and forbidde matrimonie: bycauſe that they which bene in the ſame orders, doe handle the conſecrated veſſels and holy Sacramentes. And it is therefore behoueable, that they ſhould kepe bodyly cleanelineſſe, thorow a ſingle lyfe, and abſtayning from mariage. &c. Much after the ſame

ſorte Pope Innocent ſayth.Diſtinct. 82. c. Propoſuisti. 
                  Neque eos ad ſacra officia fas ſit admitti, qui exercent etiam cum vxore carnale conſortium: quia ſcriptum eſt: Sancti eſtote, quoniam ego ſanctus ſum, dicit Dominus Deus veſter. Nor let it be lawfull for them to be admitted to holy offices or roumes, which vſe carnal company with their wiues: bycauſe it is writtē: Be you holy, for I am holy, ſayth your Lorde God. In the which doctrine it is euident, howe Mariage is diſcommended and counted vnpure. Wherefore their holy greaſelings muſte not vſe the ſame, for polluting the Sacramentes and conſecrated ſtuffe. For he that ſayth, that a maried man may not touch a Chalice, or ſuch like conſecrated ſtuffe, as here Aquinas teacheth, meaneth that it is not, bicauſe he is a man, but bycauſe he is coupled in mariage, that defileth. Is not then Aquinas a Tatian, that ſayth, Matrimonie defileth the man coupled therein, and the man the holy things? And ſecondly, doe not then the Thomiſts alſo, yt which Irenaeus ſaith of Tatian,
                  Vt ſupra. 
                  Senſim reprehendentes eum. &c. They priuily therein reprehende him, that appointed the generation of man and woman: for he might haue deuiſed a more holye waye for generation? And doe they not conſequently condē
                  ning the ſame for naught, or be it, that they do but diſalowe it, appoynte it rather to the Diuell, who is properly and onely the authour of al naughtineſſe and vncleanelineſſe: than to God, from whome no ſuch order can procéede?
               But here the Popiſtes wyll obiecte,Obiection. that the olde Tatians did condemne matrimonie in all men: & they do but dyſalowe it in a certayne ſorte. To aunſwere of the which ſhift, (for it is no reaſon) I will procéede thus. Firſt prouing that it is an hereſie,Anſwere. not to leaue matrimonie

indifferent. Secondly, that they dyſalowe it in all men,
                     1. Timoth. 4.
                   and count it vnholy. Firſt of all marke, that the queſtion is not, whether the Popiſts are further ouer the ſhooes in this errour than are the Tatians, but whether they are in it at all. For although it be a more horrible errour, to diſcommende or forbyd matrimonie in all men: yet to doe the like to a fewe or ſpecial ſort, is alſo an hereſie, albeit it ſéemeth ye gentler. For thoſe ſeducers that Paule ſpeaketh of, who ſhall haue their conſciences marked with an hote burning yron,
                     1. Timoth. 4.
                   & ſhal forbyd to marry, are not ſayd, that they ſhal forbid this ſorte, or that ſorte, but ſimply forbid to marry: ſo that as therein Tatian the elder is foretolde, ſo likewiſe his babe yong Tatian and that Church: for I dare ſay they found no ſuch doctrine in Luthers bokes. Let vs mark the words more déepely. Paule in ye thirde chapter gaue Timothe inſtruction, of good byſhoppes and miniſters duties: and in this fourth, he is bent eſpecially in theſe wordes, to paynt out, what naughty and ill miniſters and teachers ſhall doe, as it were by Antitheſis to giue it more life: and willeth among other things, that he ſhoulde aſſertaine the brethren, what intollerable burthens the erronious ſpirites in the latter dayes ſhall bring in, without care, loue and regard of the congregation, and weakeneſſe of the flocke, and that in hipocriſie. For as the nature alwayes of Heretiques ſtuffed with falſe harts, and hereſie, is, ſeming holy in outwarde appearaunce, wolues in ſhéepes ſkinnes, ſo they themſelues will not ſet their handes to any ſuche burthen. Vnto this ſenſe doth Origen vpon the wordes of Chriſt fytly ſpeake with the ſayde texte of Paule:In Mathe. Hom. 24.
                   
                  Repraehendit huiuſmodi praeceptores, qui non ſolum quae docent, non faciunt, ſed etiam crudeliter & ſine miſericordia,

& non ſecundum aeſtimationem virium vniuſcuiuſque audiētis, ſed maiora, virtute ipſorum iniū
                     gunt. Vtpote qui prohibent nubere, & ab eo quod expedit, ad immoderatam immunditiam compellunt: that is, Chriſt reprehendeth ſuch teachers which do not onely, not that whiche they teache, but doe alſo cruellye and without compaſſion, not according to due eſtimation of euery of their auditours ſtrength, enioigne greter things, thā they are able to beare: as they which forbyd to marry, reſtrayning that which is expedient, compell men to immoderate vncleaneneſſe. Thus far Origen: by whoſe wordes it may euidently appeare, that it is a doctrine contrary to the truth of the Scripture, an heauy burthen and doctrine of wicked ſpirites and tirannes to forbid mariage, or reſtrayne it, not only in all men, but in any man that can not abſtayne. When as certayne in the generall councell at Nice, which beganne Anno. 315. woulde haue mariage forbidden to the cleargie men alone, as vncleane: then Paphnutius (as Sozo. li. 1. cap. 23. ſayth) ſtart vp ſaying, Concubitium cum propria vxore caſtitatem eſse. that it is chaſtitie for a man to accompany with his owne wife: wherevnto the whole counſell agréed. Eaque in re nihil ſtatuit, ſed eam in vniuſcuiuſque arbitrium, nō neceſsitatem reiecit. And determined nothing thereof, but left it indifferent to euery mans owne wil. S. Paul alſo leaueth it frée and reſtrayneth no man there from: onely he ſayth to the woman, quae nubat, in Domino nubat ſhe that marrieth, let her marry in the Lorde. Wherefore the true doctrine is, to let matrimony remaine in al men indifferently, that thoſe that wil, may marry, euen of the cleargie. And ſo it ſhoulde ſéeme it was practized. As in .56. Diſtinct. c. Oſius. There is .7.
                  
Popes rehearſed that were Deacons, Prieſtes, and Subdeacons ſonnes. &c. Therefore the fyrſt poynte is playne,Mariage muſt be free that matrimonie is to be lefte indifferent. And that it is doctrine (as beforeſayd) of erronious ſpirits, to reſtrayne the ſame in any wiſe.
               This notwithſtanding, all the Popes kingdome, that is his cleargie, (for they are his proper and immediate ſubiects) as the Monks, Chanons, Nunnes, with all ſeculare Prieſtes and Regularies, could not be to their orders and rules admitted, vnleſſe matrimonie contracted and now and then ſolemnized, were broken and alſo forbydden and reſtrayned, as in libr. 6. c. quod votum: and in the Decretalls de conuerſ. coniug. per totum, may appeare. Of theſe the very Church and kingdome of the Pope, immediatly conſiſted. So yt all men whome he could peruert with his error, were onelye admitted to his immediate iuriſdiction. And yet though this curſed Cowes hornes were ſo ſhorte, that he coulde not ſequeſter all men, but onely thoſe ſhauelings, from matrimonie, is he therefore of any better minde, yea holier or ſounder, than Tatian was, who admitted none to his ſpeciall ſorte, but ſuch as would not marrie? Pardie his will was ſo. For if a married man was choſen a byſhop, he muſt put away his wife, ſweare continencie, & his wife muſt become a Nunne, though ſhe were his firſt wife. I woulde aſke this queſtion: whether they counted them not the holier that vowed chaſtitie and abſtayned matrimonie. Aquinas ſayth yea, Then whether they wiſhed not, yea & taught all men to purſue the ſame holy eſtate as beſte: which if they did, then they condemned matrimonie. But if it was not ſuch a thing, that they wiſhed all men to embrace, as an eſtate holier than matrimonie, they then

deceyued thoſe that embraced the ſame, aboue al other conditions and eſtates of calling and life, for the beſt. Of whome there is no ſmall number, as in the Chapter of Pſallians hereafter ſhall appeare. But it is moſt euident, that they ſo did, ſeing they prayed that al men might leade that ſingle life: as their Collect, on the day of the Natiuitie of S. Mary the Virgin (wherein they make mention alſo of S. Edith) declareth: They plucked therein the congregation forwarde,Legend. 135.
                   to imitate our Ladies ſole life. Alſo their Legenda called Lombardica in the Legend of S. Mathevve, bringeth in Mathevv extolling Ephigenia hir ſingle life aboue Matrimonie. A notable lye. And in the Legende Omnium Sanctorum. Beſides that they extoll Virginitie, with foure principal commendations, they with the fift beate matrimony flatly downe. Thus, Primo ſunt ſponſae Chriſti. Secundo, comparantur Angelis. Tertio,
                  Legend. 158.
                   
                  illuſtriores ſunt fidelibus vniuerſis. Quarto, multis gaudent priuilegiis. Quinto, praeferuntur coniugatis. That is. Firſt, the abſtayners from mariage are the ſpouſes of Chriſt. Secondly, they are cōpared to Angels. Thirdly, they are more excellent than all other of the faythfull. Fourthly, they enioye many priuileges. Fiftly, they are preferred aboue the maried perſons. Marke in theſe wordes, whether matrimonie and thoſe that liue in that ſtate, be not blamed, reprehended and condemned as vnpure, or at the leaſt leſſe holy.To the firſt. The firſt point is, that they that abſtaine frō mariage, are Chriſtes ſpouſes: the which (if it ſo be) it muſte be bycauſe they are not maried. Then muſt one of theſe two pointes followe, that they that are married, are eyther no ſpouſes of Chriſt, or not ſo fully coupled to Chriſt, as the abſtayners are. Wherin matrimonie is both condemned

and abhorred.To the ſeconde. The ſeconde is, if they that abſtayne are compared vnto Angels, then it muſt folow, that matrimonie is to be abhorred, bycauſe man thereby is abaſed.To the third. Thirdely, if the abſtayners are more excellent than al other eſtates of the faythfull, then what profiteth it me to be a Chriſtian, if I be not an abſtayner? Surely little or nothing: Wherevnto I wil ſay as Clemens Alexandrinus ſayth.
                     3. li. Stroma. 
                  Quid vero, non etiam iuſti veteres creaturam cum gratiarum actione participabant? Aliqui etiam liberos ſuſciperunt cum continenter verſati ſunt in matrimonio? Et Heliae quidem corui alimentum afferebant, panes & carnes. Quinetiam Samuel Propheta armum quem exijs quae cōmedebat reliquerat, allatum dedit edendum Sauli. Hi autem qui ſe eos dicunt vitae inſtitutis excellere, cum illorum actionibus ne potuerunt quidē conferri. That is: What I pray you, did not the righteous elders vſe the Clemens hath creaturam. woman with thankes giuing? and ſome of them after ſacred and continent vſe of matrimonie, enioyed children? And to maried Helias the crowes brought foode, bread and fleſh. And did not that maried Prophete Samuel giue to Saule to eate of a ſhoulder remayning of the former repaſt? But theſe mariage ſhunners, that thinke themſelues in that eſtate of their life to excell them, ſhall not be equall ne able to be compared wyth their workes. Fourthlye, if they, bycauſe they are not maried,To the fourth. Legend. 158.
                   ſhall haue thoſe ſpeciall priuileges (which be as the booke ſayeth) They alone shall ſing the prayſes of God and the Lambe, in the vvorlde to come: They shall haue the ſelfe ſame apparell, that Chriſte hath,
                  What ſhall the maried doe? 
                  and shall vvalke nexte vnto the ſame Lambe. Doe they not herein ſay, that theſe abſtayners ſhall be beſt accepted with Chriſt, chiefeſt in office, and lyke to

him arayed: which all ſhal happen to them, bicauſe they are not maried? Is this to the encouragement of men to marry? Is this to the cohoneſting thereof? Is this to teach matrimonie to be equallie holy with abſtayning, as Paphnutius did? But heare their laſt poynt. Fiftly, the abſtayners are preferred before the maried.To the fyft. Why? bycauſe they abſtayne from mariage. Returne we nowe with due conſideration of all theſe things, & then tell me, whether that matrimony is not condemned and dyſalowed in all men. Perhaps they wil ſay, they doe not ſimply diſcommende mariage, but in regarde and compariſon of abſtayning there fro. Is not that to diſcommend mariage? for is not euery thing reiected in the cōpariſon of another, condēned? Omnis cō
                     paratio odioſa. Euery compariſon is odious: which is vnderſtanded as touching ye thing, yt is forſakē. Where then is Paphnutius ſaying? and the generall councels conſent, to wéete,It is chaſtitie to ioine in mariage. 
                  concubitus cum propria vxore caſtitas eſt, as before is declared. Peraduenture they wil ſay, that they do yet preferre it, before fornication and adulterie. What ſhall this their liberalitie meane (conſidering that Thomas Aquinas ſayth in ye place aboue mentioned, that ye maried miniſter, is by mariage vncleane: and therefore polluteth the Sacramentes and holy veſſels) but that mariage, is in regarde of fornication, the leſſe vncleaneneſſe: the which is as muche to ſay, as that it is lawfull in the ordinance and inſtitution of God. (as Tatian ſayth ſupra) Seruire intemperantiae & fornicationi, & Diabolo: To ſerue intemperance, fornication, and the Diuell. For if the acquaintaunce of man & woman in mariage, is vncleaneneſſe, (as Aquinas and the places aforeſayde declare) then it muſt be all one with fornication: ſith the déede it ſelfe,

                  & agentis & patientis, and the effect that commeth of it in matrimonie, is all one with that, which is in fornication. Wherfore it is moſt euident, that they condēne Matrimonie in all men: though they can reſtrayne it but in a fewe. And the onely difference they make of matrimonie & fornication, is, that in the one it is lawfull for a man to be vncleane, and in the other not. Wherby they extoll continencie, none otherwiſe than Tatian (for the condemning of matrimonie) doth. As Epiphanius noteth,Epi. li. 1. to. 3. Haer. 46.
                   
                  Continentiam vero hic praedicat, Nuptias autem ſcortationem & corruptionem putat: aſſerens nihil differre à ſcortatione, ſed idem eſse: that is: Tatian extolleth abſtayning from mariage, which he thinketh to be whordom and vncleaneneſſe: ſaying that it differeth little therefro, yea to be the ſame. But let vs returne to S. Thomas, who expreſſely teacheth, that the Prieſt muſt abſtayne from mariage, leaſte he loſe his cleaneneſſe and holyneſſe by the ſame. So as the Popiſtes can not deny, but that he is a Tatian, for that he being facultatis Theologiae Doctor, doth teach it not Scholaſticè, or argumentatiuè, but doctrinaliter in his concluſion. Wherefore without all controuerſie S. Thomas muſt at the leaſte be infected or encōbred with the Tatianiſtes hereſie. If (as it may fortune) that they will ſay, he is not an Heretique, as ful ſimply the facultie of the Diuines in Paris would ſaue and purge his credite, which by no meanes they ſhall iuſtly do, ſith that of their ſpecial Doctors holdeth opinion, that Woman is not the Image of God.
            
            
               
               Diuorcing Montaniſtes.
               
                  THe time when as the Hereſie of the Cataphrygians ſprang,In An. 174 189.
                   is diuerſly written of among the authours. For where as Epiphanius ſaith, it began about the .19. yeare of Antonius Pius: contrary to that Euſebius ſayth, it roſe in the eleauenth yeare of Marcus Antonius Verus, which is of ye yeare of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. 174. Other ſay that it was in the ſeauenth of Commodus, which is of the ſame our Sauiour. 189. The cauſe and maner whereof, Euſebius moſt playnly declareth to be, on this wiſe.Eu. li. 5. c. 16
                   It is ſaid yt in Myſia a city of Phrygia there is a ſtreate called by the name of Ardabau, in the which one Montanus, who but of late arriued at the chriſtian fayth, in the time of ye 
                  Procōſulship of Gratus in Aſia, ſurprized with the immoderate deſire of gouernment, gaue him ſelfe open to the Diuel, and being diſtraught & madde, began to ſpeake in traunce of minde, as if it were vnder colour of Prophecying, agaynſt the auncient cuſtome and tradition of ſucceſſion vſed in the Church. &c. The which Sectaries of their firſt authour Montanus, are called Montaniſtes, (or if thou haddeſt rather) of the countrey ſoyle where this wéede firſt grew, thou mayſt call them Cataphrygians. There were diuers aduauncers and ſetters forwarde of this Hereſie, as Theodo. Alcibiades, Themiſtona, Alexander. &c. wyth diuers other.
               Among diuers errors which they taught,
                     The doctrine.
                     Lib. 5. c. 18.
                     
                   this is alſo mentioned of Euſebius. Hic eſt qui coniugia diſſoluere docuit, that is: This Montanus is he that hath

taught that Matrimonie may be loſed and broken of. Which notwithſtanding, he did not wtout ſome colour of reaſon. For in the ſame place, he ſayth: Oſtendimꝰ igitur primas iſtas prophetiſsas: ab eo tempore quo ſpiritu impletae fuerunt, maritos ſuos reliquiſse. We haue ſhewed heretofore, that thoſe firſte Propheteſſes, from the firſt time that they were filled with the ſame Phanaticall ſpirite, forſoke their huſbandes to whome they were coupled. The which wicked dede Montanus alowed, teaching, that for zeale of vowed religion, it was lawfull ſo to doe.The ſumme. The ſumme therefore is, that it was lawfull for a woman, bycauſe of zeale and vow of religion, to forſake hir huſbande.
               
                  The reaſons why it is condemned. Mark. 10.
                  This doctrine for diuers reaſons is condemned. Firſte, bycauſe it is directe contrary to the decrée of Chriſt. Quod Deus coniunxit, homo non ſeparabit. Secondly, bycauſe, that if it be ſo that Matrimonie cō
                  tracted, and wherof fayth is plighted (per verba de praeſenti, by wordes ſufficient of the preſente time) may be diſſolued, then they do wholly diſhonour and prophane the chriſtian religion: wherevpon the firmitie of euery contracte in fayth plighted, ſtandeth.
               
                  The Popes doctrine.Here then it reſteth to declare, howe the Popiſh Tatianiſtes agrée alſo with Montanus, and teache his Goſpell Pope Alex. the third (as the Decretall Epiſtles recorde) writeth thus to the Byſhoppe of Exon. Cōmiſsum & infra.Ex. de ſpon. c. Cōmiſsū. Significauit nobis fraternitas tua, quod quidam cuidam mulieri de contrahendo matrimonio fidem dedit: & ſe cum ea infra biennium per verba de praeſenti cōtracturum praeſtito iuramento firmauit. Nunc nutem priuata lege ductus, ad frugē melioris vitae ſuſpirat. & infra. Fraternitati. t. tali. rō. quod tutius religioni iuramenti ſeruata: prius contrahere:

& poſtea ſi eligerit ad religionem migrare, ſi tamē poſt diſpenſationem: copula non dinoſcitur interueniſse carnalis. That is: Your brotherhode hath aſſertayned vs, that a certayne man promiſed a woman, that he would contracte matrimonie with hir: and that within two yeres next folowing, he would by words of the preſent time perform the ſame with hir: he aſſured hir by an holy oth. But now rather regarding his priuate eſtate, he doth purſue the cōmoditie of a better life. &c. Thus we doe aunſwere to your brotherhode, that the ſureſt way is (for auoyding of Periurie) firſte to contract matrimonie, and afterwardes (if he ſo chooſe) to enter into religion, if that there appeare after the ſame contract, to haue bene no carnall copulation.☜ The Romanistes agrement with the Donatistes. Letting further circumſtances paſſe, I pray thée reader marke two ſpecial inſtances in this caſe of contracte: and the minde of the ſayde man, at both inſtances. Firſt is, when he ſwore & made a ſolemne othe to contract matrimonie with hir, and make hir his wife, (for that is ye nature of verba de praeſenti.) In which time his minde was ſimple to do as he ſpake: which if it was not, what néeded Pope Alexander to haue cauſed him for ſauegarde of his othe, after to contracte? If before that, he had forſworne himſelfe? as vndoubtedly if he meante not as he ſwore, he had already done. But, that when he ſwore, he ſwore with intent to marry: both ye Letter of the Decretall, the Doctors themſelues therein, and caſe, are playne. The ſeconde inſtance is, when he according to his oth, did contract matrimony. At which time of contract, if he wil (ſeruare Iuramenti religione) kepe his oth without Periurie, his minde muſt be as it was at the time of his othe made: namely, that thoſe words ſpoken de tempore praeſenti, might be ſo meant

as ſpoken. Which if it was not then ſo meant, at the time of pronouncing, as at the time of ſwearing, then (as before I ſayde) he is wylfully periured: bycauſe he promiſed to contract matrimonie, which is not performed, vnleſſe his hearte meane the pronouncing of hys mouth.In addi. ad 3. q. 45. ar. 4.
                   For Aquinas ſayth: Conſenſus exterioribus verbis expreſsus, abſque interiore conſenſu nullū matrimonium facit. That is: Conſent giuen by outward words and not inwarde conſent, is no contract of matrimonie. Yea, and then, the Pope counſelling him to ſweare with a mouth hipocritically conſenting, and an heart diſagreing and meaning contrary to his words, ſhoulde be authour of that mans renouncing of God and All hallovves, if he then ſwore by any of their Reliques. But that he perfourmed his othe, contracted very matrimonie, and made hir his wife, both Pope Innocentius, Cardinalis Alexandrinus in Lectura. Ab Panor. Dom. Anto. ſuper eodem, with the reſte of the gloſſers & Doctours conclude. Yea, albeit, that he then ſhould haue ſecretly meant, immediatly to haue entred into religion. Wherefore, ſeing that they were man and wife onely by contract, as alſo the .c. Omnes res per quaſcunque.
                  
                     
                        27. q 2. c. Matrimonium.
                     Et ideo non ſoluit illud ſepara. corp. ſed voluntatis.
                     Ibidem. c. Coniuges.
                   
                  &c. Matrimonium quidem non facit coitus, ſed voluntas. Carnall copulation maketh not matrimonie, but the will of the contracters. Coniuges verius appellantur a prima deſponſationis fide, quamuis adhuc ignoratur inter eos coniugalis concubitus. They are of right called man and wife, from the time of their firſt trouth plighting: although as yet, they are vnexperimented of the ſacred bedde. And many other places of their Canons declare. Then hath not ye wyfe right of hir owne body, but hir huſbande: neyther the huſbande ouer his owne, but the wife. As Paule declareth

ſaying: Likevviſe the man hath not povver ouer his ovvne body, but the vvoman.
                  
                     1. Cor. 7.
                   Therefore Pope Alex. hath here taught Montanus hereſie, declaring that it is lawefull for this man, though he be not his owne man, but his wiues, to depart from his wife, if he wil enter into religion and vowe chaſtitie, which Montanus counſelleth and teacheth his Propheteſſes to doe: as before is declared. And this thing Pope Alex. doth not reaſoning ſcholaſticè, or argumentatiuè: but autoritate ſuprema diffinitiuè. The aforeſayde Chapter of Alex. doth alſo well ſerue to my purpoſe layd in the Chapter before going, to proue him a Tatian: But I remit it to thy applying, gentle reader.
               Here the blinde moles of our time, both in nature,Obiection. and wyll ſightleſſe, will (keping themſelues in the darke earth) roote vp the holeſome hearbe of truth, rootes (if they can) and all. Or at the leaſt, heaue at them by falſe argument. And bycauſe the ſayd Decretall Epiſtle of Alex. hath: Si tamen poſt deſponſationē. &c. If notwithſtanding it appeare that there hath not ben carnall copulation betwene them after the contracte, they will therevpon defende him to be no Montaniſt: for that Montanus Propheteſſes had (as they wil geſſe) copulation carnall: and after that, ſeuered they them ſelues from their huſbandes. Which the Churche of Rome (ſay they) admitteth not, as alſo here the Decretall ſéemeth to meane. And therfore will conclude, the Montaniſtes had mariage bycauſe of copulation: But in this caſe there is no matrimonie, bicauſe there is no copulation. Which ſhift is onely in effecte to ſay, that this partie, who ſtandeth in the caſe of the Decretall,Anſwere. hath not exerciſed that office in mariage, payde that debt, and vſed the right, which he might, ought & was

lawful to do. For it is proued before in ye thrée chapters alleaged, that aſſone as the parties haue conſented, to hold and to haue eche other, they then from that time, are huſband and wife: though copulation followe not. By reaſon wherof, thei can not conclude: thei haue not coupled their bodies togither: Ergo, they are not man and wife: no more than if the Paſquil ſhould ſay: Pope Ioan hath coupled hir body with hir Cardinall or Secretarie, or horſe keper: Ergo, they are man and wife. For as by ye latter concluſion, we ſhuld make a whore Pope, an honeſt maried wife: ſo by the firſt we ſhould eſtéeme the bleſſed Virgin no wife: bicauſe ſhe neuer ioined hir body.Ibidem. &c. which is contrary to the chap. Beata Maria. Seing then mariage beginneth, and is full & perfecte matrimonie, from the giuing of the conſent, & ſpeaking of ye words (de praeſenti) then muſt alſo ye right of matrimonie, and due to maried perſons in that moment begin, and forth on holde. I meane the righte of eche of their bodies apertayneth to the other thenceforth, according to Paules doctrine afore ſpecified. For as S. Thomas ſayth: Et ſi matrimonium non eſt eſſentialiter,
                  In ſup. ad. 3 q. 48. art. 1.
                   
                  ipſa coniunctio carnalis: tamen eſt quaedā aſſociatio viri & vxoris in ordine, ad carnalem copulā &c. That is: Although matrimonie doth not eſſentially conſiſt in the entercourſe it ſelfe of the perſons bodies: yet is it a certaine coupling of the man and wife in order and diſpoſition to the ſame. So that as ſone as they conſent, eche of them are inueſted with the right ouer the others body. Whereby he cannot, as the Decretal ſayth (Priuata duci lege) be perſuaded with conſideration of his priuate eſtate or perſon, for that he is not Monodicos, at his owne pleaſure or liberty, as Paule, ſaith in the place of the Corinthes afore mentioned: Vir nō habet poteſtatem ſui corporis, ſed vxor. &c. And ſo

likewiſe, the man hath not power ouer his own body, but the wife. So that, that wil wherwith once ſhe or he moued by priuate care, of eyther of their own perſons or eſtates, might haue vowed, willed, and at pleaſure & libertie conſented, is altered, made bound, and becommeth by the contracte, ſuch a ſubiect, that it dependeth, (as touching the altering of the ſtate, of eyther of their bodies or mindes) vpon the yea or nay of the perſon entituled and befaythed therewith. (S. Thomas) De illis tantum bonis poteſt eſse votum,
                  In ſup. q. 64 art. 4.
                   
                  quae noſtrae ſubiacent voluntati, qualia non ſunt ea, in quibus vnus alteri tenetur: & ideo in talibus non poteſt aliquis votum emittere, ſinc conſenſu eius, cui tenetur. Vnde cum cō
                     iuges ſibi inuicem tencantur in redditionem debiti, per quam continentia impeditur, non poteſt vnus abſque conſenſu alterius continentiam vouere, & ſi vouerit, peccat, & non debet ſeruare votum. &c. In thoſe onely things, doth a vowe holde, which bene ſimply ſubiecte to the vowers owne wil. Of the which ſort, thoſe thinges are not, in the which we are indebted and in daunger to other. And therefore of ſuch things no man can promiſe or vowe: withoute the conſente of the other partie, to whome the right appertayneth. Hence therefore is it, that bycauſe man and wife holde ech to other (as in a Reciprocal ſort) in a mutual debt and payment thereof, by the which continence is broken,A phraſe of a Tatian. the one can not without the others conſent, vowe chaſtitie. Which if he yet ſhoulde, he ſinneth, and ought not to kepe hys vowe. &c. Thus far Aquinas. I doubt not but now that theſe two things playnly appeare.  Firſt, that the right of the maried perſons ouer ech others body, beginneth and taketh hold, immediatly vpon the conſent giuen, & wordes (de praeſenti) ſpoken.  Secondly, that of conſent

matrimonie doth onely and eſſentially conſiſt, though there were neuer copulation had therin. So that if we graunt that the elder Montaniſtes had carnall copulation in their mariages, and that the caſe of the Decretall had none: yet bycauſe mariage is the conſent and not the acte of. &c. by the which conſent once giuen, the right of their bodies is tranſferred to eche other: yea though there followe no copulation: therefore Pope Alex. for vowe of religion ſeuering them that are maried (as are the conſenters, though abſtayners) muſt be a Montaniſt. And the moſt ſhift is, to ſay that he is not with the vulgare people, ſo open & manifeſt, as the elder, who is more gentler of the twayne. But what néede I to aunſwere the ſame friuolous ſhift, conſidering, that the ſame clauſe, Si tamen. &c. wherein Pope Alex. forſpeaketh the mutuall acceſſe of their bodies, is not added to the intent, to declare that matrimonie thereby is made: but onely to this ende, that by not vſing his wife, he may ſéeme ſtil to abide in his purpoſe of entring into religion, and not to ſtarte therefro: as otherwiſe, he enioying his wiues body, ſhould doe by that déede, which is directe contrary to the purpoſe of abſtayning, which the religious men vow. For as Dominus praepoſitus ſayth,Sup eodem. The ſenſe of the Decretall. though the yong man (in the caſe of the Decretall) meant to enter into religion: as yet he had not firmly and wholly determined the ſame, nor vowed it. Wherfore ye Pope willed him, leaſt that the two yeres in this vncertaine and variable debating ſhould ouerſlippe him, and ſo ſhould incurre Periurie, to contract matrimony, and betrouth himſelf according to his othe. The which notwithſtanding, he afterward might enter into religion and vowe if he woulde. The clauſe, Si tamen, which therevpon followeth, is then

onely added, bycauſe he thereby ſhould declare, that he ſtarteth not from that purpoſe: and as they call it (non conuolat ad vota directè contraria continentiae,) did not eſtabliſh himſelfe in the ſtate of matrimony: which is direct contrary to their Tatian rules and religion, as S. Thomas in the authoritie nexte before alleaged ſayth.
               If they ſhall obiect, that in the caſe of the Decretall the woman conſented to relinquiſhe the right: and in Montanus doctrine, the ſeperation and vowe is done without any ſuch conſent: then to anſwere the ſame, I alleage that the true meaning and interpretation of the ſame Chapter (according to the cōmon opinion of the Doctors) is otherwiſe: who alleage it, to proue that the party maried, may performe his vowe made before copulation. And maugre the will of the other, & wythout ye conſent enter into religion:Diſtin. 32. c. Scriatim. as the ſame D. praepoſitꝰ Cardinal. declareth thus: Diſtingue poſt Gemi. & Car. Quandoque coniuges contraxerunt non tamen eſt copula conſummatū, & tunc alter inuito alio etiam remanente in ſaeculo poteſt religionem intrare, & remanens in ſaeculo cum alio cōtrahere, & eſt caſus extra de ſponſſ. c. Commiſſum. ibidem de conuer. coniug. c. Ex publico. That is, diſtinguiſhed after the opinion of two Doctours Gemi. and Card. that ſometymes the huſbande and wife haue contracted, and not vſed copulation, & then the one may without the others leaue, yea, though repugning and tarying in the ſeculer and worldly eſtate, enter into religion. And the partie remaining behinde in the ſeculer eſtate (they cal it the world) may marry. As a ſpeciall caſe in the chapter Commiſsum, &c. & Ex publico, declare. In ye which allegation appeareth how the ſame chapter or Decretall

Epiſtle of Alex. is vnderſtanded. And to make the practiſe of theſe Popiſts more plaine, I wil here briefly rehearſe the caſe of the ſame chapter Ex publico, by the ſayde Doctours alleaged,Ex. de cōuerſ. which is thus. The ſame Alex. 3. writeth to the Byſhoppe of the Dioceſſe of Brixien. whome he deputeth his delegate in this matter: that by a certayne publique inſtrument it appeareth to him: that whereas the Byſhop of Verone toke in hande to determine and ende a cauſe of matrimony depending betwene a certayne man, one A. on the one partie, & a certayne woman, one M. on the other partie:A faythfull Biſhop againſt a falſe Pope. All men were not of the Popes minde. he, by his diffinitiue ſentence approued ye matrimonie: and therevpon enioyned the woman, that ſhe ſhould betake hir to hir huſbande, and vſe hym with all wifelike and mariageable affection. The which thing ſith ſhe denied to doe, ſhe was, by the ſame Byſhop excommunicated. The which notwithſtanding, we commaunde thée (ſayth the Pope) albeit ſhe is maried to the ſame man, and yet remayneth (as ſhe ſayth vntouched of him) that if it appeare that he hath not had companie with her, and that ſhe will enter into religion, taking of hir, ſufficiente warrantize or ſuretie, that ſhe ſhall within the terme of two monethes, either go to hir huſbande, or leauing him, chooſe religion: then abſolue hir from the ſentence of excommunication wherein ſhe ſtandeth: in ſuch wiſe, that if ſhe wil enter into religiō, they ſhall reſtore eche to other the giftes on eyther ſide giuen & receyued. &c. It is moſt playne that the Pope Alex. ſo fauoreth ye vowed life, yt although the parties are by god (who worketh the conſent of the minde) coupled togither, yet he dare ſeperate them, contrary to the fayth of Chriſtian religion, wherein it is plighted and faſtened. Surely Paul dareth not doe ſo. For he ſayth:

Let not the maried perſons defraude ech other,
                     1. Corinth. 
                        •
                     . vnleſſe it be perhaps for a ſeaſon, and that by both their conſentes. Agayne Vnuſquiſque ergo, in quo vocatus eſt, fratres, in hoc, maneat apud Deum. that is: Brethren let euery man abyde before God, in that eſtate of life, vnto the which he is called. But it is no maruell that this Pope ſpake ſo, for he had not the ſpirite that Paule ſpake by, as their diuers behauiour declareth. For Paul called to the office of the Apoſtleſhip of the Gentiles, neyther ſhouldred with Barnabas, Apollo,
                  Crantz. 6.
                   or anie other. Contrarywiſe the L. Alex. ſhouldred out Victor, Paſcall, Calixte, Innocente (or foure other, by what name ſo euer the writers name them) all called therto by Gods ordinarie meane, the Emperour. Paule, for the quietneſſe of the congregatiō, remitteth of his very right:Plat. Sabellie. Decad. 1. Lib. 7. Sigeſſ. Contin. 
                  Alex. for his honor reſiſteth Fredericke the Emperour by force of Armes. Paule honoureth all eſtates of Princes, and humbleth himſelf before Agrippa. &c: But Alex. rideth from the Citie of Totiacū
                   to Lingerim, with Levves the French king, & Henrie of England wayting vpon foote as his Pages, leading hys Horſſe by the brydle, the one on the right, the other on the lefte hande, in great pompe and iolitie: yea, and cauſeth the Emperour to lye proſtrate before his féete.Sabell. Ibid
               
               But to returne to our purpoſe: it behoued the Pope ſo to councel and entice al men by right and by wrong to the vowed life, bycauſe, that many withſtode him: as the ſayde Byſhop of Veron did. Alſo bycauſe that elſe, he ſhould ſéeme to condemne the abſtayning life in others, and reſtrayne the ſame in the cleargie, in whome he (aboue all others) alowed the ſame, and compelled thoſe that ſhould receyue orders to enter into.
               Finally then to conclude, for as much as Pope Alex.
                  
teacheth the departure of the man from the womā in the c. Commiſsum:
                  Decret lib. 3. tit 3.123.
                   & the woman from the man, in the ſayd c. Ex publico: when as gladly the man would kepe his wife in the one caſe, and the wife hir huſband in the other caſe: and that bycauſe, they will profeſſe themſelues a Monke, or a Nunne: which is an hereticall ſecte, as ſhall be declared hereafter. No indifferent reader can denie, but that the Romaniſtes or Popiſtes holding his ſteppes, are Montaniſtes: breaking Gods ordinance, and diſhonoring the Chriſtian fayth, wheron the ſame contracte is plighted.
            
            
               Pelagianes.
               
                  
                     In epiſtola ad Cteſiph.
                     Epiſtola. 106.
                     
                  
                  THe Hereſie of the Maniches, was the ground (as Hierome wryteth) to this which aroſe of Pelagiꝰ, alſo called by ſirname Brito, or Briton, for difference ſake of Pelagius Tarrentus, as Auguſtin declareth, who being a man of a moſte hote & earneſt zeale, was firſt a godly and good Chriſtian: promoted to diuers dignities by the Church, is in Syria likewiſe made Monke. But afterwardes fell from the Church and became an Archeheretique: and began to ſowe the ſéedes of that wéede, about the yeare of our Lorde, as Proſper ſayth .415. But as Martianus ſayth, 414. in the .5. yeares of Honorius and Theodoſius the Emperours raygnes. In diuers places, in the Eaſt, in Fraunce,Lutzubburg. 
                  Rome, and thence, he himſelfe came into this realme of Englande to eare our lande wyth the ſame.

The principall and chiefeſt aduauncers of this ſect, to let other paſſe, was Celeſtius & Iulianus as Auguſtine declareth: and are of the ſame Celeſtius (who is very famous therein) called Celeſtianes. And in this realme, (beſides Pelagius himſelf) one Seuerianus and Agricola his ſonne, ſet forwarde the ſame, about the yeare of our Lorde, as Proſper declareth .432.
               
               The Hereſie, that firſt tooke hold of Pelagius,
                  Their Hereſie. Aug. liber. 1. q. 2. epiſtola. Pelag. c. 13. Ibidem. Liber. 4. c. 2. Et de gratia & libro arbio tr. ad valent. c. 5.6. &. 15. Prosper de ingratis. was yt he taught that mā notwithſtanding Adams fall, had not loſt his frée will: but fully and naturally enioyeth the ſame. Of this, as of their firſt beginning & whereof they are moſt famous, I call them in their blazone Freevvill Pelagianes: and not bicauſe it is their onely ſole hereſie. For out of it, there ſpringeth diuers: but ſpeciallye tvvo notable errors, no leſſe horrible then hurtfull: As firſt, concerning originall ſinne, ſecondly Iuſtification. Of which two perillous braunches, and ranke roote, bicauſe I determine to intreate, I wyll procéede on this maner. Firſt ſetting & laying a parte the doctrine of ye olde Pelagianes in order as they ſtand, I will ſecondely couche ſeuerallye the doctrine of the yong Pelagians (the Montaniſtes before gone) next after euery of their fathers faults: ſo that by ech of them, fo coupled togither, thou better mayſt marke howe the yong Cockatrice croweth after the elders note. Entring thus vpon the error of frée will.Free will.
               
               
                  Pelagius dicit in libro de libero arbitrio. Habemus poſſibilitatem vtriuſque partis a deo inſitā,
                  Aug. de gratia Chriſti q. Pelag. & Celeft. c. 18.
                   
                  velut quadam (vt ita dicam) radicem fructiferam atque foecundam, quae ex voluntate hominis, diuerſa gignat & pariat, & quae poſsit ad proprij cultoris arbitrium, vel nitere flore virtutum, vel ſentibus horrere vitiorum. Pelagius (quoth Auguſtine) ſayth in his worke that he

made for frée will in this wiſe. We poſſeſſe a certayne ableneſſe and poſſibilitie to both wayes. Which God hath planted in vs lyke (as I may ſay) vnto a certayne fruitfull roote, which of mans owne will bringeth forth and beareth diuers fruites. And the which euen at the pleaſure of the tylther thereof, can eyther be comely & beawtifully arayed with flowers of vertue, or elſe doe the contrarie, by bearing bryers or wéedes. Whereas in the former part of this treatiſe I vſed to gather the ſumme of ye Hereſie, I ſhall not néede here in this place to doe ſo now: for that it is ſummary, brief and playne ynough. But as I before promiſed, ſo I will here annexe the opinion of the Popiſts, after ſuche maner, as they accuſing and confuting one another, ſhall both bewray their Felowes, and condemne themſelues. The yeare, anno. 1563. there came forth a booke printed in the ſhop of Ziletus at Venetia intituled de quadripartita Iuſticia.
                  The biſpops accuſeth Soto the Emperour confeſſor, alſo the Deane Ruard. Luſitane. Li. 1. c. 25.
                   The author whereof is one Luſitanus Lyrienſis Epiſcopus, who hath dedicated ye ſame his worke to the late Councell holden at Trent. In the which he accuſeth Dominicum Soto the late Emperor Charles ye fift his Confeſſor or Ghoſtly Father, and Ruardum Tapperum Deane of Louaine, of this hereſie of Pelagiſme, on this ſort. Magis ergo placet modo ſententia Aúguſtini Hippo. epiſcopi, & Gregorij Ariminenſis, quam alia oppoſita, nec ſoli ſunt Auguſtinꝰ & Gregorius, ſed multos habent aſſeclas grauiſſimos quos memorabimus. Nunc recens plurimū reuerendus Dominicus Soto Philoſophus & theologus doctiſsimus, & in ſtudijs bonarum ſcientiarum plurimū verſatus in ſuo opere de natura & gratia, multis innixis rationibus cenſuit.
                  The Popiſhe Pelagianiſme 
                  Abſquè auxilio ſpeciali gratiae poſſe hominem bene moraliter agere. Vt interius latius ponitur atque

explicatur ex ipſo. Quantum autem pertinet ad queſtionem preſētem, refert Gregorium Ariminēſem in eo quod Gregorius negat vllum eſſe opus bonum, antequam in vltimum finem referatur, qui eſt Deus. Addit quoque Sotus quod non immerito Scholae omnes theologorum Gregorio reclament. Againe, Ad dicta doctoris Ruardi,
                  Luſitanus cöt, quadripart. Iuſti. li. 1. c. 7.
                   
                  quae profecto non placent iam nunc dicamus in ſpeciali. Docet itaque in tertia propoſitione, quod voluntas praeuenta à deo per amorem finis, in rebus fidei imperare poteſt mediorum inquiſitionē, diſquirere, quod ſit conuenientiſſimum, & eligere quod commodiſsimum iudicauerit. Docet in quinta, quod voluntas ſic praeuenta ſi plura ſint media vtilia poſt inquiſitionem libere elegit, aut poteſt eligere, medium ſibi magis conueniens. Docet in .6. quod fidelis homo in lumine fidei diuinitus accepto, ſic praeuentus poteſt cogitare, cognoſcere, credere ea quae ſunt fidei, operare opera ſalutis, & alijs habitibus vti. Vt declarat ſtatim antequam illam ſextā concluſionem ponat in forma. Docet in ſeptima quod homo non fidelis, ſed ſufficienter inſtructus voluntate per pium affectum à domino preparata, poteſt velle credere. Et intelligit, vt declarat, quod omnia iſta poteſt in potentia propinqua voluntas ita praeuenta & preparata ſine alio auxilio prius natura voluntatē flectente quā voluntas ipſa credere velit, imperare, aut eligere ſine alia motione ſpeciali, cum ſolo auxilio generali. Vt volūtas praeuenta per piam affectionem, per ſuos habitus à Deo, per amorem finis, ſit iam ſufficiens principium ad credendum, ad vtendum ſuis habitibus, ad praecipiendum de medijs inquirendis atque eligendum cum ſola generali influentia: tanquam ad credendum ad bonis habitibus, iam habitis vtendum, ad praecipiendum de medijs

& ad eligendum, Non indigeamus vllo modo immediate adiutorio gratia Chriſti ſed ſolū mediate, id eſt vt det nobis illa principia, piam affectionem, amorem finis, bonos habitus. Cum enim ille doctor poſitis hijs principijs in voluntate, ſeu in homine, non requirat auxilium ſpeciale gratiae dei. Vt voluntas velit ſecundum illa principia operari, & operetur atque dicat generalem influentiam ad id ſufficere: manifeſtum eſt: quod ad opera volūtatis & illorum principiorum: Excludit neceſsitatem gratiae Chriſti immediatae &c. The which in our tong meaneth thus. Auguſtines & Gregorie Ariminenſis,
                  The Papiſtes elſe had wrecked on their carcaſſe long agoe. iudgemēt better liketh me than the other that are contrarye to the ſame. Ne yet are Auguſtine and Gregory alone of the ſame minde: but they haue on their ſides many, yea and thoſe worthie champions, of whome I will make mention. Now very lately the reuerende M. Dominick Soto an excellēt Philoſopher and diuine, and very muche exerciſed in the ſtudies of good artes,Soto a frier Pelagian. in his worke intituled de Natura & gratia perſuaded by many reaſons, is of this minde. That man of him ſelfe, without any ſpeciall helpe and grace, is able to worke that thing which is morallie good, as hereafter is declared out of his owne worke. But as touching that which belongeth to thys preſent queſtion, he doth rehearce the ſayde Gregorie Ariminenſ. in that matter: wherein the ſame Gregorie denieth, that any worke is morally good, before it be referred to the vttermoſt end and mark, which is God. And further,Gregorie Arminenſis, against Soto, The Popes ſcholes Heretiques. the ſame Soto addeth, that all the Scholes of the diuines are (not without cauſe) againſt Gregorye therein. But nowe let vs ſpeake in ſpeciall to the ſayings of Doctor Ruard, the which truely done nothing lyke. For in his thirde propoſition he teacheth

thus. That a mans will preuented of God, by loue of the ende, can in matters of fayth gouerne and rule the inquiſition and ſearching out of the meanes, finde out what is moſt méeteſt, & chooſe that which he ſhall iudge moſt commodious. In the fyft concluſion, he teacheth yt a will ſo preuented, if in any profitable meanes after reaſoning and ſearching had, appeare: may of it ſelfe freely, or is able, to chooſe that of thoſe meanes, which is moſt fytteſt. In the ſyxt concluſion, he teacheth that a faythfull perſon, who is in the light of fayth, giuen him from aboue, can ſo preuented, thinke, knowe and beleue the things appertayning to fayth, worke the workes of ſaluation, and vſe the other habites, or naturall qualities, as he immediately before the faſhioning of of his ſixt concluſion declareth.A Turke may beleue if he liſt. In the ſeauenth he teacheth, that an Infidel (but one ſufficiently learned) his will firſte prepared by God through a godly affection, can of himſelfe haue the will to beleue.Luſitan. expoundeth Ruarde. And he vnderſtandeth (as himſelfe declareth) that mans will ſo preuented and prepared (as aforeſayd) can without any other helpe and ayde, of hir owne facultie, power and abilitie worke all theſe thinges: nature fyrſt bowing the will, before wil hir ſelf liſteth to beleue, to rule, or chooſe, without any other ſpecial motiō, by the only general ayde. So as mans wil preuēted by a godly affection, by his habites or qualities from God, by loue of the ende, ſhould nowe be a ſufficient beginning to beleue, to vſe the ſayd habites, to order the ſearching out of commodions meanes, and to chooſe them by an onely general influence. As though to the acte of beleuing, to the vſing of good habites and qualities already receyued, to the ſearching out of meanes and choyſe therof, mans will by no meanes néeded the immediate &

direct ayde and grace of Chriſt: But that Chriſt ſhould after a ſorte, farre of, all onely lay that ground, a godly affection, a loue of the ende and good habites or qualities.The application to the Pelagian. Whereas therefore, this Doctour (thoſe beginnings ſet in mans will) requireth not the grace & ſpeciall help of God, that will forth on, may luſt to work according to the ſame beginning: in this he trauayleth to ſhew, that the cōmon generall influence of nature, is thereto ſufficient. So that it is manifeſt, that he excludeth from the workes of mans will and their beginnings, the immediate neceſſitie of the Lorde Ieſus Chriſtes grace.
               Thus haſt thou heard (gentle reader) how Luſitanus a Byſhop and father of the counſell, indicteth, yea and conuicteth Dominicus Sotto, by his owne wordes a felon. For what playner confeſſion can be had of any Pelagians mouth, than to ſaye as Sotto before hath ſayd (vnleſſe Luſitanus béelye him) that man of hymſelfe withoute any ſpeciall helpe and grace, is able to worke the thing which is good.Soto a flat Pelagian. Is not this all one with that which Pelagius ſayth? That mans will, that fertile trée, can eyther flouriſh with vertues, or doe otherwiſe with vice, at the tilthers owne pleaſure? And no leſſe doth he to Ruard Tapper the Deane of Louaine, at whoſe face he ſo aymeth the vowe and bolte, that it ſeemeth, he, by his ouertaking of the Pelagians, is of ye twaine,Ruardus a Pelagian. the brimmer marke. For, which of the olde Pelagians, hath bene ſo impudent to ſay, that if a Turke and Infidell knew, and had learned the Articles of the beliefe withoute boke, he might beleue then in Ieſus Chriſt, if he liſted, or if he would: as Ruarde in his .7. concluſion declareth? Although he (for ſhame I geſſe) addeth this, that he muſt be prepared by God through

a godly affection: the which in effect is no more to ſay, but the Turke who vnwares is a ſléepe in his dronken error, being waked after his ſlumber, tolde or aduiſed that he was dronke, may, now at his own wil, receiue from the officers hande, eyther the ſwéete comfortable water of the Goſpell Ieſus Chriſt, being taught what it is, or elſe his firſt ſtrong wine. So that the vttermoſt that he graunteth to God, is no more, but to be as the waker of the ſlumbring man, being nowe neyther dronke nor ſober. But be it that they teach God to prepare ſo the minde of man, as that he worketh therein an alteration, yea, a forwardeneſſe in the man, as a ground layd, wheron he may further builde, if he wil, or if he wil not: are they not yet Pelagians? yes truly: vnleſſe they will graunt, that all our will and déedes to God, muſte be continually gouerned and ſtayed by Gods ſpecial grace in Ieſus our Chriſt. For otherwiſe howe could it be true that our Sauior hath ſayd? Sine me nihil poteſtis facere. without me ye can do nothing.Ioan. 5.
                   For the Pelagians themſelues, though they graunt ſo much, are yet Pelagians and Heretiques: as S. Hierom noteth. Ita Dei gratiam ponunt Pelagiani,
                  In Epiſtola ad Cteſiph. 
                  vt non per ſingula opera nitamur & regamur eius auxilio, ſed referunt ad liberū arbitriū & ad praecepta legis, ponentis illud Eſaiae: Legem Deus in adiutoriū poſuit, vt in eo Deo referendae ſint gratiae, quod tales nos condiderit, qui noſtro arbitrio poſsumus eligere bona, & vitare mala. On this wiſe doe the Pelagians, place the grace of God, that we are thereby, not in all, but in ſome of our workes, ſtayed and gouerned by the helpe thereof, but they referre the ſame to our frée will, and to the commaundements of the law, pleading the authoritie of Eſay: the lord hath giuen a law for the ayde of man:

So that then we ſhal prayſe God, for that he hath created vs ſuch, as can by our owne fréewil, chooſe good and eſchewe the euill.
               That the Pelagians graunt as much in our wil, to the grace of God, as Tapper doth, it is euident.
               If they nowe (conuicted with the manifeſtneſſe of their hereſie) will ſay, it is not their Churches doctrine, but Schole doctrine, what ſhal thei in ſo ſaying meane? Whence commeth their Church men, but from their Scholes? If it be ſo that they are learned, as they bragge, where haue they learned it? Not at Geneua, not at Franckfort. &c: if in their owne ſcholes Louain, Paris or ſuch like, whoſe thoſe ſcholes be, and what doctrine therin is taught, Soto and Tapper declare. Soto ſayth, all the ſcholes are on his ſyde, Luſitanus wyth Aug. Greg. Ariminenſis, and the valiant hoſt of champions following them, are their profeſſed enimies. Wherfore ſendeth Soto his bokes out of the ſchole dores? To what ende doth Deane Ruarde ſende his doctrine from his vniuerſitie of Louaine, approued wyth the glorious priuileges of ſchooles and Monarches? But bicauſe they will haue their Church doctrine (and not ſchole queſtions) knowen to ſimple men: otherwiſe, they were but braggers & vaynglorious perſons. Whereof I would our Popiſts by their foreſayd ſhift, ſhould rather than I, accuſe thē. Be not amazed, gētle reader, to heare this their diſtinction of ſchole doctrine and Church doctrine, which is as much to ſay, as ſchole truth, and Church truth. But ſtay a while, let me with thy pacience, ſomewhat digreſſe, and thou ſhalt briefly ſee ye factions of their ſcholes, wherin they are brought vp, and whence they bragge them ſelues to be good Schole men.
               
                  The chiefeſt founder of them, and the only father that made their vnnaturall concorde for Diuinitie,The faction of the Popiſtes ſchooles. as the arbour declareth, was Peter Lombarde who is partely receyued of his children, partly refuſed, as the 26. errors (wherof the vniuerſitie of Paris hath condemned him) declareth. From him the reſt of the Diuines come. Some are of the faction of thoſe that are called Terminalles, ſome Reàlles, ſome Formals, ſome Thomiſtes, ſome Scotiſts, ſome Occamiſtes: yet al theſe wil be Catholique diuines, and in the truth, though they are thus in their factiōs deuided one agaynſt another. Qui Thomam ſequuntur,
                  Eraſ. con. Lat. 
                  a Scoto & Gerſone diſsentiunt, eos penè pro Haereticis habent. They of Thomas faction diſagrée, both from Scotus and Gerſon, counting them almoſt for Heretiques. And this thing they doe within the ſchole walles very quietly,A mocke. and brotherlie: though they warre abrode, as Eraſmus ſayth.In Encheridij Epiſtola. 
                  Sed quid futurum arbitramur, ſi Turcis vt Chriſtum amplectantur. Occamos, aut Durandos, aut Scotos, aut Gabrieles, aut Aluaros propoſuerimus? Quid cogitabunt aut quid ſentiēt (ſunt enim illi vt nihil aliud certè homines) vti audierint illas ſpinoſas & inextricabiles quaeſtiones, de inſtantibus, de formalitatibus, de quid ditatibus, de relationibus? preſertim vti viderint de ijs adeo non cōuenire, inter magnos illos religionis profeſsores: vt frequenter vſque ad pallorem, vſque ad conuitia, vſque ad ſputa, nonnun
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      vſque ad pugnos, inuicem digladientur. Vbi praedicatores pro ſuo Thoma, cominus atque eminus pugnantes. Minoritas contra ſubtiliſsimos & ſeraphic os doctores iunctis vmbonibus tuentes. Alios vt Nominales, alios vt Reales loqui. &c. What thinke we (ſayth Eraſmus) would come to paſſe, or be done, if we, perſuading the Turkes to

Chriſtian religion, ſhould offer them, the Occamiſtes or Durandians, the Scotiſtes, Gabrieliſtes, or Aluariſtes to peruſe?The ſchole doctrine. What would they thinke or iudge, (for they are, as no more, ſo men) when they ſhal ſée theſe knotty and vncleaneable ſubtilties, of Inſtaunces, of Formalities, of Quiddities & Relations? Eſpecially when they ſhall ſée ſo much diſcorde amongſt thoſe their chiefeſte profeſſours of their religion, that oftentimes they queſtion hotely amongſt themſelues,The ſchole concorde. Frier Ruſh moderator. Tantara tantara tantara tara. euen to reprochfull wordes, ſpitting one at another: yea, and nowe and then, the matter come to fyſtes? There, vpon the one ſide, the preaching Friers, in their Thomas his quarrell, firſt ſkirmiſhing farre of wyth ſhotte: at laſt aduauncing, ſet on to the puſh of pyke and handgrypes: Vpon the other ſide the Minorits coupled to their targets, ſhield and defend their moſt ſubtile and Seraphicall Doctours, nowe calling by the name of Nominals nowe Reals &c. as aboue. Where ſo many factions, ſectes, & part takings are, all chalenging the name of Catholiques: and of all, ſome muſte lye, who can (hauing care for his ſoule health) iuſtly commit himſelfe, to their credite? Seing they hauing ſo many factions, neuer would open the ſame as yet, to the ſimple, to whome it appertayneth to know, vnto what part, they ſhall for reaſon and truthes ſake encline. Howe daungerouſly and with what care, ought we to take their workes into our hands,Homer. odiſs. or reade the ſame? But eyther as Vliſses paſſed the Maremaydes, or elſe liued within the Witches Circes dores? Wherfore it were wel, towarde the diſcharge of their credit and ſimple dealing, that thoſe men that of late haue fayned names, and belied ſectes on others, ſhould truly ſet ſo out their owne in their proper termes, ſo as the ſimple may know the

ſchole from the Church, or which part of their ſchole is of their Church. Of the doctrine whereof,In li. ante. 60. annos edit. Lutet. 
                  Rupertus Gallus, a man of no leſſe holineſſe than gret learning, about .300. yeares paſt, was by viſion aſcertayned, that the Diuines then, of their Churche, were like vnto a man, that hauing at his backe plenty of good and holeſome breade, not withſtanding mambled a flint ſtone, that he helde in his hande. Now to returne.
               But that the credite of Eraſmus (that Phoenix of our age) may be without queſtion (omitting Picus Mirandula, Nicholaus Clemangis,
                  The authour of this worke retourneth.
                  In lib. contra Luth. art. 36.
                   
                  Catherinus Compſanus epiſc. with others that find fault with theſe ſeas & factions of their diuines) I wil rehearſe (returning to my place from whence I firſt departed) the opinion of M. Shacklock his Roffenſis, which maketh mentiō both of the diſcord of the ſchole men, & hereſie of their Diuines in this verie point. Hoc dixi propter Patres, quorum ſententiam ſequi malui, quam Scholaſticorum.
                  Roffenſis against the Popiſtes. 
                  Cum in hac re mutuo ſibi pugnent. Patres enim aſserunt, neminem poſse quic
                        
                           
                        
                        quam
                      boni velle, line ſpeciali▪ Dei auxilio, nec ſufficere generalem illum influxum. Nonnulli contra Scholaſtici ſic contendunt, hunc ſufficere, vt quis abſque illo auxilio benè moraliter agere, & bonum facere poſsit, non ſolum ex genere, verum etiā quod debitis vndique circumſtantijs ornatum fit. At ſi Scholaſticorum argutias aduerſus Patres, admittimus, ſequetur etiam, vt abſque hoc auxilio. Pharao quantū
                     uis indurati cordis ſuiſset, & ij qui traditi fuerunt in reprobum ſenſum, potuiſsent bene moraliter agere,The Fathers agaynst the Popiſtes. mihi ſane credibile non eſt. (that is) I ſay ſo, bicauſe of the fathers, whoſe iugement I had rather follow, than the ſchole men, the which in this poynte ſtriue eche cleane

contrary to other. The Fathers alleage, that no mannes will can wiſhe good wythout Gods ſpeciall ayde: and the generall influence, is not ſufficiente thereto. Contrarywiſe, many ſchole men, ſo reaſon, that the ſayde generall influence, is of it ſelfe ſufficient, wythout the ſame ſpeciall helpe. So that mans will of it ſelfe, is able to exerciſe it ſelfe morally wel. And to do that which is not onely generally good, but alſo adourned wyth all kinde of circumſtances. But if we ſhall admit & allowe the ſchole mens ſubtilties, agaynſt the fathers iudgementes, it would then alſo followe, that Pharao, although he had an hardened heart, and thoſe that are turned ouer into a reprobate ſenſe, ſhoulde be able likewiſe to doe ſo, which truely ſéemeth to me, not to be credite worthy. Thus farre Roffenſis: who maketh ſo playne the matter of the ſchole mens diſcorde among themſelues, and falſeneſſe of their opinions in this point, as that I néede not further to inſtructe thée thereof.
               Yet that notwithſtanding, I thought it my parte gentle reader, before I ende this poynt, to make thée priuy to two things. One is, that although the ſcholemen ſay, that man of his owne frée will, can worke & do that which is good: Yet for al that, ſome of them wil not graunt, but man for the entraunce into heauen, muſt obtayne grace.Euen wyth the Pelagians Bycauſe, though his déede is (bonū, tamen non meritoriū) good, yet it is not meritorious. In this they go iuſt togither with ye 
                  Pelagians, as out of the ſame authoritie of Hierome, ad Cteſiphon. appeareth. But this is talked of, vppon the poynte of ſhame: and as I may ſay at a deade lifte. The ſeconde is,More than the Pelagians howe that they goe beyonde the olde Pelagian, who ſayth, that a man hath néede, and is to be ayded and

inſtructed, by the law, as is before in ye ſame authority of Hierome alleaged. Cōtrarywiſe, they conclude, that he hath dictamen naturale, rectae rationis, cui ſe poſsit naturaliter conformare voluntas. That man hath in him a natural inſtruction, of right reaſon, to the which, will can naturally conforme himſelf. As if thou mark, (to let others for briefeneſſe paſſe,) Roffenſis in the laſt authoritie, thou ſhalt well perceiue.
               The firſt braunch of this roote is now to be intreated of: that is, their error and ignoraunce of originall ſinne, which muſt nedes be in the Church of both theſe Pelagians: bycauſe that they erre in, and be ignorant of the doctrine of man, his abilitie, and vnabilitie, as I may ſay, his pouertie and wealth. Wherout muſt néedes come and procéede, the doctrine and knoweledge of his originall ſinne and debte. This therefore is their error.
               
                  Pelagius per offenſam praeuaricationis Adae,
                  Secundum Conc. Auraſiac. 
                  non totum ſecundum corpus & animam in deterius dicit hominem commutatum, ſed anima libertate illaeſa durante, corpus tantummodo corruptioni credit obnoxium. That is: Pelagius ſayth that by the offence of Adams tranſgreſſion, the whole man is not both in body and ſoule, chaunged and become worſe: but that the body alone, (the ſoule remaining yet ſound, and in his libertie vntouched) is ſubiect to corruption. In ye which wordes, well mayſte thou (gentle reader) ſée, that he is ignoraunt of originall ſinne: bycauſe he erreth in the effect that followeth the ſame, the want of willes libertie. Iudging Adam ſound in himſelf, he thinketh that the ſame tranſgreſſion worketh corruption, onely in the bodies of vs his heires: which he ſuppoſeth, we only of the whole man receyue from him. And therefore

falſely teach the ſoule his frée will to remaine. For if they did knowe, that the ſoule of Adam, had after the fall, bene thereof vtterly ſpoyled, they coulde (conſidering his wife was knowen of him, but after his fall,) not, but conclude: that we haue ſuche poore and ſpoyled ſoules, as we receyued of his ouerthrowen eſtate. Vnleſſe they wil ſay, that ye ſoule commeth not (extraduce) of the roote of that running vine Adam. Of al which in déede it is moſt playne, that they are ignoraunte. The ſūme therfore of their doctrine which I meane here to note) is: that originall ſinne, is not any thing in any of vs: but in Adam: (as touching the empairing of the power of mans ſoule) & yet they graunte, that we haue a blemiſhe or hindraunce thereby, which according to their true meaning,Hilar. Arcla. Auguſt de reliq. Pelag. mai rather be called a puniſhmēt: that is, a baniſhment from heauen: & muſt haue entry of ſome other (for that corruptible bodies can not enter there, being in corruption, which they ſay we haue by Adams tranſgreſſion) as afore may appeare. And out of Auguſtine we may gather,Ep̄iſtola. 89.
                   yt they taught man to be borne without ſinne, ſo that then ye firſt ſinne, which in this life he cōmitted, was his originall ſinne. And then it muſt folow, that ſinne is in vs, but by imitation, not propagation. Attend now gentle reader: for here according to my promiſe I wil ioyne the Popiſts doctrine:The Popiſtes doctrine. ſo, as in one word, both the errors ſhal apeare playne. The ſame Dominicus Soto (of whō before I ſpake) that worthy Hercules of the Popiſts,Soto agaynſt Pighius. aſſaulteth egrely, one Albertus Pighiꝰ Campenſis one of their moſt famous Goliathes,
                  De natura et gratia. li. 1. c. 9.
                   in this maner. Igitur ſunt hoc aetatis, qui quamuis non omnia, partem tamem horum argumentorum contra vetuſtam opinionem opponentes, ab ea defecerunt, dicētes non eſse in ſingulis hominibus peccata

ſingula originalia: ſed vnum illud quod commiſit protoplaſtus: eſse originale delictum cuius omnes rei ſumus, & à quo denominamur peccatores. Horum primicerius Albertus Pighius, vir profecto & pius & doctus, qui nihilo ſecius malè de hoc audit, quaſi peccata in nobis originalia omnino inficietur. &c. (that is) There is alſo of this our age, ſome that denye, though not all, yet part of the argumentes: who opponing agaynſt the auncient opinion, haue reuolted therefro: ſaying that euery mans owne ſynnes, is not his originall ſinne: but only that one ſinne, which our firſt father committed, is our originall ſinne, wherof we are all gilty, and whereof we are called ſinners. The Enſigne bearer of theſe men is Albertus Pighius: a man truely both godly and learned: yet notwithſtanding herein, is euill ſpoken of. As if he wholly ſhould denie any originall ſinne to be in vs at all. &c. In the which wordes it is manifeſt, that Soto iudgeth euery man to be pure and frée from ſinne, vntill he hath himſelfe cō
                  mitted ſinne: and that counteth he the originall ſinne of euery man. And condemneth Pighius, for teaching the contrary: namely, for that he ſayth men are counted ſinners from the roote Adam. And therfore Soto agréeth with that laſt opinion of the Pelagians, alleaged out of Auguſtine.
                  
                     Controuerſiarum Ratiſponenſium controuerſia. 1.
                     
                     Ac iux. exē
                        plar. apd. Carol. Iuill.
                     Lutet. impreſſū. An. 1549. Fol. 32. b.
                   But Pighius though he ſayth (as Soto reciteth) that we are called ſinners of Adam, as he ſayth to Pope Paulus tertius▪ Cuius vnius reatu, omnes conſtricti naſcimur peccatores, à quo nos liberat, & abſoluit regenerationis in Chriſto gratia. (That is,) By the offence of which one Adam, al we obliged, are borne ſinners, from the whiche, the grace of regeneration in Chriſt, deliuereth and fréeth vs: Yet vnderſtandeth he, thys naming of vs, to be ſinners,

borne ſinners, obliged in Adam, and to haue néede of the grace of Chriſt: none otherwiſe. But that it, which was culpa in Adam, is in vs, rather poena than culpa. Wherein he agréeth with that opinion which is firſte appoynted to the Pelagians.
                  Ibidē. Fol. 8. a. Vnleſſe he be contrary to his concluſion. Sed vnde carentiam eius iuſticiae, aut adultis nobis, aut paruulis propriè peccatū demonſtrent, & nos eſse debitores illius iuſticiae, nihil habent. Immo id ipſum euidenti veritate aduerſatur. But howe it ſhoulde come to paſſe, that the wante of that originall righteouſneſſe, ſhould be either of vs that are of yeres, or to the babes counted properly for ſinne, and that we are debitors thereof, they can not ſhewe. Yea, the ſame is rather contrary to the manifeſt truth. Vnleſſe he be contrary to his concluſion, Nulla lege poſse paruulos obligari.
                  Ibidē. Fol. 9. a. 
                  Fol. 8. or to any other of his concluſions in the firſt .31. leaues,Diſcord of the Doctors for original ſin. (which if he be) or elſe vnderſtand not himſelfe (as it is moſt like) then muſt ſome take the payne as a good Conſtable, to agrée that eluiſhe ſkull with their braynes. That muſte not be Biell, although otherwiſe,
                     Lib. 2. diſtinct 30. q. 2.
                     
                     Peter Lombards opiniō. Anſelm. opinion.
                   he hath taken great trauayle. For Peter Lombard (one of the ſoundeſt of all the reſte) who ſayth and that well, that originall ſinne, is a diſeaſe of our nature gotten from Adam. &c. Alſo for Anſelmus whoſe opinion is, that it is wante of originall righteouſneſſe. &c. To accorde them, eche with others, as alſo D. Alexandr. Scotus, Thomas, Bonauenture, and diuers other, agaynſt whome, that godly Pighius & wor-Goliath ſtandeth. Otherwiſe thinking as wel of them ſelues, as Pighius did of himſelfe, they muſt deuiſe ſomething, of their owne braynes as he did: bycauſe their Church hath not determined the ſame.Lib. p̄dict. Fol. 2. a. As Albert Pighius ſayth in theſe wordes: Quid verò ſit ipſum

peccatum orìginis, & in quo conſiſtat eius propria ratio, eccleſiaſtica definitione certum non eſt. &c. that is, Our Church hath not yet determined, what originall ſinne it ſelfe is, or wherein the proper reaſon therof cō
                  ſiſteth. God woteth, there muſt néedes be ſmall knowledge of our iuſtification in Chriſt, when their Church preacheth not a certayne doctrine, of the firſt growing and aryſing of our accompt, nor teacheth what or how much therby it is. For as they acknowledge not ye bondage of mans will,Iuſtification. ne yet the impairment of his whole nature, ſithens the fall: ſo likewiſe, they both erre in the doctrine of iuſtification. But firſt the olde Pelagians, thus as I can briefly gather out of S. Auguſtine.
               
               
                  Dicimus inquit ſanctos veteris teſtamenti perfecta hinc Iuſtitia ad aeternam tranſiſse vitam, id eſt,
                        Lib. 1. contra Litteras Pela. c. 21.
                        
                        Lib. 4. c. 2.
                        
                      ſtudio & obſeruatione virtutum tranſiiſſe. We ſaye, quoth the Pelagians that all the Prophetes, Apoſtles and Sainctes of the time of the olde Teſtamente, haue departed hence and entred into the euerlaſting lyfe by perfecte righteouſneſſe (that is) by the endeuor and keping of vertue. In ſūme therfore this is their doctrine, (as I may gather the ſame out of ſainct Auguſtine in both thoſe places alleaged) that Iuſtification is a certayne vertue or qualitie in our ſelues, by the which, we are in our ſelues iuſtified, and not all onely in Chriſt.
               To the which verye well the Popes Church & doctors agrée:
                     The Popiſtes doctrine.
                     Tomo. 2. art. 8.
                     
                   & eſpecially the generall councell of Trent holden Anno. 1547. As Ruarde Tapper the Deane of Louaine (of whome before we ſpake) teſtifieth thus. Quare rectiſsime definitum eſt in concilio Tridentino: ſeſsione quinta, capite. 7. Quod cum iuſtificamur,
                  Fol. 30.
                   
                  non modo reputamur, ſed verè iuſti ſumus & nominamur, & Anathema eū cenſit, qui inhaerentē iuſticiā negat. Aliquanto

poſt,
                  Fol. 37. Ruard fighteth with Pighius. 
                  Ex quibus patet, quod nullā habet probabilitatem doctrina Alberti Pighij, qua dicit quod in Chriſto iuſtificamur coram deo, non in nobis: non noſtra, ſed illius iuſtitia, quae nobis iam cū illo cōmunicantibus imputatur. That is. Wherfore the generall coū
                  cell of Trent hath moſt perfectely determined in .5. ſeſſion the .7. chapter. that when as we are iuſtified, we are not ſo onely reputed, but we are truely iuſt and ſo called. The ſame generall councell holdeth him accurſed, which ſhall deny, that righteouſneſſe ſtickerh not in vs. And ſomewhat after he ſayth. Whereout it appeareth, that the doctrine of Albertus Pighius, hath no probabilitie therein. In which he ſayth, that we are before God iuſtified in Chriſt, and not in our ſelues, nor by our owne, but his righteouſneſſe, the which is now imputed and reckened to vs, that holde in communion thereof in him.
               
                  Luſitanus againſt Pighiꝰ.Alſo the ſayde Lyrienſis the Popes Achilles before ſpoken of, aſſaulteth the ſame Pighius in the ſame his worke before mentioned, defending the ſame error of the Pelagians againſt Pighius, as Soto for originall ſinne, and as Ruarde laſt before, for the point of Iuſtification was. After this ſort. Hunc errorem ex parte ſecutus eſt Albertus Pighius, qui ſicut prius docuerat, omnes homines peccatores naſci in Adam, non quaſi aliquod proprium peccatum ſeu culpā contrahant in ſeipſis,
                  Luſitanus and Pighius vnderſtand not Pighius alike. 
                  ſed ex ſola imputatione peccati Adae. Ita poſterius docuit homines iuſtificari in Chriſto, formaliter à peccatis, non per aliquam iuſtitiam, quam in ſeipſis accipiant realiter, ſed per ſolam imputationem Iuſtitiae Chriſti. Id ergo aſſerit Pighius, ſimul docens cum Caluino, quod in Chriſto, iuſtificamur in deo, non in nobis, non noſtra, ſed illius Iuſtitia, quae nobis cum illo,

iam communicantibus imputatur: & quod propriae iuſtitiae inopes, extra nos in illo doceamur iuſtitiā quaerere, à cuius iuſtitia per imputationem ſumus iuſti. &c. That is Albertus Pighius foloweth this error after a ſorte. Who as before he taught, that all men are borne tranſgreſſors in Adam, not as though they did worke any fault, or ſpeciall offence in themſelues, but onely by the accompting of Adams ſinne to them: Euen ſo, laſt of all, he hath alſo taught, that men are in Chriſt formallie iuſtified from their ſinnes: and not by anye righteouſneſſe, which they in thēſelues really receiue: but by the only accompting of Chriſtes righteouſneſſe vnto them. That is the ſame which Pighius aſcerteyneth, and togither with Caluin teacheth:He belieth Caluin. that in Chriſt we are iuſtified in God, not in our ſelues, by hys & not by our righteouſneſſe, ye which is accōpted ours, partaking therof in him: & that we lacking righteouſneſſe of our owne, are taught to ſeke the ſame without our ſelues in him: by whoſe imputed to vs, we are made righteous. &c. In which fray that Luſitanus & Ruarde haue againſt Pighius, it is euident, what they defende: namely, that man is iuſtified in himſelfe, by himſelfe and not by Chriſt, in Chriſt, as Pighius ſayth. Wherefore by al likelihode, they holde him accurſed, by ye ſame councell of Trentes authoritie. But of what force their curſſe is, they being Pelagians, Pighius (as I geſſe) foreſeing, ſpared not to ſpeake the truth, in this point, as in the ſame his foreſayde worke, in ſecunda controuerſia, may appeare.
               If thou arte minded to ſée more of their diſcorde reade M. Sententiarum diſtinct. 19. Li. 3.19.
                  Fayth iuſtifieth. 
                  Tho ſuper 6.2. ad Cor. ſuꝑ. 11. ſuper. 1. Cor. 1. ſupꝑ. 3. c. ad Titū. lect. 1. c. ad Timoth. c. 1. lect. 3. ſuper. Iacob. 2. In the which places,

the ſayde maiſter of the ſentences and S. Thomas proue, that Sola fides, fayth alone iuſtifieth. Such a mightie God is our God, that openeth ſometime the Diuels mouth, in thoſe whome he doth poſſeſſe, to cō
                  feſſe the truth: yea if Balaam be blinde with the affections, the mouth of his Aſſe.
            
            
               Coluthians.
               
                  Lib. 2. tomo. 2. Haer. 69. Lib. 1. c. 4. Haer. 65.
                  
                  
                     EPiphanius ſpeaketh of one Colluthus an Heretique, whoſe ſcholers were called Colluthiani. Alſo Theodoretus, ſpeaketh of the ſame name: which ſect I thinke is the ſame that Aug. remēbreth. Theſe men taught as the ſame Auguſtine ſayth, Deum non facere mala: contra illud quod ſcriptum eſt, Ego deus creans mala: that God did not work the yll: contrary to the ſaying that is writtē, I am the God,In the table of Luthers ofſpring. that worketh the euill. This doctrine doth Staphilus and Stapleton, teache in the explication of their Arbor, and in their booke.
            
            
               Gnoſtiques.
               
                  ABout the yeare of our Lorde 137. as Nicephorus, Euſebius and Theodoretus Cyri Epiſco. do witneſſe, one Carpocrates did (among other Heretiques) firſt ſpring, of whome, Euſebius ſayth, the ſect of the Gnoſtiques did ariſe. Of which

minde alſo Irenaeus is. The horrible doctrine and fylthie maners of them was vniuerſallie ſuche, as that we iuſtlye maye iudge, the Popiſtes to be extraught of that houſe and lygnage. The thing notwithſtanding that I intende to match, & ſet them in viewe eche with other, is the maner and rite that they vſed, whereof both Irenaeus & Epiphanius ſpeake: that they had Images painted, and alſo caſt of Golde, Siluer, and other mettall. Whereof they ſayde ſome, were the Images of Chriſt, made vnder Pontius Pilate, according to our Sauiours lykeneſſe. Some, the Images of Plato, Ariſtotle and Pythagoras. Before thoſe, vſed they to doe reuerence, after the maner of the Heathen. What the maner and doctrine of the Popiſtes, in this caſe is, the bookes of maſter Doctor Harding and M. Martiall, ſo euidently doe declare, as that (it concurring with the practiſe of the Church, whereof no man is ignoraunt) I néede not to rehearſe any wordes more ſpeciall, than euen ſo to referre thée, to the ſame writers. This hereſie hath had ſo good ſucceſſe, that euery Realme hath their ſpeciall Idoll, as S. George and S. Deniſe. Euery corporation his, as the Marchaunt Taylors of London, S. Iohn Baptiſt: the Grocers, S. Anteline. &c. and euery man his ſpeciall, and that for euery miſerie and euill.
            
            
               Anthropomorphites.
               
                  A Certayne Syrian called as Epiphanius ſayth Audius,
                  Haereſ. 50. Lib. 4. c. 10.
                   or as Theodoretus ſayth Audaeus (Auguſtine calleth them Vaudianos) dyd ſowe this errour vnder Valentinian the Emperor: or elſe in the

time of Arius and Councel of Nice. The Monkes of Egypt were fauourers of this hereſie, who of the ſame are called as in their blazon. They taught that God had the ſhape of man, and was in limits and members compriſed as man is.
               
                  Theodor. IbidThough the Popiſtes teach not in their pulpettes this doctrine, ne yet in their volumes: yet how groſſe ſo euer this error is, in their dedes teach thei the ſame: which is the ſecond kinde of preaching. Who hath not ſeene the picture of God the Father alowed, paynted, carued, caſt and ſo forth, occupied in their Churches, and worſhipped?
            
            
               Chazinzaries.
               
                  Nicephor. lib. 18. c. 54.
                  
                  THeſe Heretiques, ſpring from thoſe that are called Monoſophytae with whome they in al things agree. But are worſhippers of the Croſſe, and therefore are called Chazinzaries of the Croſſe: which among thē is called Chazus. In our dayes theſe may be called Martialiſtes of M. Martiall. Agaynſte whome and his hereſie, viewe the learned aunſwere of M. Archdeacon Calfhill: and for the popiſh croſſe conſecration, loke in the Chapter Saincters.
               
            
            
               Angelici.
               
                  Aug. Haer. 39.
                  
                  WEre certayne Heretiques, inclined (Auguſtine ſayth) to the vvorſhipping of Angels. Which ſecte though in Epiphanius time were worne out, yet the Popiſtes haue receyued the ſame, as S. Michael the Archangell his feaſte

declareth. The office of which day, appoynted in the Popiſtes Church, ſerueth for the honour of all other Angels:
                     c. 154. as Bilethus in his Rationale Diuinorum declareth: who calleth it the feaſt of all Angels.
            
            
               Collyridianes, or Mary men.
               
                  THere were certayne Heretiques ſo called, as Epiphanius recordeth, who remayned about the partes of Arabia.
                  Lib. 3. to .2. Haer. 79.
                   They were earneſtlye gyuen to the honouring of our Lady, and vſed at certayne preſcribed times to ſpred a cloth vpon a ſtole, and therevpon to ſet certayne great Loanes, called Colluridas to the ſame ende. With theſe heretiques the Popiſtes agrée. In that they catholiquely or generally worſhip our Lady, as vſus Sarum bindeth them. And particularly, as they were wont on Mydſommer, to haue light, and the table ſpred and furniſhed with great Loaues, and victualles all night long, before the Images of S. Iohn and our Lady.
               
            
            
               Meſsalians.
               
                  VNder the raygne of Valentinian,
                  Lib. 3.4. de Haer-fabulis. the hereſie of the Meſsalians did ſprout forth, as Theodorete witneſſeth. They taught that Baptiſme, ſhaued from the receyuers, their ſinnes like a raſour. This, is roote to the Popiſtes doctrine, that Sacramentes conferre grace. With theſe Meſsalians S. Thomas Aquinas doth agrée in theſe wordes: Per Sacramentum Baptiſmi omnia tolluntur. &c. By

the Sacrament of Baptiſme, all ſinnes are takē away. D. Smith alſo in the ſecond boke of his buckler,Cap. 2. & .3.
                   concludeth therein.
            
            
               Valentinians.
               
                  Lib. 1. c. 18.
                  
                  IN the yeare of our Lorde .146. or there about, did this ſecte ſwarme. They vſed (as Irenaeus ſayth) after baptizing of their ſchollers, to poure oyle on them. Hence the Popiſtes learned their leſſon alſo of the like practize at Baptiſme.
            
            
               Sarahaites.
               
                  THeſe were auncient Heretiques whoſe faſhion was to abyde in caues, rockes & woodes, clothed with Skinnes of beaſts, and girded with witthes. And wandering barefoted, vſed to tye thornes at their girdels, to knocke them as they went, vpon their bare héeles. Thoſe were examples of the Popiſtes Pilgrimes and Flagellatores: euen as they are to vs, the example of the Sarahaites. Agaynſt whome S. Auguſtine ad fratres in Heremo.
                  Ser. 21.
                  
               
            
            
               Apoſtoliques.
               
                  Haereſ. 40.
                  
                  
                     SAinct Auguſtine doth make mention of theſe Heretiques. But marke (gentle reader) I praye thée, howe duely this kinde of Heretiques

chalenge birth right ouer the Popiſtes. Compare the children by this their parente. The Father chalenged arrogantly aboue all other, this name Apoſtolique. The Childe thundereth it out, and wil haue no Péere: Alſo menaceth in the name of Peter and Paule. The Father would not admit to his communion, Monkes and Prieſtes maried, or poſſeſſing any thing for their propre goods (as the Church of Chriſt ſayth Auguſtine hath many.) The Childe diuorceth them and ſuche as were once of his communion, he thruſteth them out therefore. If the Childe doth not reſemble the Father: if he degenerate: or if he be any thing vnlike him, it is in that, he is ouer the ſhooes in his fathers humor, and more egerly feedeth the ſame.
            
            
               Cathariſtes.
               
                  BE certayne Heretiques▪
                  Haer. 38.
                   (after S. Auguſtines minde) that ſuppoſe themſelues the holier, bycauſe they marrie onely once.Lib. 1. tit. 20. Parte. 3. q. 66. in addition. This doctrine the Popiſtes teach in the Decretals, S. Thomas in the ſumme, and D. Martine in his boke.
            
            
               Marcioniſtes.
               
                  FAmous is the name of Marcion,
                  Tom. 3. lib. 1. Haer. 42.
                   of whome (among the reſt) Epiphanius writeth, and (amongeſt other thinges) witneſſeth of this rite of his Church:
                     1. Parte. trac. 1. c. 4.
                   That vvomen did Baptize. The Popiſtes

agrée therewith, the practiſe declareth. And loke Manipulus Curatorum, for the doctrine.
            
            
               Sodomites.
               
                  IT is not to be thought, that the people of Sodō, haue not their ofſpring in this age. That do exerciſe both Buggery & vvhoredome: & that as no fault: or at the leſt, as a light one. The which thing ye Popiſts haue don, although not in writing, yet in déedes, and that commonly. And to let ſpeciall factes oureſlippe vs. The Statutes Annis regni Regis. H. 8.25.28.31. made and continued agaynſt Buggerie, after that in .32. of his raigne made perpetuall, declareth what both the Prince & the Realme feared. &c. And let wiſe men conſtrue to what reaſon and purpoſe, ſo good an eſtatute was .1. Mariae repealed. And as for whoredome, the worlde knoweth, whileſte the ſtalles of thoſe geldings ſtode, what filthyneſſe hath bene there. The cleanſing of ſinkes, vaultes, and ſuch like places bewrayed it not a little. Yea, about .3. or .4. yeares paſt, at the ſpoyled houſe of Waltam Abbey, there was found out a trough mured in the wal of the Abbots oratorie, full of yong childrens bones. Vndoubtedlye, although the Cannons call whoredome a trifling ſinne, yet they eſteme murder more.
            
            
               Byſleepers.
               
                  BE certayne kinde of Heretiques, as M. Staphilus and Stapleton talke of: and are

ſuch, as for tender loue of pure holineſſe and Angelical virginitie, haue their ginnes and cloſe whéeles in the wal, to tourne their Lordes Cockes into the rouſtes of their Ladies Hennes. Of the which,Libr. Monast. Germa. c. Cella Dei. Fol. 35.
                   the Countie Palatine ſpeaking of the Norbertins, giueth example to this effect. Leaſt the Monkes should lacke the ribbe vvhich once God toke avvay from man, and after reſtored agayne vvith greater gayne, they builte nighe their Couent, an houſe of religious vvomen, vval to vval: and called the ſame Paradize.
               
            
            
               Lady Liers.
               
                  THeſe come of Scotus, and Franciſcus de Marionis, both in one heape deadely belying our Ladie: in that they ſay,Tom. 2. tract. 1 c. 4.
                   ſhe was borne without the vncleaneneſſe of originall ſinne: whoſe confutation reade in Cardinall Caietane.
               
            
            
               Lady Dawers.
               
                  ALthough the hiſtory of our Sauiour Chriſtes precious death and paſſion, and the neceſſary circumſtaunces therof, is by all foure Euangeliſts truly ſet forth, in the teſtament of the ſame our only Redéemer, and as wholly therin taught, as our ſaluation requireth: yet this notwithſtanding, the ſuperſtition of the Popiſtes, is come to this ripeneſſe, that they dare preſume to adde a Codicil
                  
to the ſame Teſtament. The which contayneth, howe that at ſuch time as our Sauioure fainted, vnder the heauy Croſſe (the burthen whereof Simon Cyrenaeus ſhoulders after that felt, euen to the place of Chriſtes Life and Death) our Lady there faynted, and fell in ſowne to the grounde. In which place a Churche was built.To. 2. tract. 13.
                   And alſo from Paſsion Sonday vntil their Palme Sonday folowing, they (which belike wil dawn our Lady) kepe a yearly feaſt. Agaynſt the which ſée Caietane.
               
            
            
               Mercy Marrers.
               
                  WHere as Dauid and alſo Hierome ſay in the Pſalme: Abyſsus Abyſsum inuocat: One bottomeleſneſſe cryeth out vpon another, appoynting God to be a bottomeleſſe mercie. And in another Pſalme Dauid ſayth: Si iniquitates Domine obſeruaueris, quis ſuſtinebit? Etenim apud te propiciatio eſt, & copioſa redemptio. &c. Lord if thou ſhalt marke iniquitie, who ſhall holde out? But with thée there is pardon, and plenteous redemption. The which places (omitting further authorities) doe euidently declare, that God will not for his debts which appertayne to oure credite, call an audite of the vttermoſt farthing. Yet contrary to this moſt comfortable doctrine, the Popiſtes teach: that he will caſte vs into priſon, vntill he hath the laſte pennie of his duetie. As Caietanus witneſſeth in theſe wordes.
                     To. 1. tract. 20. q. 1.
                     
                     Ibidē. trac. 23.
                     
                   
                  Poenam canonicam poenitentibus iniunctam ſi in hac vita non impleatur, exolui oportet in alia futura vita. If the Penitent doth not in this life pay his penaunce, it muſt be

payed in the life to come. A moſte peſtilente and vglie hereſie, which they learne of the Diuels: who ſay, that after they haue a certaine time in exile and puniſhmēt ſatiſfied for their ſinnes, they ſhall retourne agayne to ioy: Where then is manifolde mercy, if paynes are price of our pardon?
            
            
               Plenarie Pardoners.
               
                  THeſe ariſe of Franciſcus de Marionis,
                  Plenarie pardoners. who teacheth, that the ſinnes for whiche we ſtand bounde, either in this life or in Purgatorie, maye by the Pope,Tom. 1. tract 8.
                   of hys owne authoritie and plenarie power be pardoned. This Hereſie is confuted by Caietane.
               
            
            
               Fayth Flyghters.
               
                  WHereas S. Auguſtine ſayth:De verbis domini ſecundū Lucam. Ser. 30.
                   
                  Quia & Baptiſmum quod ſemel adhibetur per fidem mundat. For Baptiſme alſo once miniſtred, doth clenſe bi faith. The which reaſō ought alſo of al other ſacraments to be vnderſtod. Yet notwithſtanding ye ſame, ye Popiſtes haue a ſacramēt of Confeſſion, (if it be a ſacrament) in ye which they wil not haue faith neceſſarily exercized, as Caietanus ſayth:
                     To. 1. tract. 18. q. 4.
                     
                     Fo. 32, b.
                   
                  Non eſt neceſsarium Poenitentem ipſum habere fidē ſe eſse abſolutum. It is not neceſſary that the Penitent himſelfe ſhould then haue beliefe that he is abſolued. Vnto this alſo doth M. Hoſius Hatchet agrée. By which doctrine it is euident,

that they fray out of the conſciences of men, all liuing fayth, wherby the liuely application of the ſacraments of the Church of Chriſt, is atchieued and wrought.
            
            
               Prophaners.
               
                  WHereas our Sauiour hath committed to his church, vnder the name of the keyes of Heauen, the ſentence of excommunication, thereby to admitte or ſeclude any man from the kingdome of God:
                     Lib. 3. c. 2. con. Literas. Parmenian.
                     Ser. de Anathemat.
                   the which (as Auguſtine declareth) ought not to be done for euery light cauſe, to the contempt therof, neyther as an occupation or cuſtome: but (as Chriſoſtome alſo ſayeth) of great loue and as a conſtrayned déede: yet not withſtanding, how the Popiſtes prophane the ſame, it is euident. For as the foole in the play, doth lightly vſe his dagger to euerye trifle and ieſt, ſo they (as plainely appeareth by their Camera and Conſiſtorie, which is their ſtage) doe. The which doctrine,c. vlt. & aūcte Dei. pris. they drawe out of their Cannons. Lynvvood de ſentētia excōmunicationis, and ſuch like places, wherby they haue it of like eſtimation, as Aeſopes frogges their beame. In that, is it not to prophane it?
            
            
               Saincters.
               
                  AS it was very ſtraunge in the Primitiue eſtate of the goſpell, to haue or ſée any Images, ſo was it much more ſtraunge, to haue any creature called on in prayer. And in the policie and cō
                  mon wealth of the Iewes, the ſame was wholy abhorred.

Neyther was that maner in the beginning of the church, vnder the lawe of nature.Sap. 14.
                   For as Salomon ſayeth: Rich men becomming tiraunts ouer their vnderlings and ſubiectes, appointed in thoſe dayes of idle wealthineſſe, their dead children and friends to be worſhipped: and for the memorie of ſuch, erected Images: neyther had euery one an Image that would, but ſuch as the rich and mightie men (whom I might call Nemrods) accorded on. This cuſtome ſo grewe on, as, not only it was ye nouriſher of Idolatrie, but a meane that common treaſures were augmented: by reaſon that the licence giuing of erecting ſuche Images, belonged to the Senators. &c. As for example, in Athens & Rome. This practize ye tiranne of Rome hath (although in dede clarkly cloked) left in the Decretals.Titt. de reliq. et. venerac. ſancto. And in Innocentius to this effect. Although that euerie man may pray to any man departed this life, of vvhom he had opiniō of holyneſſe in the tyme of his life: yet appertaineth to the Pope to faincten (for by this he had gret reueunes) and canonize thoſe, that shal be vvorshipped: be it eyther by publique or priuate office or ſeruice: or by publique and hallovved Image. If thou markeſt (gētle reader) this marchaundize of the Pope, thou ſhalt apperceyue, how gaine hath plucked into the church, the abuſe of the olde Gentiles. And here I will anexe (according to my promiſe) the maner of conſecration of the croſſe (although it ſemeth to ſerue rather for ye place of Chazinzaries) for this ende, that by it, which ſéemeth moſt out of doubt and feare of ſuperſtition, thou mayeſt ſée, how in the reſidue of Images and this, they in their conſecrating, ſerue ſuperſtition, and not memorie of their pretended miſterie. If the prieſt be not at Maſſe, then he muſte put on his ſurplice and ſtole,

and begin thus: firſt ſprinkling it with holye water. Adiutoriū &c. domine exaudi &c. dominꝰ vobiſcū. Orato:
                  Exſacerdot. Romani vſus. 
                  Let vs pray. We pray thee O Lorde holy father almighty and eternall God, that thou vvouldeſt vouchſafe to ble✚ſſe this vvood of the croſſe. That it maye be an healthfull medicine to mankinde, a maſſiueneſſe of faith. Alſo a comforte, protection and defence againſt the cruel dartes of the enimies. Through Chriſt our Lord. &c.
               
            
            
               Let vs pray.
               BLe✚ſſe O Lord, this thy croſſe, by the vvhich thou haſt berefte and taken the vvorld out of the poſſeſſion of the Diuill: and by thy death haſte ouercome the informer of ſinne, vvho reioyced in the firſt mans trangreſſions, concerning the forbidden tree. Bl✚eſſe àlſo O Lorde and make ho✚ly this ſeale of thy holye paſſion, that to thy enimies, it may be a let, and to thy beleuers make it a perpetual ſuccour, amen. Then holye water muſt be caſt once yet againe, with this prayer. Let this vvoode be ſanctified, in the name of the Fa✚ther and the Son✚ne, and the holy ✚ ghoſt, that ſuche as pray and bovve for the Lordes ſake before this croſſe, may find health to their bodyes and ſoules, thorovve Chriſt. &c. Amen.
            
            
               Catholiques.
               BE thoſe that ſo diſcant out of harmonie vpon this worde Catholicos, that they will haue thoſe people their Church, who are ye multude

and moſt vniuerſall number. Which is as much in conſequent to ſay, Whores, Baudes, Sodomites, Infidels and al that vvalke the broad vvay. This is in euery of their mouthes.
            
            
               Viſiblers.
               
                  ARe thoſe that holde opinion, that the church of Chriſt, is alwayes viſible, and to be diſcerned of the worlde, and is neuer hid from the view of man. This doctrine the author of the appologie of priuate maſſe hath.
               
            
            
               Myſterie Mongers.
               
                  ARe of Durandus, that interpretateth vveathercocks, belles, cappes, and tippets, to a miſterie and ſecret ſenſe. Looke in Rationale diuinorum Durandi.
               
            
            
               Aaroniſtes.
               
                  ARiſe of Pighius Hierarchie, that wil haue the miniſterie in the Church of the Goſpell,Lib. 2. c. 4.
                   be after the faſhion of Aaron his Leuiticall order.
            
            
               Popiſtes.
               BE thoſe that ſaye,Lib. 4. c. 8. in fine. the Pope can not erre from the faith: as Pighius hath taught in his

                  Hierarchie,
                  Pigh. againſt Caietane. condemning Cardinall Caietane. Therefore obey they his commaundements, with vttering his ſpirite, and weare his liuerie coates, be he neuer ſo farre diſtant from their territorie.
            
            
               Gospell facers.
               
                  Pighius lib. 1. c. 4.
                  
                  BE thoſe, that by crying out on the aucthoritie and name of the Church, diſgrace the goſpell, and diminiſh the authoritie thereof.
            
            
               Politique Popistes.
               
                  ARe thoſe, that wil all men, onelye for temporall and worldly cauſes, vniformitie, and comely ſight, to compoſe themſelues to their manner and faſhion of religion.Sozo lib. 1.
                   As in time paſte Iulian the Apoſtatate in his dayes did. And in Germanie the Interim.
               
            
            
               Coniurers.
               
                  MAny of the olde Heretiques hold opinion, that all creatures, as well the onely Vegitatiue, as reaſonable, are naught. Some ſay, they were created naught. Some ſay, they are vnholy, bicauſe they are the dwelling temple of the Diuel. &c. The Popiſtes haue this doctrine: as the fruits of their practize do declare. For they coniure the

Diuill, out of the creatures that they vſe for their ſeruice. Yea out of the children, that come to baptiſme thus, after the maner of the Church of Rome.
                  Ex ſacerdotal. 
                  I coniure thee vncleane ſpirite, In the name of the Fa✚ther, and of the Son✚ne, and of the ho✚ly ghoſt, that thou goe out and departe from this ſeruaunt of God. &c. And this déede, agreeth with the doctrine of S. Thomas. But perhappes thou mayſt be ſeduced in this coniuring caſe, for that ignorauntlye thou mayſt ſuppoſe, that children borne vnperfect, (bicauſe of the propagation of ſinne originall in them,) haue the Diuell in them. Wherefore to make the caſe plaine of their drifte. I let thre here another coniuring practize, that they vſe of creatures, in whom ſinne neyther is by propagation nor imitation, and of ſuch whoſe nature can not ſinne. I coniure thee thou creature oile, by God the Father ✚ almighty, vvho made heauen and earth, the ſea and all that is therein. Get thee hence and flye avvay all thou povver of the enimie. All armye of the Diuill. All incurſion and all fantaſie of Sathan, from this creature of oyle, that it maye be to all thoſe that vſe the ſame, health both of minde and bodye. In the name of God ✚ the father &c. This their practize bewrayeth their doctrine.
            
            
               Hallowers.
               
                  OVt of the aboue ſayde hereſie of Coniurers, doth this procéede: that the creature after the comming out of the Diuell, is to be halowed. For the which cauſe, the Popish prieſte in baptiſme, doeth bealch or blovve on the childe:

ſmere him and poulder him, that the Diuell coniured out, ſhould not retourne againe. As S. Thomas in the place laſt before alledged, teacheth. And Epiſtola de conſecratione &c. per totum. Diſt. de conſecratione.
               
            
            
               Creature Swearers.
               
                  WHere as Ieremie by the ſpirite of God, reprehendeth the Iſraelites for ſwearing by creatures, the Popiſtes notwithſtanding doe teach, that it is lawefull to ſweare by creatures: to wéete, vpō 
                  reliques, a conſecrated hoſt, and ſuche like:2.2. q. 89. art. 6 as S. Thomas, and the Decretalles vnder a ſpeciall title, do declare.
            
            
               Tyme Seruers.
               
                  ARe thoſe, that ſerue not all the yere, but ſome parts therof, with their Matrimonie Sacrament: and that is, for the hatred they bare vnto it: appointing more holineſſe in their time, than in matrimony Gods holy inſtitution, this is common & néedeth no reciting of authoritie.
            
            
               Formaliſtes.
               
                  BE thoſe, that teache formes, and ydle apparayling of things, with maners and circumſtances, that edifye not, but are impertinent.

As in building of a Church,Drrand. lib. 1. c. 1.2.
                   that the firſt ſtone muſte be layed by the .B. and that they muſt caſt holy water ouer the ground. Alſo, that the firſt ſtone muſt haue a croſſe grauen on it. That the head therof ſtand to the eaſt: and an infinite number of ſuch like toyes.Ex. de tempe ordinando. Furthermore in orders giuing, that no patche of the pratling (I woulde ſaye of praying) be omitted. For thē orders are not giuen: And ye like happeneth if their tooles of that toye, be not touched: as Caietane ſayeth,To. 1. Tract. 26
                   and alſo Ray. c. Veniens de presbit. non bapt.
               
            
            
               Primacers.
               
                  ARe thoſe, that teache the Pope to be Lorde ouer the whole world, glo. et doct. in prohemio. F. And that he may abſolue any man from his alegeaunce, promiſe, debt and duetie, of his (as they call it Plenitudine poteſtatis) meere or full power: whether the ſame be, of ſubiectes to their Princes, or wife to her huſband, or ſuch lyke. Inno. art. 9. q. 3. per principalem. C. de qua. praeſcript. L. Bene Azenone. C. de praeci. Imp. l. quoties. Linvvood tit. de ſententia excommunicationis. Caietane. Tom. i. tract. 25.
               
            
            
               Simoniackes, or quid vultis Dariers.
               
                  
                  ARe they, that for money breake all diſcipline of the Church: and do let ſinne, and ye puniſhmēt therof be ouerpaſſed. Whereby riche men may ſinne payne leſſe, but poore men ſhall be punniſhed. I may liken thē to the hunters of the Caſtor, that perillous beaſt. For when as thoſe hunters find the Cueles or genitals of the beaſt, which he purpoſely byteth of for his ſauegarde, they let the noyſome body goe, for the filthy parte: Euen ſo, beſydes that, that the Popiſtes for the crimes of ſuch offenders, take of their filthie Mammon ſo greate a grype, that nowe and then they leaue them gelded of their good: yet notwithſtanding, bycauſe the noyſome nature is not corrected, the man ſtil following the ſame, falleth into their handes: and then hauing no moe genitals to loſe, muſt ſatiſfy in body, who afore by purſſe eſcaped. The doctrine of this Hereſie is taught in the Decretalles.Ex. de poenàs & remiſſi. And it ſhall be neceſſary to annexe ſome parte of the wares of the Pope, and price thereof, as they goe for, and are ſolde in his ſhoppe or Camera at Rome.
               
            
            
               Lecheríe.
               
                  A Pardon for Lecherie done by a Clearke, whether it be eyther wyth a Nunne, in or without the Cloyſter, or with one of his kinne, or aliance to him: or with his God daughter,A reaſonable chapman. or any other: he ſhall pay aſwell for one as for all theſe togither .36. Turnois and .3. Ducats: and therwith be diſpenſed to

haue orders and benefices eccleſiaſtical. But if among theſe crimes, he aſke a pardon for Buggerie (the ſinne agaynſt nature) or done with beaſtes, ſo that he may then be alſo diſpenſed for orders and benefices, ye price then is .90. Turnois .12. Ducates .6. Carlines. If onelie pardon be aſked for the ſinne agaynſte nature or done with beaſtes, with a diſpenſation and inhibition, he payeth .36. Turnois .9. Ducats.
               A pardon for a Nunne that hath often played the good fellowe both without and within the Cloyſter, with a clauſe that ſhall enioy the dignities of that order, yea to be Abbeſſe, ye price therof is .36. Turnois .9. Ducats. A pardon that a prieſt maye kepe a Concubine in his houſe continually: and retaine his benefice and orders alſo, is had for .21. Turnois. 2. Ducats. There be like caſes in lay men.
            
            
               Murder.
               
                  A Pardon for the ſonne ye hath killed his father, his brother or ſiſter, is in euery of theſe caſes al one. 4. Turnois. 1. Duckat. Carlines. 8. If the father or mother kill their owne childe, the price is no more but ſo. If a woman drincke to deſtroy hir childe, the price is. 4. Turnois. Duckatte. 1. Carlines. 8. Thus I might procéede for all ſinnes done agaynſt the x. Commaundements of almighty God: agaynſt coū
                  cels, Sinodes, Decrées, & Decretals. But it ſhall ſuffiſe to touch this, and omitte the other for briefeneſſe ſake.
            
            
               
               Patrines.
               
                  BE thoſe that contrary to the commaundement of Chriſt (to wéete, put vp thy ſword Peter into thy ſheath) teach Peter to drawe it againe: and make of ſhéepe keping Peter, a temporall Magiſtrate,Lib. 5.1. tit. Lorde and warriour. Vide Pighium.
               
            
            
               Armurers.
               
                  ARe thoſe that teache men to defend either body or ſoule: and to arme thēſelues with creatures. As a halowed written goſpell, the length and breadth of the nailes & croſſe: a Maſſe: a Fryers Cowle and ſuche lyke. For the proufe of the written goſpell, of the nayles, the worlde doth know it verye well: and of thoſe ſame are in my handes to be ſéene, yet: for more proufe, loke the Breuarie of the Franciſcanes: Among the which I finde this, Franciſcus rogauit deū et impetrauit, vt nullus in habitu, poſfit male mori. S. Frauncis aſking of God, obtayned of him, that none clothed in the holy habite of his order, ſhould dye an euill death. Againe. Quicquid homo edit poſt auditionē miſſae, magis proficit & cōuenit Naturae quā ante. In auditione homo non ſeneſcit, nec debilitatur: ſicut ex ligno vitae, Adam non infirmabatur, nec vita eius breuiabatur. Whatſoeuer a man eateth in the daye after he hath heard maſſe, it ſhall doe him more good, and better agrée with nature, than before. Alſo in the time of Maſſe hearing, a man ſhall

neyther waxe weaker, nor elder, no more than Adam (marke their ignoraunce of ſcripture) by eating of the trée of lyfe. As touching ſuche kinde of harneſſe and Philtres the Baſilides, Carpocrates, and ſuche other Gnoſtiques, were occupiers and deuiſers: of whome Euſeb. writeth. So likewiſe Theodoret. and Epiphan.
                  Lib. 4. c. 7.
                  
               
            
            
               Spirituall kindreders.
               
                  IF thou gentle reader, loke in the Ambrey of the Popes holy wiſedome, in the title de cognatione ſpirituali, thou ſhalt finde out a ſpirituall kindered (for ſo the title doth call it) which groweth out of two contrary rootes: the fleſh and the ſpirite. A meruellous thing it is to ſée it, for two reaſons. Firſt in this: that as the mother which bare the childe (the throwes of whoſe trauaile maketh the birth certayne, which is as it were ye preching of Natures truth) is of the kinde or bloud thereof, after the maner of a mother, and therefore enioyeth the ſame Natural name: Euen ſo, by the doctrine there taught, the ſureties that holde the childe at baptiſme and biſſhopping, are forſooth Pater & mater ſpiritualiter.
                  
                     Brother not in Chriſt but Pope.
                     c. Martinus.
                   Father and mother ſpirituallie: And their children are brethren and ſiſterne to the babe baptiſed. Yea and as a ſpeciall caſe in the ſame title declareth of Lotharius and Theberga, the wife of the man who was ſuretie, is of kinde (though ſhe Chriſtened not the childe) to the ſame childe hir huſband chriſtened: and can not (which is the ſecond maruell) marry with the Father of the ſame babe, they both being frée from their firſt mariages,

no more than the ſpiritual childe can, with any of his godfathers or godmothers childrē. The dreame that they builde this on, Panormitanus in place before alleaged doth ſaye, is: Niſi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua & ſpiritu ſancto: Except a man be borne of water and the holy ghoſt. Wherein thou mayeſt ſée, how like blinde Sodomites, they grope after a newe kindred, and forget the very birth in the holy ghoſt, who is the wombe for the childebirth of the Church. Which newe birth in theſe wordes ment, ſith it commeth not by the ſuretie, but rather by the water: and not alone by the water, as the worde (&) declareth, but chiefely by the ſpirite, which in the outwarde ſacrament is to be loked for: marke whether they minde any thing elſe, but an holy (I wil not ſay ſuperſtitious) tirannie: a craftie hindering and contemning of matrimonie: and an eſtéeming and worſhipping of Elements. And beſides this, in ſequeſtrating this kindred from matrimonie, they euidently declare, that it is not Chriſtes ſpirituall kindred, which the holy ghoſt worketh in all the faithfull, without the which it is not lawefull for any of the ſame ſtocke to marry. For S. Paule ſayeth: Nubat, ſed in domino. Let the woman now a widow marry,Hierom con. Iouinian. but in the Lorde: that is, with a ſpirituall brother. Let vs (gentle reader) praye to God, that for Chriſtes ſake, he will ſende his Angell, to kéepe theſe Sodomites out of Lothes houſe. Amen.
            
            
               Halfe Communion Manichees.
               
                  THe faction of the Manichees ſprang in the yeare of our Lorde God, as Euſebius ſayth 281. being the .3. yeare of the Emperour Probus
                  
raigne. But Epiphanius ſayth the .276. yeares:Lib. 7. c. 31.
                   after ſome Hiſtoriographers accompt as the ſame Epiphaniꝰ teſtifieth .246. The author wherof was one Manes,
                  Lib. 2. to. 2.
                   as Euſebius calleth him. Auguſtine commonly calleth him Manicheus, which by interpretation is to ſaye,Euſeb. ibi. madde: as he was, (Euſebius ſayth) of Nature. After the preaching of his error, and receyuing of the ſame, he choſe vnto him .12. diſciples imitating Chriſt. Epiphanius ſayth .22. Out of the which, he choſe thrée moſte ſpeciall. Thomas, Herma and Adda. And they were the moſt truſtie and famous Abbetters thereof. Their doctrine was large, and extended to the infection of all our Chriſtian religion. But that which I intende to intreate of, is their abuſe in the adminiſtration of the Lordes ſupper, the holye communion.
               Their accuſtomed maner, was to miniſter ye fame vnder one kinde: yt is to ſay, the bread only.Manich. comtannion. In ſermo. 4. Quadrag. Ex. Petr. de Soto. Lect. 10.
                   And vſed not to receyue the cup. As Leo the Pope declareth in theſe words: Cumque ad tegendā infidelitatem ſuā noſtris audeant intereſſe myſterijs, ita in ſacramento per cō
                     munionem ſe temperant, vt interdum lateant. Ore indigno corpus Chriſti accipiunt, ſanguinem autem redemptionis noſtrae haurire omnino declinant, quod ideo veſtram volumus ſcire ſactitatem, vt vobis huiuſmodi homines et hijs manifeſtantium indicijs, & quorū deprehenſa fuerit ſacrilega ſimulatio, notati & proditi, a ſanctorum ſocietate, ſacerdotali auctoritate pellantur. De talibꝰ. n. beatus Paulus Apoſtolus eccleſiam dei proinde monet, dicens: Rogamus autem vos fratres, vt obſeruetis eos, qui diſſenſiones & offendicula praeter doctrinam quam vos didiciſtis faciunt, & declinate ab illis. That is to ſay: And when as the Manichees, for the clocking of their vnfaithfulneſſe, dare preſume to

be preſent at our myſteries, they ſo behaue themſelues in the communion of the ſacramentes, as that nowe and then they eſcape vnknowen. With their vnworthy mouthes, they receyue the body of Chriſt, but they wholy withdraw themſelues from the drinking of the bloud of our redemption. The which thing we would that your holyneſſe ſhould vnderſtande, that ſuch men by thoſe markes of their declaration eſpied, and whoſe ſacrilegious hipocriſie ſhall be betrayed, maye by the authoritie of the miniſterie, be ſeparated from the ſocietie of the holy ones. For of ſuch, the Apoſtle S. Paule hath neceſſarily forewarned ye church of God, ſaying: But vve praye you brethren, that you vvatch thoſe, that make diſcention, and vvorke offences, beſides the doctrine that you haue learned, and eſchevve them.
               
               In the which wordes of Leo, theſe two things bene manifeſt. Firſt, that it was the peculiar maner and religion of the Manichees, to vſe onely the breade, the firſt part of the ſacrament. Secondly that in Leo his time (which was about the yeare of our Lord .464) both partes were vſed in the church of Rome. And ſo to do, was the ſpeciall rite.
               
                  The maner of Rome.The doctrine of Rome, & the behauior of their church in this caſe, is plaine & manifeſt. For who hath not had experience, of ye ſame their ſacrilegious withholding & robbing of the people of that part of the cōmunion? Yea Aquinas ſayth: yt it is not decent for the lay man to receyue ye ſame.Part. 3. q. 80. art. 12.
                   
                  Solus ſacerdos Euchariſtiam nō ſine ſanguine fumere debet: caeteros autem ſub vtraque ſpeciae communicare non decet. That is, the prieſt only muſt receyue the ſacrament, not without the bloud: but it becommeth the reſt to communicate vnder one kinde. And Caietane, commenting vpō the ſame place

of Aquinas, frameth thrée queſtions. The firſt, that we are not bound by the commaundement of Chriſt whē we communicate, to communicate vnder both kinds. The ſecond, that it is not more profitable for the communicants to receyue in bothe kindes, than in one onely. The thirde is, that it is not expedient for the church, that the people ſhoulde doe ſo. But the practiſe of this is ſo common,
                     Lib. 4. diſt. 12. q. 2.
                     
                     Art. 3. dub. 1. In inflitutionibus.
                     Lectione. 10.
                     
                   that I paſſe ouer to rehearſe Biell, or any other of them. And therfore ende here with ye ſaying of their Peter Soto. Donemus igitur illis, fuiſſe vſū vtriuſque ſpeciei, quod teſtimonium illud Gelaſij Papae confirmat, & aliud Leonis in ſermone quarto quadrageſimae: de quo ſuperius diximus: Vbi Manichaeos dicit, ſpeciem vini non ſumere: oſtendens aperto, id contrarium fuiſſe conſuetudini catholicorū. Demus igitur hoc haereticis. That is: let vs graunt to the proteſtants, that the vſe of the church was to miniſter in both kinds: the which, the teſtimonie of Gelaſius the Pope, and of Leo in his .4. ſermon for Lent, (of the which before we haue ſpoken) doeth approue: wherein he ſayeth that the Manichees cuſtome is, not to vſe the wine: declaring that ye ſame was cleane contrarie to the cuſtome of the Catholiques: let vs then giue that cuſtome to heretiques. But bicauſe I am here entred into the matter of the ſacrament of the holy communion, I will annexe the ſpeciall contrarieties and hereſies as touching the ſame.
            
            
               Caparnaites or Naturall Bodiers.
               
                  BE thoſe, that teach that the very body of Ieſus Chriſt, fleſhe, bloude and bone &c. as it

was borne of the virgine Marie, is in the Sacrament eaten. This though it may be proued by thoſe arguments which are called Atechnois, that is, by the depoſing and teſtimonie of euerye ſimple Popiſt: yet I thinke it beſt to declare their doctrine by their authors.Parte. 3. q. 75. art. 4.
                   
                  Aquinas ſayeth: Hoc quod conficimus, corpus ex virgine eſt: That which in the ſacramēt we make, is the bodye receyued of the virgin. And afterwarde: Non ſolum caro,
                  Ibid. 76. art. 1.
                   
                  ſed totum corpus, ſcilicet oſsa, nerui et alia huiuſmodi. That is: not only Chriſts fleſh, but alſo all his whole body: to wéete, bones ſinewes and ſuch like. And D. Gardener ſayeth in his booke againſt the reuerend father M. Cranmer: Chriſt giueth truly (in the ſacrament) to be eaten,
                  Folio. 274. Folio. 81.
                   
                  the fleſh he ſpake of before, taken of the virgin Mary. &c. For the ſcripture ſpeaketh of Chriſts body vvhich vvas betrayed for vs, to be giuen vs to be eaten. &c. The practiſe of their Church agréeth with that doctrine. For by the Cautele of their Maſſe, the prieſt muſt haue his thought whollye bente to doe that in the perſon of Chriſte, which Chriſt in his inſtitution did. And al the pith of that pageant, lieth vpon this worde Meum. Which of force muſt be to conſecrate that body which he, at his inſtitution had.
            
            
               Newe Sacramentaries.
               
                  Folio. 69.
                  
                  AGainſt the which: Doctor Harding in his late worke is. As alſo Gardener is (though he ſpake the ſame) in another place, againſt the ſame in theſe wordes. We receyue not in the Sacrament Chriſtes flesh that vvas crucified,

being ſo a viſible, & mortal flesh: but Chriſts flesh glorified, incorruptible, impaſſible, a godly and ſpirituall flesh. Wherout it appeareth, that whileſt D. Gardener (& Harding) would haue an other fleſh, than that which was crucified to be in the ſacrament, that they varie from the firſt opinion and practiſe of their church. And in that, that M. Gardener will not haue: that fleshe vvhich vvas crucified, being ſo a viſible flesh in the ſacrament, & yet would haue very fleſh therein, it is euident yt beſides that he falleth frō the elder Popiſts: he is an hererique, in ye nature of Chriſts body in heauen: bicauſe he maketh it an inuiſible body, which can not be accident to our ſubſtaunce, though it ſhall be, (as in him, it already is) glorified. But thus muche briefely, remitting thee for the reſt, to the plée of the reuerende father the B. Sarum and D. Harding.
               
            
            
               Quantitiners.
               
                  
                     GArdener ſayeth: vvhen vve ſpeake of Chriſtes body in the ſacrament,
                  Lib. 3. folio. 76.
                   
                  vve muſt vnderſtande a true bodye, vvhich hath both forme and quantitie. And therfore ſuch as cōfeſſe the true Catholique faith, they affirme of Chriſtes body al truth of a natural body &c. And afterwarde he ſayeth. So as if Chriſt be preſent in the ſacrament, vvithout al forme and quā
                     titie, then is he there neyther as God nor man. Againſt which doctrine of quantitie & forme of Chriſtes body in the ſacrament, al their doctors are. Among other Biel writing thus, alleageth.Lib. 4. diſt. 11. q. 1.
                   
                  Et dico notanter corpus tale non tantum, quia non eſt in ſacramento quantum: cū
                     
ibi non ſit extenſum nec circūſcriptiuè: vt priori diſt. tactum. &c. And I ſpeake notingly or effectually in this ſaying: A body of ſuche qualitie and not micheltie: bicauſe that in the ſacrament, there is no micheltie or quantitie. When as therin is not any largeneſſe of bodye or compaſſe for the limmes. Alſo D. Smith who in that field fought as he thought for M. Gardener in that quarrel of the ſacramēt, is againſt him in this point of quantitie and forme.Fol. 106.
                  
               
            
            
               Faſhioners.
               
                  THe elder Popiſtes ſay, that Chriſt is not in the Sacrament according to dimenſion: that is laying out of hys limmes, or placing and ordering of the ſame: as Aquinas teſtifieth thus. Dictum eſt autem, quod corpꝰ Chriſti comparatur ad hoc ſacramentum, non ratione quantitatis dimenſiuae, ſed ratione ſuae ſubſtantiae.
                  
                     Part. 3. q. 76. ar. 3.
                     
                     Ad. 3. obiect.
                   It is ſayd before, that the body of Chriſt is compared to this ſacrament, not according to the meaſure or parting out of the parts of the ſame, but according to the reaſon of the ſubſtance. And therfore Smith ſayeth: that the bodye of Chriſt is thus in the Sacrament in ſubſtaunce ſacramentallie. So that the hande is in the ſubſtaunce,In his aſſertion & defence canon. 44. Fol. 55.
                   the head is in the ſubſtance, and ſo likewiſe of the reſt of the members. And that they be not diſtinct and in déede locallie placed the one from the other, but be ſo confounded in the Sacrament, that whereſoeuer the one is, there is the other. The contrarie therto Maiſter D. Gardener teacheth in the .3. booke thus.Fol. 69.70.
                   
                  The partes of the vvhich (talking of

the bodye) be in themſelues diſtinct one from another. And bicauſe it elſe ſhoulde be (as he geſſeth) a monſtrous body. He therfore concludeth that it is meaſured out according to the quantitie and placing of his members and limmes.
               
            
            
               Bread Spoylers.
               
                  BE thoſe, that ſay that the words of conſecratiō ſpoken, there remayneth no part of bread nor of wyne: but that which is eaten, is fleſh and bloud. Impoſsibile eſt (ſaith Aquinas) poſt conſecrationē remanere in ſacramento, cum Chriſti corpore, ſubſtantiam panis et vini.
                  Part. 3. q. 75. ar. 2.
                   It is impoſſible there ſhould reſt in the ſacrament after the conſecration therof, the ſubſtance of bread & wine, with the body of Chriſt. Againſt the which, Caietanus the Cardinall, finding himſelf agréeued with the diuines,To. 2. tract. 2. c. 3.
                   ſayth thus. Hoc caput falſiſsimum eſt, quod Theologi dicunt, corpus Chriſti corporaliter & praeceptibiliter ſumi: quoniam & ſpiritualiter et non praecipiendo (ſiue ſenſu ſiue intellectu) ſed credēdo, corpus Chriſti ſumitur in Euchariſtia, ſacramentales autem ſpecies corporaliter et perceptibiliter ſumuntur. That is a moſte falſe doctrine which the diuines teach: namely that the body of Chriſt is corporallie and ſenſible receyued in the ſacrament: for that, that ſpirituallie and not ſenſibly (eyther to ſenſe or vnderſtanding) the bodye of Chriſt is in the ſacrament receiued by only beléeuing: but it is the ſacramentall kindes of bread and wyne, that are receyued, both ſenſiblie and corporallie.
            
            
               
               Accident rotters.
               
                  Parte. 3. q. 77. art. 5.
                  
                  VErie variable and contrary is the doctrine of the Popiſtes vpon this queſtion, whereof the moulding, rotting, wormes & aſhes of their burned hoſtes come. Aquinas confuteth .iij. opinions. The firſte is of thoſe that ſay, that the wormes come onely of the ayre rounde about. The .ij. of thoſe that ſay, that the olde ſubſtaunce of bread and wyne before by the wordes of conſecration affrighted and frayed away, retourne and corrupt. The .iij. (which he counteth ſomwhat probable) that it commeth of a new matter and ſubſtance of bread and wyne created by God for the purpoſe. Of this laſte iudgemēt is D. Smith ſaying thus.Folio. 64.105.
                   
                  I ſay that the conſecrated vvyne turneth not into vinegar, nor the conſecrated bread, mouldeth not, engēdreth vvormes, nor is burned, nor receyueth into it any poyſon, as long as Chriſts body and bloud are vnder the formes of them: vvhich do abide there ſo long, as the naturall qualities and properties of bread and vvine tarry there in their naturall diſpoſition and condicion, that the bread and vvine might be naturally there (if they had not bene chaunged into Chriſtes body and bloud) And alſo as long as the hoſte and conſecrated vvyne, are apte to be receyued of man and no longer: but goe and departe thence by Gods povver as it pleaſeth him. And then a nevv ſubſtaunce is made of God, vvich turneth into vineger, engendreth vvormes, and mouldeth, is burned, feedeth men and mice, receyueth poyſon. &c. Retourne

we now to Aquinas:Ibidem. who at the laſt addeth his iudgement, which is the ſtraunger, bicauſe the angelicall doctor teacheth it. It is, that they engender not in the ſacrament after any of the afore ſayde ſortes: but looke vvhat could be engendred of the foreſayde ſubſtaunces before conſecration, the ſame (ſayth he) aftervvard is by miracle engendred of quantitate dimenſiua panis & vini (that is,) of the firſte diſpoſition of the matter of bread and wyne.
               
                  Marcus Antonius ſayth, that the accidents brede the ſame. Poſtremo ſi omnes excutias panis partes, proprietates omnes, nihil proprietatis deceſſiſſe comperies, ſed manere in accidentibus. Appellatur panis, manet effigies quae erat, manet pondus, color durat, guſtus eſt idem qui fuerat, denique corrūpuntur. Laſt of all if thou wilt ſearch in euery part of the breade, & all the properties therof, thou ſhalt finde that all properties therof are abiding in the accidents. It is called bread, the ſhape which before it hadde, remayneth, it holdeth waight, it kepeth color and yeldeth the olde taſt, finally it rotteth.Fol. 300. & 400.
                   &c. And the ſame Marcus Antonius (I ſhould ſay) M. Gardener in his boke, is of the ſame opinion alſo in theſe wordes. And shortly to anſvvere this author, it is not ſayde in the doctrine of tranſubſtantiation, that there remayneth nothing: for in the viſible forme of bread, remayneth the proper obiecte of euery ſenſe truely, that is ſene vvith the bodily eye, is truely ſene, that is felt is truly felt, that is ſauored is truely ſauored, & thoſe things corrupt, putrifie, nourish, & conſume after the truth of the former nature. The diuerſitie of the opinions of Smith & Gardener, being both of one age, and ſworn brethren in this field againſt the reuerend father Cranmer, ariſeth of this: that D. Gardener
                  
leaneth toward S. Thomas,
                  Lib. 4. diſt. 12. q. 1.
                   and D. Smith to Biell a ſententiarie, and are thus by reaſon of their diuers teachers, diuers.
            
            
               Estians.
               
                  THis poore worde (Eſt) is diuers wayes canuaſſed, ſhaken and taken among thē: for Marcus Antonius taketh it ſubſtātiuely,Fol. 171.
                   for (Is): after the ſimple maner of the worde it ſelfe. Sexta conſideratiō eſt leuis: nam catholici ſimplicitatem ſermonis ſequuntur, vt ſit omnino quod Chriſtus eſse dicit, qui quum de vna ſubſtantia pronūciat, illam eſſe corpus ſuum verbis Chriſti inhaerentes: illam catholici, vnam eſſe profitentur, & quam Chriſtus declarat, videlicet corporis ſui. &c. The ſixt cōſideration is of no waight. For the Cathoilques followe the playneneſſe of the wordes, taking wholly it to be the ſame, that Chriſt hath ſayde it is. Who ſith he hath ſpoken the wordes of one onelye ſubſtaunce, and that it is his body, they profeſſe it is one ſubſtaunce, and the ſame that Chriſte ſpake of (to wéete) his bodye. In this ſaying of Marcus Antonius, thou mayeſt ſée (is) onely taken for it ſelfe as it ſoundeth. But D. Gardener, that Proteus ſayth,Lib. 2. fol. 333.
                   that (is) is taken for made: Which ſpeach, breade is the bodye of Chriſt, is as much to ſay, as is made the body of Chriſt &c.
               
            
            
               Vncertaine demonstratours.
               
                  
                  NO leſſe contrary are thoſe Popiſtes,Fol. 24. b. and repugnante in the demonſtration that this word (Hoc) meaneth: for Antonius ſaith thus. Hoc eſt corpus, ſubſtantiam ſignificare corporis, nec de pane cui nihil erat ſimile quicquid intelligi. &c. This ſaying this is my body, doth ſignifie the ſubſtance of the body, neyther is it al vnderſtanded of the breade, with the which the body hath no reſemblance. And ſo likewiſe M. Gardener ſayth.Fol. 102.
                   
                  When Chriſt ſayde (this is my body) there is no neceſſitie that the demonſtration (this) should be referred to the outvvard viſible matter, but may be referred to the inuiſible ſubſtance. And the like he hath in another place.Fol. 284. Fol. 27. & 70.
                   But M. Gardener in the Diuels ſophiſtrie hath forgotten this doctrine, and the wiſe mans counſel: Mendacem memorem eſſe oportuit. It behoueth a lyer to haue good remembraunce: for there he ſayth. Chriſt ſpake plainely (this is my body) making demonſtration of the breade, vvhen he ſayde this is my body.
                  Fol. 53.
                   But as M. Gardener is againſt himſelfe, ſo is M. D. Smith againſt him in the ſame point.
            
            
               Metamorphiſtes.
               
                  THe common opinion of the elder Popiſtes is, that the body of Chriſt in the ſacrament is made of bread:Fol. 29.
                   with the which M. D. Gardener in many places, agréeth, ſaying: the Catholique Church acknovvledging Chriſt to be verye God and verye man, hath from the beginning vpon theſe textes

of ſcripture, confeſſed trulie Chriſtes intent and effectuall miraculous vvorke to make the bread his body and the vvyne his bloude.
                  Fol. 165.
                   
                  &c. And againe he ſayth, thoſe many hoſtes, after conſecration, be not many bodyes of Chriſt, but of many breads one body of Chriſt. (Alſo) for he gaue that he had conſecrated,
                  Fol. 333.
                   
                  and gaue that he had made of bread. Furthermore shevveth me that of bread is the body of Chriſt. And that of breade is made the body of Chriſt. But M. Gardener that ſéeketh to contrary the truth, contrarieth himſelf, agreing with both alike,Fol. 228.
                   thus. And Chriſt maketh not himſelfe of the matter of the bread, nor maketh himſelf ſo oft of bread,
                  Fol. 89.
                   
                  a nevv body. &c. Againe, in vvhich miſterie it vvas neuer taught (as this author vvillingly miſreporteth) that Chriſts moſt precious body is made of the matter of bread, but in that order exhibited, and made preſent vnto vs.
                  Part. 3. q. 75.
                   And in this latter opinion he is become a Thomiſt: ſecretly graunting that, which openly and playnely they would not. So playing wily beguily, he beguileth himſelfe.
            
            
               Iudaiſtes.
               
                  
                     SAinct Thomas ſaith, that euil perſons and the reprobate, eate the verie body and drinke ye very bloud of Chriſt in the ſacrament.Part. 3. q. 80. art. 3.
                   
                  Non modo iuſti, ſed peccatores, Chriſti corpus ſacramentaliter ſuſcipere valent. So that Iudas thereby receyued the body and bloud of Chriſt.Ibi. 81. art. 2.
                   So likewiſe D. Gardener S. Thomas ſcholer, as his maiſter taught, ſo ſayeth. For the learned man vvill anſvvere, that an euill

man by force of Gods ordinaunce, in the ſubſtance of the ſacrament, receyued in deede Chriſtes verie bodye there preſent, vvhole Chriſt God and man. But hearing Hilarie, Auguſtine and other fathers,Super Mathe. ſermone de Sacramento fidel. Feria ſecunda Paſch. pleading hard matter of nullitie againſt this mariage, better aduiſed, doth in another place remember himſelfe on this wiſe. But as vve receyue him in the ſacrament of his flesh and bloude (if vve receyue him vvorthylie) ſo dvvelleth he in vs naturally. &c. Wherin it is plaine, he meaneth that the vnworthy receiuer receyueth him not. But D. Smith ſolde to ſinne, reclaimeth not himſelfe, running forward out of the way, leapeth ouer hedge and ditch, neuer ſtaying to conſider the wayes that he hath trode, ſayth:Fol. 136.
                   that the vnrepentant ſinner hath Chriſtes body (yea) and ſpirite in him.
               
            
            
               Mice feeders.
               
                  IF the doctrine of the Cannoniſtes ſhoulde be true, the Mice in our dayes might be happy: and ſpecially the Church Mice. For ſome of them waying that euill men receyue Chriſt in the Sacramente, fleſhe, bloude and bones: and that by the conſecration, he is to the ſubſtance of bread. &c. ſo tied, that he may not (who would not elſe dwell with Beliall nor abide with ſinners) aſtarte, but muſte be touched of them and remaine with them, do conclude that a Mouſe, Ratte.
                  Gloſ. ſuper. c. Qui bene non custodiūt. De Conſec. dist. 2.
                   
                  &c. may eate the flesh and drinke the bloud of Chriſt in the ſacrament, being holyer and purer than the wicked are. F. Perin is of this opinion, in his boke, and aſketh with

the Canoniſtes what inconuenience can come thereof. And S. Thomas is alſo on that part. Here D. Gardener,
                  Fol. 75.
                   yet awakened by the laſt iobbe that Auguſtine gaue, ſtādeth for the truth, ſaying: that no creature can eate the body and bloud of Chriſt but onely man.
               
            
            
               While Tariers.
               
                  Fol. 64.65.
                  
                  
                     DOctor Smith ſayth that Chriſt flieth vp into Heauen ſo ſone as the bread is chavved in the mouth or chaunged in ſtomack. But D. Gardener forſaketh here the Popiſtes in the plaine fielde, both D. Smith his ſworne brother, ſaying,Fol. 59.
                   
                  there vvas neuer man of learning, that I haue read termed the matter ſo, that Chriſt goeth into the ſtomake of the man that receyueth,
                  All papiſtes fooles quoth wincheſter. 
                  and no further. For that vvhich is vvritten cōtra Stercoraniſtas, is nothing to this teaching, nor the ſpeache of any gloſe if there be any ſuch, vvere herein to be regarded. And in diuers other places of the ſame worke againſt M. Cranmer, appeareth: which thou ſhalt finde (gentle reader) in M. Cranmers boke. Fol. 60.64.65.
               
            
            
               Deuotion ſatisfactours.
               
                  
                     SAint Th. ſayth, that the Maſſe is a ſatiſfactorie Sacrifice, by the deuotion of the prieſt and offerer,Part. 3. q. 79. ar. 5.
                   
                  fit ſatiſfactoria illis pro quibus offertur, vel etiam offerentibus, ſecundum quātitatem ſuae deuotionis.
                  
And before that. Sed in ſatiſfactione magis attenditur affectus offerentis, quam quantitas oblationis. That is: the ſacrament is ſatiſfactorie for thoſe, for whome it is offered, or alſo for the offerer, according to the quantitie of the offerers deuotion. For in ſatiſfaction regard is rather had to the affection of the offerer, than to the quantity of the oblation. D. Gardener ſayth agaynſt it,Fol. 92.
                   
                  M. Cranmer burdening the Popiſts with the ſame. Which maner of doctrine I neuer read, and I thinke my ſelfe it ought to be improued, if any ſuch there be, to make the deuotion of the Prieſt a ſatiſfaction.
               
            
            
               Satisfactories Reall.
               
                  DOctor Smith ſayth, the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, is the ſacrifice that appeaſeth Gods wrath,
                     Fol. 24.148.164. and is our ſatiſfaction and reconciliation. Prieſtes do offer for our ſaluation to gette heauen and to auoyd hell. What is to offer Chriſts body and bloud at Maſſe? to purchas thereby euerlaſting life, if it be not the Maſſe to be a ſacrifice, to pacifie Gods vvrath for ſinne, and to obtayne his mercy.
                  
                     Fol. 4.37. This alſo M. Gardener confuteth on this wiſe. The onely immolation of Chriſt in himſelfe on the Altare of the Croſſe, is the very ſatiſfactorie ſacrifice for reconciliation of mankinde to the fauour of God. And I haue not read the daylie ſacrifice of Chriſtes moſte precious bodie to be called a Sacrifice ſatiſfactorie. But this ſpeach hath bene vſed in dede, that the prieſt should ſing ſatiſfactorie, vvhich they vnderſtode in the ſatiſfaction of the Prieſtes duetie. &c.
               
            
            
               
               Reiterators.
               
                  Fol. 431.
                  
                  DOctor Gardener ſayth: that Chriſtes Sacrifice by him done on the Croſſe is reiterated. And then vve muſt beleue the very preſence of Chriſts body & bloud on Gods bords, and that Prieſts do their ſacrifice, and be therefore called and named ſacrificers.
                  Fol. 436.
                   Agayne. The Catholique doctrine teacheth the dayly Sacrifice to be the ſame in the eſſence that vvas offred on the Croſſe once.
               
               But this variable man is agaynſte him ſelfe for the truth in another place thus. This is agreed and by the Scripture plainely taughte, that the oblation and Sacrifice of our Sauiour Chriſt, vvas and is a perfecte vvorke, once conſummate in perfection, vvithout neceſsitie of reiteration, as it vvas neuer taught to be reiterated, but a meere blaſpheming to preſuppoſe.
               
            
            
               Propitiators.
               
                  THeſe ariſe of D. Gardener, who agréeth with S. Thomas, That the Sacrament is a Propitiatorie Sacrifice, thus.Folio. 437.
                   
                  The acte of the Prieſt done according to Gods commaundement, muſt needes be Propitiatorie, and prouoke Gods fauour, & ought to be truſted on. &c. The confuter whereof is the ſame D. Gardener in theſe wordes:Fol. 92.
                   
                  For vndoubtedly Chriſt is our ſatiſfaction vvholly and fully, vvho hath payed our vvhole debt to God the father, for the appeaſing of his iuſt vvrath.
               
            
            
               
               Venialiſtes.
               
                  ARe they that teach that this ſacrament doth purge veniall ſinnes onlie:Diſt. 32. c Praeter hoc. Parag Ad hoc. as Barth. Brix. the gloſſer of the Decrées ſayth. And Pope Paſcaſius in the ſame Chapter the which Iodd. Fan. and Archydiacon therevpon ſayth: Venialia tantū, venial ſinnes alone.Fol. 432.
                   And Cardinalis Alexandrinus ſayth alſo ſo, with D. Gardener.
               
            
            
               Mortaliſtes.
               
                  BE thoſe, that ſay it taketh away mortal ſinnes alſo.
                     Part. 3. q. 79. art. 3.4. Of which ſect S. Thomas is. Et ſic hoc ſacramentum habet virtutem remittendi quaecūque peccata. &c. And ſo this Sacramente hath force and ſtrenght to make ſtrayght and blotte out all kinde of ſinnes.
            
            
               Breadworſhippers.
               
                  
                     DOctor Smith ſayth, that the figure of the bread and wine is to be worſhipped,Fol. 145. b. 
                  D. Gardener ſayth: Adore it, vvorship it, there is not to be ſayd of the figure: ſo likewiſe Marcus Antonius.
                  
                     Fol. 202.272. Fol. 176.
               
            
            
               
               Iacobites.
               
                  THe Hereſie of the Iacobites dyd ſpring aboute the time of the raygne of Heracletus the Emperour. And as Nicephorus writeth,
                     Nicepho. li. 18. c. vlt.
                     Ibi. c. 5.2.
                     
                   neere vpon the yeare of our Lord Gods incarnation .625. of one Iacob a Syrian borne, an obſcure perſon and of no fame, who for the ſame his vnleneſſe was called Zanzalus.
                  Ib. c. eod. This man compriſed a ſecte out of the former hereſies, which is as it were the ſinke of all the filthyneſſe of the former ages. And hauing made a medley of the errors of Arrius and Apolinaris doctrine, as touching the humanitie and natures of Ieſus Chriſt our bleſſed Sauior, did alſo in outwarde ceremonies and adiaphorois expreſſe the ſame. For alwayes the behauiour of any ſect is to be faſhioned outwardly according to the inwarde doctrine: for elſe were the faſhion monſtrous, and not naturall. Therfore vſed they alwayes by their Church rites, to preach the ſame effect of Chriſtes humanitie and natures.Their doctrin And the lyuelyer to expreſſe that Chriſt receyned not our nature, a perfect ſoule and perfect body of Abrahams ſeede, they vſed in the time of the adminiſtration of the holy communion, the myſteries of the ſame very fleſh and very bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, not to deliuer common breade leauened to the Communicants, leaſt they ſhould ſeme with ye catholique church by the vſe of the common breade leauened, to confeſſe that Chriſt receyued, and they in thoſe myſteries deliuered, a common body of our common nature, leauened as ſayth Nicephorus:
                  Lib. 18. c. 53.
                   
                  Iidem ipſi re diuina faciendo

azymo non pane vtuntur.
                  Lib. 18. c. 53.
                   
                  &c. And ſtraight vpon it he ſayth, Vnam ea re in Chriſto naturam deſignantes: that is. The ſame Iacobites in their miniſtration vſe paaſt (or ſtarch) not breade, therein declaring one only nature in Chriſt. What rite and ceremonie the Popiſtes accuſtome in this matter, it is euidente, and ſo manifeſt, that I nede not to remember ye ſame, but rather iuſt occaſiō to lament that euer we learned ſuch a leſſon of ſuch teachers But happly they wil ſay that they teach no ſuch doctrine as the Iacobites dyd: which is as much to ſay, as they can not tell, or remē
                  ber not what they teach. Be thou mindefull (gentle Reader) of the doctrine which D. Gardener the newe Sacramentarie teacheth. Gardener ſayth. They gyue in the Sacrament the fleſh of Chriſt, but ſuch fleſh, as is of a God: and a ſpiritual fleſh and inuiſible, he ſayth Chriſt hath in heauē, which inuiſibilitie is not proper to our ſubſtance, nor to Chriſt in our ſubſtaunce if he hath the ſame. And vndoubtedly when he aſcended, he caried a viſible body: and vnleſſe he lefte it in the cloudes, he entred his fathers manſion therein, and therin aduocateth for vs: exerciſing as our prieſt that part of his Liturgie. And alſo the immortalitie of our ſubſtance and the glory of the ſame, wherby it is in Chriſt already made ſpiritual: taketh not away the ſubſtance of the ſame, nor the viſibilitie of the ſame. But Chriſt at his appearing ſhall be viſible, as it is ſayd.Apoc. 1.6.
                   
                  Ecce venit in nubibus & videbit eum omnis oculus, & qui eū pupugerunt: beholde he commeth in the cloudes, & al eyes ſhall ſée him, & ſo ſhal they that haue pricked him. Yet if it ſo were that Chriſt had a body in heauē, of an inuiſible ſubſtance: is not for all that, our fayth, and our hope better ſtirred vp by remembring in the common

bread his common body, once receiued of vs, and nowe made a glorified body: than by a wafer and ſinging ſop an other body? If a man ſhould bring a pore Hinde of the countrey, a boxe of wafers at his cōming from ye plough to cromme his potage with, he would thinke his body as little ſtrengthened by ſuch mocke-bread, as we may thinke our ſoules edified by ye ſame.
            
            
               Pſallianes.
               
                  Haer. 57.
                  
                  THoſe Heretiques which Auguſtine ad quod vult Deum, calleth by the ſame name of Pſallians (which is a Siriacke worde) he ſayth, may alſo be called (Euchitai) that is, beades men: or as we may ſay,Lib 3. to 2. Haer. 80.
                   liplabourers, for much praying, or rather pratteling ſake. Epiphanius counteth them Meſſalians, and writeth of them and their ſects vnder that name.Lib. 4. c. 11.
                   They did riſe as Theodorete writeth (differing therein from Epiphanius) in the time of the raigne of Valent. the Emperor: & about the yeare of our Lord 367. The captaines of which ſect was Dadoes, Sabas, Adolphius, and others. Whoſe guiſe and behauiours though it ſéeme at the firſt ſhewe holy, yet it is an hereſie, as Auguſtine noteth, thus.
               
                  Tantum. n. orant, vt eis qui hoc de illis audiunt incredibile videatur. Nam cum Dominus dixerit, oportet ſemper orare & non deficere. Et Apoſtolus, ſine intermiſsione orate, quod ſaniſsime ſic accipitur vt nullo die intermittantur certa tempora orandi. Iſti ita hoc faciunt nimis, vt hinc iudicentur inter Haereticos nominandi. Dicuntur Euchitae opinari Monachis non

licere manibus ſuſtentandae vitae cauſa laborare: atque ita ſe ipſos Monachos profitentur, vt tum ab operibus vacent: The Pſallians vſe ſo muche to pray, that it may ſéeme incredible to the hearer. For where as our Sauiour ſayth, that we ought to pray continuallie, & not to ceaſſe. And the Apoſtle ſayth, pray without intermiſſion, which ſurely is to be vnderſtanded, that no day ſhoulde paſſe without ſome exerciſe of prayer: theſe men doe accuſtome, to ouer pray ſo muche, that therby they are accompted in the beade roll of Heretiques. And it is alſo ſayde, that they iudge it not to be lawefull for Monkes to laboure for their liuing: and therefore many of them profeſſe themſelues Monkes for eaſie liues ſake.
               In theſe words thou mayſt (gentle Reader) apperceyue, that men abſtayning from the affayres of thys life, and honeſt trades, eyther by colour of ſole prayer, or alſo for that cauſe, be Heretique Pſallians, and not Monkes. And their aſſemblies, factions of ſuch Heretiques, and not Colleges of Chriſtians. Of the which ſort the Popes Church hath many, thronging out of ye foure chiefeſt Regular, irregular profeſſions.Volat. 21.
                   One is S. Baſile, the other S. Auguſtine (with lie & al) the third S. Frauncis, the fourth S. Benedicte. Of whom (in dede) commeth the firſt ruled orders or vowed life & ſciſmes of theſe ſects, which ben many. In the entreatie wherof I wil procede thus. Firſt declaring certaine of their orders for men. Secōdly for womē. Thirdly the diuers concorde of their ordered diſcorde among themſelues, wherein ſith breuitie will not ſuffer me to be curious, I doubt not but thy gentleneſſe will diſcharge my credite therein.
            
            
               
               Benedictines. Anno. Domini. 530.
               
               
                  Volat. ibid. Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2.
                  
                  COme of Benedictus Nurſinus, Abbot of the Monkerie of Caſsinenſs. who with his ſiſter Scholaſtica, firſt inuented this hereſie of regular life, when as the Mōks afore time hitherto, ſerued Chriſt without any ſuch bondage of vowe and rule, as after followed. The extent of the reuenewes of Benedictes Abbey aforeſayde, amounted to the yearely ſumme of 40000.
                  That is reconing euery Flor. but at. 4. ſbil. 8000. poū
                     des the yeare. Florences. Their wéede is in theſe latter dayes a ſhauen Pate, a blacke Cowle, and vnder it a white Gowne: they weare bootes: and their Abbots haue a Byſhops Croſier caried before them. In whoſe rule amongſt other things is contayned, That he vvhich doth not kepe the rule, and is bounde thereto, muſte knovve that he is damned of God.
                  Metr. Krantz. Lib. 8. c. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               Cluniacke order. Anno. 920.
               
               
                  THis roſe about that ſeaſon vnder Pope Iohn the tenth, in the countie of Burgundie (ſome ſay of one Oddo) other ſome of one Berno Gallicus, and are partly conformed to the order of Benedictus.
                  Volat. ibid. Sabel. Aene. 9. Lib. 1.
                   For yet & a good while after they knewe no other. Of later time they weare a garment of Oxes haire, and a long Scaplar.
            
            
               Humiliators order. Anno. 1017.
               
               
                  
                  ABout this time Henry the Emperour, the thirde of that name,Volat. Lib. 21.
                   baniſhed diuers Mediolaners: and of them roſe this ſect. In the time of Pope Benedict the eyght,He vſed to ride in his life time. who as Platina ſayth was ſéene to ryde vpon a blacke horſe, after his death about the place where his treaſure was hid. Pope Innocent the third and diuers other Popes, approued this order, and graunted it their protection.
            
            
               Camaldulenſium order. Anno. 1030.
               
               
                  THen one Romualdus Rauenatus,
                  Polydo. de I
                        •
                     . Lib. 7. c. 2. Sabelli. En. 9. Lib. 2.
                   beganne the ſame order, which hath a certayne affinitie with the Benedictines
                  ▪ And wheras before time the Monkes vſed their coates & cowles of what colour they them ſelues liſted.Volat. li. 21.
                   This Hereſiarch appoynted his ſeruauntes and fellowes, a white Cowle (and none otherwiſe) to weare.
            
            
               Vallis Vmbroſian order. Anno. 1060.
               
               
                  ABout this time one Iohn Gualbertus a Florentine began this ſect,Volat. 22. Polydo de Ins. Lib. 7. c. 2.
                   which hath hys certayne agrement with the Benedictes. Gregory the ſeauenth in his time allowed the ſame.
            
            
               Chanons Regularie Anno 1070.
               
               
                  ABout this time one Abbot Arnulphus, began that order in the dayes (as ſome recken) of Pope Alexander the ſeconde, a victorious

Champion,Polydo de In. Lib. 7. c. 3.
                   who ouercame Cadolus Byſhop of Parmenion (choſen Pope as his better) in the plaine field. Their wéede is a Sarplar of blacke, tied vnder their arme.Metrop. Lib. 7. c. 50.
                   They are as it were the Bollimon of Monkes and Prieſtes, or as Krantz calleth them, Regularum irregulatio, the miſſerule of Rules.
            
            
               Grandimontenſs. order. Anno. 1080.
               
               
                  Volat. Lib. 21. Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2.
                  
                  ABoute that time one Stephanus Gallus, who vſed to weare nexte hys bare body, vnder a black cowle, an habergeon, did excogitate this ſect out of the Benedictines. That crafty Monke Gregorie the ſeauenth, after the accōpt of ſome writers, being Pope, and Scholler as they ſay, in Necromancie.
            
            
               Carthusian order. Anno. 1095.
               
               
                  Pla. Aemil. 5. Pol. Lib. 7. c. 3. Krantz Metrop. lib. 5. c. 19 &. 25.
                  
                  CAme of one Bruno a Coloner, who toke occaſion of a certaine Doctor (that being dead, & his Corps in the Church abyding the obſequies, cried out, I am damned by the iuſt iudgement of God) to deuiſe the ſame out of the Benedicts. Theſe eate onely fyſh, and no fleſhe, and vowe ſilence by rule.
            
            
               Ciſtertiene order. Anno. 198.
               
               
                  
                  ONe Ardinus or as Polydor ſayth,Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 2. Krantz, Lib. 5 c. 19.
                   
                  Arding an Engliſh man, and Robert Moliſmenſis began this order of Monkes as Volateranus & Sigebertus ſay, Paſchalis ſecundus then being Pope: at whoſe death the Euening or ſhutting in of the night, ſodaynly became ſo bright for an houres ſpace together, as that the Moone which then was at the full, was altogether vnapperceyued. They weare redde ſhoes, a ſhirt ouer their gowne, and their Abbots a Croſier.
            
            
               Bernhardes order. Anno 1113.
               
               
                  THis order S. Bernhard they ſay began, and framed that ſecte out of the dyſorder of the Ciſtertiens. They weare a black Cowle.In vita Bernhards. This order went ſo wel forwarde, that in his life time there were .160, houſes thereof.
            
            
               Duytch Lordes.
               
                  ABout the foreſayd time,Polyd. li. 7. c. 5
                   began the order of the Teuthoniks, commonly called Duytch Lordes. For they are for the moſte parte Gentlemen borne, whom in this place I remember, that in them thou mightſt call to minde the warrelike rowte of religious Ruffians. They weare a white mantell, & a blacke Croſſe vpon it. It is lawfull for them to haue a beard. The founder therof was one Gaufredus de Aldemaro.
                  Volat. Lib. 22. Tyr. Li. 12. c. 7.
                   This was done in the dayes of Innocentius the ſeconde, who bycauſe at hys

own luſt and pleaſure he vſed to alter the eſtate of the Churches in Syria,
                  Tyr. Li. 14. c. 4
                   ſtirred vp great contention and ſciſmes among the byſhops there.
            
            
               Premonſtratenſs. order. Anno. 1140.
               
               
                  Volat. Pol. Lib. 7. c. 3.
                  
                  THe authour thereof was one Nobertus Lotharing, Byſhop of Laudane, who ordeyned them white Chanons to weare a white cowle. They are called Chanons Regulars exempted.
            
            
               Wilhelmites. Anno. 1170.
               
               
                  Sabelii. En. 9. Volat. Lib. 21.
                  
                  THeſe be a kinde of Heremites rayſed vp by one good Iohn of Mātua. Their wede is black. Some appoynt it to one Guilihelm. byſhop of Aquitane.
               
            
            
               Carmelites or white Friers. Anno. 1175.
               
               
                  Polido. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 3.
                  
                  THe white Friers firſte began about this time in Syria. They fayne thē
                  ſelues to be folowers of Helias in Carmell Mount. They vſe a blacke weede, and a white Mantle or Cope. Theſe two ſectes began in the dayes of Alexander the thirde, of whoſe goodneſſe (in part) I entreated before.
            
            
               Croſse Friers. Anno. 1197.
               
               
                  Volat.THis order called Cruciferers, that is to ſay Croſſe cariers, beganne in Italie, the ſame time

they trauayled barefooted and bareheaded, they lodged on the earth, and were girded with hempe. This was in the dayes of Pope Celeſtinus the thirde.
            
            
               Barefoote Friers. Anno. 1205.
               
               
                  
                     SAinct Frauncis the Frier of Aſininas,
                  Volat. 21. libre the ſonne of one Peter Barnardine, did deuiſe this order and ſect of religion, called Gray Friers, Begging Friers,
                  
                     Too many names for true men.
                     Sa. En. 9. li. 9.
                     
                   
                  Barefoote Friers, Minors or Franciſcanes: preaching in a Cowle, of whome before I mencioned. The colour wherof was Millers Graye: on their heades was ſhauen a large crowne. Their Girdle muſt be full of Knottes. They goe a limlyfting in the countrey for their lyuing. &c. Innocentius the thirde (in whoſe dayes they aroſe) approued them. This ſame Innocentius is he,In Phil. of whome Abbas Vſpergenſ. ſayth that he vſed to ſay thus: Eyther the Pope muſt take from Philip his Crovvne, or Philip from the Pope, his Apoſtolique Miter, Keyes, and ſvvorde. And therfore crieth out agaynſt Rome:Pol. de In. li. 6 c. 14.
                   Thou haſt that thou long thriſtedſt for O Rome, ſoūd thy triumph, for thou haſt ouercome the world by wickedneſſe not by religion. This ſwarme excéeded the number of .60000. in the dayes of Sabellicus.
               
            
            
               Trinitie order. Anno. 1214.
               
               
                  VNder the ſame Pope thys order began by one Iohn Matta & Felice an Ancherite. Their apparell and wéede is white,Volat. Pol. de. In. li. 7 c. 21.
                   a croſſe on their breaſt half red, halfe blewe.
            
            
               
               Dominicke or blacke Friers. Anno. 1225.
               
               
                  THis order was deuiſed of one Dominicus,
                  Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
                   & therfore are called Dominicks, preaching or lying Friers, blacke Friers, begging Friers. They weare a black cowle. By the meanes of certaine of this broode, Henry the Emperor was poyſoned in ye cuntrey of Berna. Pope Gregorie .ix. helde the chaire of Rome whē as they ſprang. This Gregorie is he that compiled the fiue bokes of Decretall Epiſtles. This Pope promiſed life euerlaſting to as many of the Emperour Fredericks ſubiectes,Plat. Aen. 9. Li. 6. Volat. 21.
                   as would fight agaynſte their Lord. Sabellicus declareth that in his time there were .4143. houſes of his broode. This thing ſhoulde ſéeme true, as wel bycauſe of the credite of the author, as otherwiſe: and eſpecially bycauſe that Helias, Ioannes and Albertus did by battayle ſtriue who ſhould be ſucceſſor to S. Dominicke in his Abbey: which they would neuer haue done, vnleſſe that their kingdome were already big and rich, yea and was likelier to be larger and richer.
            
            
               Bonne Hōmes.
               
                  Polydo. de In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
                  
                  THis ſect firſt began here in England, at a towne called Ashering, in the raygne of King Richarde of Cornevvall, whoſe ſonne built the Monaſterie. They vſe girt cowles and blewe hoodes.
            
            
               
                  
                     Sabelli. En. 9. Lib. 7.
                     
                     Polido. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
                     
                  Ladyes order. Anno. 1280.
               
               ONe Tudent of Florence began this order, Their apparell is blacke.
            
            
               
               Celeſtine order.
               
                  THis ſecte aroſe of one Celeſtinus Eſerimnenſis, who was the fift Pope of that name He beganne the ſame order after his conſecration. And after the ſixte moneth of his enthronization retourned thither agayne. But by the craft of Boniface his ſucceſſor; otherwiſe called Caietanus, who hiering falſe harlots in the night times to ſpeake thorow trunks to him as by oracles, perſuaded him to returne for his ſoules health to the Heremites life. Whervpon he reſigned his Popedome.Plati. in vita Celest. Notwithſtanding, he was deceiued of his purpoſe: for his ſayd ſucceſſor by treacherie, cauſed him to be ſhutte vp as priſoner, in the caſtle called Fumonis, where the ſiely ſoule ended his life miſerably. This Caietane is that glorious Monarch and Pope, who one ſolempne day apparelled in his Pontificalibus, played the parte appertayning to his office, & bleſſed the people with the Apoſtolique bleſſing. And on an other adourned in the Emperours robes, had as appertayneth vnto the Emperour a naked ſworde caried before him: and ſitting cryed aloude, beholde here two ſwordes. But afterward by Gods iuſt iudgement, this ambitious and couetous man (if it be lawefull to call him man) dyed miſerablie in the priſon,Plat. vnder captiuitie of the faction of the Gibellines.
               
            
            
               Ieſuites order. Anno. 1367.
               
               
                  THis order then began of Iohn Colombinus & of Frauncis Vincentius of Sennenſ. who inſtituted their followers to gette their liuingVolat. Sabel. Polydo. de. In. Lib. 7. c. 4.
                  
                  
with their trauayle and ſweate,Vol. Sab. Pol. de. In. li. 7. c. 4.
                   gathering this broode but here and there, from houſe to houſe, arayed in cō
                  mon, and not ſpeciall attire. But when Vrban then Pope, ſawe them differ ſo muche from other Monkes, both in vow, profeſſion and holy labouring life, he called them to Rome, not ſo muche approuing them, as corrupting them. For then he preſcribed them a white Cowle, a ſquare hoode hanging downe to their ſhoulder, and are girt with a girdle of a Piſſel, wearing on their bare féete wodden pattens, and that they ſhould weare a cloake made of fine woll of Canuſium. They were at the beginning called Apoſtoliques, and not in holy orders,Apoſtoliques vt ſupra. but gaue themſelues onely to prayer.
            
            
               S. Saluieurs. Anno. 1415.
               
               
                  Volat. Blondus. Plat.
                  THis ſecte began vnder Pope Iohn the xxiij. of that name: a man more fitte for the warre and fielde, than for the Church. Their coates and ſcaplers are white, and haue on their vppermoſt garment a ſpeare.
            
            
               Montoliuetes order. Anno. 1420.
               
               
                  Pol. de. In. li. 7 c. 2.
                  
                  ABout that time one Bernard Ptolomeus broched this order, cladde in a white wéede: the ſame was afterwarde approued by Pope Gregorie the twelfth.
            
            
               Minimorum order. Anno. 1455.
               
               
                  
                  
                     FRanciſcus Siculus began this order in Fraunce:Volat. & conſidering that old Frier Frauncis did call his Minors, that is, the leſſer of al orders: thinking to ſhewe a countenance, as humble as his, he calleth this ſecte Minimorum, which is to ſay, leſſer than the leaſt of al orders:Pol de. In. li. 7. c. 5.
                   which in effect is no order. Theſe men vowe (beſide Myſogamian) not to eate fleſh, but to liue with rawe fruites, and not dreſſed meate. I doubt not Chriſtian reader, but theſe ſectes of the Popes Pſallians rehearſed, are ſufficient to cauſe thée to iudge and determine of the reſt. For I haue mentioned theſe onely, becauſe they ſéeme the chiefeſt and pureſt: whereof the aduerſarie may beſt affie himſelfe, and bragge of the deuiſers thereof. Not bycauſe there is no more, or that the reſt are not the horribler: or ſuch as the parties themſelues lothe to think on. Therfore I omit ouermuch to trouble thy eares, or moue tediouſneſſe by rehearſing. The Diſciplinals.

                     
                        The shadovved vayle.
                     
                     
                        Hieruſalem brethren.
                     
                     
                        Chrovvched Friers.
                     
                     
                        The order of the vayle of Ioſaphat.
                     
                     
                        The Heremite Friers.
                     
                     
                        The reformed Carmelits.
                     
                     
                        The Sclauonites.
                     
                     
                        Saint Anthonies order.
                     
                     
                        The Sheere brethren.
                     
                     
                        The order of the Svvorders.
                     
                     
                        The order of Starred Monkes.
                     
                     
                        The order of Starred Friers.
                        A Rowte of Religions.
                     
                     
                        The order of double Croſse brethren.
                     
                     
                        The order of Conſtantinopolitanes.
                     
                     
                        The Gregorians.
                     
                     
                        The order of Wenclaus.
                     
                     
                        Nolharts brethren.
                     
                     
                        Saint Sophies order.
                     
                     
                        
                        S. Iames vvith the ſvvord.
                     
                     
                        S. Iames vvith the shell.
                     
                     
                        S. Helenes brethren.
                     
                     
                        S. Mary Magdalene.
                     
                     
                        S. Hierome Heremites.
                     
                     
                        S. Ambroſe Lordes.
                     
                     
                        The order of font Euerarde.
                     
                     
                        Ioſephs order.
                     
                     
                        Sepulchre order.
                     
                     
                        The order of the Keyes.
                     
                     
                        The order of the Hungarians.
                     
                     
                        The Specularies.
                     
                     
                        The order of the Thebans
                     
                     
                        The order of Sarabites.
                     
                     
                        Recluſes.
                     
                     
                        The vayle of Cavvline.
                     
                     
                        The Sambonites.
                     
                     
                        The vale of Scholars.
                     
                     
                        Paules brethrē of Galatia.
                     
                     
                        Honofreans.
                     
                     
                        Rufus Monkes.
                     
                     
                        Nevve Niniuites.
                     
                     
                        Cellites.
                     
                     
                        The Haborites.
                     
                     
                        Chaptre brethren.
                     
                     
                        Begarts order.
                     
                     
                        The Friſonarie congregation.
                     
                     
                        Reformed Iuſtines.
                     
                     
                        S. Paules Heremites.
                     
                     
                        S. Iohns Heremites.
                     
                     
                        The holy Ghoſt order.
                     
                     
                        S. Peter order.
                     
                     
                        S. Loyes order.
                     
                     
                        S. Victor order.
                     
                     
                        S. Thomas order.
                     
                  
And diuers other moe, which being rehearſed woulde make vp the full accompte of an hundreth. But as touching their Pſallians ſects for women, I wil write ſo much as ſhall be alſo neceſſary for thee to geſſe, as by parte, the whole, and none otherwiſe.
            
            
               S. Scholaſtica Nonnes. Anno. 536.
               
               
                  
                     BEnedict otherwiſe called Benet (of whome we haue made mention heretofore) had a ſiſter called Scholaſtica, who learned of hir brother Benet the way & maner of hatching and brooding (among

women) ſwarmes of religion. Their vayle, cloke and cowle is black: They weare alſo a wimple, as al the reſt do.
            
            
               S. Agnes. Anno. 1105.
               
               ABoute this time one Agnes a Virgin began this religion at Ieruſalem.
               
            
            
               Chanoniſses.
               THis order beganne and ſprang of the Chanons Regular. Their Mantels are black, and their Rochets white.
            
            
               Carmelitiſs.
               
                  
                     BRocardus the generall of the Carmelites, clocked togither this flocke of Hennes to his rule. Their Mantels are white, their vnderclothes blacke. Their Sainctes be Sibilla and Sibillina, Angela Archangela, Ioanna & Katherina.
               
            
            
               Auſten Syſters.
               
                  THe Auguſtine Friers, bycauſe they would not clock without Hennes fayned a rule of Monica Auguſtines mother, and gathered a couent of women, as their brethren of all ſorts did. They weare a black girt Gowne, and white Kirtels. Their principall Sainctes are Helene and Clare.
               
            
            
               
               Begynes of S. Frauncis.
               
                  THeſe be the Gray Siſters of the third order of S. Frauncis rule, that trotte from place to place to ſick mennes beddes, prowling and getting howſoeuer they may in ſickneſſe and health, for their Couent.
            
            
               S. Katherine Nonnes.
               THeſe people are clothed in the colour of the Dominicks. They are at the ſolemnitie of their profeſſion, maried wt a ring. It firſt began at Senna.
               
            
            
               Norman Syſters.
               BE thoſe that were wonte to be in euery good towne, and pray for their founders ſoules.
            
            
               Penitent Whoores.
               
                  THe authour therof was one Iohn Teſſeran a Franciſcan of Paris, who aſſembled cō
                  mon women together, and made a religion & rule of them.
            
            
               Nonnes of the roſarie of our Lady.
               
                  A Dominicke Frier firſte deuiſed this ſecte: and their order is to ſay on their beades a certaine mber of Lady Pſalters: which being done they call it the Roſarie.
               
            
            
               Of the ten vertues of our Lady.
               THeſe Nonnes vſe many coloures: their Vayles are blacke: their Kirtels are white: their

Scaplars are red: their Mantels are gray. This ſecte firſt deuiſed the Chaplette, that is, to repeate. 10. Aue Maries, a certaine number of times.
            
            
               S. Brigides.
               
                  THis Brigide was a noble wydowe of Suetia, who ordayned this ſecte, wherein Monkes and Nonnes dwell together. The women haue the vpper roome, and the men the neather. They haue a ginne or turning whéele in the wall, wherewith properly they may conuey the one ſorte from the other.
               I will of theſe orders for women alſo let paſſe a great number, hoping that thou (gentle reader) wilte take this for a ſufficient rehearſall, ſeing I mind but ſummarily & briefly, as it were with the fingers ende, to touch the ſame. That thereby thou mighteſt ſée the Popes Pſallians in both kindes of men. Iudging by the practiſe, the doctrine. Now briefly marke the contrarieties, and diuerſities of ſuch of them, as proceede out of the chiefeſt ſectes: from the which though once they procéeded as out of the roote, yet they varie and are other ſectes in themſelues, whereby thou mayeſt iudge of the harmonie of their religion, ſéeing they are thus fallen from their founders, and diſagrée in themſelues.
               White Monkes & Nonnes ſpreading into

                     
                        Clariualenſs.
                     
                     
                        Bernardines.
                     
                     
                        Premonſtratenſs.
                     
                     
                        White Gilbertines. And ſuch like.
                  
               
               
                  Blacke Benet Monkes ſpreading into

                     
                        Harmonie of the Popes Regulars.
                        Valiſumbrenſers.
                     
                     
                        Camaldulenſs. who weare white.
                     
                        Grandimontenſs.
                     
                     
                        Cluniacks.
                     
                     
                        Montelmenſs. And many others.
                  
               
               There is great diſcorde about the rule of Benet: bycauſe the ſectes agrée not what he hath commaunded or not. As Frier Angelus de Clauaſio ſaith in his ſumma Angelica, and therefore néedeth the Popes expoſition to appeaſe them.
               
                  Auguſtine Monkes and Nonnes ſpreading into

                     
                        Blacke.
                     
                     
                        Blevve.
                     
                     
                        Ruſset.
                     
                     
                        White. And many other.
                  
               
               The rule of this ſect was chaunged by Pope Leo de Carato. Anno. 1401. Sabel.
               
               
                  Dominicks Monkes and Nonnes, wherof the two firſt ſectes varie from the tertiaries. And this rule nedeth the explication of the Pope.
               
                  Minorite Monkes and Nonnes ſpreading into

                     
                        Obſeruancers.
                     
                     
                        Conuentuals.
                     
                     
                        Reformates.
                     
                     
                        Collectans of ye Goſpel, & of the Hoode.
                     
                        Amedees.
                     
                     
                        Tertiaries which contayne men and women together.
                  
               
               
                  Saint Clares order ſpreading into

                     
                        Obſeruantes.
                     
                     
                        
                        Reformates.
                     
                     
                        Vrbanes.
                     
                  
               
               Frier Clauaſius declareth, that Pope Eugenius the fourth allowed hir rule, in the which fiue thinges are vnder payne of deadly ſinne commaunded The firſt is Obedience to the Abbeſſe. The ſeconde is, Wilfull pouertie. The third, Abſtayning from Mariage. The iiij. Election of the Abbeſſe. The fift, to be cloyſtred. &c.
               
                  Carmelites Monkes and Nonnes deuided into

                     
                        Recluſes.
                     
                     
                        Begintes.
                     
                     
                        Conuerſes.
                     
                     
                        Donates. And ſo forth.
                  
               
               Beſides Camaldulenſers, Iohannites, Ieſuites, Carthuſians & many other moe, whome for tediouſneſſe I omit to rehearſe.vi. de rel. do. 4 Religionum glo. ibid. For euē the Popes their ſelues were aſhamed of this diuerſitie, Quia diuerſitas religionum inducit confuſionem, bycauſe the diuerſitie of religions bring confuſion, as euidentely maye appeare by their ſects and ſciſmes therein. And therefore reſtrayned the inuenting of any more. As Boniface the eight ſayth, Gregorie the tenth in the ſeconde Councell holden at Lyons dyd. For God ſtirred the heartes and weakened the wits of men long before that Councell of Lyons (which was in the yeare of our Lord. 1273,) to ſeeke the truth. And therefore many men muſed at the varietie of theſe. Locuſtes (whereof Iohn in the Apocalips prophecieth,Apoc. 9. In Ep. de Mo. & Sacerdote which came out of the ſmoke of the bottomleſſe pit) as Anshelmus Auelburgenſis about ye yeare of our Lorde .1150. teſtifieth of his age and time. But to (returne to our purpoſe.) There is none of all theſe orders of the Regulars aboue rehearſed, but as

ſone as they are profeſſed, are by and by become Euchites or Pſallians, euen of bente vowe and purpoſe: both in the ſuperſticious vſe of prayer, and abſtayning from working for their liuing. For euery religious perſon, is bound to the obſeruance of Canonical houres (which in number are .7.) to wete, the .j. the .iij. the .vj the .ix. with Mattens, Euenſong, & Complin, both in the cōmon ſeruice vſed after the maner of the Church of Rome,
                  c. fin. 92. Dist. et. c. 13. de voto The diſcorde of cōmon ſeruice. and thoſe of the vſe of Sarum, vſe of Yorke, & vſe of Bāger: though theſe laſt are more ſtuffed with prayer to our Lady & Saints, thā that of Rome. But ye Monks ſay theſe houres neyther after ye vſe of Rome, nor Metropolitane Church, but with certaine ſpecial Himnes, Verſieles, Antiphonies & Collects of their religion,Gl. in. Cle. de celeb. Miſs. rule & profeſſion. And therefore make not one kinde of Pſallians, but ſo many kindes, as they haue diuerſities of prayers,Henr. Gan. in quo alibet. Clauaſius in ſumma. orders, & rules of life. All which the houres & ſeruice muſt they not omit, for then they ſhuld incur deadlie ſin. Yea or if any vſe at their pleaſure to change the ſame for other prayers rehearſed in their ſteade. And if he ſhuld happē by negligence, yt he ſhould omit in ſaying or ſinging of the ſame, any part thereof, he is bound to make his accoumpt and number vp,Pet. de Pal. in 4. diſt. 15.
                   eyther with a Pater noſter, or Pſalme, or elſe he ſinneth. And the like if he ſay them not in their due houres: or one in anothers houre. Therfore muſt the Regulars riſe at mydnight to ſay Mattens, at the vpriſing of the ſunne to ſay the firſt houre.Clauaſius in ſumma. Pol de. In. Lib. 6. c. 2.
                   &c. and ſo forth on, the reſt, to the honour of our Lady, after the inſtitution of Vrban the Pope, and diſcharge of their rule. Whereby it is euident, that they doe a thing almoſte incredible. Following the aduiſe that Petrus de Palude giueth, to pray an hundreth times by day, and an

hundreth times by night, the obſeruance of their rule and rite of their Romiſh Church, become Pſallians, with whome as they agre in Battologia, liplabouring and pratling, ſo they alſo doe in a loytring life, and in aduouching of the ſame doctrine, as ſo the Pſallians did. Witneſſe of Gabriel Biel,
                  Sup. 4. diſt. 16. q. 4. prop. 1.
                   who graunteth that all ſtrong of limme, and labourlike beggers, ought to worke, or otherwiſe not to eate. Which notwithſtanding he ſayth that Friers, Monkes, and the reſt of this broode ought, though they are no preachers nor church miniſters, yet by almes to be prouided for & not work: bycauſe, Non ſolum his modis ſeruitur Eccleſiae, ſed etiam deuotis orationibus, et caeteris exercitijs ſpiritualiter, his. n. acquiritur gratia Eccleſiae, placatur ira dei & impetrātur omnia neceſsaria corpori & animae &c. Vnde tota Eccleſia eſt vna reſpublica, ergo quiſquis vſibus Chriſtianis neceſsaria erogauerit, vbique ea quae ſunt ſibi neceſsaria accipit. &c. that is. That ye Church is not only ſerued by preaching and adminiſtration of the Sacraments, but alſo by deuout prayers, and ſuch like ſpirituall exerciſe. For by the ſame grace is obtained for the whole Church: Gods wrath is appeaſed, & all things neceſſary both for body and ſoule are obtayned.A falſhode. Wherefore ſyth the whole Church is a common wealth, it is requiſite that whoſoeuer layeth out any thing for the ſtate of the whole, ſhould euery where receyue ſuccour for his néede. The which reaſon how vnable it is to holde water, any man may aperceiue, that conſidereth how the reaſon, in the latter parte, (which is as a Metaphor brought frō 
                  Syndico a general Proctor) fayleth, as well bycauſe the godly exerciſes in the firſt parte ſuppoſed, are not (if the reſt were graunted to be good) founde in the Cloyſters according to all the

eſſentials and circumſtances thereto requiſite & therin ſuppoſed: as alſo bycauſe that though it may happen, that the way and meanes howe the general procurer ſhal prouide for his nede, may be left to his own conſideration, yet the wayes and meanes how a chriſtian ought to prouide,
                     2. Theſs. 3.
                   is not ſo. According to Paules doctrine: Qui non laborat, non manducet. He that laboureth not, let him not cate. Whoſe doctrine, yea, & example is to be folowed.Biel ibidem. Although ye 
                  Alexius (as Biel ſayth) forſoke his wife & patrimonie, went a begging throughout the worlde. Although Benet abode thrée yeares in a caue, not working, but liued of the almes of a Monke of Rome, yea, notwythſtanding that the Church of Rome hath licenſed, warranted, and defended, theſe Drones and Caterpillers of the Common welth, or any other example of Dominick or Erauncis. The which Frauncis rule they their ſelues followe, euen as they liſt, which is in dede nothing at al. What and howe farre they dare preſume to breake the other rules, be thei elder, or be they later, it may wel be iudged: Sith this that is one of the laſt and of the chiefeſt and principall of rules, is broken and marred. Of the which it ſhall not be out of the way, ſo to entreate, as ſeing the marring of the ſame, thou thereby mayſte perfectely viewe the ſtate of all the other. In reading whereof I pray thée be ſo indifferent,Franc. Lamb. Auinioniens. c. 1.
                   as I for my part ſhall be in the deſcribing of the ſame: and iudge the beſt thereof.
               In the beginning of their rules thus ſtandeth it written. Regula & vita Fratrum minorum haec eſt. Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti ſanctum Euangelium obſeruare. that is. This is the rule and eſtate of the lyfe of the Friers Minors, to obſerue the holy Goſpell of

our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. And in the ende: Sanctum Euangelium Domini noſtri Ieſu Chriſti, quod firmiter promiſimus, obſeruabimus. that is. As we haue promiſed, ſo will we kepe and firmely holde the Goſpel of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Pope Nicholas the third,Lib. 6. de verborum ſig. c. Exiuit. extolleth the ſame rule very highly thus. Haec eſt apud deū & Patrem munda & immaculata religio. &c. that is: This is the pure and vndefiled religion with god and the father. &c. By reaſon wherof I iudge, that after S. Frauncis in an earneſt deſire & purſute of euerlaſting life,Volat. Lib. 21.
                   had tried by foure yeares ſpace the life in the wilderneſſe, as alſo the prowling life of beggers, ſuppoſing to finde (among all) ſome maner of life whereby he might attayne to the holieſt, was admoniſhed to liue and be contented with the cōmon rule of all chriſtians: the Goſpell of the Lord Ieſus. For in his Teſtament S. Frauncis teſtifieth, that he was admoniſhed by oracle and commaundement from the Lord, that he ſhould liue according to the rule of the ſayde Goſpell. As if Chriſt ſhould ſay. Frauncis, diſtract not thy mind to this or that eſtate of life, thinke not ſometimes to become a Carthuſian, ſomtime a Bernhardine, or ſuch like. For the rule of righteouſneſſe conſiſteth in the Goſpell, the common rule and religion of all Chriſtians. After the like ſorte Antonius Heremita was admoniſhed, aboute Anno Domini. 350. & perſuaded (as Petrus Pariſsiēſ. Cantor. ſayth) to receyue the Goſpels rule. And therefore when any Monkes came to hym for rule of life, he offred the ſame Goſpell to be onely folowed by them: & infecting them therewith, thought (as I iudge S. Frauncis after him did) to make them Goſpellers and preachers of the ſame to all men. And the rather, bycauſe there were fewe true teachers in

                  S. Frauncis time. He therefore bound them to that office:
                     4. exiuit. preſcribing almoſt the forme of their ſermons (as the ſayd Pope Nicholas ſayth.) Habetur in eadem regula etiam,
                  The Franciſcanes muſt preach. 
                  quod in praedicatione quam Fratres faciūt fint examinata & caſta eorum eloquia: ad vtilitatem & edificationem populi, annunciando eis vitia & virtutes,What. poenam & gloriam. that is. In the ſame rule of S. Frauncis, is alſo contayned, that the ſermons of thoſe Friers ſhoulde be of due examined ſtuffe, true matter and pure: to the perfect edifying of the people, inſtructing them of vices and vertues, of payne & glorie.They muſt poſseſse little. And by the like conſidering of the couetouſneſſe of the Monkes, of and before his time, whom the Councel of Cabilion (which was about the yere of our Lord 800. in ye gret Charles his dayes, could not reſtraine: but that they would perſuade men to bequeath landes and goodes. &c. to their Monaſteries: whereby it was like it would come to paſſe (as it afterwardes did) that the Cleargie ſhould be Lords of all,Math. 4.
                   and then hauing the Diuels offer, might fall downe and worſhip him, ordayned that they ſhuld take no money, be no gatherers of goods or patrimonie. But hauing meate and drinke. &c. ſhould willingly driue forwarde the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt in ſuch pouertie, leaſt that while they are Philochremator, that is, ſtudiers for lucre, the worke of the Lord, and building of the houſe ſhuld be vndone.Hagg. 1.
                   Which Haggei the Prophet crieth agaynſt: & therfore they are bound to work with their own hands for their liuing as the ſame Pope Nicholas in yt place aforeſayd declareth. But this good zeale of Frauncis toke ſmall effect, for it ſared therwith, as it doth wyth good hearbes, that ſette in a dry ſommer and deawleſſe dayes, ſone wyther. I ſo ſay, bycauſe that the Popes

holyneſſe ſtrayght way caught it by the ende, pearced the roote, and by expounding the purpoſe of Frauncis peruerted the religion. Gregorie the .ix. Nicholas the third, and Clement the fift, eche in his time began to approue, expounde, and ordayne Frauncis: or rather miſforme him: as by the example of the vnnaturall chaungelings of theſe late yeares appeareth. Where Frauncis would haue obediēce to God in Ieſus Chriſt ſworne, there muſt they ſweare obedience to Francis. In place of folowing the rule of the goſpel, they muſt folowe the Popes explication. In ſteade of ſuch edifying and pure Sermons, they muſte preach Legende lies, Ouidius Metamorphoſis, an ouerworne Goſpell or Epiſtle in Latine, and Canonicall houres. And for working for their liuing, they muſte loyter. For a poore Couent or Cloyſter, a Kings palace and wealth. Finally, in ſteade of the putting out of one pore hand for a pennie, holde a hoode of a pecke. Well, thereby declared they (to the wiſe man) their couetous hearts and larger conſciences. Wherefore I dare aduouch if Frauncis ſawe thoſe that chalenge his name, in theſe dayes, he woulde, marking their fatte chéekes & ſofte handes, ſay they are no Franciſcanes, but Pſallians. And marking their continual pratling, and ſmal preaching, alſo ſay they are no Franciſcans but Pſallians. But for all their deformities, he would laſt of all, ſay they are Cerberus whelpes: and their Couent a kennell for the ſame. If the Franciſcanes of our dayes are myſſeſhapened: If that godly be ſo peruerted, that they are become rather the Heretiques of their founders than folowers, what ought a man then to iudge of the reſt: if the ſame rule of Frauncis or any other more were good. And as touching ſuch orders whoſe rule &

profeſſion is naught in the erection and firſt foundation of the ſame: and was neuer good, I neede not to ſpeake at al. If therfore theſe regular profeſſours, before briefly paſſed ouer, would examine their Dortour chéere, Canonicall houres and loytring life, I doubte not but that they all would ſay, that they loked as like Pſallians in our time, as the Pſallians in Auguſtines time, and they all in them, loked like Heretiques.
            
            
               Encratites.
               
                  Haer. 25. Epiph. lib. 2. to. 1. Haer. 47.
                  
                  
                     SAinct Auguſtine folowing the iudgement of Epiphanius, counteth this ſecte of the Encratites a ſciſme or factiō of the Tatianiſtes: appoynting the Tatians for the chiefe head and fountayne of the ſame. The accompte of their firſte ryſing, is conteyned in the Chapter of Tatians, as in their roote of whom they firſt about the yere of our Lord .175. ſprang.
               Their name doth euen at one worde declare, what doctrine thou ſhouldeſt loke for at their handes. They are called Encratites, which ſignifieth abſtayners.Aug. ibidem. 
                  Nec recipiunt (ſayth Auguſtine) in ſuorum numerum coniugio vtentem, ſiue marem ſiue foeminam, non veſcuntur carnibus, eaſque omnes abhominantur. that is. They receyue not into their Couent, eyther man or woman maried, they eate no fleſh, but deteſt all kindes thereof.
               With the which doctrine and maner of thoſe Encratites, the foreſayd Regulars, ſo in euery poynte agréed, as they may well graunt that Auguſtine hath meant of them: whatſoeuer he writ as touching the Encratites. For the aboue ſayde Regulars receyued

none to be of their nūber, but mariage forſwearers: do not the Encratites ſo? They alſo are bound by profeſſion to deteſt al fleſh: and doe not the Encratites ſo? Theſe Carthuſians vowe neuer to eate fleſh:De. In. li. 7. c. 2.
                   euen ſo all Monkes, or the moſt parte of Benets rule doe. Polydorus Virgilius doth giue them a pretie ſcoffe: that eyther the moſt parte of Monks eating fleſh continually agaynſt their profeſſion, are Heretiques, or are continually ſick. Yea and theſe holy charterlings are ſuch deſpiſers of Mariage, that if a maried woman come within their cloyſter,Tatianiſme. it muſt be waſhed and clē
                  ſed after hir with holy water: as by good proufe it hath bene ſene. But the common prouerbe is wythout all doubt true in them: ſée ſport, not ſée, no ieſt.
            
            
               Carpocratians. Anno. 173.
               
               
                  ABout the yere of our Lord God 173. in the .xj. yeare of the raigne of Hadrian the Emperour: as Theodoretus, Euſebius and Nicephorus declare, gods Church was aſſaulted wyth the egre Heretiques Saturninus, Baſilides and Carpocrates, of which latter commeth this ſecte called Carpocratians,
                  Irenaeus. lib. 1. c. 24.
                   whereof I entreate in this Chapter. Theſe ſectaries were ſo puffed vp with pride, that they (as Irenaeus declareth) ſayd ſome of them were like to our Sauioure Ieſus in obſeruing of righteouſneſſe, & in knowlege. And alſo that, parte of them was more excellent than Peter and Paule.
                  
                     Li. Conformitatum. Fol. 2. Impreſs. Mediolan.
                     Anno. 1510.
                     
                   The ſame doctrine doe the Franciſcanes teach in theſe wordes. Franciſcus ad litteram fecundū Euangelium obſeruaunt, non tranſgreſsus apicem vnum & iotam. Et ſolam ipſe cum ſuis habet regulam.

&c. S. Frauncis hath perfourmed the holy Goſpell iuſt with the letter,Fol. 5.
                   not breaking any one iote or pricke. And in another place: Omnes virtutes ſanctorum, tam vaeteris quam noui teſtamenti, in Franciſco poſita ſunt vnitiuè & coniunctiuè. that is. Al the vertues of the holy fathers, eſpecified both in the olde and newe teſtament, are all wholly & togyther in S. Francis. Alſo in the .8. leafe he ſayth. Franciſcus ſimilis Adae Abel, Enos, Enoch, Noe, Abrahae, Iſaac, Iacob, Ioſeph, Moſy, Aaron, Phinees, Ioſua, Iob, Samſoni, Iephite, Gedeoni, Samueli, Eliae, Elizeo, Ionadab, Eſaiae, Ieremiae, Iob, Thobiae, Ezechieli, Danieli, Micheae, Petro, Iohanni Baptiſtae, Iohanni Euangeliſtae, Iacobo, Bartholomeo, Paulo, in ſumma omnibus Sanctis. And in many other places thoroweout the whole boke, which I omitte.
            
            
               Priſcillianiſtes. Anno. 382.
               
               
                  
                     PRiſcilianus of the Countrey of Spaine, or as Hierome ſayeth, of Galatia, did beginne his famous faction vnder the raygnes of the Emperours Gratian and Valentinian, which was about the yere of oure Lorde God .382. Firſt in Spaine,
                  Haer. 70.
                   then after, in Fraunce. They taught, that they ſhould not tel nor open the ſecrets of any man be they neuer ſo filthie, vnrighteous or perillous: as Auguſtine noteth thus. Iura periura, ſecretum prodere noli. that is. Sweare and forſweare, the ſecrete thing forth ſhewe not: and this was percell of their doctrine. The ſelfe ſame doctrine the Popiſtes haue in theſe wordes of Cardinall Caietane.
                  To. 1. tract. 21.
                   
                  Nullatenus licet confeſsori reuelare

peccatum confitentis,, etiam deliberatam occidendi ſummi Pontificis voluntatem habentis. that is.Et in ſūmula Parag. Confeſ. It is not by any meanes lawfull for a ghoſtly Father to reueale the offence or wicked purpoſe of his ghoſtly childe, no, not if his purpoſe were ſtoutely ſtayed to kyll the Pope himſelfe. The practize of their Church doctrine is partly touched by Fabian entreating of the death of King Iohn. But very largely and truely,In parte Fab. ſet out by the no leſſe learned than painefull brother M. Fox, in his Actes and Monumentes of Martyrs. For when as a Monke of Svvinſted in Lincolneshiere called Simon (the ſonne of Simon Magus) hadde determined to poyſon the foreſayd King with wine, wherin a Toade had (by him pricked) vometed by ſuch tormente hir venime, and did before hande confeſſe to his holy Abbot the ſame his purpoſe. The ſame Abbot moſte trayterouſly kepte ſecrete the ſame from the Prince: yea, & that more is, heartened the Monke to the ſame murther of the Prince, and of himſelfe, firſt drinking therof to him. For which good déede, the Monke ſhould haue a perpetuall Maſſe for his ſoule. But who can loke of ſuch rootes for other frutes?
            
            
               Iewiſh Blaſtians.
               
                  
                     EVſebius maketh mention of one Blaſtus,
                  
                     Lib. 5. c. 14.15.19. who was (as by him may be gathered) about the yeare of our Lord god 174. a man infected with the Hereſie of Valentinian. And as Theodoretus witneſſeth, he was an elder in the Church of Rome. Tertulian ſpeaketh of him vnder ye name of Blaſtrus. His mate in this his errour was one Florinus. But that which I intend to write of, is that which the ſame Tertulian
                  
teſtifieth.In fine Lib. de praeſc. Her. 
                  Blaſtus latenter vult Iudaiſmum introducere. &c. that is. The ſame Blaſtus indeuoured himſelfe ſecretely to bring into the Church of Rome ye Ceremonies of the Iewes. By the which ſaying of Tertulian, it is to be apperceyued, that the Church of Chriſt counted it Hereſie, to vſe any one of the Leuitical Ceremonies, or to conforme hir ſelfe to the maner and faſhion of that Church. Of the ſame minde alſo ye general councel of Laoditia about .300. and odde yeres after our Sauiour his birth was. Yea, and the church of Rome was once hir ſelfe of that minde agaynſt the Aſians. But ſhe ſtayed not long therein. For beholding that hir eſtate and countenance of religion, was in the outwarde glory baſer than Iewe and Gentile, did ſhewe hir ſelfe with a new attire: faſhioned partly after the Iudaiſme whiche ſhe before abhorred, and partely after the Gentilitie of the Egyptians,
                  Ioannes Boemus. lib. 2. c. 12 Durand & Beleth. ꝑ totū. Act. 15.
                   
                  Gretians and Romanes. The which was not lawefull: no not for the Iewes to do. For as the Apoſtles in the holy Synode at Ieruſalem, did ſtrike oute the Iudaiſme which falſe brethren wold haue brought in among the beleners of the Gentiles, ſo did they alſo commaunde them to abſtaine frō the Ethniſme of their forfathers. Whiche notwithſtanding this, hath the Churche of Rome broken. Thus hath ſhe reuolted. Thus is the thing lawefull by hir authoritye, whiche is otherwiſe vnlawefull.S. Thom. 1.2. q 103. art. 4.
                   
                  Nam Gentilitatis ritus repudiabatur tanquam omnino illicitus, & a Deo ſemper prohibitus. Ritus autem Legis ceſsabat tanquam impletus per Chriſti paſſionem vtpote a Deo in figuram Chriſti conſtitutus. For the rite of the Gentiles (ſayth S. Thomas) was of ye Church altogither refuſed, as wholly vnlawfull and alwayes by God forbidden. But the

rites of the lawe did ceaſſe, as by the paſſion of Chriſt accompliſhed: namely ordayned of God for a myſterie of Chriſt. Wherefore in viewing of this ornament of the Church of Rome, thou muſt (gentle Reader) mark, firſt thoſe things that ſhe had from the Iewes, wherin ſhe agréeth with the hereſie of Blaſtus. Secondly thoſe that ſhe had from the Gentiles: wherin ſhe is become a Gentile. For although they are applied to Gods religion, ſo farre as they can apply the ſame: yet by no meanes are they incorporated: bicauſe Gods religion is ſuch as alwayes abhorred the Ethnicke rites. The which thing thine owne trauayle, (with the helpe of Durandus and Belethus and Boemus, their owne writers,) eaſily may doe. And therefore I omitte the ſame for ſhortneſſe ſake. Which alſo cauſeth me to ouerpaſſe a gret number more of hyr toyes and trimming.
            
            
               Maſse.
                Anno. 235.
               
               
                  POntianus a Romane ordayned the Confiteor to be ſayd of the prieſt before Maſſe.Nauclerus. Gen. 8.
                  
               
               Anno. 426.
               
               
                  Celeſtinus a Campanois appointed the introite to the Maſſe.Volat.
               
               Anno. 443.
               
               
                  Leo a Thuſcane lengthened the Cannon wyth Sanctum Sacrificium. &c. and Igitur Oblationem.
                  Sigebertus. Pol. de. In. li. 5. c. 10.
                   
                  &c. vnto Placatus.
               
               Anno. 513.
               
               
                  Synmachus a Sardinian,
                  Volat. aboute that time Byſhop, faſhioned the Maſſe (cloughted by many of hys prediceſſors) into a forme and more perfect ſorte.
               
               Anno. 583.
               
               
                  Sigeb.
                  Pelagius the ſecond a Romane ordayned the Prefaces to the Maſſe.
               Anno. 593.
               
               
                  In Decret.
                  Gregorius a Romane added the Kyrieleiſon nine tymes to be ſayde, the Alleluiah, the Offertorie, and the thrée Poſtlacions in the Cannon.
               Anno. 690.
               
               
                  Sergius an Antiochen caſt to ye Maſſe Agnus Dei.
               
               Anno. 731.
               
               
                  Sigebertus.
                  Gregorie the third ioyned the clauſe, Eorum quorum ſolemnitas hodie. &c. to the Canon of the Maſſe.
               Anno. 768.
               
               
                  Stephanus the third prouided that Gloria in excelſis ſhould be euery Sonday ſong at Maſſe.
               Anno. 772.
               
               
                  Adrianus a Romane, leaſt, paſſing deuiceleſſe (as touching this thing) he might ſéeme to be barrayne in the birth of Antichriſt, was deliuered of .ij. twinnes, thoſe repetitions or doublings in the Offertorie.
               Anno. 1215.
               
               
                  Ex Lib. 3. c. Sane.
                  Honorius a Romane ordayned, that the Hoſte at Eleuation ſhould be worſhipped, and that he ſhuld be caried with light and ſuch like to the ſicke.
               Anno. 1484.
               
               
                  Math. Pal.
                  Innocentius the eyght gaue licence vnto the Norvvaies, to conſecrate without wine.
            
            
               Orders, dignities, and degrees.
                Anno. 283.
               
               
                  Diſt. 24. c. Subdiacon.
                  GAius a Dalmatian ordayned that Prieſtes ſhould be conſecrated in their offices, whether that

they were Oſtiaries, Lectors, Exorciſtes, Acoluthes,
                  Diſt. 24. c. Subdiacon. 
                  Subdeacons, Deacons, Elders or Byshops.
               
               Anno. 295.
               
               
                  Marcellinus an Apoſtatate Byſhop, appoynted that there ſhoulde be .xxv. Paroches and euery one to haue his gouernour to baptize the Gentiles and bury the deade. Whervpon, about .800. yeares after,Polid. li. 4. c. 9
                   the deuice of Cardinals ſprang.
               Anno. 714.
               
               
                  Gregorius the ſeconde a Romane, commaunded that no man ſhould mary with his Goſſip.Tom. 1. Concil.
               
            
            
               Faſting.
                Anno. 220.
               
               
                  CAliſtus or Calixtus the ſeauenth Pope being a Romane borne,Diſt. 76. c. Ieiunium. appoynted the dayes called Angariae, that is the Imbre foure times in the yeare.
               Anno. 406.
               
               
                  Innocentius an Albanian ordayned that Saterday ſhould be faſted.De Conſecr. 3. c. Sabba. vero.
               
               Anno. 421.
               
               
                  Bonifacius a Roman ordained yt the Saincts éeues ſhould be faſted, wheras before his time it was not ſo.Pot. li. 6. c. 4.
                  
               
               Anno. 593.
               
               
                  Gregorie a Romane added foure dayes to the beginning of Lente: he forbad milke, chéese,Ibidem. c. 6.
                   butter and egges.
            
            
               Holy dayes.
                Anno. 318.
               
               
                  SIlueſter a Romane ordayned at the requeſte of Conſtantine, the feaſt of Petri ad vincula.
                  Ibidē c. 8.
                  
               
               
               Anno. 537.
               
               
                  Sigeb.
                  Vigilius a Romane ordained the feaſt of Candlemaſſe.
               
               Anno. 626.
               
               Honorius a Champanois ordayned the feaſt of the Exaltation of the Croſſe.
               Anno. 828.
               
               
                  Plat. Sab.
                  Gregorius the fourth a Romane, at the requeſt of the Emperour appoynted the feaſt of All Sainctes.
               
               
                  Pol. de. In. li. 6 c. 8. Volat. Ibidem.Anno. 1002.
               
               
                  Iohn the .xviij. ordayned the feaſt of All Soules.
               
               Anno. 1260.
               
               
                  Vrbanus the fourth, ordayned the feaſt of the Sacrament, called Corpus Chriſti day.
               Anno. 1471.
               
               
                  Extravagan.
                  Sixtus the fourth apoynted the dayes of preſentation and conception of our Lady, of S. Anne & Ioſeph.
               
            
            
               Mariage
                Anno. 386.
               
               
                  Diſt. 82.
                  
                  SIritius a Romane did fyrſte tirannouſly forbid mariage to the Prieſtes.
               
                  Pol. li. 5. c. 4.
                  
                  Gregorie the .ix. about the .1075. yeare of our Lorde toke it wholly away.
            
            
               Burying.
                Anno. 220.
               
               
                  Plat.
                  CAliſius the .xvj. Pope, hallowed ſpeciall places (which we call Churchyardes) for burying.
            
            
               Conſecrations.
                Anno. 220.
               
               
                  Polid. li. 5. c. 6. & Libr. 8. c. 1.
                  
                  CAliſius or Calixtus the .xvj. Pope, a Romane borne, firſt conſecrated & dedicated a Church vnto

the honour of our Lady, which he did in the countrey beyond Tyber.
               
               Anno. 269.
               
               
                  Foelix being Byſhoppe,Plat. Sab. did ordayne that Altares ſhuld be conſecrated.
               Anno. 283.
               
               
                  Gaius a Dalmatian appoynted that Chriſtians ſhoulde bring of their firſte fruites to the Altare,Pol. li. 6. c. vlt. and that there they ſhould be hallowed after the maner of the Iewes.
            
            
               Dedications.
                Anno 609.
               
               
                  BOnifacius the fourth a Martian,
                  Blondus. lib. 9 Diacon. lib. 18.
                   this man altered the temple which M. Agrippa builded to al the Ethnicks Gods, vnto the Church of All Sainctes.
               
               Anno. 621.
               
               
                  Bonifacius the which was a Champanian,
                  Sigeber. Sab. did beſtowe the Church and Altares, on Théeues for their Sanctuaries.
               
            
            
               Church Inſtruments and vtenſiles.
                Anno. 202.
               
               
                  ZEpherinus a Romane borne,Pol. lib. 6. c. 12. Plat. ordayned that thenceforth the ſacrament of Chriſtes bloud ſhuld not be miniſtred any more in woodden veſſels, but in glaſſe.
               Anno. 227.
               
               
                  Vrbanus the .xvij. Pope ordayned that from his time forward the Communion Cup (which then was wood or glaſſe) ſhould then be ſiluer or golde.Gratian.
               
               Anno. 256.
               
               
                  Stephanus a Romane, and aboue .xx. the .iij. B. ordayned

certayne Veſtimentes and apparel for the miniſtration,Pol. de. In. li. 6 c. 12.
                   after the maner of the Iewes Prieſts, and for the Altares.
               Anno. 258.
               
               
                  Volat. Sab.
                  Xiſtus the ſecond of that name, an Athenian, was B. and in number .24. he appoynted that thenceforth it ſhould not be lawefull for a Prieſt or Leuite to weare their gay Veſtiments, but in an holy place.
               Anno. 318.
               
               
                  Plat. Sab.
                  Silueſter a Romane beſtowed on the Church, both linnen Albes and Corporalls.
               
               Anno 406.
               
               
                  Pol. lib. 6. c. 11.
                  
                  Innocentius an Albanian deuiſed that the Pax ſhuld vpon feaſtful dayes be caried about to be kiſſed: and that the cleargie men ſhould kiſſe one another.
               Anno. 420.
               
               
                  Iſiodor. Volat.
                  Sozimus a Gretian, about that time. B. apoynted the Paſchal taper on Eaſter éeuen to be hallowed.
               Anno. 463.
               
               
                  Hilarius a Sardinian firſt publiſhed the Cannons for lawe,Sab. Volat. and appoynted the Churche to be trimmed with golde and ſiluer.
               Anno. 593.
               
               
                  Volat. Sab.
                  Gregorius a Romane deuiſed the lightes in the Church, and maner of the Quéere.
               Anno. 606.
               
               
                  Plat.
                  Sabinianus a Thuſcane endued the Church wyth the deuiſe of the Lamps continually to burne, and the practizing of Belles.
               Anno. 608.
               
               
                  Bonifacius the thirde a Romane, who firſte obtayned the name of Pope & vniuerſall Byſhop,Pol. lib 5. c. 6.
                   enriched

the Church Altares with a licence to weare faire lynnen couerings.
            
            
               Poſſeſsion Temporalties.
                Anno. 227.
               
               
                  VRbanus the .xvij. Byſhop ordained and licenced the cleargie men to receyue temporall poſſeſſions.Pol. lib. 6. c. vl.
               
               Anno. 265.
               
               
                  Dioniſius appoynted and ſet out to euery Miniſter his pariſh and Church,Pol. lib. 4. c. 9.
                   commaunding them to be contented therewith.
            
            
               Peculiaritie or exemption.
                Anno. 241.
               
               
                  FAbianus a Romane ordaynrd that Prieſtes ſhould be impleaded only in the eccleſiaſtical courtes: and that none ſhould accuſe them but their like.
                     2. q. 7. c. Sicut.
               
            
            
               Annoyling.
                Anno. 318.
               
               
                  SIlueſter a Romane deuiſed that Byſhoppes ſhould be annoynted after the maner of the Leuiticall Prieſtes.Pol. lib. 5. c. 3.
                  
               
               Anno. 406.
               
               
                  Innocentius an Albanian appoynted that ye oyle which before was for the Byſhops proper vſe,Sigeb. ſhould nowe be alſo for the ſicke. &c. Some appoynt it to Foelix the fourth an hundreth yeares ſithens.Volat.
               
            
            
               Tranſlation.
                Anno. 253.
               
               
                  
                  Tom. 1. Concil.
                  COrnelius a Romane, about that time Byſhop, at ye requeſt of Lucina a noble lady of Rome, tranſlated or conueyed the bones (if they happened on them) of Peter & Paule vnto a more honorable place: wherby he was the firſt beginner of the Ceremonies or right of Tranſlation.
            
            
               Primacie.
               
                  Diſ. 17. c. Synnodum.
                  MArcellus, who as Platina writeth, ſucceded Marcellinus the Apoſtata, decréed that no acte, by whome ſoeuer appoynted, ſhould be of any force, vnleſſe it ſhould by the authority of the Byſhop of Rome be confirmed.
               Anno. 336.
               
               
                  
                     3. q. 6. c. Dudū
                  
                  Iulius a Romane ordayned, that the Councelles ſhuld not be called togither or celebrated without the Byſhop of Romes conſent.
               Anno. 406.
               
               
                  
                     9. q. 3. Nemo Iudicabit.
                  Innocentius an Albanian exempted to ſea of Rome from the ſubiection of being iudged & conſtrued of other.
            
            
               Seruice.
                Anno. 368.
               
               
                  DAmaſus a Spaniard apointed that the Pſalmes ſhould be toſſed from ſide to ſide:Pol. Lib. 6. c. 2.
                   and that at the ende of euery Pſalme, Gloria Patri. &c. ſhould be ſong.
               Anno. 404.
               
               
                  De Conſ. diſ. 1. c. Apoſtolica.
                  Anaſtaſius a Romane about that time was conſecrated Byſhoppe, he ordayned that thenceforth all people, as well of the cleargie as of the laitie, ſhoulde hearing the Goſpell, ſtand and yelde curteſie.
               
                  Anno. 426.
               
               
                  Celeſtinus a Campanian apoynted that the Pſalmes ſhoulde be ſong after the order of Antiphonies.
                  Sab. Sigeber. In ꝓhē. 5. part. He alſo deuiſed the Graduale. Durandus ſayth, Ambroſe deuiſed the ſame.
               Anno. 445.
               
               
                  Leo a Thuſcan found out (by the aduiſe of Mammertus Byſhoppe of Vienna) the petie Proceſſion,Pol. lib. 6. c. 11.
                   or Iacke gangs.
               Anno. 413.
               
               
                  Symmachus a Sardinian decréed that on Sonday,Plat. and on euery birth day of Sainctes, Gloria in excelſis ſhould be ſong.
               Anno. 530.
               
               
                  Agapetus a Romane decréed that thoſe Proceſſions ſhould goe rounde about the Church euery Sonday.Volat. Plat.
               
               Anno. 537.
               
               
                  Vigilius a Romane layde out for euery holy day proper and fit leſſons.Iſiodor.
               
               Anno. 556.
               
               
                  Pelagius the firſte a Romane deuiſed the Canonicall houres,Pol. lib. 6. c. 2. Plat. who firſt applyed the Maſſe for Anniuerſaries or yeare mindes of the deade.
               Anno. 583.
               
               
                  Pelagius the ſeconde ordayned the ſeauen ſorts of Letanies.Sigebertus.
               
               Anno. 593.
               
               
                  Gregorius a Romane deuiſed the manner of the Quéere, the Antiphonies to the Maſſe,Greg. lib. 4. Epist. c. 88. Pol. li. 8. c. 1.
                   and the large or honourable Proceſſions. He was the firſt that pronoūced pardon to ſuch as on choſen and ſpecial dayes reſorte to Church.
               
                  
                  Plat. Volat.
                  Vitellianus a Champanois, brought in, (himſelfe being a Muſitian) the artificial ſinging and harmonie of Organs and inſtrumentes.
               Anno. 707.
               
               
                  Poly lib. 6. c. 13.
                  
                  Conſtantinus a Syrian, bycauſe the Images had as ſimple right, ſo vnquiet poſſeſſion and ſmall fauor with their Landlordes, decided the cauſe that hitherto hong before his predeceſſors variable: graūting them licence, to be paynted in the Porch of S. Peters church at Rome.
               
               Anno. 731.
               
               
                  Plat.
                  Gregorie the third ordayned the Images to be honoured and worſhipped.
               Anno. 796.
               
               
                  Pol. lib. 5. c. 10.
                  
                  Leo the thirde a Romane ordayned the thrée Proceſſion dayes before the Aſcention. Alſo the burning of Frankencenſe after the maner of the Gentiles and Iewes.
               Anno. 1050.
               
               
                  Blondus. 3. dec. 2.
                  
                  Leo the ninth a Germane drewe a paterne for the Church to ſing the Himnes and ſongs for Sainctes.
               Anno. 1086.
               
               
                  Poly 6. c. 2.
                  
                  Vrbanus the ſecond, ordayned the .vij. Canonicall houres, to the honour of our Lady.
               Anno. 1315.
               
               
                  Poly. 6. c. 12.
                  
                  Iohn the .xxij. he deuiſed that the Sanctus bel ſhuld be tolled thrice euery day, at which, the hearers ſhould ſtraight crouch and ſay the Aue Maria.
               
            
            
               Baptiſme.
                Anno. 369.
               
               
                  
                  DAmaſus a Spaniarde ordayned the Croſſing with Chriſme on the browe at Baptiſme.Tom. 1. Concil.
               
            
            
               Confirmation.
                Anno. 318.
               
               
                  SIlueſter a Romane, deuiſed the confirmation of Infantes: we call it byſhopping.Plat. Sab. To. 1. Concil. Some appoynt it to Meltiades, and other ſome to Euſebius.
               
            
            
               Excommunication.
                Anno.. 772
               
               
                  ADrianus a Romane deuiſed firſt the Seales of leade, called Bulles.Poli. lib. 8. c. 2.
                  
               
               Let this ſummarie abſtract, be to thée (gentle reader) a ſufficient demonſtration and teaching, how the Popes from time to time haue bredde this their monſtrous religion, and clowted comelyneſſe.
            
            
               Rethorians.
               
                  THe ancient Philaſter and after him Auguſt. (out of him) make mention of one Rhetorius, who helde a maruelous vaine opinion, to wéete: Omnes haereticos recte ambulare & vera didere. That al the heretiques walked aright and ſayd the truth. Which though perhaps he did, eyther by expounding of their meaning, or ſuch like ſorte to couer their ſhames withall: yet for that he concluded to that effecte, he is an Heretique with eyther of them in their ſeuerall errors. How much honeſtie ſo euer he would doe them: he hath thereby diſhoneſted himſelf. Euen ſo the Popiſtes in theſe our dayes, think that it

ſtandeth much with their honors, that they ſhould defend the Apoſtaſie of their Church of Rome, for whoſe ſake they ſtick not to damne themſelues: I know not by what compact. For albeit that their Churche followeth the Heretique Antropomorphites and Angell men, Cathariſts and Colliridians, Chazinz
                        •
                     ries and Coluthians, Montaniſtes and Meſsalians, Donatiſtes and Pelagians, with the reſt of the .24. errours of the old Heretiques,To. 1 tract. 30.
                   yet dare they ſay with Caietane: Proprio ſenſu ac germano ſacrarum Scripturarum. Eccleſia ſemper vtitur in ſacris Canonibus. That their Church doth vſe in the Cannons the proper and naturall ſenſe of the holy ſcripture. Which ſaying being true: of theſe concluſions one muſt follow: that they are eyther Heretiques of ſound Canons, or elſe yt they liuing and teaching according to their Cannons, are the Heretiques of hereticall canons. For as it is moſt euident: that there is but one truth: ſo is it (without al doubt) playne that they varie therefro. Ruardus and Roffenſis agrée not: Luſitanus and Soto concord not: neyther are they in vnitie with Pighius. The elder age of the Popiſtes, is againſt the Popiſtes of this time: And yt Popiſtes of this age againſt themſelues. Gardener againſte Smith, and alſo againſt himſelfe, Smith againſt Gardener. Not for the ſtanding of a table, kneling, ſitting or wearing, but (amōgſt other) for the large doctrines of Fre vvill, originall ſinne, Iuſtification, and Sacrament of Chriſtes body: Of the which latter point they haue many contrarieties, & errors: although it be the waightieſt ware of their pedlers pack: For the which they haue embrued themſelues with the bloude of Gods Sainctes: who of right they ought to haue ſpared, and firſt haue tourned their tirannie

to themſelues, and haue fierd there owne folk, or at leaſt haue agréed with themſelues, before that they woulde compell other to agrée to their diſcorde: which I ouer paſſe, ſith it is more playnely proued before, than eyther order or neede in this place require againe. The proufe whereof perhappes may cauſe (the aſtoniſhed at their horribleneſſe) to demaunde howe it then could come to paſſe that the ſame ſhould continue till this day, neyther God, nor man hewing it downe. To the which I anſwere, as touching Gods will working therin (for that the cauſe therof is not wholly reuealed) we muſt ſay with Paule: O altitudo Sapientiae &c. O déepeneſſe of Gods wiſedome. Notwithſtanding the ſecretneſſe whereof: yet that ſuche a thing ſhould be, Paule and Iohn the Euangeliſt, with many other witneſſe. The which Iohn calleth it by the name of Babylon the great Citie: vnder which name Peter (as the Popiſtes expounde the laſt chapter of his firſt Epiſtle) meaneth Rome. Partly for the preſent diuerſitie and cōfuſion (For Babylon by interpretation ſignifieth ſo) of the Gentiles ſuperſtitiō there vſed: partlye for that in the ſpirite he did with Iohn foreſée the confuſion of Chriſtian religion, that ſhoulde ſpring thence to infect all chriſtendome. As the auncient and effeminate Babylonians did in their dayes the whole worlde. And though the worlde neuer gaue ſtroke thereat, what then? it ſtandeth with his nature, to foſter and ſet forwarde ſuperſtitions, and to ſpare no coſt. No not their wiues earings nor ornamentes, and birth right of their heres. Yea pardie at the building of Gods tabernacle they will not deale ſo frankly, as to ſpare the ſame. An eaſier religion it is, to be ſaued by Symon Magus méere grace & plenitudine

poteſtatis and fulneſſe of power (leade his ſcholer neuer ſo looſe a lyfe) then by fayth in Chriſt which demaūdeth in obedience a holy life: which to the carnal & groſſe world is vnſauerie, aſwell for that he can not abide the ſpiritualneſſe of faith: as alſo for that, that holyneſſe is againſt his decayed nature, it alſo is againſt his courage to be brideled, or obey. Poſſiblye the author of the Apologie for the priuate Maſſe, Hoſius and the other of that broode, will thinke: that I graunte their plea of quiet poſſeſſion: whereby they will preſcribe againſt the truth: I confeſſe nothing leſſe: but rather muſe that they ſo fondely reaſon.
               For the Church of Chriſt in this eaſe, is much like vnto a familie or flocke, whoſe right of long tyme wrongfully with holden, though all the flocke doth not with open mouth clayme: yet if anye one heire of of nigheſt kinne ſtande for the ſame and obtaine, the quiet poſſeſſion of the defendāt is empaired. Euen as the Popiſtes is, wherby they cannot, Bona fide poſſidere, without miſtruſte of forged title preſcribe and poſſeſſe, another mans right and place. And God in all ages hath ſtirred vp ſome good members, & heires of grace to purſue the right of the Church. As Anno 313. the Counſels of Nice and Mileuitane ſtode againſt the appeales to Rome. Innouation of Prayers. Supreame authoritie. And for the Mariage of Prieſtes. Secondly, Anno Domini. 430. the ſixt general councell of Carthage (which endured fiue yeares) agaynſte the ſupremacie. Alſo Pope Innocentius the firſt, for the mariage of Prieſtes. Thirdly Pelagius the Pope. Iohn Maxentius, Anno. 513. agaynſte the ſupremacie. Fourthly Pope Gregorie the firſt. Anno. 600. againſt the ſupremacie. And the ſixt Councel of Conſtantinople,
                  
for Prieſtes mariage. Fyfthly, Anno. 700. S. Hulderich reſiſteth Pope Nicolas in the caſe of Prieſtes mariage. Sixtly, Anno. 800. Clemens Scotus, of the Vniuerſitie of Paris, agaynſt Boniface, for ye mariage of Prieſtes, and agaynſt Images. Seauenthly, Anno. 940. the firſt Ottho the Emperour agaynſt the ſupremacie & pride of the Popes. Eyghtly, Anno. 1050 Lupoldus Byſhop of Mentz agaynſte Leo the ninth, for the ſupremacie. And Nicetas for the mariage of the Cleargie. Ninthly, Anno. 1120. the cleargie of Englād and Germanie, for their wiues. Tenthly, Anno. 1213. Fredericke the ſeconde Emperour agaynſt the Popes tirannie. Eleuenthly, Anno. 1329. the whole kingdome of Fraunce agaynſt the Pope and his Court. Twelfthly, Anno. 1400. Thomas Rhedonenſsis, Nicolaus Cuſanus, and Aeneas Siluius (before he was Pope) againſt the pride of the Pope, and for Prieſtes mariages. Finally, in this laſt hundreth yeare, God hath rayſed vp Laurentius Valla, Hierome Sauanorola, & the Earle of Mirandula, wyth innumerable many moe of worthy Champions, of whome ſome haue foughte vnto their knées in bloud for the right of the Church, whoſe doughty dintes done, cauſe this trée to wyther (as thou maiſt view) and to be without al hope of further frute. Euerye man according as God hath lightened their heartes, hath dealt in the right of the Church: by reaſon wherof the Popiſts can not (as I before ſaid) plead preſcription. Nor we be ſo blinde, as to thinke the religion of the Proteſtants to be a new doctrine, which through all ages hath bene thus defended (though I touch but a fewe, by many more) as I am readye to proue. Wherfore it is a very loude lie, to ſay that Luther begonne the ſame. All which notwithſtanding,

God hath reſerued the vtter ouerthrowe of the ſame trée,The authour ſatisfieth his promis made in the beginning, for continuance of the Church. to the breath of his owne mouth, (which approeheth nowe at hande) leaſt fleſh and bloud ſhould glorie in ſo valiant a conqueſt. Thus much therefore to them that demaund, why neyther God nor the worlde did hewe downe this trée, nor ſtocke the roote. The ſumme wherof is, that he was pleaſant and did agrée with the ſuperſticious and filthy nature of the world: & that God though he hath cauſed his church to ſtrike from time to time thereat, yet hath reſerued the ſame to a greater puniſhment and ſeuerer iudgemente. As he alſo hath done Mahomet the eronious trée without ye Church, which both are nouriſhed with the water of ignoraunce. Euen as ſo to be, is the maner of Heretiques. For if either Simon had wel receyued the doctrine of the holy ghoſt, or Iudas of the Meſsias, it is not to be thought that they would haue departed from the Church: Falling when they ſéemed to ſtand, deceyued by arrogancie, which I may properly call ignorance. The which ſith it was ſo néedeful for the beginning of this trée, is by the aforeſayd Babylonians, the Popiſts, vſed as a no leſſe neceſſary pollicie, and licoure for the maintayning and watering of the ſame. Neyther doe the Popiſtes miſſereſemble their brother Mahomete whoſe religion writtē vnder the olde Arabical tong, & cōmaundement of not interpreting & expounding the ſame, beyonde the literall ſenſe, hath vnder mighty and thundering termes, being otherwiſe ſenſeleſſe and ſpiritleſſe, ruled the poore ſely ſoules, as Iupiters blocke amongſt a number of frogges. He is counted a learned Prieſt, that can reade his ſeruice playnely and turne it into the Sclauonian. &c. tong. The which eſtimation of ſuch learning doth rather of right appertayne

to the Mahomet Prieſts, than to the Popiſtes, of whom the greater part can not write nor ſpell in their mother tong their own names, much leſſe expoūd their Latin Portus, or reade beſide their owne. Surely the Romiſhe cleargies ignoraunce was ſuch, that within theſe fiftie yeares (as common reporte is) they ſayd in the vniuerſitie ſcholes, when gréeke wordes hapned to hand, It is Gréeke and can not be read. And what Latin they did vnderſtand, write or ſpeake, it is to common nowe to minde. And yet were they proude in this their ignoraunce. But I may not let paſſe to remember what gréeuous and haynous Heretiques they were counted that did read, & much more that expounded or talked of the ſcriptures, in their mothers tong. Wherefore ſithens they were wholly vnſéene in all good letters, language, and learning, (as wel ſhéepe as ſhepheard) it is no maruell though they fell into error, no more than if blinde guides or wanderers in the dark, ſhuld do into the pit. For whereas none can giue good counſell, the citie decayeth, as it did in the dayes of Roboā
                   the ſonne of Salomon, who aſking coūſel at the mouthes of the vnſkilful, by folowing the ſame, peruerted the common wealth, & made ſciſme in the church of Iſrael. And if after thoſe dayes it happē 
                  Elias or any other of the Prophets to ſpeake the truth, in the foliſh eares of that ignorant and peruerted people, then the huſbandman with his forke, (who is winged as thou ſéeſt) is redy at hand to ſtrike. Ah alas what a pitiful muſter is now before my eyes, of thoſe whome that ſubtil ſerpent (as touching the body hath ſlayn) and as a raging tirant iniuriouſly murthered, ſuppoſing to ſet forwarde his tillage by bloudſhead, as by Iudas he beganne. But Ieſus Chriſt our

Lord, hath ſet their ſoules with him on high, out of whoſe aſhes many riſe in this our age, to fight againſt this trée, wherof the ouerthrow is at hand, which God for Ieſus ſake haſten. Amen.
            
            
               Of the toppe of the Tree.
               
                  AS the loue of God toward vs, or his diſpleſure for our ſinnes hath alwayes bene pronounced by vocall meanes in his Church: ſo hath he likewiſe through all ages almoſt, preached the ſame in certayne examples or paternes. His loue by mercyfull, his wrath and horrible diſpleaſure by meanes right terrible. Yea, & when we are eyther ſo deafe that we care not to heare, or that our eares are ſo tender, that they liſt not abide the breath of truth, for amendment: then pleaſeth it him to preach to our enimies, yt thoſe that cannot alſo heare for wāt of true teachers, may anticipate and go before them that can and liſt not heare, in amendment, and in repentance of life. And as the ſame examples are, after diuers & ſundry ſortes manifeſted: ſo likewiſe the table or matter wherein he depainteth or carueth out the ſame, is not alwayes one. Sometimes it is in the Skie: as Conſtantine the gret viewed (ſome ſay) in heauen, the ſhape of a Croſſe, a ſigne and ſermon of Gods kindeneſſe enſuing.
                     2. Mac. 10.
                   So armies fighting, and ſuch like, haue bene doctrines of his dreadful diſpleaſure. Sometime it is in the earth and frutes, as well of the ground, as alſo of creatures wombes, which being deliuered, in their right ſhape and forme, are tokens of his louing

kindeneſſe towards vs continued. But otherwiſe being monſtrous, eyther in hauing more limmes than néede requireth, or wanting to ſatiſfie the néede of nature, or elſe hauing all, be notwithſtanding miſſeformed in faſhion or colour, yea or myſſeplaced: are after their maner, eyther ſignes to vs (oute alas) of hys anger, or leſſons of our blindeneſſe, and to vs often times of both. As our ruffed pigs and calues haue here in England, of late dayes (I feare me) bene of both to vs. For al be it that the tokens that God oftentimes doth ſhewe from heauen to the earth, are nowe & then truely expounded, for the vſe and common caſe of all ye world: yet is it not but to be conſtrued as a common rule, that the monſters of England, concern properly that land: As thoſe of other realmes, do the people of ye proper ſoyle: which is ſpeciall to them. But bycauſe that heauen is the common goale or baſe appoynted for vs all: Theſe therein ſhewed, doe (circumſtaunces conſidered) concerne ſo many, as thinke to attayne and get that ſame. And it is an opinion no leſſe probable than common, that the huge monſters breadde in the intralles and depthes of the maine ſeas, as long as they containe themſelues in the ſame, are not any ſpeciall preachings to any one countrey: bycauſe the high ſeas are in Nullius bonis appertayne to no man or countrey properly. But if that they remoue thence and are caſt vp or ariue in créekes, ſhoares, or riuers of any countrey: then by common aſſent, they abode or preach to their hoſtes ſomething, God tourne it to good.
               Vpon conſideration wherof, I haue placed in the vppermoſt toppe of the trée, this vglie ſhape. A thing

wherin the horrible confuſion of Rome, is ſufficiently and properly preached, and cōtayned in a little ſūme: euen as the floure, frute, or ſéede, doth in a very ſmall bulke, or codde, compriſe the vertue of the roote, ſtock and braunches being many.
               
                  The deſcription.
                  ROME the mother of the world, is ſcituate in Italie, through the ſame there runneth a famous riuer called Tybre: vpon the which, there was in the yere of our Lord .1496. found this horrible monſter, the ſhape whereof is thus. The head and mane of an Aſſe. The body throughout is ſcaled, excepte the breaſtes, belly and wombe, and thoſe are the partes of a woman. The right hand is the foote of an Elephant, the left is the hand of a man. From the buttocks there iſſueth a Dragons tayle, and at the ende thereof, a Dragons heade. Vpon the one hippe there is an olde mans face. The right foote is the foote of an Oxe: and the left, is of an Eagle, or of a Gryphon.
               
                  The interpretation.But for as much as it hath pleaſed God to carue and ſhape the ſame, amongeſt the entiere lompe and heape of nature, onely out of, and from the territorie of Italie, and of all other parts, from the chiefeſt part thereof. And to faſhion that various and diuers monſtrouſneſſe, into one body: It can not but be confeſſed, that it doth appertayne both onely to Rome, and alſo ſignifieth a body politique, riſen in that cuntrey, to a maruellous and moſt horrible confuſeneſſe. The kingdomes of the Medes,
                  Daniel. 7.8.
                   
                  Perſians, and Macedons. &c. is by the holy ghoſt foreſhewed to Daniell, in the ſhape of bodies naturall. And it ſtandeth alſo with the maner of Paules ſpeach, to call the Churche by the name of a body,
                     1. Col. 4.
                   
                  Vnum corpus ſumus, We are

all one body, ſayth he, ſpeaking of euery Chriſtian in the Church. So in the Apocalips of S. Iohn,
                  Ioan. 12.13.
                   the holy ghoſt alſo foreſheweth Antichriſt, the eldeſt ſonne of the Diuel, ſometime by a woman. And his kingdome by a beaſt of many heades. And ſometime by a Cat of the mountayne riſing out of the ſeas. And in that this monſter is the body of a woman, whoſe ende natural is to beare children: it muſte ſurely preach vnto vs, that Church ſo deformed. For the Church of Chriſt alſo is figured by Eſay and Iohn,
                  Eſai. 49.54. Ioan. 12.
                   in the perſon of a woman: bicauſe of the birth and regeneration wherein the children of God are dayly borne a newe in Chriſt: euen as the natural ſonnes of Adam are dayly miſſeſhapened in the church of Antichriſt, into the ſocietie of the myſticall body of ſinne and perdition.
               The Heade is oftentimes taken in the ſcriptures for the Magiſtrate, or chiefe Soueraigne.Heade. Then whō or what people an Aſſes head ſignifieth in this place,Oſe. 1.1. Sam. 15.1. Cor. 11. Deut. 20. Deut. 22. Mat. 21. Ezech. 13.
                   thou mayſt, gentle Reader, eaſily iudge. Nature teacheth vs, that out of an Aſſes hed, there procedeth but Aſſelike inſtruction (that is) doctrine worldly, carnall, fooliſh, ſlouthfull, wanton and gentyle. As the Scriptures doe accorde therto: ſo the ſame we finde, in the Church of Rome, as the thinges before ſpecified declare.
               The Scriptures vſe this worde Ceruix,
                  Necke. Iob. 13. Deut. 32.
                   (which is the Necke) for pride and ſtubbourneſſe, which therfore in this monſter ſignifieth the proude and ſtubbourne mindes, that they in their blinde errors haue, againſt the truth and very ſeruice of God.
               The Scales, wherwith the body is couered,Scales. ſignifieth their friendes and Alies of the worlde, ayding and

ſuccouring the ſame.Iob. 41. Apoc. 10.13.
                   For in Iob we may ſée the ſame ſenſe. The ſea, is the worlde, as the Apocalips declareth: And then conſequently, the fyſhes, the people, and the Scales are their defence that they haue and vſe. So that thereby the Pope and his members are ſignified to be defended and ſuccoured of the worlde after the maner of the ſame.
               
                  Breaſtes. Stomack. Bellie.The Breaſtes, Stomacke and Bellie, ſignifie the Cardinals, Prieſtes, and religious rablement. And the reaſon is: bicauſe theſe partes are deareſt, fineſt and moſt neceſſarie of and to the body, and to ye frute that cōmeth of the ſame. So is their learned cleargie, inſtructers and féeders of their blinde ſcholers figured therein. And the two breaſtes are the works of Lombard and Gratian: whence they drawe their diuers nouriture and foode. Alſo it betokeneth thë volupteouſneſſe that they are in, and vſe euen paſt honeſt and ciuill ſhamefaſtneſſe: for the ſame was found as naked from couering,Pſalme. 17. 1. Cor. 6.
                   as they whome it ſignifieth, are voyde of grace. Ready to be vſed of the whole world.
               
                  The right hande.The right hande is (as beforeſayde) the foote of an Elephant. This beaſt is very huge, cruel, & of might and courage ſtrong. And therefore the auncient warriours vſed them in the fielde, agaynſt their enimies, to breake both the frontes, and ranges of the valiant ſouldiors,
                     
                        •
                     . Mach. 8.
                   ſet in the vauntwardes of their Phalanxes, or Squars of pietons or footemen. And bycauſe of his ſtrength, they vſed to place vpon him more men than one, in ſeates builte for the purpoſe. And though he was very ſlowe of pace, yet he did not eaſily wtdrawe himſelfe from the ground that he once had gained, no though he were withſtode or aſſaulted by great force.

Neyther was he pliant in his legges, bycauſe he wanted ioyntes therein, and therfore could not be taught to bowe, as mules, horſes & ſuch creatures are, wherby alſo his legges are the ſtronger and the ſturdier.
               And the hande in Scripture ſignifieth mens déedes, and outward life. As Pilate waſhed his hands,Math. 2. Samuel. 14.
                   to declare and diſſimule the innocencie of his déede. So Dauid ſayth to the Thecknick: Nunquid manus Ioab tecum? is not the hand of Ioab with thée (which is) the work or déede. And the ſame interpretation might I proue by the like authorities out of both Teſtamē
                  tes: ſo that the hande muſt ſignifie the déedes of that myſticall body politique, being mighty, cruel, ſturdy, ſtubborne, preſuming vpon, winning & conquering all men, not eaſily yelding ouer the aduauntage gotten. And in that, that it is the right hande: it muſte ſignifie their cleargie, and Canons. For as the right hande is moſt worthieſt in his place: ſo it is alſo the hande, wherewith a man doth moſt nimbly, ſtrongly, readily, & moſt accuſtomably, doth his worke, & purpoſe. But whether their decrées haue bene the ſame, and done the like, it may eaſily appeare to him that calleth to minde, the horrible cole curſes, of bel, boke, and candle, which the conſciences not all only of ſéely men, but euen the imperial thrones, and crownes of Emperours, haue trembled and quaked at for feare: neyther could their puiſſance, reſiſt the aſſault of that Eliphants foote, nor yet recouer the damages done thereby, vntill this day. This right hand is their ſpiritualtie, and grieuous miſſegouernemente of their cleargie, which is more excellent than the left hand:The left hande. for that is their ciuil power, ſoueraigntie, and might,

ouer and by the Laytie. And if thou aduiſe thée wel, yu ſhalt, gentle reader, aſſure thy ſelf that ſome myſterie is in this. That God hath placed the mans hande vpon the left ſyde, and ſpoyled the right ſyde thereof. Vndoubtedly to declare by a mans lefte hand, a lefte faythgiuer, promiſe breaker, and diſſembler. For he with whome the Pope hath kept touch, or aſſurance, hath eyther bene to ſharp, or to hote for him. Yea, and the light breaking of his promiſes, hath ben a doctrine authoritie and example, for ſubiects to doe the like, to their ſoueraignes and princes.
               
                  The right foote.The Right foote is the foote of an oxe or ſuch like. And it hath his diuers ſignification. For the foote is ye baſeſt and leaſt honoured of the members of the body. Secōdly, it is ſuch as is ſubiect to al the powers & motions of the minde & other partes of the whole man, & is (as I may ſay) the page or groome. Thirdly, it is the membre, that ſtayeth, and whereon the whole man doth ſtande: wherefore in this body politique, it muſt for the baſeneſſe and inferioritie, for the ſubiection to the ſuperiours, and for the ſuſtayning and holding vp of others, the worthier partes, ſignifie, in the righte foote, the baſeſt ſorte of the ſpiritualtie, and in ye lefte, the baſeſt ſorte of their laitie. For Ieremie doth meane by the foote,Ierem. 12.
                   the baſer or weaker ſorte of men. But of what maner or qualitie, this their rablement of ſubiectes, both eccleſiaſticall and lay are, the ſundry kindes of féete doe declare. The Oxe foote doth ſignifie their ſimple and doting Portifarie prieſtes, Charterers, Soulemongers, and ſuch like, their Nuns, Siſters, Anchoreſſes, and the reſte, Pardone preachers, Ghoſtly fathers, Decretaries and Summiſtes, with

an infinite rablement of Idiotes. For by an Oxe, is ſignified the blockiſhneſſe of fooles, and dullerds: ſuch as they are which in that kingdome do giue and occupie themſelues in their contemplation, and amaze thēſelues in the milne of their inextricable ſubtilties, and tierſome quiddities.
               The Left foote which ſignifieth their laie ſubiects,The left foote. is the foote of a Griphon. The former parte of which beaſt is an Eagle, the hinder an Oxe, this is one of the fore féete of the Gryphon, wherewith he ſeazeth vpon his praie, as the Eagle doth: and ſignifieth thoſe that in that body politique, giue themſelues to the life actiue, and are gatherers, rakers togither, Extortioners and gréedy guttes. Such are their Bulliſtes, Dataries, Copiſtes, Somners, Notaries, and the like: who in this parte, by Auarice vpholde the body: as their cleargie doth in the other part vpholde the ſame by ignoraunce and foliſhneſſe.
               But ſome perchaunce will obiecte that the eſtate of the Churche of Rome is not ſuche nowe, as in all poyntes it hath bene. In déede I graunte that ſithens the complaynte of Germanie, Englande, and Fraunce, and their deliueraunce from the tirannie of the ſame, it is, will it, nil it, ſomewhat amended: Neyther doe I ſo applie and interpretate the partes, that I haue hetherto from heade to foote, gone on, as that it ſhould be the full declaration of all the whole thereof, or for all the whole time of the continuaunce thereof. For there reſteth, the olde mannes heade vpon the hippe, and the tayle with the Dragons head at the ende thereof, which ſtand vpon the hinder part of the body:Heb. 9.
                   and doe ſignifie according to holy Scripture,

the time of the declination and latter age of it: wherfore thou haſt hitherto but heard what it was in the beginning and chiefe royaltie therof: Now hearken what it is toward the drawing on, & the end thereof. And firſt the heade is of an olde vplandiſh man (as it did foreſhewe) the which ſignifieth that the teachers therein, muſt ſomewhat conforme themſelues to reaſon, and become more natural than their predeceſſors: And that alſo the doctrine of this body politique in this latter time, muſte be altered from the doctrine that the firſt head did teach, being then both gentyle and worldly, according to the nature of the Aſſe: and become ſomewhat more naturall, and truth like, than it at the firſt was, according to the nature of a man, which his head ſheweth. And yet foraſmuch as thys heade hath his place vpon the hippe, loking downewarde, it muſt ſignifie the ſame doctrine to be earthly, and not heauenlye, euen ſo muche differing from the heauenlye, as there is difference, betwene the right place of the heade, and the hippe, betwene the Church of God and of Hipocrites. So that a conformitie in naturall doctrine and humaine wiſedome, muſt be one meane, to ſtay and ſuſtayne that Church in the latter age thereof.
               
                  Eſai. 9.19.
                  The Tayle in this hinder part of the Church doth by authoritie of Scripture, ſignifie their flattering, and falſe preaching Prophets, teachers and writers, whoſe penne and tong ſtirreth and writeth for gaine, and picke thereby a quarrell, at their good benefactors purſſes, & almoſe box: being the ſecond proppe to ſtay pthe ſame Church with.
               And foraſmuche as there ſhall wante no power of

Sathan to the ſuſtayning therof,Pſa. 73.90. Eſa. 17. Apo. 12.
                   there is at the end of the tayle a Dragons head: which in Scripture is alſo taken for the Diuell himſelfe, & for the Tirans of this world, wicked and bloudthriſtie perſones, that then ſuppoſe themſelues to haue done their duetie, when as they may embrue themſelues with the bloude of the Saintes of Chriſt.
               Theſe men if they can not preuayle with their carnal and natural reaſon: then they vſe flatterie, if not ſo: then tirannie: which are thrée meanes, ſo puiſſant, as that they might if it were poſſible, ouercome the elect therby. But be not diſmayed gentle Reader, lay thy hope vpon Chriſt our Sauiour. And although his truth preached in this monſter, doth agaſt & aſtonne thée: yet for that this (the ſame) was caſt vp in that riuer deade (and therefore muſt ſignifie an ende, conqueſt, and full deliuerie of this worlde, and Gods ſainctes therefro) reioyce, and with a liuely voyce preaſſe to the Heauens warde, wherein thy ioyes ſhall be full,Apo. 12.
                   and with the ſainctes already deliuered in fayth ſay: Nowe is ſaluation and ſtrength, and the kingdome become oure Gods, and the power his Chriſtes: for he is caſte downe which accuſed them before God day & night: and they ouercame him by the bloud of the Lambe and by the worde of their teſtimonie, and they loued not their liues vnto death, reioyce you heauens and reioyce you therein. Saluation, glorie and honour, be aſcribed vnto the Lorde our God,Apo. 19.
                   for true and righteous are his iudgements, bycauſe he hath iudged the greate Whore, which dyd corrupte the earth, with her fornication, and hath auenged the

bloud of his ſeruauntes, of hir hande: Alleluiah. Prayſe the Lorde, good Reader, with thy whole ſoule, and helpe me for Ieſus ſake with thy feruent prayers.
               
                  August. in Epistola. 7.
                  
                  I confeſſe my ſelfe to be of that number one: which write in profiting, and profite by writing.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            IMPRINTED AT LONdon, by Henry Denham, for Lucas Harriſon, dwelling in Paules Churchyarde, at the Signe of the Crane. Anno.
                1566.
         
         
            
            Faultes eſcaped.
            
               
                  
                     Leafe.
                     Side.
                     Line.
                     
                        Faultes.
                     
                     
                        Correction.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        5
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     this time
                     his time
                  
                  
                     
                        7
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        15
                     
                     
                        Latmù
                     
                     
                        Latmum
                     
                  
                  
                     ibidem
                      
                     
                        24
                     
                     
                        Latinians
                     
                     
                        Latmians
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        9
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        28
                     
                     as that, that they
                     as that they
                  
                  
                     
                        10
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        10
                     
                     
                        2. Queſt Sepe
                     
                     
                        2. Que. 4. Sepe
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        11
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        18
                     
                     Chanons
                     Cannons
                  
                  
                     
                        17
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        32
                     
                     and driue backe
                     and backe
                  
                  
                     
                        33
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        6
                     
                     if in any
                     if in many
                  
                  
                     
                        48
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        3
                     
                     
                        Epiſtola
                     
                     
                        Extra
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        50
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        11
                     
                     that ſhall
                     that ſhe ſhall
                  
                  
                     
                        52
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        14
                     
                     
                        diſcention
                     
                     
                        diſſention
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        54
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        17
                     
                     
                        Quantitiners.
                     
                     
                        Quantitiuers.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        55
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        19
                     
                     
                        praeceptibiliter
                     
                     
                        perceptibiliter
                     
                  
                  
                     ibidem
                      
                     
                        20
                     
                     
                        praecipiendo
                     
                     
                        percipiendo
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        61
                     
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        8
                     
                     rather iuſt
                     rather haue iuſt
                  
                  
                     
                        69
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        6
                     
                     
                        Montelmenſs.
                     
                     
                        Montoliuenſs.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        75
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        15
                     
                     did ſhewe
                     did ſhewte
                  
                  
                     
                        82
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        14
                     
                     flocke
                     ſtocke
                  
                  
                     ibidem
                      
                     
                        15
                     
                     flocke
                     ſtocke
                  
                  
                     
                        84
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        18
                     
                     to our enimies
                     to our eyes
                  
                  
                     
                        88
                     
                     
                        2
                     
                     
                        32
                     
                     pthe
                     vp the
                  
               
            
            The margine of the ſecond page of the eyght leafe hath Conciliorij for the which reade Conciliorum.
            
            Alſo whereas two leaues haue the number .33. the firſt of them is to be numbred thus .32. the margine in the ſeconde page of the ſayde leafe hath Arminenſs. for the which reade Ariminenſs.
            
            In the margine of the .49. leafe, in the fyrſte page. for Drrand. lib. reade Durand. lib.
            
         
      
   