
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     ❧ TO THE Right worshipfull, Sir PETER LEIGH, Knight, grace be multiplied in this life, and happinesse in the world to come.
                  
                     AS Hanna dedicated her Samuel, a Nazarite, to her God at Shilo, so am I bold at your intreaty to separate this mine Anna, a Prophetesse to the Lord at Ierusalem: and do pray 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
may passe vnder the shelter of your worshipfull protection. The Saint is but homely arrayed, and not for these curious daies wherein wee liue: and in which the Son, though clad with glory: yet cannot runne it course, but with censure either of too high a pitch, and then it burneth, or of too lowe a being, and so it heateth not. Atheists, Papists, and Libertynes, will censure my plainnesse both in matter of faith and fact, I looke for no other but to feele their piercing eye, and venomous tooth: yet if I escape in some measure the sorrow of my

Sauiour sighing, and saying: Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends;Zach. 13.6 I make lesse reckoning of those that are without.
                  Haply the Title of the booke may seeme strange, and from the subiect therein handled; but if you thinke vpon the Ladder Iacob saw in the way to Padan-aram, whose first step was on earth, and last step in heauen, you will finde that none can attaine perfection aboue, but first his feete must stand in the Lords presence belowe. It was Anna her holy haunt, she frequented the Church here, that she might come to

blessednesse there, we may not leap out of our mothers wombe into our fathers ioy: but wee must goe by staires from the Temple of grace, to the Tower of glory.
                  In the meane time this is yours, and so am I in all duty and deuotion obliged, by many your respectiue fauours to me, and mine, from you and yours. Nor doe I hope you will conceiue the length, breadth, and depth of the loue I beare you, can euer bee contained within the circle of these fewe lines. Epistles, and papers may point at more loue then they can expresse: but the

heart is the closet that keepeth all, how euer these papers speake. And so I leaue you, with my very good Lady your wife, and all yours to the mercifull protection of the Almightie. From London. this 14. of December. 1608.
                  
                     Your Worships euer in my loue, W. LEIGH.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  To my louing Countrymen, but especially to the Parishioners of Standish in Lancashire.
                  
                     MY deere brethren, beloued and longed for, these twenty yeares haue I wrastled with God, as Iacob did in Bethel, in teares and prayers, to gaine a blessing to my selfe in the saluation of your soules; and with what fruit, he knoweth best, who knoweth all: as a father I haue trauailed in birth, againe and againe, that Christ might be formed, or at least confirmed in you. Many a Sabboth haue we sanctified with a double solemnity of prayer, praise, and prophesie: Many a moneth haue we celebrated the Lords

Table with the blessed memory of his death and passion: Many a time as a Nurse haue I wiped and wrapped vp your stains: and many a careful night haue I told in mourning after your defectiōs: And for any wrong I euer did you, heere I am, beare record with me before the Lord, & before his anoynted, whose Oxe haue I taken, or whom haue I impleaded. God will witnesse with me before whom I stand, in the sight of men and Angels, that I neuer sought yours, but you, that you might be moulded for a better life, and that Christ might be formed in you.
                  Yet may I say in some sort as it is in the Prophet: This day is a day of tribulation and rebuke:
                     
                        Isay. 37.3.
                      
                     for the children are come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. I speake not of all, for many of you hath the Lord chosen, and you are my hope, my ioy and reioycing, in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ

at his comming; but of many I may say, I feare left I haue bestowed vpon them labour in vaine.
                  While some with Reuben abide among the sheepfolds to heare the bleatings of the flocke, they are couetous:
                        Iudg. 5.
                      Some with Gilead abide beyond 
                        
                           •
                        orden in the greene fields, and medowes of their delights, and they are carelesse: Some with Dan remaine in ships, and are gone beyonde the seas; they dote vpon their Romish Idols, and they are faithlesse: Some with Meroz sit at home in the cels of their superstition, and they are resolute recusants, who will not come to helpe the Lord, to helpe the Lord against the mightie. Well, I say no more but this: These diuisions of Tribes are great thoughts of heart, yet may we not bee heartlesse, but hold on our course with vnwearied diligence, hoping that if we sowe in teares, we shall reape in ioy, as did they of whom it is

sayd by the Psalmist; Ibant, flebant, mittentes sua semina: They went weeping, and carried precious seede, but they shall returne with ioy, and bring their sheaues.
                  A glayning of which sheaffe formerly fallen into your eares, but now I feare forgotten, and gone out of your hearts, I haue thought good, againe to present vnto your carefull and christian viewe; for it grieueth me not to rehearse the same things often; and for you it is expedient. Asaphs song was melodious, though Israel sōg it oftē; & the Arks marching about Iericho seuen times, was no shame in the siege & sacking of Iericho. As it is an office of the holy Ghost to leade vs into all truth, so is it to bring all things to our remembrance which haue been told vs: seldome told, often forgotten; and who is sufficient for these things? You are nailes of the Sanctuary and it is not one stroke can fasten

you to your hold; but you must be often riuited with the same heart, hand and hammer. I hope to see you in the high feast of Christ his Natiuity towards: yet for that I know not how the Lord may dispose of me, and of mine occasions abrode, I haue sent you this first step towards heauen, as an exercise for the time. It was Anna her holy haunt, looking and longing for Israels cōsolation; I pray God you may trace it on earth, as she then did: so shall you be sure to treade it in heauen, as she now doth. My good & worshipfull friend required it, I may not deny it: your soules need it, I may not withdraw it: Take it then as a pledge of my deerest loue, euer in my praier with you, euer in my practise for you. And now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout, so as both in soule, spirit, and body, you may be kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ:

faithfull is he which calleth you, which will also do it. Brethren pray for vs▪ and the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
                  
                     From London 
                        this 14. of December. 1608.
                        
                      
                     Yours in the Lord assured, W. LEIGH.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ANNA HER HOLY HAVNT.
                  
                     
                        
                           LVK. 2.
                        
                        
                           36 ANd there was a Prophetesse one Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher, which was of a great age, after she had liued with an husband seuen yeares from her virginity.
                        
                           37 And she was widow about fourescore and foure yeares, and went not out of the Temple, but serued God with fastings and prayers, night and day.
                        
                           38 She then comming at the same instant vpon them, confessed likewise the Lord, and spake of him to all that looked for redemption in

Hierusalem.
                        
                           39. And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galile to their owne city Nazareth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        AMbrose saith well, Morale est vt qui fidem exigunt,
                     
                        De Abitu Mariae in Montana. cap. 3. 
                     fidem astruant: It standeth with all congruity that such should publish faith, as languish after faith; of which number I hold this Anna to be, produced of the holy Ghost in this text, as a worthy witnesse of Christ his blessed birth and incarnation, and so to be preached in the high feast of this his solemnity. In whom I obserue three things of speciall note, for the practise and imitation of all such as loue the Lord Christ and his profession.
                  
                     First, the description of her person: full of modestie.
                  Secondly, the practise of her life: full of pietie.
                  And lastly, the profession and publishing of her Christ: full of verity.
                  And with this threefold cable of modesty, pietie, and veritie, is she haled vp to heauen; and hauing powred this pretious balme vpon the head of Christ on earth,Math. 26.13. why may not this Gospell be preached throughout all the world, as a memoriall of her, that she did it to bury him in her dearest thoughts?
                  And first for the person, ye see here a woman described in your sight, not wanton in her lookes, garish in her apparell, with painted face, curled haire, or naked brests, prepared for the Theater of men; but graue in countenance, modest in behauiour, and garnished

with all religious vertues within, fit for the temple of God. Such saints are seemely to speak to the praise of our Sauiour, to professe his name, to witnesse his truth, to swaddle the babe, and to sing his Lullaby, as this day, in solace of their saued soules, and full solemnity of his blessed birth and incarnation.
                  And now that a woman doth witnesse see the mercifull prouidence, of our God, who would haue the comming of his Christ to be declared by all sorts of people, and sexe; that all might be inexcuseable who did not beleeue him, and all might be cleared who did professe him.
                  He took testimnoie frō the pure nature of Angels who sung to his praise, Glory be to God on hie, and in earth peace,
                     Luk. 2.13.14. 
                     &c.
                  
                  He took testimony frō the cleer

nature of the heauens, which shined to his praise when he said, Vidimus stellam eius in oriente,
                     Mar. 2.2. We haue seene his starre in the East Simple shepheards witnessed this truth, when, as it is in the text, All that heard them,
                     Luk. 2.18. 
                     wondred at those things which were told them of the shepheards.
                  
                  Old Simeon lapped him in his armes, and layd him in his heart with this profession of his praise, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace, according to thy word; I haue seene enough, I haue my loue, I haue loued enough, I haue my life. Aged Anna here an holy widow confessed likewise the Lord, and spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Ierusalem. Yea Iohn in the wombe springing, and children in Rama crying, cōfessed Christ in their death, ere they could speake of him in

their life. Finally Christ would be professed both of men, & women, virgins, wiues and widowes, of old men and babes, yong men and maids, of holy Patriarches, inspired Prophets, renowned kings, that all states and both sexes might exspect redemption by grace, from which they were fallen by transgression: Whereunto accorded Ambrose when hee sayd, Prophetauerat Symeon, prophetauerat copulata con
                           •
                        ugio, prophetauerat virgo, debuit etiam vidua prophetare, nequa aut professio deesset, aut sexus: Simeon prophecied, the maried wife prophecied, a virgin prophecied: yea and a widow must prophecie too, lest Christ might seeme wanting to either sexe, or to any profession. And it is further to be obserued for the credit of the cause in hand, that none must witnesse their

Christ, or publish his praise, but such as liued to loue him, according to that, I haue beleeued,
                     2 Cor. 4.13. 
                     therefore I haue spoken.
                  
                  
                     Abraham was glad to see my daye, saith Christ,Ioh. 8.56. and therefore he spake of him. Moses longed after him that should come,Exod. 4.13. and therfore he sayd, Mitte quem missurus es. Dauid sighed after him, and therefore he said, I will not go into the tabernacle of mine house, nor into my bed, nor will I giue mine eyes sleepe, or rest to the temples of my head, vntill I find out the place that is appointed for my Lord, the tabernacle of the mighty God of 
                        
                           •
                        acob. Now the mystery being reuealed vnto him, he said presently, Behold we haue heard it at Ephrata, which is Bethleem, and found it in the wood: and we will enter into his tabernacle, and worship before his footestoole.
                  
                  
                     
                     Esay ioyed at the birth, and therefore he spake of him, & said, A child is borne,
                     Esay 9.6. 
                     and a sonne is giuen.
                  
                  
                     Ieremy of Anathoth in the land of Beniamin was full of the newes,Ier. 31.22. and therefore he spake and testified thus: Behold I will create a new thing vpon the earth, A virgin shall inuiron a man.
                  
                  So was Ezechiel by the riuer Kebar, and Daniel by the bankes of Vlay,
                     Dan. 9.24. both Captiues in Babylon, yet full of spirituall deliuerance by Christ; and therefore they testified much of his blessed birth, death, and resurrection, with full deliuerance of all the faithfull in and through the Messias. What should I say more? Simeon longed, Anna expected, Mary sighed, Elizabeth languished after Israels consolation; all liued to loue their Christ, and for that were chosen to publish his praise, and witnesse

the truth of his blessed Natiuity.
                  The vse of the doctrine in respect of vs is this, that if men will be Prophets to professe Christ, and women with Anna wilbe prophetesses to confesse the Lord, & to speake of him to all that looke for redemption in Israel; they must both beleeue the Lord, loue the Lord, and liue in him. Else will the Lord say as he did to the wicked,Psal. 50.16.17. 
                     Why takest thou my word in thy mouth, and thou thy selfe hatest to be reformed. Or else as he did to the damned diuell, when he called him the holy one of God, yet the Lord rebuked him, saying: Hold thy peace, and come out of him; as and if he should say:Luk. 4.35. Tush diuell though thou tell the truth, yet will I not be witnessed o
                        •
                      by thee. Like that of Paul to the Pythonesse, when he was grieued to heare Satan witnesse of God, his saints,Act. 16.16.17.18. &

saluation. Where you see that each mouth is not for all meate, nor all apparell for euery backe; each lambe is not for the sacrifice, nor all trees are for the fabricke of the temple: Christ will not be witnessed of any but of men of worth; and if any wil shew forth his glory, let them take heed that they themselues be not ignominious. Cum canerem reges, & praelia, Cinthius aurem vellet, & admonuit, To sing of kings, and conquests, is too high a subiect for homely shepheards; you may not exceed your straine, least Apollo plucke you backe. And againe he said well who euer he was that sayd: Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? Verrem de furto? Who can endure Gracchus to cō
                     plaine against sedition, or Verres against theft? the one being a base theefe, & the other a ranke rebell.
                  
                     Ye haue taken a profession vppon you this day (my deere brethren) to confesse with Anna the Lords Christ, to publish his praise and to solemnize the feast of his blessed birth and being; it stands you vpon therefore to see vnto it, that by no leud conuersation you blemish his birth, but so to demeane your selues in all modesty, piety and godlines, as you may be worthy witnesses of his truth; knowing with the blessed Apostle Paul,
                     Tit. 2.12. that the grace of God which (as this day) brought saluation vnto all men, hath appeared, and teacheth vs that we should deny vngodlines, and worldly lusts, and that we should liue soberly, and righteously, & godlily in this present world.
                  I dislike not of your feasting if Christ be your guest, and withall if you feede vpon his faith in the

faire assembly of his saints.
                  I dislike not of your houses trimmed vp with Holly, Bay, and Iuie, so your hearts be prepared for God, and Christ to be your garland: your garments are tollerable,Reuel. 7.14. Reuel. 
                           •
                        9.8. if you wash your stoles in the bloud of the lambe, and be arrayed with his righteousnes. And for your musicke, mirth and minstrelsie, so ye strike out with Dauid a song of Sion, and sing vnto the Lord with a grace in your hearts,Col. 3.16. so ye dance as he did before the Arke of God,2. Sam. 6.
                           •
                        4. and sound out with the angels the babes lullaby thus: Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will towards men; ye may reioice, I say ye may reioyce: for such mirth & musicke is pleasant vnto the Lord, and sweet vnto his saints: yea it is as one saith, Mel in ore, in aure melos; in corde Iubileus, Hony to the mouth, musicke

to the eare, a Iubily to thy heart.
                  But if you will keepe this feast with your dough sowred,1. Cor. 5.8 and with the leauen of all corruption, being enemies to the crosse of Christ, making your belly your god, your glory your shame,Phil. 3.18.19. for that you are wordly minded; I say then, you blemish the birth of your Sauior, you grieue the spirit,Ephes. 4.30 and you are not worthy to witnesse his truth with Angels, Simeon, and Anna. I say for conclusion, let the Babes birth (as this day) bury all thy sin in this his solemnitie, and in the middest of thy pride looke vpon his pouerty. When thy house is full furnished with guests, thinke how there was no roome for him in the Inne.Luke. 2.7▪ &c. When thou art laid in thy bed of downe, thinke how the Babe was found in the cratch. When thou art lapt in thy warme

clothes, thinke how the child was swaddled in clouts. When thy tenants are about thee, and thy friends fawne vpon thee, thinke how solitarily the child was found with Ioseph and Mary, all alone. When thou art in thy peace, thinke vpon his persecution,Math. 2.14. and flight into Egypt, I say thinke vppon the banished Babe. When thou art in thy mirth, thinke vpon his moane. When thou art in thy life ioyous, thinke vpon his death dolorous: And i
                        •
                      thou wilt with Anna truly professe him, be a prophe
                        •
                     esse: go not in the streets to haunt the Theaters,Gen. 34.1 &c. or see the shews of the Shechemits with Dina, but abide in the temple as she did, and serue God with fastings and prayers, night and day▪ Watch and play (I feare) these 12. dayes will be the exercise of many, bu
                        •
                      watch and pray in the practise of

few: It may be all that heare me this day, can say,Psal. 118.23.24. 
                     This is the day which the Lord hath made; but I feare me few can say, We will reioyce, and be glad in it. The Lord deliuer vs from Baltassars feasts, that we neuer take the golden and siluer vessels brought from the temple at Ierusalem (I meane our sanctified soules,Dan. 5. 
                     1 Cor. 6.19.20. and holy bodies bought with a price) thereout to drinke our wine, vent our sinne, praise the gods of gold, and siluer, of brasse, of iron, of wood and of stone. But to preuent both the sinne and the iudgement Baltassar saw, we will not cease, by the grace of God, whilest the dayes of your banqueting go about, we wil not cease (I say) with the holy and patient Iob, to sanctifie you with our prayers, and preaching, as he did his children.
                  We wil rise vp early in the morning,

and offer vp burnt offering
                        •
                     
                     ▪ that is our broken hearts, with sighes and sobs to the number of you all: for Iob thought, and so do we, it may be that my sonnes haue sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts.Iob. 1.5.
                  
                  The Lord giue vs grace to temper our mirth with moane, our solace,Zach. 12.10. with sorrow, because of him whom we haue preached. Fill our hearts (O Lord) with the feare of thy iudgements, and feeling of thy mercies: and as we professe thy name this day, and acknowledge thy nature as this day to be made ours; so graunt that our bodies and soules may be sanctified thereby,Ephes. 5.3. &c. and sinne may be namelesse, and we blamelesse in all our dwellings. Amen. Amen.
                  
                  Secondly, in this testimony of Anna, I doe obserue paucity o
                        •
                      professors, and that they are few

in the world who exercise the worke of faith to God, or charitie towards men. For of all the thousands in Ierusalē, & ten thousands in Israel, onely foure persons, to wit, Mary, Ioseph, Simeon and Anna attended the busines in cherishing the child Iesus: two at his birth in Bethlem receiued him into the world,Exod. 13.2. and only two in the temple presēted him according to the law of the first borne? Where were the Scribes? where were the Pharisees, where were the Actuaries of the law? They sayd nothing of their Christ, they did nothing for their Christ.
                  There was no King to protect him, no Prophet to declare him, no Priest to present him in the Temple: he came, I say, Cum altum erat silentium & nullus Propheta erat reliquus, when all was hush, and neuer a Prophet left. Onely Marie
                     
was mother, midwife, nurse and all;Luk. 2.48. she fed him at her owne brests, she swaddled him with her owne hands; onely Ioseph was his triumphant coach and attendant: he caried him in his armes from Bethleem to Nazareth, from Nazareth to Egypt, and from Egypt backe againe to Nazareth, and so to Galily: I say Ioseph and Mary, they were no more; they bare the burthen without pompe of princes, or preasse of people to honour the babe: yea and heere in the Temple when he should be presented, who was there of all Ierusalem that stept out of their doores to do him any duty, seruice, or homage, but old Simeon and aged Anna,
                     Luk. 2.48. citizens of no great note, either for wealth, worship, or honour? And being lost, onely two sought him, Pater & ego, &c. Thy father and I haue sought thee with very heauy

harts.Esay 9.3. Al to iustifie that of the Prophet, both of their time and ours: Multiplicasti gentem, & non magnificasti laetitiam, Thou hast multiplied the nations, but hast not increased their ioy; much people, litle piety, many countries, few conuerts: and whereof I may say as one did of the priests of his dayes: Multi sacerdotes, pauci sacerdotes, multi nomine, paucire, Many Christiās, few Christians, many in name, few in deed.
                  It is, and hath beene euer the plaint of the Church, much to deplore the frailty of her faith, with the barrennes of her wombe, and to be like the little worme Iaacob, which was trod vpon with euery foote; like little Zoar in respect of great Sodome! Oh it is but a little one and my soule shal liue. A brand taken out of the fire, so are the faithfull of God, few and

fined.Zach. 3▪ 2. A few berries after the vintage, a few tellies after the gleaning, a lodge in a garden of cucummers frequented of few: and as a lilly among the thornes, so is my loue among the daughters;Cant. 
                           •
                        .2. one Lilly but many thornes, and pricked because of it sweete perfume. I say, religion is not of this world, but of another. This world loueth her owne, if ye were of the world (saith Christ) it would loue you: but because yee are not of this world it will loath you. I pray not for the world (saith Christ) but for those few whom thou hast giuen me. Totus mundus in maligno positus, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that treade it: But narrow is the way that leadeth to saluation, and few there be that hit it. All the Prophets runne vpon this string, and sound this

dolefull musicke:Isaiah. 53. who will beleeue our report? Helpe Lord for there is not one godly man left: woe is me for I am like the sommer gatherings, &c.Mich 7.1.
                  
                  Our dayes are no better, nay surely worse. If a man be religious, he shall be censured; if he be prophane, he may be pampered; and who will beleeue our preaching? is the mournefull complaint of all the Prophets of this time: few follow, many leaue vs: and of those few that followe, I feare in fine, if Christ support not we shall be constrained to say as he did to the disciples shrinking, Vultis & vos abire,
                     Ioh. 6.67. Will you also be gone?
                  Surely, surely, from his birth to his buriall, the world was euer barren of faith. And if you please yet further to vrge it, you shall find that they were but few who

did helpe this blessed Babe, either in his life, or at his death.
                  The earth was barren of faith, when at his birth Angels from heauen must sing his Lullaby. So was it of entertainment, when there was no roome for him in the Inne, but the stable must be his chamber, and the cratch his cradle: beasts of the field had their holes, and fowles of the aire had their nests: but the Sonne of man had not whereon to lay his head. It was barren of preachers, when the shepheards that kept their sheepe vpon the downes of Bethlehem, must leaue their flockes and publish abroad the thing which was told them of that child.
                  It was barren of protection by kings to be nurcing fathers, or queenes to be nurcing mothers, when Herode was vp, and all Ierusalem, seeking the life of the child

to kill it. It was barren of Scripture when the Iewes had locked it vp, and the Gentiles must be guided by a starre to the place where the Babe was.
                  Finally, it was barren of mourners at his buriall, when only Ioseph of Arimathaea, and Nicodemus with a few of the Maries followed the hearse, and gaue him the last duty of eternall obsequie.
                  And so to conclude, and close with thy religious heart, neuer man spake like this man, and yet who did beleeue him? neuer man did like this man: and yet who would obey him? neuer man died like this man, and yet who pitied him? Not he but Barabas was in the popular cry of all, and Hosanna in the highest, was turned to crucifie in the lowest.
                  All I haue sayd, is for our instruction and comfort. Instruction to

teach vs that multitude is no true note of the Church of God, but rather the cōtrary: for paucitie of professors, barrēnes of faith, & the narrow way, haue euer bin plaints of the true Church, and companions indiuisible, so signified by Christ, and to our comfort when he sayd, Feare not my little flocke, for it is your fathers mind to giue you a kingdome. I say, you my little flocke, and not the multitude of this wicked world; for pietie is not for popularity.
                  The comfort we gaine is this, that wee knowe wee are of God, though the whole world lie in wickednesse.
                  Neuer should I deeme my selfe to be of the true Church, but for it paucitie.
                  Neuer should I thinke of Christ to be the Sonne of God, but in his pouertie.
                  
                     The wreathed crown of thornes vpon the head of Christ, is more pretious then all the diadems of princes; and the little flocke is of more esteem in the eies of Christ, then are all the heards of the reprobate. The Turkes and Sara
                     
                        •
                     ens who persecute the cause of Christ and Christians, are numberles: and the East and West Indians, who know neither God, nor his Christ, are as a new world full peopled with all impietie.
                  God grant they do not stand vp in iudgement against vs in that great day, to reproue vs of farre greater impietie, in that we haue neglected so great saluation in this our happie day of grace: wherein Christ, I much feare, hath not the gleanings of our parishes to professe him, of our wordes to praise him, of our workes to honour him, of our

thoughts to ioy in him, so as if it euer might be said, now is the time with vs, Multiplicasti gentē non magnificasti laetitiā, thou hast multiplied our natiō with all temporall blessings, but thou hast not increased our ioy in heauenly comforts.
                  Our soules are sad, our zeale is cold, our spirits are dumpish, our faith is fraile;Ier. 9.3. we are of no resolution, we haue no courage for the truth:Col. 3.12. we are a people of no bowels, either to pity the Babe in misery, or publish him in maiesty, What should I say more? We are of no religion: for that we are of any religion, temporizing with al, resoluing vpon none. We neither loue nor liue the life of the Gospell: but many walke, as I haue told you often, and now tell you weeping; who are enemies to the truth, whose belly is their god, and glory their shame, and they do

but mind earthly things. The Lord deliuer vs from these sinnes, that we be not partakers of more heauy iudgements then euer yet we felt. What euer it is, I feare our future fall,Heb. 2.2.3 for our present neglect of God and godlinesse.
                  Now let vs proceed, it may be some wil obiect: How is it that women, as Anna and such,1. Cor. 14.34. tooke vpon them the function and ministery of teaching in the Church? sith Paul saith, women must be silent, and not speake in the congregation.
                  I answer, although the office of teaching in the Church ordinarily be committed of God to men; yet that the Lord may declare his freedome in teaching, and that he is a free agent in all his workes, and tieth himselfe to no particular: he hath sometimes endowed women with a propheticall spirit, to publish

his praise, and such a one was this Anna,
                     Exod. 15.20. 1. Sam. 2. 2. King. 22. and of old, Miriam the sister of Moses. Also Hanna the wife of Elkanah, and Hulda the prophetes in the dayes of Iosia: And after al in the dayes of the Apostles, the foure daughters of Philip the Euangelist.Act. 21.9.
                  
                  Nay I know not how, but though in these dayes women be most wanting in filling of Churches following of Christ, and publishing his praise:Exo. 38.8. 2. Sam. 2.
                           •
                        2. 1 Sam. 18.6.7. yet of old, womē kept the doore of the tabernacle, and came out with their Timbrels, and praised the Lord, that Saule had killed his thousand, and Dauid his ten thousand; and sure I am,Luk. 8.
                           •
                        .3. Math. 28.1. about Christ women were most officious, to do him any seruice, either in life or death.
                  
                     Mary the blessed virgin and mother of Christ, no sooner receiued the message from heauen of the

conception in her wombe,Luk 1.39. &c. but her hart was full, and she dispatched her selfe into the mountaine country, to communicate the newes to her cosin Elizabeth. And Elizabeth no sooner heard the salutation, but the Babe sprang in her wombe for ioy, and she was filled with the holy Ghost, and being full, she could not but vent it with a crying loude voyce, to the praise of her Sauiour: Blessed art thou amongst women,
                     Luk. 2.
                           •
                        2. &c. 
                     because the fruite of thy wombe is blessed.
                  
                  Where note that Mary is blessed, not for her virginity, or any worth in her selfe, but for that the fruite of her wombe was blessed; and yet may I say with Augustine,
                     Mar. 3.31. &c. Motherly piety had done Mary no good, vnlesse she had caried Christ more faithfully in her heart then she did in her wombe, to iustifie that of Christ, when they told him: Thy

Mother and brethren stay for thee. Who is my mother, or who is my sister or brother (saith he?) euen he that heareth the word of God and doth it; he is my mother, sister and brother. And this is the spirituall kindred we haue with Christ, more excellent then the carnal, by how much more the soule excelleth the body.
                  What shal I say more? Women they were that ministred vnto him in his life, at his death, and after his death.
                  In his life, when they left their houses,Luk. 8.2.3 country and delights, and followed him from Galily, ministring vnto him of all their substance.
                  
                     Luk. 23.49At his death, when all his acquaintance stood a farre off, the women that followed him from Galily, beheld these things.
                  And women they were that ministred

vnto him after his death,Mar. 16.1. &c. when they came early in the morning with spice, balme, and syndone to bury him; to whom the Angell sayd, Go tell the Disciples that he is risen: where obserue that women Factae sunt Apostolorum apostolae.
                  
                  And how negligēt soeuer our women be in all duty to God and his Christ; yet know they this to their sin and shame (and I feare to their iudgement and confusion one day) that though they wil not conceiue Christ, yet a woman did; though they will not receiue Christ, yet 
                        •
                      woman did; though they will not follow Christ, yet women did, and ministred vnto him of all their substance; though they will not behold Christ in his passion, yet women did: And though they will bring no spice, balme or Syndon to bury Christ, yet women did:

though they will neither come to the Church, nor abide in it: yet Anna wil, and there continue both night and day, fasting, praying, & praising the babe Christ. I tell you plaine, these women wil stand vp in iudgement against you one day, for that they haue followed the Lord, and ye are fallen from him: they haue lulled the Lord in mercy, and ye haue wakened him in iudgement: they haue found him in Bethel, and yee haue lost him in Bethauen. I say in this, that they haue bene officious to serue him in all duty, both in his life, at his death, and after death: and ye haue neglected him in all, serued your selues, and done him no deuotion.
                  
                     Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things, one thing is needfull.Luk. 10.41 42. 
                     Mary hath chosen the better part which shall

not be taken from her; and that was, when she sate downe at the feete of Iesus to heare his preaching, thereby lodging Christ more truly in her heart, then Martha did in her house.
                  Hauing thus made good vnto you the sufficiency of restees, manifesting Christ his blessed natiuity, all of speciall note,

                        1. For Pietie,
                        2. For Paucitie,
                        3. For Perspicuitie:
                     
                  
                  It now remaineth that we come to the description of Anna her line, life, and doctrine of Christ; euery circumstance whereof is sufficient to giue credite to the cause she hath in hand, and grace her person.
                  And first for her name, it is worthy 
                        •
                     our consideration, that it is a name of worth: for Canna by interpretation, is gracious, Bonum nomen, bonum omen; of which word,

                     Iohn was called the Harbenge
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Christ: And Anna the mother o
                        •
                      
                     Samuel, a word proper to both sexes; to giue vs to vnderstād, that neither is of worth with God, but by speciall grace preuenting, attending, perfecting: for by grace ye are saued, not of your selues; it is the gift of God,Ephes. 2.8.9. not of workes, lest any man should boast.
                  And here giue me leaue a little to taxe the pride of this world, who giue names rather sauoring of flesh and bloud, then of the spirit of God, and practise of the godly.
                  Such were the cosins of Zachary and Elizabeth,
                     Luk. 1.60 61. &c. who when she said her sonne should be called Iohn; Tush, sayd they, there is none of the kindred that is called by that name; which done, they left 
                        •
                     he mother and went to the father, and made signes how hee would haue him called: he wrote vpon the

tables, His name is Iohn; as and if he should haue sayd:Psal. 49.11. Some build houses, & call them by their own names; but God hath built me by my sonne, and he shall be called Iohn. To his further glory god hath made me gracious, in that I haue begotten the Harbenger of my Christ; my wife is gratious in that she hath borne the Messenger of my Christ: and he is gracious in that he may but vntie the shoe latchet of his Christ.
                  Cleipe him not Zachary,
                     Luk. 1.63. for the Prophets are ended; but cleipe him Iohn, for grace is now begun, and will neuer be ended; his name is Iohn.
                     Gen. 2.19.20. When God had made Adam, and brought him into paradise, he suffered him to giue names to all his creatures, and for two causes. The first that he might distinguish one from another: The second that he might haue a property

in all; and it is thought he gaue names according to the nature of the things.
                  Wouldest thou distinguish child from child? let their names be significant: so did the Iewes of old, and it were not farre amisse for Christians to practise the same now; that as the Lord hath made them thine by nature, so thou should appropriate them his by grace, naming them of some great mercy or speciall grace flowing from him. That names should be significant, it may appeare by the practise of all the godly. Adam of red earth, so called by God himselfe.Gen. 2.23. 
                     Eue is Isha, which is of man, for that she was framed of his rib. Cain of a possession,Gen. 4.1.2 for that his father thought he had begotten the promised seed, as a repossession of that Paradise which he had formerly lost. But when he saw the

crookednesse of Cain, he called his second sonne Habel, which is vanity, condemning his owne vanity in his thoughts. And it is of speciall note and obseruance, that after that, he tooke occasion by the names of his children, to vnfold the misery of man.
                  
                     Sheth,
                     Gen. 4.25. a child begotten after his owne image and likenesse, as well concerning his creation as corruption.
                  
                     Sheth called his sonne Enoch, which is desperation.Gen. 5.4. &c. 
                     Enoch called his sonne Kenan, which is dispossession.
                  
                     Kenan called his son Mahalaleel, which is perceiuing death Rahel yeelding vp the ghost in her painfull trauell,Gen. 35.18 called her child Bennoni, which is, the sonne of my sorrow.
                  Of such significant names of mans misery the Scripture is full▪
                     
one I cannot passe in silence,1 Sam. 4.19. &c. to wit of Phinehas wife, who whē she hard that the Arke of God was taken by the Philistines, and that religion was gone, she called the child Icabod; which is, the glory is gone from Israell.
                  The Lord grant that wee haue neuer cause so to say, so to christen our children, or so to sigh to the sorrowe of our sinfull soules, when as for our vnthankfulnesse, the glorie shall go from Englād. The vse of all is this: that as nere as we can, wee should cleipe our children with significant names, such as are no sooner heard, but they should make an impression in vs & them, either of the Lords mercie, or our owne miserie. But and if we will take in the pride of our harts, such names sauoring of flesh and bloud as Dauid did, when he called his sonne Absalon, which is

the fathers peace:2 Sam. 3.3 let vs take heede it fall not out with vs as it did with him; for hee became his fathers bane. A good aduertisement to see to our names, that wee bee not better called, then qualified, as Absalon was, crossing a good name with a bad nature.
                  As for prophane names taken from the Gentiles, and such as sauour of idolatry, away with them, as Iupiter, Mercurie, Venus &c. Names we may take of our ancestors, so wee follow their vertues, as Dauid, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob.
                  
                  It is written of one,
                        Massala Coruinus.
                      that he was so obliuious, that he had forgotten his owne name. I feare there bee many such who little regard to follow the vertues of such as they would bee called after; yea oftentimes wee heare the sound of our names, but we forget the signification.
                  
                     
                     Gen. 32.28Thou shalt bee no more called Iacob but Israel, as preuailing with God, so said the angell; and after Iacob had it, he neuer lost it, hee neuer forgot it: and it was with him as with Scipio Africanus, Qui nihil inde praeter cognomen accepisse dicitur, he had nothing frō Carthage but the bare name: so what had he or what haue we in this world, but a wrastling with God for a blessing?
                  
                     The daughter of Phanuel.
                     From her gracious name, now come wee to the faithfull family whereof she was descended, which is here said to be Phanuel.
                     
                     A gracious childe no doubt, of gratious parents, I meane, a flourishing branch of a fruitfull tree: for Phanuel is Peniel mentioned, Gene. 32.30. which is the face of God, being the place where Iacob
                        
wrastled with the Angell, & said, I haue seene God face to face, and my life is preserued. In memorie whereof Phanuel learned 3. things, notable presidents for fathers of families to follow, in making holy their children and houshold.
                     1 The sight of God in his word, thus: I haue seene God face to face.
                     2 The wrastling with God for a blessing by powerfull prayer,Hosea▪ 12.3 4. and practise of all piety, thus: I will not let thee go, except thou blesse me.
                     3 The assurance of Gods mercie and blessing after such fight & contention, in these words: my life is preserued.
                     Let this bee a modell to frame your families by:Gen. 18.19. Acts. 10.2. 
                              •
                            Sam 6.11. Io. 11.1. &c. so shall ye bee blessed in all your habitations as was Abraham, Cornelius, Abed-Edō, Lazarus at Bethania, and Iosua,
                        
when he resolued & said, If it seem euill vnto you to serue the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serue:Iosua. 24.14.15. but I and my house wil serue the Lord.
                     Godlines is great gaine, whereunto appertaineth not onely the things of this life, but of the life to come.1. Tim. 4.8 Is it gaine you seeke for? & would you aduance your houses? and preferre your children? Then liue godlily, & bring them vp in his feare: so shall ye not only honour them in this world,Ephes. 6.4 but in the world to come. I haue beene yong, saith Dauid, and now am old;Psal. 37.25 yet I neuer saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seede begging his bread.
                     The remembrance of the iust is with praise, but the name of the wicked is with rottennesse: Let the rule of the Apostle guide you in the bringing vp of your

children and familie in nurture, & holy discipline.
                     If there be any that prouideth not for his owne,1. Tim. 5.8. and namely for them of his houshould, he denieth the faith, and is worse then an infidell.
                     Which is true and may be verified,Math. 6.20 not so much of temporall trash, as of heauenly treasure; euē of that which r
                           •
                        st cankereth not, moth consumeth not, nor theefe breaketh through, and stealeth.
                     Men thinke it sufficient if they be godly themselues, though their children bee riotous.1. Sā. 2.27. Let Ely his example answere that obiection, punished for his impunity: & let Iobes care of his children banqueting,Iob. 1.5. increase thy diligēce in feare of their future fall.
                     The Senate & people of Rome as Tullie recordeth, sent euery yeare six of their Princes children

to the land of Hetruria, there to learne the art of diuination. To credit the profession of diuinity, then Princes children were sent to see into the entrals of beasts, & flight of birds; our inspection now is deeper, and we soare higher, euen into the bloudy wounds of a sweete sauiour,Rom. 8.34. bleeding on earth, pleading in heauen: and yet (woe is me therefore) both meane men, and mightie thinke diuinity too base for their profession. O that wee had the gleanings of our noble, gentle, and princely bloud, for the credit of our religiō, weaned, vowed, and dedicated (as Anna did her Samuel) Nazarites for the Lord,1 Sam. 1.22 and in her owne words thus: I will bring him that he may appeare before the Lord, and there abide for euer.
                     
                     The Lord from Horeb inioyned this exercise to all fathers, that

they should teach their children thus:Deu. 6.20. when thy sonne shall aske rhe in time to come, What mean these testimonies, and ordinances and lawes? then thou shalt say vnto thy sonne &c. Hezechiah rehearseth it as a benefit to all posterity, that godlinesse should flowe from faithfull fathers to faithfull children, The liuing: the liuing,
                        Esai. 38.19 
                        hee shall confesse thee, as I doe this day, the father to the children shall declare thy truth. And Paule leaueth it for an instruction irreuocable: Ye fathers prouoke not your children to wrath,
                        Ephe. 6.4. 
                        but bring them vp in instruction, & information of the Lord.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the Tribe of Ashur.
                     That Anna her testimony of Christ might bee of greater credit, shee is here commended for the tribe wherof she came,Gen. 30.13 which

was Ashur the eight son of Iacob: but before I come to speak of that tribe in particular, giue me leaue a little to tell you of the tribes in generall.
                     And why the spirit of God hath beene so carefull to distinguish tribe frō tribe, in the course of all the scriptures; which was I assure you for no other cause but to find out the promised seede, euē Christ the Messias and sauiour of all the world, his blessed line and linage. I say, to proue the incarnation, that sith it was his good pleasure to bowe the heauens and come downe to bee manifested in the flesh, it might appeare in what flesh. For as in the search of Achās stealth Iosua seuered tribe from tribe,Iosua. 7.16. and family from family, mā from man, till he came to Achan the sonne of Carmi, of the tribe of Iuda, and he was taken.
                     
                        So search the scripture, & you shall finde in the booke of generations, how carefull the Spirit hath been to seuer tribe frō tribe, house from house, man from man, till it came to Iesus Christ, the son of Dauid, the sonne of Abraham,
                        Mat. 1.1. Luke. 3.23 the father of all the faithfull, and so of Isaac, Iacob, and Iudah.
                     
                     Now that Anna the prophetesse is of the tribe of Ashur, and neither of the tribe of Leui or Iudah, it is much to instruction and consolation, to see that neither the spirit of prophesie is tyed to Leui,
                        Ephes. 2.12 nor saluation onely to the tribe of Iuda; nor we must dispaire of the grace of God, sith the Lord hath giuen saluation apparantly to those that were of another tribe, yea to gētiles aliants from the common weale of Israel.
                     For if you looke into the booke

of God, yee shall find that Ashur was the sonne of Zilpa, handmaid to Lea. Gen. 30.12.13.
                     O Lord how wonderfull are thy mercies, and waies past finding out! The lawful wife despised, the handmaid respected, & of her must come Ashur one of the tribes in Israel; and of that tribe sealed vnto saluation, as many as of the tribe of Iuda,
                        Reuel. 7.6 euen twelue thousand. Now in this particular tribe of Ashur whereof Anna came, I doe obserue a double blessing prophesied of; one by Iacob, honorable,  of much fruit and great aboundance, thus: Concerning Ashur,
                        Gen. 49.20 his bread shall be fat, and he shall giue pleasures for a king.
                     By Moses, a religious, and as it  were a pregnant prophesie of this Anna the daughter of Phanuel: for saith he, Ashur shalbe blessed with children, and he shall be acceptable

vnto his brethren, and shal dip his foote in oile. Thy shoes shall be iron and brasse, and thy strēgth shall continue as long as thou liuest.
                     For the first,Deu. 33.24 
                              •
                           5. it may seeme that Ashur was an honourable Tribe, and for honour to be humbled to the obedience of Christ, and of his gospell, is a rare thing in this wicked world: for not many mightie, not many noble are called, but GOD hath chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, and God hath chosē the weake things of the world to confound the mightie things; and vile things of the world, and things which are despised,1. Cor. 1.26 hath god chosen, and things which are not, to bring to nought, the things that are, that no flesh should reioice in his presence.
                     Nay, many in respect of this,

that they are great, noble, princely, & haue dipt their foote in oile, as was said of Ashur, they take occasion thereby to wax proud, vaine, cruell against the poore, & grieuous ouer the Saints of God; respecting religion with like reuerence as Rubē
                         did his fathers bed, who defiled it, and so do they: & therefore I may say as he did,Gen. 49.4. your dignitie is gone.
                     Honour, noblenes, and gentility, stand not so much in your descēt as in your ascēt; not how you are descended of men, but how you doe ascend to God; it is not the greatnesse of your bloud, but the generosity of your spirit, soaring like Eagles where Christ is, feeding vpon him your selues, & bringing him downe for others repast, to iustifie that: Kings shall be thy nursing,Esay. 49 23 fathers & Queenes shall be thy nurces, they shal worship

thee  Which and if you doe not, then take heede to your place & high callings: for Potētes potēter tormēta pat
                              •
                           ētur, the mighty shall be mightily tormēted.Wisd. 6.6. Esay. 30.33 
                        Topheth is prepared of old, euen for the mightie it is prepared Fulmen petit culmen. The higher the spire, the nearer to fire.
                     But come we to Moses prophesie of Ashur, which seemes more proper to the present occasion, & as it were, a pregnant prophesy of Anna:
                     
                        Ashur shall bee blessed in his children, &c.Deut. 33.24.25. &c.
                     
                     
                        Ashur in Phanuel, Phanuel in Anna, Anna in her Christ, of whō shee trauelled in expectation, till shee saw him in the flesh presented in the Temple.
                     
                        Ashur was blessed in his children, Anna in her Christ.
                     Ad to the blessing of the faithfull

children, a singular and rare constancy in the faith, by such obedience thereunto as appertaineth, mentioned in this:
                     Thy shoes shall bee yron and brasse, and thy strength shall continue as long as thou liuest: or as it is in one translation according with the originall: Sicut dies iuuentutis tuae, ita et senectus tua.
                     
                     True in Anna, if euer in any of that tribe, whose shoes were yron and brasse; she stedily stoode to the faith of Christ from the first day of her virginity, to the last day of her widdowhead: I say, so long as she liued, shee did continue a virgine, a wife, a widdow, and was found faithfull and constant in all estates. Sicut dies iuuentutis ita et senectutis: As was her youth, so was her age. A iust reproofe to the men and women of these our wretched dayes: wherein for the

most part, all are shod with corke for shoes of brasse and yron: wee are not of Ashur, stidy in the truth, but wee are blowne away with euery blast of vaine doctrine,Ephes. 4.1. and there is not the least gale of prosperity, or storme of aduersity, but it maketh vs to goe back as in the day of Midian, or like the children of Ephraim,
                        Esay. 
                              •
                           .4. which being harnissed and carying bowes, turned themselues back in the day of battaile.
                     Nay,Psal. 78.9·10. the Lord is so careful we should no
                           •
                         turne back, that by his aduertisement wee may not so much as looke back, and therfore he said, remember Lots wife.Luke. 17.32
                     
                     Yea and Paule went yet a degree further, when hee said one thing I doe, I forget all behind, and hold hard to that which is before, &c. Where note,Phil. 3.13 14. that not onely our foote and eie, but our very thoughts must go forward and

not backward.
                     You haue begunne well this good newe yeare, now what should let you to go forward? Let a daughter of Phanuel, & a child of Ashur, gracious Anna teach the perseuerance in this Christian life, to end thy widdowhoode in his feare, as thou hast begunne thy virginity in his faith. And beware of relapse, both in the point of faith and fact: if thou fall from faith, see thy iudgement. Heb. 6.4.5.6. If frō thine obedience, which is in matter of fact, then see thy iudgement. 2 Pet. 
                        
                           •
                        .20.21.
                     No man that taketh the plowe in his hand,Luke. 9.62. and looketh back, is fit for the kingdome of God: obserue (O Christian) saith one, what Christ puts into thine hand, Non delicias, pecunias, et id genus reliqua, sed stiuā, the plow stilt, which is thy paines in piety, neuer to be

left off, if thou looke to reape blessednes for thy painfulnes.
                     It is said of the powers diuine, in the first of Ezechiel,
                        Ezec. 1.17. 
                        Quod non reuertebantur, cum ambularēt, that they returned not whē they went. & Eze. 46.9. churchgoers may not returne by the way of the gate, whereby they came in: but they must go forth ouer against it; ye must gaine by your deuotions, & euer depart better instructed then when ye came. This is the day of circumcision, ye must be cut, not in the outward skinne, but in the inward heart and conscience: for thus saith the Lord, no stranger vncircumcised in heart,Ezec. 44.9.10. nor vncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuarie, neither yet the Leuits that are gone back from me when Israel went astray from me after their Idols, but they shall beare their iniquity.
                     
                        So then for conclusion, let Anna her constancy bee your rule, who first & last followed Christ with perseuerance, perseuerantia, cūseueritate: be kind to your godly motions, and cherish them, but be cruel to your bad affections, & kill them. Salomon saith well. Pro. 18, 9. Hee that is slothfull in his worke, is euen the brother of him that is a great waster.
                     The Angels vpon the ladder were not seene to rest,Gen. 28.12 Iohn. 1.51 Cant. 5.15 but either to ascend, or descend; and Christ in the Canticles is described to haue legs of marble in sockets of gold: to teach vs that constancy in Christ, is constancy in gold, and more precious then the Carbuncle Topas, or Chrisolite, yea and more sweete thē all the trees of incense. In via vi
                              •
                           tutis non progredi, regredi est, & qui non proficit deficit: Not to go forward in the way of vertue,

is to go backward, and he leeseth that gaineth no
                           •
                        .
                     
                        Which was of a great age, after shee had liued with an husband seuē years from her virginity, &c.
                     
                     In the description of Anna her person, I haue told you that she was by profession a Prophetesse, by name gracious, of a religious familie, and of an honourable Tribe.
                     It now remaineth, we come to the maturity of her age, and threfold state of her life, which she passed in all godlines & honesty: all to make her witnesse of greater credit, to the honour of her Christ, whom she published
                     For as the wise man saith, Age is a crowne of glory, when it is found in the way of righteousnes Pro. 16.31. That is, when it is ioyned with religion▪ or else the elder that the wicked are, the more

they are to be abhorred.
                     Her age argued her honesty, vertue, and godly life: for the sinner,Psal. 55.23 wicked, and vnrighteous liue not halfe their daies: Pride, auarice, wine, & women are hatchets to cut downe the tree of thy life, ere it come to it full growth. Dalila in her wantonnesse, Baltassar in his bolles,Dani. 5.1 
                              •
                            Sam. 18.9 
                        Absalon in his pride, were all cut off in the middest of their daies; sinne goeth before destruction, & it hasteneth on the iudgement.
                     As one flood puts on another till they come to the great Ocean, and then they are swallowed vp: so one sinne puts on another, till we come to the graue, & then all are swallowed vp in iudgemēt. I say therefore, Obsta principijs, begin betimes, and let thine age & thine honesty grow together: for what an incongruity is it to bee

gray in haires, and greene in affection? thy yeares to go forward, and thy religion backward?
                     It is said of Anna, Quod haec processerat in diebus multis, because with the course of her yeares, ran the circle of her religion, vertue and honesty; & as the daies of her youth passed, so the vanities of this world euer died in her.
                     
                        Erubescat senectus, quae se emendare non potest, that old age may bee ashamed and blush, that knoweth not how to begin to amend.
                     I say amend, for that manie hauing passed their youth in sinne, shame, and ignorance, deeme it too late to amend when they are old; as when they say, I am now too old to learne: to whom I answere; Etiamsi senes magis decet docere, quam discere, magis tamen decet discere quam ignorare, August: in Epist. ad Heb. Although it be more

seemely for old age to teach then to be taught, yet is it much more seemely to learne then to bee ignorant. The onely thing that letteth in old age to learne and to amend, is auarice: Cum cūcta vitia in sene consenescunt, sola auaritia iuuenesc
                              •
                           t: Whē all vices grow old in age, onely couetousnesse waxeth young. The vse of all is, that our old age should euer be a credit to our place and calling. As also that as our yeares do increase, sin should decrease; and neede we had, by Anna her exāple to weane our affections in youth, that they do not ouerule vs in our age. Ex peruersa volūtate facta est cōsuetudo, et dū cōsuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas, of a froward wil is ingendred an euill custome, & while custome is not withstood, it growes to a necessity. Peccata senum praedicantur in quid, Old mens

sins are essentiall. I do further obserue out of the text, that she passed the threfold state of her life, in all piety and godlinesse. A virgin, a wife, & a widow, she passed all without staine to any, a pure virgin, an honourable wife, a religious widow: so she liued, and so she died, and for that her name is memorable.
                     Now of these three kindes of life, to wit, virginity, marriage and widdowhead, the Monkes make much adoe, and such a difference in the sight of men and God too, as doth no lesse argue thē of foule impietie, then of iust hypocrisie, preferring virginity and widdowhoode much before marriage, euen in the sight of God: for they attribute vnto virginity the fruite and merit of a hundred fold, vnto widdowhoode of sixtie fold, but vnto Matrimonie, as a state

more vile and beggerly, only thirty fold.
                     Yea and yet some more superstitious thē these, who left vnto mariage no place of fruit or blessing; but that of an hundred fold they gaue vnto martyrdome, that of sixtie fold to virginity, and that of thirtie fold to widdowhoode; reckoning mariage among those kindes of life, which are nothing pleasing vnto God, but onely of mercy suffred to bee, and are not farre from fornication, Whereupon this speech hath fallen from their filthy mouthes: Nuptiae teram replent, virginitas Caelum, The married replenish the earth, but virgins fill heauen; as and if lawfull marriage had nought to doe with heauen. O how truly are the foule frogs taxed in the froth of their fornication, sin, & sodomie, by Bale in his Votaries, thus? They

frowne at marriage, who laugh at letchery.
                     But leaue wee these hypocrites in their superstition, and let vs see what the Scripture saith of these three states of life.
                     1 First, the scripture saith, of a truth, I perceiue that God is no respecter of persons, but in euery nation he that feareth him, & worketh righteousnes, is accepted of him. Acts. 10.34.
                     2 And Paule saith,1. Cor. 7.19 Circumcision auaileth nothing, nor vncircumcision, but the keeping of the commandements of God.
                     3 And againe, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Iewe nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Iesus: And if ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seede, and heires by promise. Out of all which I gather

that God is no accepter of persons, nor respecteth any mā, place, state or condition of men, but as they respect him in true piety and godlinesse.
                     He respecteth no person, place or state of life, but in the cause: blessed cause, blessed person, whether virgin, wife or widdowe: cursed cause, cursed person, whether widdowe, wife, or virgin. Giue me a religious virgin, and I will prefer her before an irreligious wife or widdowe; giue me a religious wife or widdowe, and I will preferre her before an irreligious virgin. For if God respect not circū
                        cision which was his owne ordinance, and vnder the lawe, nor reiecteth vncircumcisiō, which was abominable by the Law, but a new creature; will he (trow you) regard virginity, which was neuer enioyned by law, but as a newe

creature.
                     I gather againe, that vpon the touch of Christ,Reue. 7.14. all states are sanctified, and neuer till we haue dipped our stoles in the bloud of the Lamb: If then ye be Christs,Gal. 3.29. yee are Abrahams seede, and heires by promise: not heires for that ye are Iewes rather then Grecians, not heires for that ye are men, rather then women, virgins rather then wiues, Kings rather thē peasants: but ye are heires because of the promise, euen of the promised seede; which laid vp in your hearts by faith, vnfolds the inheritance vnto you, and maketh you heires of his heauenly kingdome. In which sense I may say with Augustine, Caelibatus Iohannis non praefertur coniugio Abrahae, the single life of Iohn hath no prerogatiue aboue the marriage of Abraham; and so to conclude with the Apostle.

1. Cor. 7.20.21. &c. Let euery man abide in the same vocation wherein he was called.
                     Art thou called beeing a seruant? care not for it.
                     Art thou bound to a wife? seeke not to bee loosed: art thou loosed from a wife? seeke not to be bound But if thou takest a wife, thou sinnest not; and if a virgin marry, she sinneth not: neuerthelesse such shall haue trouble in the flesh, I say in the flesh, not in the faith: for it is no touch of faith for virgens ro marrie.
                     And therfore true it is, Molestiae coniugij, sunt paena peccati, non matrimonij: the troubles of marriage, are punishments of sin, not of matrimony: But leaue we the comparison, and come we to Anna, how commendably shee passed these three states of life, in all piety and godlinesse: for it is euident by the

text, shee was a chaste virgine, a chaste wife, & a chaste widdowe.
                     A rare thing in these vnchaste daies, wherin fewe, either virgins, wiues, or widdowes go vnspotted: she liued with one husband seauen yeares frō her virginity Ergo, she was a virgin vnspotted in the day of her espousals.
                     She liued seauen yeares with an husband; she liued with him, shee liued not from him; she liued to loue him, she liued to obey him, him and no other: for that had bin a death and not a life.
                     The text saith well, shee liued with him, which argued her patience as well as her chastity: for if she had not beene peaceable▪ it had beene no life but a death they led, according to that of Siracides: an euill wife is a yoke of Oxen that draweth diuerse waies, hee that hath her is as though he held a Scorpion.
                     
                     
                        Lastly, as the Lord guided her in her virginity, honoured her in marriage, so hee loued and protected her in her widdowhead, an estate of life much respected of God, as may appeare by the scriptures.
                     Wherein the Lord enioyneth from Horeb, (to which imperiall law all owe homage) Ye shall not trouble any widdowe nor fatherlesse childe;Ex. 22.22 if thou vex or trouble such, and so he crie and call vpon me, I will surely heare his crie.
                     And it was a sinne, with a vengeance laid vpon the rulers of Israel, that they iudged not the fatherlesse, neither did the widdows cause come before them.Esay. 1.23 Iam. 1.27
                     
                     Whom to relieue, the Apostle maketh a part of pure religion, & vndefiled before God.
                     But Anna her widdowhead was pairlelesse both for prouidence &

pietie: she saw the Lord Iesus presented in the Temple, which she could not, either in her virginity, or when she was a wife; to tell you that euē therin, widdowhead had the prerogatiue aboue virg
                           •
                        
                        nity, by the Lords prouidence. And the chastity of her widdowhoode appeared in this, that she so cōtinued for the space of foure score and foure yeares.
                     Chambering and wantonnesse rotteth the bones, and shorteneth the life; but temperance euen in that, giueth length of daies. To liue fourescore and foure yeares was much, and so long to liue in chaste widdowhoode was more: but all that time to serue God in the Temple night and day with fasting and prayer, was most of all; farre from the practise of our wanton widdowes, who ere they haue well finished the funerals of

the first husband, are ready to solē
                        nize the Nuptials of a second. Which though I dare not say, it is vnlawfull, yet may I say, it is not seemely, and charge them with this fault, that they haue soone forgotten their first loue.
                     It was demanded of Valeria the Romane (her husband being dead) why she married not againe: she answered that of right she could not, for that her husband yet liued, though not in her house, yet in her heart; and till he were there dead, shee doubted shee neither ought, nor could marry another.
                     And Marcia wife to Cato, being likewise demanded why she married not againe, answered, shee could yet finde none that would marry her but for hers. But Amira her answer was full both of loue and wit, when she wonde out her selfe from second marriage, with

this resolution.
                     If I should marry againe (saith she) then it must needes fall out that my husband should proue either good or bad: if good, then should I euer liue in feare to loose him; if bad, then in griefe to keepe him, and therefore none is best.
                     I speak this to correct the lightnesse of our daies, wherein both Virgins, wiues, and widdowes are too wantonly giuen, neither regarding the vaile of their virginity, the honour of their marriage, nor the holinesse of their widdowhoode with gracious Anna.
                     
                     It may seeme in the Apostles time, that widdowes had their speciall place and praise in the church, as you may reade, 1. Tim. 5.3.6.11. Nor do I see why euen yet they might not doe vnto God the like good and acceptable seruice, especially those of elder

yeares: and for the yonger women, I say with the Apostle, I will that the yonger women marrie, and beare children,1. Tim. 5.14 and gouerne their houses, and giue no occasion to the aduersarie to speake euill. Finally to preserue and keepe thy chastity without corruption in all three estates, six things are required, 1. sobriety. 2. labour, 3. plaine apparrell, 4. a restraint of thy senses, 5. little speach, and that poudered with honesty, 6. shūning of opportunities, as of persons, place & time. Cassiodore super Matthaeū.
                     
                     
                        And went not out of the Temple, but serued God with fasting & prayers night and day.
                     
                     From the description of Anna her person, a mirrour of all modesty for virgins, wiues, & widdowes to behold; it now remaines wee come to the practise of her life in all piety, and publishing of her

Christ in all true faith and verity: her godly life appeared in this, that shee did altogether deuote her selfe to the seruice of her God, first amplified by circumstance of the place where, In the Temple; secondly the manner how, with fasting and prayers: thirdly the time when, night and day.
                     
                     In that she went not out of the Temple, it argued that she was no gadder abroad, but liued all in priuate to God, and with his saincts in the great congregation! whither she went no doubt, as the blessed virgine did to her cosin Elizabeth, Cum festinatione,
                        Luke. 1.39. 
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           . with all hast. Non gaudet diu videri in publico, she had no ioy to bee abroad: this blessed widdowe followed after faith, and not fashions.
                     She had no solace but in the assembly of Saints, no ioy but in

the fruit of her faith, no pleasure but in the Temple of her God.
                     And therefore no doubt she said as Dauid did, blessed are they that dwell in thine house, they will be alway praysing thee. For one day in thy court is better then a thousand elsewhere: I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God,Psal. 84.4. &c. then to dwell in the tabernacle of the wicked.
                     These dayes are Dinaes dayes; for many of our virgins, wiues, and widdowes will not be kept within our dores.Gen. 34.1. &c. And others are so far from seruing of God in the Temple, with gracious Anna, night and day, that of all other places they loue it least, and seeke it last.
                     Yea, they neuer come but when they are carried, in the day of their birth to baptisme, and in the day of their death to buriall.
                     
                        
                        Dina went out of her fathers doores to see the shewes of the Shechemits: it cost bloud, and it lost honesty.
                     
                        Bersheba washed her selfe in publique, it killed her husband,2. Sam. 11.2 it lost her honor, it endangered the king, and plagued Israel·
                     Had Iephthe his daughter kept within the doores,Iud 11.34. it might haue saued her life, but she was too proude of her fathers praise, out shee must to gaze vpon his glory; well well, she bought it deare, for her dance was to the graue, her tymbrels playde her passing peale, and the Damosells mourned her funerall.
                     What should I say more? Esau lost the blessing with being abroad, and Iacob got it with being at home.
                     
                        In cunctis quae foris sunt vae vae, Amos. 5.16. And they shall say to

all in the high wayes, alas, alasse· Dauid in one of his Psalms makes a good wife an ornament for a mans house, and here I may make a widdow an ornament for the Church of God: Not then an ornament for the Theater, playes, spectacles, fayres, markets, or doue-ales, there onely to see and to be seen; No, no, she must be as a snayle to carry her house vpon her backe, her children at her brests, her hādmaids at her heels, with care in her heart, and cost in her hands, to buy balme, to bury Christ in her dearest thoughts.
                     He was a Pagan that sayde of Sempronia, that she could saltare & canere, paulo elegantius quam decuit probae: that she could sing and dance more minion-like then became a modest matrone. Shall heathen see into such sinnes, and shall Christians be senselesse? Of

old, virgins were vailed, and the maried were couered,Gen. 24.65 & for that were called nuptae; but now all is garish, and the vaile of modesty is put away: bare head, bare necke, bare brests, with painted face, and oyled countenance; so farre from all godly cariage and Christian couerture, as they are from virginall modesty, and nere the suspition of prostituted shame and honesty. Trowe you that God wil be so answered when fire shall fyne these fashions, flash in our faces, and yee shall meete him in the cloudes? when to hide your selues it will be vnpossible, and so to appeare, it will be intollerable.
                     See in the second place what she did in the Temple; she came not to see others, and to be seene her selfe: she came not as a mony changer, to trade in the Temple, or to haunt the seats of them that

solde doues, whipped out by Christ, Math. 21.12.
                     Nor did she come to serue the time, as those who now and then drop into the Church for feare of danger, & when that is past, they are gone, like Seamewes, who neuer stir but in a storme. But she came as you may here see, to serue God with fasting and praier, night and day. And this seruice of God it was her loue, it wvs her life, she loued it, and therefore she liued in it.
                     And sooner might ye draw the Sunne from the firmament, then blessed Anna from her deuotiōs. Her eare hearkned, her eies watched, her feet were shodde to the seruice of her God 
                           〈◊〉
                         serue him was the crowne 
                           〈…〉
                         head, & diademe of her prai
                           •
                        e, she gloried in nothing more thē that she might lick vp the dust of the sanctuary.
                     
                        Nor did this seruice flow from a seruile feare, but from a filiall loue, according to that; Ye haue not receiued the spirit of bōdage to feare againe, but ye haue receiued the spirit of adoption,Rom. 8.15. whereby we cry Abba father.
                     She serued him purely and nothing with him, shee serued him onely and nothing beside him, she serued him truely, and nothing for him; but woe is me to tell: we are so farre from seruing him, that we make our God to serue vs euen in our sinnes, according to that of Esay:Esay. 43.24 Thou boughtest mee no sweet sauour with money, neither hast thou made mee drunke with the fat of thy sacrifice; but thou hast made mee to serue with thy sinnes, and wearied me with thine iniquities.
                     Now come we to the manner, how she serued God in the Temple,

expressed in these words, with fasting and prayers.
                     
                     Not that she put any merit in the one or in the other, but vsed both as meanes to strengthen her faith in the Messias, whom after she did confesse and professe. And therefore it is said, she serued God with them, and not merited by them, or was iustified through them: beeing a seruice, it was no desert but a duetie; wherein when shee had done all that euer shee could,Luk. 17.10. yet was she vnprofitable, till she confessed the Lord, and spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Ierusalem.
                     This therefore is the right vse of our prayer and fasting, to bee vnto vs as it were bellowes, by which our faith in Christ is refreshed and inflamed. And it is specially to be obserued, that fasting is put in the first place of her

seruice to god, thereby to teach vs that we must be broken by abstinence, ere we cā be well prepared to any good deuotiō. For as if you put an eg or chesnut into the fire, & break it not, the heat no sooner cōmeth vnto it, but it bursteth & leapeth out: yet not so, if before you put it in, you break it neuer so little in the head. So may we say of mē, presuming to come before the maiesty of their God, who is a cō
                        suming fire; if they come vnbrokē, fat, & full, and not hūbled with fasting, prayer & watching, they easily leap out of the fire of their deuotions, & fall away frō heauenly contēplation. Not so Pueri illi Babylonici, mētioned in Daniel, who refused the portion of the Kings meat, & choose rather to feed vpon pulse. They would bee broken with prayer, abstinence, & fasting, the rather to abide the fiery furnace,

out of which they were deliuered.Dan. 1.12
                     
                     So Moses was with God vpon the holy mount,Exod 24.18.34.28 forty daies and forty nights without meate or drinke: he was broken like a chesnut with abstinēce, that he might the rather indure the fire of Gods maiesty.
                     So this holy Anna would bee broken like a chesnut with prayer, fasting, & watching in the temple night and day, to mortify the flesh, that it might not abate the vigor of the spirit in the heat of her deuotions.
                     It is therefore expedient (my deare brethren) that by your abstinence ye keepe vnder the flesh, especially in your deuotions and seruice of God,2. Cor. 12.2 and so as you may say with the blessed Apostle, whether in the body or out, I cannot tell, God he knoweth: For the flesh

is that Eue tempting vs to eate of the forbidden fruit.Gen. 3.6 Gen. 39.7 The flesh is Putiphars wife, prouoking chaste Ioseph to filthy lust. The flesh is,Iud. 4.18 Iudg. 16.19 that Iael beguiling Sisera, with faigned loue to his destruction. The flesh is that Dalila who pleasantly tooke Sampson into her bosome, and betrayed him vnto the Philistins, cut his haire, put out his eies, and made him a scorne to all the people.
                     The flesh is that dancing minion,Math. 14.8. whom nothing could please but the head of Iohn Baptist on a platter.
                     Finally, the flesh is that dorekeeping damosell,Math. 26.69. 
                        Ad cuius vocem Christum negamus, at whose voice Peter abiured his Christ, and so doe we.
                     In regard of all which, it stands vs vpon as we loue the saluation of our soules in the seruice of our

God, that with blessed Anna here, and Paul elswhere, we beate down our bodies with prayer, fasting, & watching, to bring it in subiection to the spirit,1 Cor. 9.
                              •
                           7 lest by any meanes after wee haue preached to others, wee our selues should bee reproued.
                  
                  
                     Night and day.
                     
                        Anna her deuotion is here exemplified by circumstance of the time she bestowed in the seruice of God, which was both night and day, as it is in the text, spoken by way of trope; not that she euer dwelt in the Temple, for how could it be said then, that shee came at the same instant vppon them? Or that her fastings were such, or prayers so many, as she had no leisure either to eat in the day, or rest in the night: for how

could she euer then haue come to such maturity, and length of dayes?
                     But the speech is familiar, and meaning such, as doth imply from the spirit which spake it, that she was frequent in her deuotions, and a continual Church commer. As we say of him who is a painfull student, that he is neuer from his booke, nor from the presence of his Master: or of him,1. Thess. 5.17. who praieth much, we say he is alwayes in prayer. Or of him who is a good hearer, why such a one is neuer from the Church, sermō, and sacraments.
                     So may it be said of Anna the Prophetesse, that she was much in prayer, and fasting: hoc opus, hic labor, hoc artificium, hoc exercitium, it was her worke, it was he
                           •
                         labor, it was her art, it was her exercise.
                     
                        When euer any holy thing was performed in the Temple, were it in the morning or in the euening, Praesto aderat, she was euen at hand: nor did shee at any time neglect the publick seruice, but was still present.
                     Holines (saith the sweete Singer of Israell) becommeth thine house for euer:Psal. 93.6 holy saint, holy shrine, holy God, holy people, holy temple; holy Anna did hallow it night and day, with her holy presence, prayer, and fastings.
                     Here learne then by Anna her due deuotion, and daily practise of godlines, and piety, how to frame your selues for the Church & holy assembly; handle not the holy things with vnwashen hands, but rather say with Dauid, I will wash mine hands in innocency, and so will I go to thine altar, Psalme. 26.6.
                     
                        Learne with Anna to loue the Church: where a mans treasure is, there is his heart.Math. 6.21 Can there be greater treasure anie where then in the temple of God? where hee hath promised that his eie, eare,1. King. 9.3 & heart, shall be perpetually. Say with Dauid, Lord I haue loued the habitation of thine house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth, Psal. 26.8. Is his presence there? is his honour there? Why should we then denie to honour it with our presence? Is his heart there to loue it? & darest thou to loath it?
                     One thing (saith the Prophet) I desired of the Lord, that I will require, euen that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies of my life, to behold the beautie of the Lord, and to visit his temple, Psal. 27. When Dauid desired this one thing, it may seeme he excluded

all other things; and when he desired it to require it, hee made full account to obtaine his desire.
                     When hee required to dwell in the house of the Lord, he made it his habitation; & when he would there dwell all the daies of his life, he made it no tabernacle for a time, but an abode for euer.
                     Finally to sanctifie all with a sanctified end both of his abode, and biding there, he said, I seeke this solace in his sanctuary onely that I may behold the beautie of the Lord, and visit his Temple.
                     And so to conclude a doctrine from Anna her practise in the continuall exercise of her piety in the Temple, as also from Dauids desire to rest himselfe with the sparrow ouer the Altar of his God, and euer to dwell in the habitation of his holinesse:
                     I gather, that it is beseeming

the saints of God, vncessantly to pray, duely to fast, and daily perseuere in the practise of all pietie and godlinesse. For he that perseuereth to the end shall be blessed;Mat. 24.13 and true it is, Frustra nititur, qui non innititur, the tree that is oftē planted, and often plucked vp, it neuer prospereth, it beareth no bowes, it brings no fruit. So is the planting in religion, vertue, and piety; if thou leaue thy first loue, & be remoued frō the first groūd of good faith & obedience, thou art as a tree twice dead,Iude. 12. & plucked vp by the rootes, and good for nothing but for the fire. O well said Syracides. Eccle. 27.
                     
                        Homo sensatus in sapientia manet sicut sol, stultus autem sicut luna mutatur, A man of vnderstanding is steddy as the sonne, but a foole is changeable like the moone. Iust and holy men are stable like

                        Abraham, the father of all the faithfull, who, as the foules fell vpon the carkase of the sacrifice, still droue them away; and so as one saith: Inceptum quod fecit, non reliquit infectum, what hee begun he neuer left vndone; like vnto that of Caesars expedition: Nil factum credens, cum quid superesset agendum, instat atrox, who neuer thought thing well done, when any thing was left vndone.
                     The vse is good, and Anna was happy in her holy haunt: for that she brake of no deuotion, her loue was full of labour; in prayer often, in fastings often, in watchings often, night and day shee tooke no rest, but in the sweet repose of Israels consolation, whom she sought in the Temple till she found him, and then euer treasured vp in her deerest thoughts. Be it therefore farre from vs, that

our diuinity should bee without deuotion, our profession without practise, our zeale without such sanctitie. May we sit at ease in Syon, and haue no courage for the truth? may the minister or the magistrate sleepe? may the people shift off so soueraigne a seruice to their God and Christ? O then where is our first loue? where is truth? where is faith? where is religion? Wee had all in the daies of our tryall, when the fire fined it, the crosse grieued it, & our martirs sealed it with their dearest bloud: then was the word of God precious as in the daies of Samuel; then at midnight, Paule and Silas prayed, sung psalmes vnto God, & prisons were shaken with true deuotion.
                     And haue we now left it in the happy daies of our peace, & vnder the gouernemēt of so gracious

a Soueraigne? shall it grow vnder the crosse, & shall it grieue vnder the crowne? shall it prosper in the daies of persecution? and shall it wither in the daies of peace? shall the Arke of God passe through the swellings of Iorden, and shall it make a stop in the sweete running waters of Shilo? shall Moabs rest be Moabs ruine? then woe vnto vs that euer we liued, to enioy so great blessednesse, with so little holinesse.
                     But here is our wofull want, we are ignorant of our God, and wee know him not: we think any thing will please him, any religion, any obedience, any prayer, any preaching, any duety, any deuotiō; like Themistius the Philosopher, that would perswade Valens the Emperour, Deo gratam esse sectarum varietatem, vt ita plur
                              •
                           bus modis colatur: That God was well pleased

with varieties of sects, because by that meanes he may haue more sundry and diuerse wayes of his worship and seruice. Or we deale with our great God of heauen, full of Maiesty, full of might, full of feare, full of fire, as it is recorded the Mexicans did with Ferdinando Cortasio; who being much astonished with his great exployts, and wondering whether he were a God or no, sent Ambassadors vnto him with these gifts and instuctions: Tria genera munerum ad te ferimus, primo quinque homines; & si Deus quidem crudus es, & sanguine placādus, cape istos & vescere; plures etiam dabimus. 2. sin bonus mitisque es Deus, en tibi herbas & p
                              •
                           umas ad supplicandum. 3. si porro homo es, cape has aues & fructus, quos damus in tuum & tuorum vsum.
                     
                     In English thus: We present here

before thy Maiesty three manner of guests, first fiue liue men; and if thou be a cruell God and pleased with nothing but bloud, take these and eate, we will prouide more: But if thou be a good and a mild God, behold here are herbs and fethers to supplicate with; & if thou be but a mere man, take this fowle and fruit, which we giue for thee and thine to vse. Christiane quid rides, de te narratur fabula, Why smilest thou O Christian, the tale is true of thee. You Papists deeme cruelly of your God, and you thinke him pleased with nothing but bloud in your deuotions; you haue diapred the earth with the bloud of his saints: and, as one of your owne Poets saith, you dayly separate the soule of Christ from his body, and yet drawe incruently Christs bloud out of his veines.
                     
                        We Protestants deem too basely of our God, and we thinke him pleased with any thing, euen flowers and fethers wil fit our deuotions; but fy vpon such fealty.
                     You Atheists of these our daies who dare say in your heartes, though not with your mout
                           •
                        
                        ▪ There is no God: you thinke of him but as a mere man, fowle and fruite is for your deuotion: whilst you make your belly your God, your glory your shame, and mind nothing but these earthlie things.
                     VVell, Anna her deuotion was another, night & day, she sought, she sued, she wrastled and praied and found God at Bethell: And for vs, seeing as the Apostle saith, we receiue a kingdom which can not be shaken,Heb. 12.28. &c. let vs with her haue grace, whereby we may so serue God, that we may please

him with reuerence and feare, for euen our God is a consuming fire.
                     
                        She then comming at the same instant vpon them,
                        Luk. 2.38. 
                        confessed likewise the Lord, and spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Ierusa
                           
                              •••
                           .
                     
                     We are now come to the last part and shutting vp of all, which is Anna her profession of Christ in all verity; without which, what formerly hath beene said, is nothing either to Anna her praise, or perfection in piety.
                     For what is her gratious name? whats her godly family? whats her honorable tribe? whats the maturity of her age, her chaste cariage in her virginity, mariage & widowhood? whats the resting of her selfe in the temple, with the continuall seruice of her GOD there, with fasting and praiers

both night and day? I say whats all this good, without the soueraigne good,Acts. 4.11 Leuit. 2.13 euē Christ the stone of our building, the salt of our sacrifice,Mat. 2
                              •
                           .11.12. Eph. 5.2. the wedding garment we must put on, the sweet perfume,
balme, and incense that sauoreth and relisheth all our actions? without which (I say) al our deuotion (be it neuer so deare) is dead, distasteth with our God, and endangereth our soules. And this is the reasō why we say, Quod opera infidelium sunt peccata, The works of Infidels are sin, be they neuer so iust, neuer so chast, neuer so patiēt, 
                           〈…〉
                         that it 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     Now 
                           〈…〉
                         Christ, I 
                           〈…〉
                         when the 
                           〈…〉
                         vpon 
                           〈…〉
                         when 
                           〈…〉
                         by 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
when the parents had brought in the babe Iesus, to doe for him after the custome of the lawe, then came Anna not by chance, or vpon the call of any, but by speciall motion of the holy Ghost (no doubt) and instinct of the Spirit; which did suggest that euen now Shilo was come,Gen. 49.10 Esay. 9.6. Christ was born, a Sonne was giuen, euen the expectation of Israell, to all that longed for him. In which longing she looked, and saw sufficient for her saluation, nor had she euer seene with her eyes, had she not longed with her heart: for in her 
                           〈…〉
                         in her 
                           〈…〉
                         notable 
                           〈…〉
                         still to 
                           〈…〉
                         good, 
                           〈…〉
                         vs in 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
the Lord was his guest.
                     
                        Daniel by the bankes of Hula, while he was speaking in prayer, and confessing the sinnes of the people, the man Gabriel appeared and informed him, Daniel. 9.21. &c.
                     While Zacharie attended the euening sacrifice, and the incense was a burning, the Angell sayde, feare not Zachary, for thy prayer is heard, Luk 1.42.
                     
                        Isaac walked in the field praying, and sawe Rebecca comming.Gen. 24.63
                     
                     While the Ma
                              •
                           i followed the starre, they found the babe.Math. 2.10 
                              •
                           1.
                     
                     And while Cleopas and the other talked of those things that had happened at Ierusalem,Luke 24.14.15. Christ drew neere and talked with them. And when did the holy Ghost fal vppon the assembly and fill the house where they late? but when they were all with one accord in

one place, looking and longing after the promise. Acts. 2.1.
                     I say for conclusion, watch, pray, and practise piety, long and looke after the day of your redemption: blessed is that seruant whom his master when he commeth shall find so doing. Matth. 24.46.
                     But woe, woe, and woe againe, to all such as neither watch, pray, long,Zeph. 1.12. nor looke, but lie in their sinnes, and are frozen in their dregges; how will they answer the Lord at his fiery comming, who are so found? If iudgement begin at the house of God,1. Pet. 4.
                              •
                           7.18. & the saints shall hardly be saued, where? where shall the sinner stand? when to hide themselues it will be impossible, and to appeare it will be intollerable. O that men were wise, then would they vnderstand this, then would they

consider their latter end. Deuter. 32.29.
                     See againe, and weigh with me how the faithfull, good, and godly do mutually help one another in the seruice of God.
                     
                        Simeon was praising & preaching Christ in the Temple, & behold Anna was ayding with all diligence to further that blessed worke; & superuenit, as it is in one translation, she was vpon him ere he was aware, and did communicate with him in that holy seruice. So was Aaron to Moses: for that he had a stammering tongue.Exod. 4.16 Acts. 13.2. 2. Tim. 4 10 Psal. 122.1 
                        Barnabas to Paul, though Demas did forsake him.
                     The people to Dauid when they said, Come, we will go into the house of the Lord.
                     So was hee who said well, We together are Gods labourers, ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods

building. 1. Cor. 3.9.
                     And so (for the vse of the doctrine) are all ye to vs, when you helpe vs in our deuotions, ayding vs with your prayers, praises, and presence in the seruice of God; flocking hither like doues to their nests, and comming vpon vs at vnwares, as Anna did vpon Simeon when he had the babe in his armes,Esay. 60.8. with Ioseph and Marie assistants in that blessed worke. We are too solitary in the seruice of God, well it were if we were more ayding one another in the same. Birds of a wing flye together, beasts of a heard flocke together:Iudges. 5.15.16. we are too single in our deuotions, and the diuisions of Reuben are great thoughts of heart.
                     Now at Anna her comming in, she shewed her religion in two things: first, she confessed him in heart, and secondly, published

him to others, when she spake of him to al that looked for redemption in Ierusalem: iustifying that of the Apostle, Rom. 10.9. If thou shalt confesse with thy mouth the Lord Iesus, and shalt beleeue in thine heart that God raysed him vp from the dead, thou shalt be saued.
                     Where note, that heart and tongue are tied together, nor can any man say he is religious, if he be silent; thinke he neuer so well, if he doe not speake, hee is of a dumbe and dead religion; For euen as at the approach & presēce of the Son, vertue flowing from it, trees wax greene, florish, and yeelde their fruite; so Christ the sonne of righteousnesse shyning vpon his saints,Mala. 4 2. what maruaile is it, if they breake out into prayses, and smell more sweet then all the trees of incense?
                     
                        Againe in that it is said she did likewise confesse: See th
                           •
                         consent of faith and doctrine, that her beliefe and speech of Christ was all one with that of Symeon; to wit, that he should be a light to the Gentiles,Luk. 2.32. the glory of Israell, a rocke to the religious, a ruyne to the reprobate, and a sword to Maries heart, all inuring that Christ should be both our life and mortification
                     Learne further, that if Christ being made man,Philip. 2.7. and taking vnto him the shape of a seruant, as he lay in the cratch was sung of the Angels, and seene of the sheepheards; if in the Temple he was preached by Symeon, and confessed by Anna, to the wonder of Ioseph and Marie:
                     How much is it of greater wonder, that now neither seene nor felt, yet the godly should relish

him in soules, and found out his praise to their endlesse saluation. O that we did know our own blessednesse in the certainty of our knowledge, by a more speciall meane and manner.
                     For we goe not by sight but by hearing, nor do we admire Christ ex his quae foris apparent, for that which we see in him, but for that which we haue heard of him: for it is not only, Blessed are the eyes that see, but also, Blessed are the eares that heare the things that you heare.Math. 13.16.17.
                     
                     Nor is it, Blessed are the pappes that gaue thee sucke,Luke 11.27.28. but rather blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it.
                     
                        Ecclesiastes saith well, Take heed to thy foote when thou entrest into the house of GOD, and be more nere to heare then to giue the sacrifice of fooles; for they

know not that they doe euill.
                     The Maiesty and mercy of our God cannot be seene with mortall eye, but he is apprehended by faith, and hearing, without further processe, search, or scrutiny. Thomas may sound into his wound by feeling, but he cā neuer sound his will but by hearing.
                     For euen as in aged Isaac when he blessed Iacob, all his senses failed him but hearing, and onely in that he was not deceiued:
                     So in the knowledge of Christ our Sauiour, and in the certaintie of his trueth, all our senses are senselesse, but that of hearing: the voyce is Iacobs voyce, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
                        Gen. 27.22
                     
                     The Paganes papizing, and our Papists paganizing are palpable in their religion, pleasing they are to all their senses, in all their deuotions, but onely to that of

hearing, and that also if it be fed with pipe and Organ: but if you speake of preaching, and would fil it with heauenly harmony, they shut the dores, they stop their eares, and they will not heare, charme you neuer so wisely.
                     Onely in this, Isaac said true,Psal. 58.4 5 It is the voice of Iacob; but when he said, They are the hands of Esau, he was deceiued.
                     
                        Iacobs voice will not deceiue, it is the word of God: but Esau his hands will still deceiue you, they are but the inuentions of men, and beggerly rudiments of this world: as, Touch not, tast not, handle not,Gal. 4.9. Coloss 2 21.22. which all perish with the vsing, and are after the commandements & doctrine of men.
                     And spake of him to all that looked for redemption in Ierusalem.
                           Text.
                        
                     
                     When the heart is full, the

mouth will vent, and as is the liquor within,Psa. 116.10. so is the relish without.Mat. 12.34 I haue beleeued, and therfore haue I spoken, saith one; and of the aboundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh, saith another.
                     
                        Anna was full of her Christ, & therefore she could not but vent him; she had treasured him vp in her dearest thoughts, and for that she could not but lay him out to her best aduantage. O wel said the kingly Prophet Dauid,
                        Psa. 108.3. I will giue thanks vnto the Lord among the people, I will sing praises vnto thee among the nations.
                     To thanke GOD in priuate is much, to speak of him among the people is more; but among the nations to sing his praises, is most of all.
                     The doctrine is good, and this it is: the godly are neuer wanting in the practise of this piety, that

as they are faithfull and true to God in beleeuing, so are they charitable towards men in publishing their Christ, pregnant they are, and they cannot but bring forth.
                     Consider what she speakes of, she reades no destinies, nor tels no old wiues tales, she reports no newes like the Athenians,
                        Acts. 17.21 Tit. 1.12. or speaks of belly-cheare, like the slow bellyed Cretians; her speach is of no ryot, ribaldry, or wantonnesse: but she speakes of him, viz. of her Christ, to all that looked for redemption in Ierusalem: According to that of Peter,
                        1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speake, let him speak as the words of God. Whereby we are admonished, that our speach should be chaste, godly and gracious, euer tending to edification, and the building vp of our brother in god lines and piety;Eph. 4.26. alwaies mindfull

of our sauiours aduertisemēt, that For euery idle word,Mat. 12.36 we must giue an account thereof at the day of iudgement. And surely this is true, sanctified and spirituall speeches do inflame the soule,Psal. 119.140. according to that of the Psalmist: Ignitum eloquium tuum vehementer, & seruus tuus dilexit illud: Thy word is wonderfull fiery, and thy seruant loueth it. And whereunto accordeth Ieremy 30.9. His word was in mine heart as fire, &c. And that of Cleopas, Did not our hearts melt within vs, when he talked with vs of these things?Luk. 24.32.
                     
                     But contrarily, vaine, idle, and prophane speeches doe quenche the fire of our loue towards God and man, according to that of the Apostle:2. Tim. 2.16 1. Cor. 15.33. Stay prophane & vaine bablings, for they shall increase vnto more vngodlinesse. And againe, Euill words corrupt good

manners:Ecclus. 9.
                              •
                           7. and Sit omnis oratio tua in praeceptis altis simi: Let thy talke be with the wise, and all thy communication in the Lawe of the most high.
                     It is here further to be obserued that this blessed Matron spake of God, not to all, but to such as looked for redemption in Ierusalem.
                     To teach vs that wee must not cast our pearles before swine,Mat. 7.6. or giue holy things to dogs: for such are not capable of heauenly doctrine, or diuine mysteries, witnesseth the Apostle:1 Cor. 12.14. 
                        Carnalis homo nō percipit ea, quae sunt spiritus dei: The naturall man perceiueth not the things of the spirit of God: as also Esay the Prophet. 28.9. Whom shall hee teach knowledge? and whom shall hee make to vnderstand the things that he heareth? them that are weaned from the

milke, and drawne from the brests. And Dauid Secreta domini timētibus eum,
                        Psa. 25.14▪
                         the secrets of the Lord are reuealed to thē that feare him, &c. Sapientiā loquimur inter perfectos. But woe is me to tell:1 Cor. 2.6. fewe looke for redemption (as it is in the text) either of their sinnes, of their sauiour, or of their lost time; of their sinnes wherein they liue: which they are so farre from breaking off by repentance, that rather they solace themselues in them, according to that: Laetantur cū malefecerunt, et exultant in rebus pessimis: The wicked are glad when they doe euill, and reioice in their wickednes: to preach to such, is to beate the aire.
                     But rather our words will cary weight, pierce, and wound such as trauell and bee heauy laden, groane vnder the burthen of their sinnes,Mat. 11.28 and looke for the day of

their redemption.
                     And as for the time lost, who doth redeeme it, though the daies be dangerous? And so I conclude from all I haue said of Anna her vnfolding of the heauenly misteries to such as looke for redemption in Ierusalem:
                     The misteries of God are treasures hid in the ground of our hearts, wherein the Lord would bee kept, as in a field of blessing: which if thou discouer to the Babilonians, that is, make knowne to the wicked and vnworthy, as Hezechia did to the messengers of Meradock-Baladan, King of Babel,
                           
                              •
                           say. 39.2. when hee shewed them the house of the treasuries, the siluer and the gold, and the spice, and the precious ointments, and all the house of his armour; I say, take heede of the like sinne, least thou fall into the like iudgement, which is to go

captiue to Babilon, robbed of all thy riches, and the virgin Sion mourne to see her sonnes or Eunuches in the pallace of the King of Babell.
                     If wee preach peace, and they will not receiue peace, wee may shake the dust of that place from our feete and bee gone;Mat. 10.14 that dust shall iudge dust in the great day. Into the citie of Samaria enter ye not,Math. 10.5 they looked for no redemption; and therefore the secret therof might not be reueled vnto thē, according to that, Secreta domini timētibus eū,
                        Psal. 25.14 
                        the secret of the Lord is reuealed to them that feare him,
                     
                     If any shall say, beeing suncke in sinne, wee are no worse then dogs, and yet dogs may eate of the crums that fall from their masters table:Mat. 65.26 I answere, true indeed if you rise out of sin, & be no such dogs as bite and barke at our deuotions,

but come in all humility, and (as the Chananite did) sue and seeke in true faith, and feeling the crūmes of mercy that fal frō your masters table, then come and taste with Anna how sweete the Lord is, then come & speake of him with Anna to all that looke for redemption in Ierusalem.
                     
                        And when they had performed all these things according to the Law of the Lord, they returned into Galilie to their owne city Nazareth.
                     
                     Although this scripture say nothing of Anna whose story hitherto we haue followed, for the better manifesting of Christ in the flesh: yet it is necessary to be annexed further, to make plaine the history of Christ his incarnation by speciall growth in body, and strength in spirit, with al complements of wisedome, fauour, and

grace both with God and man.
                     Wherein I pray, you would obserue three things: all clearing the truth of the incarnation, and prouing our Christ to be perfect man against Ebion, Carpocr
                              •
                           s, Cerinthus, and such like; who dire the deity in denying, some the humanity, some the diuinity▪ I say this is cleared in this place by a threefold subiection, whereunto the Lord would yeeld himselfe as the Son of man, but neuer as the Son of God.
                     The first is his subiection to the Law out of these words: when they had performed all things according to the Lawe.
                     
                     The second was his subiection to persecution, which I may terme a iudgement of the Lawe in these words: they returned into Galilie to their owne citty Nazareth.
                     
                     The third and last is his subiection

to increase and growth in body, and strength in spirit, by little and little; infallible proofes of his humanity, and no waye applyant to the diuinity, out of these words, And the child grew and waxed strong, &c. Christ was subiect and vnder the Lawe:

                           1. Morall.
                           2. Ceremoniall.
                           3. Iudiciall.
                        
According to that, When the fulnesse of time was come, God sent foorth his sonne made of a woman, and vnder the Law,Gal. 4.4. &c. that he might redeeme them which were vnder the Lawe, that we might receiue the adoption of sonnes.
                     He was subiect to the Lawe Moral, when he said, Math. 5.17. Thinke not that I came to destroy the Lawe, or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them.
                     
                     He was subiect to the Lawe Ceremonial, when he was circumcised

and presented in the Temple,Luke. 2.21 &c: all ended when the vaile of the Temple rent asunder from the toppe to the bottome, which Temple after was ruinated body and all,Mat. 27.51 
                        Nepopulus rediret ad Iudaismum.
                     
                     He was subiect to the Lawe Iudicial, when he endured his painfull passion, and vpon the Crosse was cursed for vs all; according to that Gal. 3.13. Christ hath redeemed vs from the curse of the Lawe, when he was accursed for vs, for it is written, cursed is euery one that hangeth on a tree. He performed all, that he might make an end of all, so as no lawe might rise vp in iudgement against vs.
                     When Christ was transfigured vpon the holy mount, it is sayde that Moses and Elias talked with him, and told of his departure which he should suffer at Ierusalem.

                        Luk. 9.30.31.
                     To teache you no other then that ye are here taught, to wit, that Christ is the end and accomplishment both of the Lawe and Prophets, whereof Moses and Elias are chiefe; for whereat points the Law, but at a bloudy sacrifice? whereon stand the Prophets, but vpon the Messias sent and slaine? and what is their communication with Christ, but of his departure which he should accomplish at Ierusalem?
                     So then the Lawe and the Prophets do accompany Christ, and Christ in person doth accomplish them: Christ, not Moses, not Elias, nor one of the Prophets; and yet Christ with Moses, with Elias, and with all the Prophets; they to find out his lyne, he to finish their course. And all this sprung from the endlesse fountaine of his loue

which loue (I may say with the blessed Apostle) is the fulfilling of the Law, Rom. 13.10. or end, if ye wil, for so saith the same Apostle: The end of the commandement is loue out of a pure heart,1 Tim. 1.
                              •
                           
                         and of a good conscience, and of faith vn
                           •
                        aigned: which holy loue streamed with his bloud, when it issued from all his veines, to redeeme vs from this killing lawe. Where by double right and authority he hath conquered:
                     First, as the sonne of God, & Lord of the law.
                     Secondly, as the sonne of man in our person: which is as much as if wee had ouercome the lawe our selues: for his victory is ours.
                     All the iurisdiction of the lawe was executed vpon Christ.
                     First, it accused him as a blasphemer,Mat. 26.65 and a seditious person.
                     Secondly,Ioh. 11.50. it made him guilty

before God, of the sinnes of the whole world.
                     Thirdly, it so terrified and oppressed him with heauinesse and anguish of spirit, that his sweate was like drops of bloud, trickling downe to the ground. Luke 2
                           •
                        .44.
                     And lastly, it condemned him to death, euen to the death of the crosse: a maruellous combate, where the law a creature giueth such an assault to his creator, and against all right practiseth his whole tyranny vpon the sonne of God, and he most innocent.
                     But to proceed, it may seeme by the text, that the Euangelist doth more specially ayme at some performance of the law, done by Ioseph and Mary, in that it is sayd: When they had performed all those things. &c.
                     True it is, & this their performāce

may be a president to vs, whereon to looke in all our deuotions.
                     First, that we leaue nothing vndone, which the Lord hath commanded by his law.
                     Secondly, that wee performe nothing of our owne deuising; but as it is enioyned vs by the eternall law of the eternall God.
                     The Babe was crucified, Mary was purified, and the childe presented according to the law; they performed al, & left out nothing: & they did it according to no deuice of their owne: but as the line and leuell of the same lawe ledde them.
                     And here two sorts of people are sweetly taught, if not iustly taxed by the spirit of God, of intollerable impiety. First, such as thinke they please God if they serue him by halfes, performe some things, but not all according to the lawe

of the Lord: Halfe prayer, halfe preaching, halfe Sacrament, halfe Saboath, will serue their turne in their demi-deuotion; but Ioseph and Mary performed all. Secondly, such as do performe a seruice, but after their own fashion, vsing for doctrines of the Lord, mens traditions in a voluntary religion,Col. 2.22.23. Mat. 15.9. and will worship, neuer taught from Horeb, neuer enioyned of the Lord: to whom I may say with the Prophet,Esay. 1.12 Heb. 3.5. 
                        Who required these things at your hands? Moses was faithfull from the gold to the goats haire: our faithfulnesse is more in the haire then in the gold.
                     The vse of al is this, by the example of Ioseph and Mary, to ayme at perfection in all our actions with God, who requireth thee to bee faithfull, and neuer to breake off thy course, till thou hast finished the race: for what will it profite

thee to begin at the Font, and to breake off ere thou come to the Graue? to begin in the spirit, and to end in the flesh? to haue ingresse in Christ, and egresse in Anti-christ?Gal. 3.3 sacramentally to reteyne Christ by baptisme, really to forsake faith by breaking the vow? I say: what wil it profit thee to shift from Sodome, vpon the Lords commaund,1 Tim. 1.19. and to looke backe and lust after it ere thou come at Zoar?
                     
                        Irridebunt te sane Daemones, Diuels will deride thee (as one saith) & say:Luk. 
                              •
                           4.30 
                        hic homo coepit edificare, & non potuit consummare, He began to build, but he could not finish. Iobs constancy was no lesse, if not of greater perfectnesse in the feare & seruice of his God, whē he said, Chap. 27. vers. 36. So long as my breath is in mee, and the spirit of God within my nostrels, my lippes

surely shall speake no wickednesse, and my tongue shall vtter no deceipt.
                     
                     
                        God forbid that I should iustifie you; vntill I dye, I will neuer take away mine innocency from my selfe.
                     
                     
                        Paule, Paule, thy contentions were many for the truth; yet was thy constancy aboue all thy contentions, when thou saydst with perfect faith and feeling, 2. Tim. 4.7. I haue fought a good fight, I haue finished my course, I haue kept the faith.
                     
                     The second thing clearing the humanity and incarnation of Christ, is his persecution in this, that they Returned into Galily, to their owne city Nazareth: Implying thereby, that immediately after, he was presented in the Temple, and his mother was purified, according to the law: and hauing

now recouered the strength shee had lost in her late labor, wherby she became more able to vndergo the iourney.
                     Now must they to Aegypt, ere they might returne into Galily, to their owne City Nazareth. This their flight foreseene of the Lord, and foretold to Ioseph,
                        Mat. 2 13. is set down at large by Matthew in the second chapter of his Gospell; but omitted by Luke in this place.
                     To teach vs that it is vsual with the Euangelists, oftē, one to omit that which another hath: & some one to supply that which is wāting in the rest: so as all in one, and not any one for all, doe make perfect the circle of Christ, his line, life, death and doctrine.
                     So is the body of all the Scriptures soulelesse and imperfect, if you stand vppon any one booke, without the supply of all; but liuely,

absolute, and perfect in their ioynt and iust proportion, like the vision of wings, wheeles & beasts, mentioned in Ezechiel, which neuer goe but as they are chained,Ezec. 1.9. linked, and locked together.
                     The vse then is this: that if you wil vnderstand one Scripture, you must examine it by another, and if you will bee ignorant in none, you must giue your diligence to the reading of all, according to that of Christ, Search the scriptures,
                        Ioh. 5.39. 
                        for in them ye thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. Not Scripture, but Scriptures.
                     Some are of opinion, to whom I assent not, that Ioseph and Mary, after they had performed the sacrifice of purgation, returned to Bethlem, that they might dwell there; but it was not to be imagined that Ioseph had a dwelling

place there, where hee was so vnknowne, that he could not finde a place to remain in as a guest. And therefore I doe easily graunt, that the iourney into Egypt was between these, that is, after the purification and presentation, and before their returne backe to Nazareth.
                     So as that which Luke sayth, of their dwelling again in their own City Nazareth, was in order of time after their flight into Egypt: which Matthew reporteth. Chap. 2.19. &c.
                     Where if the story report aright, Christ with his parents remained in exile full seuen yeares: for so they calculate the time from Herode his slaughter of Innocents, to the daies of Archelaus his sonne, at what time Ioseph againe heard from the Angel of the Lord, Arise and take the Babe and

his mother, and goe into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the Babes life.
                     
                     All to testifie that which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet: Out of Egypt haue I called my sonne.
                        Hosea. 11.1
                     
                     A wonderful worke and prouidence of God, that the Sauiour of Iudah should be cast out of Iuda, and Egypt should nourish him: Egypt, I say, euen Egypt, from whence neuer any thing came before, but euen that which was deadly to the Church of God.
                     If the Princes of Iuda will persecute Ieremy, and cast him into the dungeon, the Lord wil raise vp Ebedmeleck the Nigro, to deliuer him out of that danger.Ier. 38.12. And true it is, that the wise king saith: If a mans wayes do please the Lord,Prou. 16.7· he will make his enemies at peace with him. And it may be the Prophet meant this or the like prouidence

of God towards our Sauior here, and Saints else where, when he saith:Esay. 11.6. 
                        The VVolfe shall dwell with the Lambe, and the Leopard shall lye with the Kid, and the Calfe and the Lyon, and the fat beasts together, and a little child shall leade them, and the sucking child shall play vpon the hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shal put his hand vppon the Cockat
                              •
                           ice hole. The Lord can play with poyson, and tame the cruellest in his prouidence, when he pleaseth to preserue either Saint or Sauiour.
                     If his prouidence be vpon the fire,Dan. 3.25. Ionah. 1.17 Mark. 4.41 Dan. 6.22· Iosu. 10.12 Matth. 27.52.53. it burneth not, if vppon the water, it drowneth not, if vppon the seas, they swell not, if vppon the windes, they blow not, if vppon the Lyons, they deuoure not, if vpon Egypt, it persecuteth not; if vpon the sonne, it goeth not, if vpon the graues, they detaine not,

but deliuer vp their dead, to the glory of their God; according to that of Augustine, Vbicunque fuerit prouidentia, frustrātur vniuersa contraria, Where the Lord hath his prouidence, all crosse incounters are defeated.
                     But the vse is this, though Egypt did preserue him, yet Iudah did persecute him, and soone it pricked that would be a thorne: for if you search with care, and sound with iudgement, you shall finde that from the first conception of Christ in the wombe, to the yeelding vp of his Ghost vppon the crosse, In articulo mortis, the Crosse was euer his companion, & his life none other then a painfull passion: it hath beene euer in the practise of Sathan to maligne the truth, and by all possible and potent meanes to bury the Babe in his birth.
                     
                        
                        Gabriel no sooner came from heauen with that ioyfulll message, but straight waies hee raised a doubt in the heart of Mary, so as shee demurred vppon the point,Luk. 1.34. and sayd, How may this be? Being found with child of the holy ghost,Mat. 1.18 &c. 
                        Ioseph was iealous of his wife. What should I say more? Herode was cruell, and Bethleem was vncourteous, when Christ found more humanity & kindnesse with the beastes in the cratch, then with men in their Courts.
                     
                        Luk. 4.28.29.Sathan stirred vp the Galileans, from a high steep hill to cast him downe headlong.Mark. 5.17 The Gadorens, to driue him out of their cost & coū
                        try.Luke. 9.53 The Samaritans, to deny him lodging.Iohn. 7.3.4 His owne brethren, to circumuent him.Acts. 4.27. Iewes and gentiles, to bandy at his death, and to conspire against the truth of his resurrection. So as I may well say,

                        Inter flagella dat filium: He gaue his sonne to the tormentors.
                     
                        And the child grewe and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisedome, and the grace of God was with him.
                     
                     Being now fallen into the dangerous daies of the world, wherein all the creatures of God are in a wofull declination, and there is nothing more geason amongst men, then growth in godlinesse: I am bold to moue your patience in your wonted piety, yet once more to beare with mine importunity, whilest I make the growth of Christ a president for your practise, and so returne againe to the honor of his Priesthood; in whom I told you out of this text, three things were of speciall note, to proue him perfect man, incarnate of the blessed Virgin Mary.
                     
                     First, his subiection to the law.
                     
                        Secondly, his subiection to persecution, and flight into Egypt.
                     Thirdly, his subiection to increase, in that he grew as a child in body, spirit, and grace, both with God and man. Of the two former I haue already spoken, now of the last, if God wil, wherin two things are respectiuely to be considered out of my text.
                     That as the child grew in our flesh, to make him a perfect man, so wee must growe in his faith,2 Pet. 3.18 to make vs perfect Christians: And that as our humanity was his, to make him the son of man, so his diuinity must be ours, to make vs by prerogatiue the sons of God.Iohn. 1.12. And as he through our humanity had feeling of our miseries, so we through his diuinity,2. Pet. 1.4. must haue feeling of his mercy. If the child increase, men may not decrease, or degenerate, the bowe from the

boale, the member from the body.
                     This child is the boale, building and body; we must grow vp with him till wee come to bee perfect men,Eph. 4.13. euen vnto the age of the fulnesse of Christ: otherwise we are but blasted bowes, pible stones, rotten members, neither fit for boale, building, or body.
                     In that he grew, it proued him a creature of God by generation, of a locall being, subiect to alteration, like vnto vs in all things, sin only excepted.
                     In that he grew, it ouerthoweth a creation of Christ, which some vrge without generation; like vnto that of Adam, who was made perfect at the first, as all other creatures were.
                     In that he grew in body, and waxed strong in spirit, it ouerthroweth the Papists monster of

transubstantiation, and all power of Priesthood, to make Christ of bread, or of any other matter or mettle; for if he make him, he either maketh him a man or a child: if a man at the first, how then did he grow from a child? if a child at the first, how then did he grow to a man? If Christ so made, was a child by generation, then the priest was his father; if by creation, then the priest was his God; but he is neither of both, but their breaden Christ by vsurpation, sitting in the holy places.
                     We say, Christ was made by the powerfull working of the holy ghost, by a perfect generation.
                     They say, they make him by words of consecration without any generation. We say, the child was incarnate of the virgin, and so grew. They say, Christ is impanate by them, and needeth no

growth. We say, body, bloud, and bone, grewe together in this Child. They tell vs nay: for the child they make and offer vp, is Incruentum sacrificium, an vnbloudy sacrifice. What should I say more? the child we preach, is quadratus homo, ful of fauour, and fairer then the sonnes of men.Psa. 45.2. The Sauiour they make hath no spirit, life, liking, or grace, ether with God▪ or gracious men.
                     The heauen of heauens is his habitation, whom we preach, and hee sitteth in glory, at the right hand of his father.
                     A poore box must couer and cary your Gods, crouding one another till they moule together, and fall to rottennesse.
                     But good Lord how long? how long shall euil men thus deceiue▪
                        2 Tim. 3.13 and be deceaued? how long shall the child Iesus be hindred in his

growth, by such vnkind stepdams
                           •
                         
                        Lurida terribiles miscent acconita nouercae? How long shal these vnnaturall mothers make all Nations drunke with the poysoned cup of their popish fornicatiō?Reu. 17.2.2 But leaue we the controuersie, and come we to his misery and much mercy, which he would effect by weakest means to the consciences of your Christian hearts, who heare mee this day; and now answere mee in soule, as in the sight of God.
                     Ballance the iudgments of our God, with the inundation of our sins, and whilest we see a growth in both, let vs grieue vnder the burthē; that sin hath increased, vertue hath decreased in vs, old mercies are wearing out, new iudgements are comming on.
                     The hand of God goeth forward aboue in this vnseasonable weather, nor is it much weakened in

his stroke of plague and pestilēce, God grant his hand may likewise go forward in the holy worke of our repentance, and that we may growe with the child Iesus, to the abating of these iudgements.
                     
                        Spes est, there is hope, for that the Lord vsually cōmeth to help, when our cause is most desperate, & when all other succours faile, then commeth the suckling child in weaknesse to worke our wonders: according to that of Esay, 8.4: Before the child shall haue knowledge to cry my father & my mother, he shall take away the riches of Damascus, and the spoile of Samaria. We haue stood much vppon our owne strength, power, and puissance, and what is that, but as Damascus and Samaria? All our good must bee wrought by the weakest meanes, and in the growth of a child, will be all our

gaine.
                     Lastly, Christ his humanity is cleared in this, that he did growe in strength, and increased in wisedome and fauour both with God and man; But his diuine and godly nature did not increase or waxed in this world, but filled all, & yet was fined from all;Eph. 4.10. it knewe all things, and was ignorant of nothing.
                     The idle Monks, from their dern Cels, haue much busied themselues about Christ, his miracles done in the daies of his infancy, when he was a Babe and a child.
                     They haue filled the world with many a fable of his deedes and doings in Egypt, Bethlem, & Nazareth; much like vnto that of S. Christopher the gyant, who shrunk vnder the burthen of this Babe (as they say) when he bare the world vpon his backe, like an Atlas; but

leaue we these idle drones, in their derne diuinity, and be we silent of that whereof the Scripture saith nothing but that of his persecution into Egypt:
                     Of his growth in stature, with much increase of wisdome, grace, and fauour, both with God, and man.
                     Moses buriall was vnknowne,Deut. 34.6 lest the people should commit idolatry vppon his graue: and the Lord would shut vp in like silence what Mary said, and the child did, in the dayes of his infancy, lest the world might bee too curious of that in Christ, which little concerned their saluation.
                     The aduertisement is good from the spirit of our God, The secret things belong to the Lorde our God,
                        Deu. 29.29 
                        but the thinges reuealed, belong vnto vs, and to our children for euer, that we may do all the workes of this law.
                        
And now to shut vp all, with the shower of his mercy: Exinaniuit se,
                        Phil. 2.7. He humbled himselfe, that we might be exalted.
                     He bowed the heauens, & took our flesh with our infirmities, that he might haue experience of our miseries: and though hee were a sonne, yet learned hee obedience by the things which he suffered.Heb. 5.8.9
                     
                     He suffered wearinesse that we might haue rest. He suffered hunger that we might bee filled. He suffered ignorance, that wee might haue knowledge.Mar. 13.32 Hee suffered death, that wee might haue life.
                     And he did endure a crowne of thorne, that we might be honoured with a Diademe of glory: his strange cryes, his salt teares, his deepe sighes, with many griefes, and groanings,Heb. 4.15 shew to our solace, that wee haue not an high Priest

which cannot bee touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sinne.
                     And it is heere foolishly obiected, that ignorance and these infirmities could not light vppon Christ, because they are the punishments of sin: the same may be sayd also of death.
                     But rather the Scripture affirmeth, that he fulfilled the office of a mediator, because what punishment soeuer we had deserued, hee tooke from vs, and layde vppon himselfe; yea euen hell it selfe, with all it horrour, though some say contrary:Psal. 18.4. neither do we think that all ignorance is a punishmēt of sinne.
                     For it cannot bee thought that Adā
                         whē he was yet perfect, knew all things: neither doe the Angels beare the punishment of sin,

when they are ignorant of anie thing.
                     They know much, but not all: for then were they as God; they are ignorant of the last day, so is Christ as the son of man, though not as the son of God. And therefore the speech of our Sauiour is indefinite:Mark. 13.32. 
                        But of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the angels which are in heauen, neither the son himselfe, saue the father. Where, as Ciril obserueth in his 9. booke of Treasures. Chap. 4. he saith, not, the holy Ghost is ignorant, but the Angels and the sonne: neither doth he say the sonne of God, but the sonne onely; that it might not be grieuous to the Angels & men, to be ignorant of the last day: therefore he saith, the son also is ignorant: and this is no derogation to his God-head, as he was God, he knewe it well; but as hee

was man, hee was ignorant of it.
                     The vse is good, that if Christ was not ashamed to confesse his ignorance as hee was man, wee should neuer so stand vpon our learning and skill, as to make our selues ignorant of nothing; for to be ignorant of that which the Lord will not reueale is, Docta ignorantia, a learned and a deuoute ignorance.
                     Christ grewe, we may not wither, Christ increased, wee may not stand at a stay; woe is me to tell: all states either stand at a stay, or else are in a woefull declination▪ The child waxed, we men waine, body & spirit did grow together in him; wee pamper the flesh, we pine the soule, & we are of no growth for godlinesse.
                     We might haue been, ere this, men of might, of ready resolution

and of ripe iudgement, strong as Sampson: But Dalila hath cut our haires, whereby we are become as weake as water, and the Philistines haue put out our eies,Iudg. 16.19 wee see nothing.
                     
                        2 Sam. 1.20.O tel it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistins reioice, lest the vncircūcised be glad.
                     Popery practiseth much, and hath mightily preuailed to make at, if not to put 
                           •
                        ut the eyes of piety; and our dalliance with the pleasures of this worlde, in the lap of her delights (as with Dalila) hath cut off our strength, & made vs carelesse of our God. O tell it not in Gath, &c. Caleb desired of Iosua that hee might possesse Hebron,
                        Iosu. 14.11. there to fight with the sons of Anakim, for that they were mightie men and gyants.
                     And he went with this resolution:

I am this day 85. yeares old, & yet am I as strong as I was when Moses sent me; as strong as I was then, so strong am I now, eyther for warre or for gouernment.
                     As was his name, so was his nature, Caleb is steele, he grewe in strength, with the child Iesus: the number of his yeares abated not the vigor of his spirit: he chose Hebrō, that he might cut off Anakim, we flee Hebron for feare of Anakim,
                        Ier. 9.3. we haue no courage for the truth. Too too carefull we are of our selues, and of our children, that our bodies and theirs be faireful, & fashionable, and yet al that grace is but grasse; but for their growth in godlinesse, piety, and knowledge of the Lord, for their strength in spirit, and aboundance of heauenly grace, we reckō little, and we regard or looke after no increase. If it please God in iudgment

to cut downe our children, friends or family, in the blade and greeuenesse of their yeares; good Lord how then we waile & weepe with Rachel, for that they are not? But when we see them dead in transgressions, blasted with sinne, shame and ryot, we neuer shrinke or sorrow at it; but rather solace our selues in the sight of their sinnes.
                     Answere me, O answere me, thou carelesse Christian, why art thou so faithlesse in their funerals? Quid corpus plangis, a quo recessit anima, & animā non plangis, a qua recessit Deus? Why doest thou weepe ouer the body, whereout the soule is gone, and mournest not ouer the soule whereout God is gone?
                     Fruits of the flesh must decrease, but fruits of the Spirit must increase; whereof reade the blessed

Apostle. Gal. 5.19. Rom. 12.1. &c.
                     
                        Agiselaus in his common wealth, tooke an account or reckoning both of the youth and aged, how they liued, and how they profited in the knowledge and practise of Philosophy: we christiās are carelesse of both in diuinity. And Tully told his sonne Marke, that now hee must needes abound in the rules and precepts of Philosophy, for that he had heard 
                           
                              •
                           ratippus a whole yeare, and that in Athens. Forty nine yeares we haue heard the Lord from the mountaine of his holinesse; and yet I feare, we lesse abound in knowledge, faith, and feeling of true godlines, then we did at the first.Reuel. 2.4. We haue left our first loue, our tree is blasted, godlinesse is gone, the child increased, we decrease. The Lord euen then put into our hands talēts of gold,Luk. 19.1. and bade vs occupy till he

came. Woe is me to tell, we haue lapt thē in our napkins, and returned him his owne with no aduantage.
                     The Israelites grew vnder the burthens of the Egyptians, like palme trees when they are pressed: our God hath deliuered vs from all both burthēs & bōdage of the Egyptian Pharaoh, & yet we wither.
                     The grace of God is a continual currēt, as Zachary saith, euer emptying it selfe from pipe to pipe, til it come to the poorest of his people:Chap. 4.12 we are as poore as euer the widdow was, mentioned in the 2. Kings, 4. and our Creditors are as cruell as euer hers were; but how we feele our selues filled with the oile of Gods grace, to keepe our soules from bondage as she did her son, I leaue it to each good conscience to consider of. And so for conclusion, I say with

the blessed Apostle, my deere brethren beloued, and longed for, Seeing yee know these things before, beware lest yee be also plucked away with the errour of the wicked,
                        2 Pet. 3.17 18. 
                        & fal frō your own stedfastnes; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: to him be glory both now and euermore. Amen Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  GREAT BRITTAINES GREAT DELIVERANCE, from the great danger of Popish Powder.
                  By way of meditation, vpon the late intended treason against the Kings most excellent Maiesty, the Queene, the Prince, and all their Royall Issue:
                  VVith the high Court of Parliament at VVestminster, there to haue beene blowne vp by the Popish Faction, the fift of Nouember, 1605. If God of his great mercy had not preuented the mischiefe.
                  The second Edition, corrected and enlarged by the Author.
                  
                     
                        Psal. 5. vers. 11.
                     
                     Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their owne imaginations: Cast them out in the multitude of their vngodlinesse, for they haue rebelled against thee.
                  
                  Printed at London for Arthur Iohnson. 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE HIGH AND Mightie Prince, Henry, by the grace of God, Prince of VVales, Duke of Cornewall, Earle of Chester, and Heire apparant of the Crowne and Diademe of this kingdome of great Brittaine, France, and Ireland.
                  
                     PArdon me (my gratious good Lord, & deare Prince) if out of a loyall heart I present vnto your Princelie viewe, what I conceiued vpon these late intended Treasons, in solace of my soule, after the Lord had made the land so glorious by deliuerance: I say, Deliuerance out of the hands of cruell enemies, who strook at our fairest tree, to haue cut it downe, both roote, bole, and branches, if the Lord had not beene propitious. And because your

excellency is the highest straine in all expectance, and the Heire apparant to that crowne and dignitie, whose vndoubted right, they haue so wronged by sinister thought, word, and worke, as in former ages the like was neuer deuised in any Nation, nor (by the grace of God) euer shall: I haue made bold in these fewe leaues, and lines, to lay open the danger, with the deliuerance; and the rather to your Highnesse: for that in feeling sort, you may iustly say, Quorum pars magna fui; I haue had my part of both: for man hath endangered me, but God hath deliuered mee. If in the deliuerie and proiect of this my speech, your highnesse shall finde lesse Method then Matter, I hope your clemency will beare with my passionate heart, more affected to grieue for them who deuised the mischiefe, and to ioy for our selues that missed it, then I can well expresse, without a

troubled stile. One saith wel, Vt luctus sic laetitiae loquūtur leues, ingentes stupent: As are our sorrowes, so is our solace: in their Mediocrities they speake, but in their extremities they are silent, and say nothing. What maruell then, if this our rauishment of so great ioy for the deliuery, and deepe griefe of horror because of the danger, either enioyne mee silence, or if I speake, make me to vtter my thoughts with such passion as little passeth of the Method, so it meete with matter, to expresse the meaning of a melting heart? Nescit ordinem amor, Loue is lawlesse: and a loue thus boyling, how can it but shed ouer, and keepe no current, other then in your Royal acceptance, euer seasoned with such heauenly sufferance, as is gracious both to GOD and man. Digna prorsus & rara virtus humilitas honorata; It is a rare vertue when humility is honoured,

and honour is humbled: the blaze whereof I saw in your Princely countenance, when at your Highnesse Court at Saint Iames, it pleased your excellency to licke vp the dust of the Sanctuarie there, (vpon the Lords day:) and after the Sermon ended, to yeeld such grace in publike to the Preacher, as that he might kisse your Princely hand: which euer sithence hath strucke so great an impression of exceeding loue, and loyaltie in my poore heart, as by the grace of God, I shal neuer leaue to pray for your highnesse, as I am most bounden: and also by all meanes studie, how either my loue or life may expresse the seruice and duty I owe for so gracious an aspect. Gold and siluer I haue none: such as I haue, I giue: In the name of Iesus Christ of Nazareth, be you established. Yet if it please your good grace to receiue this simple New-yeares gift, with the least acceptance,

and as the first fruit of my labours in your Highnesse seruice: It may be, I shall with Ianus, looke backward to the olde yeare, and out of my small store, offer a pearle of an higher price. Till when, and euer, I pray God safely to keepe your Royall person, to his glory, your owne comfort, and Englands ioy.
                  
                     
                        Your Graces Chaplaine, most humble at command. W. Leigh.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  Great Brittaines great deliuerance, from the great danger of Popish Powder.
                  
                     THE Papists of these our dayes, falsly called Catholickes (vnlesse it be in this, that they are vniuersally euill) haue euer since the first yeare of Elizabeth, our late Queene of famous memory, euen to this day, endeuoured the subuersion of their deare country, to set vp their Babel of al cōfusion: And haue sought by all possible and potent meanes, to make this Church and Country (the noblest

of Nations) an Akeldema, or fielde of bloud.
                  Witnesse all their Rebellions that haue beene raised since that time, either in England, Ireland, or Scotland, euer fed with the grosse Viands of Popish Buls, and Indulgences, fetched from Rome, by Saū
                        ders, Morton, Felton, Edmond Campion, and Robert Parsons, most, or all factious Priests and Iesuits; and since spred and divulged by the poysoned breath of thousands of their Sem
                           •
                        naries, vermine of the Church, and bane of Christendome.
                  These haue done much, and deuised more against th
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     tate then euer was thought vpon in elder times; and not so much by open hostilitie, as secret treasons excommunications, and confi
                        •
                     ca
                        ••
                     
                     ons, against the liues, soules, and goods, both of Prince and people,

who were not pleasing to their deuotions.
                  But of all that euer were, this last deuice of gunpowder to blow vp all, was most detestable, diuellish, and damnable; as wherein hell was shaken, with all it furies, to haue effected their thrice bloudy practise, with this fiery resolution, of their angry Goddesse Iuno: Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta mouebo: If God will not, the diuel shall.
                  Whereupon when I do thinke,2. King. 8.11.12. &c. it is with me, as it was with Elisha, when he looked vpon Hazael his person, and sawe in his countenance his intended crueltie, toward the Israel of God: hee looked vpon him stedfastly, till Hazael was ashamed, and the man of God wept, and Hazael sayd; Why weepeth my Lord? Whereunto the Prophet answered, Because I

know the euill that thou shalt doe to the children of Israel: for their strong Cities shalt thou set on fire, and their yong men shalt thou slay with the sword, and shalt dash their Infants against the stones, and rent in pieces their women with child. Then Hazael said; What is thy seruant a dog, that I should doe this great thing? And Elisha answered; The Lord hath shewed mee that thou shalt be King of Aram.
                  
                  Wee haue stedfastly looked vpon you, O yee Romish Aramites, more cruell then Hazael, and lesse compassionate then he; wee haue wept ouer your tyrannie as Elisha did, and yee are not ashamed, as Hazael was: the prints of your former cruelties haue pierced our hearts, but this last impression hath euen wounded our soules; wherein we see nothing but traces

of bloud, and (as it were) the black face, and countenance of confused desolation.
                  King, Queene, Prince, with all their Royall issue, the onely remaine of our religious hope; Councell, Peeres, and Prophets, the next support of our happie estate; graue Iudges, and learned at Lawes, with the Knights of the Parliament, and Commons there assembled, a third pillar bearing vp the kingdome; all these our honors had gone in a day. Woe vnto vs that euer wee sinned, to deserue the hazard of so great a iudgment.
                  Which once accomplished to their full, then had wee felt (to our wofull experience) how speedily, the mischiefe would haue spred it selfe into the body and bowels of al the kingdome; wherein nothing should haue bene heard, but rumbling

of shot, and crashing of armour, outcries of mothers, & yelling of children: nothing seene but sacking of citties, burning of townes, razing of Towers, and wasting of the land, with destruction of parts, and desolation of the whole: Quorum animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit. And yet as all this were nothing, or not enough, we should haue seene these miscreants neuer satisfied with the bloud of the Saints, till they had changed our religion for superstition, our knowledge for ignorance, our preaching for massing, our subiects for Rebels, our Councellors for conspirators: and so haue brought vpon vs and ours a most woefull Sabaoth, when both the lawes of God and man (which are the sinewes of a sanctified State) had beene dissolued, and silent.
                  
                     Now if any shall say, as Hazael did, Am I a dog, that I shall doe this great euill? I answere with Elisha, though in differing termes, yet in equall sense: The Lord hath tolde me, and experience hath made it good, that where Romish Hazael is King, there is crueltie.
                  
                     Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri. The first wals of Rome were laid in blood, and euer since they haue beene scemented with such morter, as is euident, by the ten cruell persecutions of Emperours, in the first 300. yeares after Christ, & by the cruelty of Popes euer sithence: wherein Emperors haue beene Dogges to bite, but Popes haue beene diuels to deuoure, and make hauocke of Gods Saints; nay worse then diuels, and more audacious, according to that, Non audet Stygius Pluto tētare, quod audet effrenis Monachus, plenaque

fraudis Anus. Vnbrideled Monke dares vndergoe, what diuell himselfe he dare not doe.
                  And here might I seasonably taxe the perpetuall hatred, and intollerable cruelty of that Romane Antichrist, toward the professors of Gods truth and Religion: of whom I may truly say, as the Prophet did of the Babilonians, that they are, and euer haue beene a people vile in name, and sore in affliction.
                  Graues are pregnant, and would bring foorth their dead to pleade their iust cause against their cruelties; and Abels innocent blood crieth vengeance out of the earth against these cursed Cainites: and from vnder the Altar, me thinke I heare the soules of them that are killed for the worde of God, and for the testimonie which they maintained, cry with a loud voice,

saying; How long Lord, which art holy and true, doest not thou iudge and auenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?
                  Of many, take these fewe for all: Et leonem ex vnguibus. Nor will I kallender any but moderne cruelties, and such as are yet fresh bleeding in the memories of men liuing, of this age and climate.
                  
                     Mariana tempora, Anglicana stigmata; Maries times, are English staines: and who gaue the dye, but that Romish & red Dragon, bloudy beast, and whore of Babilon? not satisfied with the blood of Martyrs then liuing, but ransacked the bones of their dead, and burned them, to glut vp their crueltie. Witnesseth the buried bones of Paulus Fagius, and Martin Bucer.
                  
                  
                     Andwarpe and Naples, can witnesse like crueltie vpon a mother Queene, & Prince of great hope;

whose Funerals as some say, were solemnized both in one moneth: at Naples with ioy, and at Andwarpe with griefe; done by that Sanguinarie Inquisition of Spaine, Romish red Dragon, and bloody beast of Babilon, whose Horses mouthes fume nothing but fire,Reuel. 9.17. smoke, and brimstone.
                  
                     Paris and France, do yet streame with the blood of the innocent, murthered and slaine in that cruel massacre, on Bartholomew daye, 1572. wherein the Shatilian was slaine, and diuers others, noble and excellent men, with all the flower of the Gentry, and Protestants in France, to the number as is thought of 100. thousand; all done and deuised by the two Cardinalls of Lorraine & Peluey, countenanced by the Queene mother of France,
                     See the mutabilitie of France, for the 
                           ••
                        mber. aided with her Guis
                        •
                     an faction, and executed by Mand
                           •
                        
                        let,
                     
with such crueltie, that out of the Court of the Gaile, called the Archbishops prison, the bloud was seene in the broad day-light, to the great abhorring and feare of many that beheld it, runne warme, and smoking into the streets of the Towne, & so downe into the Riuer of Scene.
                  
                  So great a dishonor, and so great an infamie to that Nation, as the most part of them are ashamed at this day of their owne Countrey, defiled with two most filthy spots of Poperie, falshood, and crueltie; of the which, whether hath beene the greater in that religion, it is hard to say.
                  I passe to speake of the Butcherie of Henry, late King of France, by two Iacobin Friars, with poisoned kniues in their handes, and Popish Bulles in their bosomes; which Guignard the Iesuite was

not ashamed to call an heroicall act, and a gift of the holy Ghost.
                  I say nothing of Parry his stab of death, and Lopas his Pill of poison, intended against Queene Eliza, of famous memory, by their owne confession, the best natured and qualified Queene, that euer liued in England: yet this may I say, that the dagger was sharpened, and the Pill was poysoned with the venome of Popery; else Benedetto Palmio, and Hannibal Codrotto, two factious Iesuites, had neuer beene traduced as bellowes to blow the fire, and kindle the coales of so great a mischiefe, with this warrantie, to enflame their hellish hearts: that the fact was lawfull and meritorious.
                  But if all these were clapt in one, they may not ballance with the waight and woe, of our late entended dismall day, if God of

his great mercie and wonted clemencie, had not put by the deadly blow.
                  For a day of death, like that of Doome, in ictu oculi, had put out the light of Englande, King, Queene, Prince, Peere, and people; All had perished, and all at once.
                  Seruants had ruled ouer vs, and none could haue deliuered vs,Lamen. 5.
                           •
                        . &c. out of their hands: our inheritance had beene turned to the strangers, and our houses, to the Aliants: our fathers had beene childlesse, and our children fatherlesse: In our English Rama had beene a voice heard, mourning and weeping, & great howling: Mothers weeping for their children, and children for their mothers; and neither had beene comforted, because they were not.
                  Wee should ere this, haue

drunken our water by measure, & eaten our bread by waight:Lamen. 5.4. &c. our skinne had beene blacke as an Ouen, because of the terrible famine: they had defiled our women in Sion, and our maides in the Cities of Iuda: our neckes ere this had beene vnder such persecution, as wee should haue been weary of ourliues, and neuer haue had rest when our soules had bin put into the hands of so viperous a generation, who would haue shut vp our liues in the dungeon, and cast a stone vpon vs:Lamen. 3.5.3. I say, so generall a iudgement, so speedie and so bloudy, had neuer beene in any kingdome.
                  Nay more, that deadly blow at once, and in Ictu oculi, ere this, had taken the elder from the gate, and the young men from their songs; it had silenced the Prophets, and dissolued the lawes,

both of God and the Nation: I say still, as formerly I haue said, so generall a iudgement, so speedie, and so bloudy, had neuer beene seene in any kingdome.
                  The Royall Pallace of Westminster, Cittie, and Sanctuarie there, built by the Noble Kings of this Land, & now honoured with the presence of as mighty a Monarch as euer went before, with as wise a Councell as euer England had, with as full a Senate of Nobles as euer sate there, with Bishops for learning, gifts, and graces, equalling (if not aboue) the reach of former times, and with Knights and Commons of the lower House of Parliament, in all respects sutable; this Royall Place and Presence, with all the Honor, Puissance, and Pietie thereof, to haue bin blowne vp at once, and in Ictu oculi: I say still, so generall

a iudgement, so speedie and so bloudie, had neuer beene seene in any kingdome.
                  O vnnaturall and degenerate Englishmen! how could you euer endure, to thirst after the destruction of so sacred a Senate, and sweet an assembly? how could you finde in your hearts to seeke the destruction of so benigne a prince and so Royall an issue, with the vtter subuersion of so glorious a state? by bringing into the bowels therof that Romish Apollyon,
                     Reu. 9.11. mentioned in the Reuelation; who where hee is victorious, staineth the earth with bloud, the ayre with blasphemie, and the heauens with his abominable and luxurious incontinencies.
                  The old worthy Romanes the two Decii, thought it the most heroicall thing that might bee, to vow themselues to death for their

Country, and euen to spend their liues in defence of their Altars, Temples; and Monuments of their Elders, but you seeke to see your Countrey bathing in the bloud of your Prince, Peeres, and Prophets, in the bloud of your parents, kinred, and friends; to see the cities, graues, and temples, of your predecessors, consumed with fire: to see your Records burned, your Actuaries destroyed, your virgins deflowred, your women rauished; and finally, to bring the noblest of Nations into a perpetuall slauery and seruitude, by as deadly and dolorous a blow, as euer was deuised, or done, in any kingdome, except in that kingdome of darknesse, where is nothing else but hell, horror, and all confusion.
                  Surely, surely, for this your entended mischiefe, and your former

murthers, the worme that neuer dieth, will gnaw your rebellious hearts, and the furies of hel which neuer giue rest, will haunt you in your habitations: where euer ye goe, they will speake in the voice of those Kings, Queenes, and Princes, with whose bloude you haue embrewed your trayterous hearts, and hands; as it is said Caesars ghost did to Brutus and Cassius, whom in the Senate they murdered with such crueltie.
                  O vnkinde Countrymen, and cruell Caitiffes; I haue beene your blisse, but you are now my bane: I haue beene your mirth, and you are now my moane: I haue beene your wealth and shadow in a florishing Empire, but you are now my want and woe: in a decaying estate, I haue preserued your wiues to your comfort, and your children to your great ioy; but y
                        •
                     
                     
haue made my wife husbandlesse, and my children fatherlesse, to their vnspeakable griefe. I clothed you with scarlet, and hanged ornaments of gold vpon your apparell, spotted with the purest Armines; but you haue couered my dead corps with a Carpet of greene grasse, diaperd with my dearest bloud. Finally, I haue kept your Daggers within your sheaths, and you haue sheathed them within my heart: Fie, fie; Flee, flee: And whither can you flee, but the Hagge will euer haunt you? nor can you euer fare well, till the Furie finde you faultlesse. Interim nos ad sepulehra vadimus: We sleepe in peace.
                  The Lord deliuer our Church and Country from all such Brutish and Cassian cruelties, so as neuer they bee able either to touch the Lords annointed, or doe his

Prophets any harme: and praised be the Lord which hath not now giuen vs a prey vnto their teeth, for our soule is escaped, euen as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is broken, and wee are deliuered.
                  Let this suffice for the danger deuised by men, but vndone by God; and if any would know by what men, and of what Religion; I answer, by Englishmen, and of the Popish Religion: Nor will I say that all of that faction were priuie to that practise, yet may I say, that none (for ought I yet heare) were of the conspiratie, but the popishly affected, and so branded: which when God hath the glorie, and the truth is knowne, then will it appeare how farre the humor hath spred it selfe into the body of al the kingdom, too much (God wot) decaied with that deadly

maladie.
                  Yet I hope well, in time, if such bee the fruits of Popish Religion, that fewe will gather Apples of that blasted tree, a tree of Sodome, faire in sight: but in truth, and touch, nothing but Cindars, and rottennesse; and of all the staines that euer Poperie had, I am perswaded that this is of the deepest die.
                  For in stead of blowing vp vs, they haue blowne vp themselues, and their Religion, with such a wound to their cause, as will neuer bee cured by any craft, being blotted with one of the horriblest Treasons, that euer was contriued, and such as God & Nature could neuer brooke to bee amongst the cruellest Cannibals, Turkes, or Scithians, that euer were. No maruell then, if Ciuill states abhorre it, Christian Nations detest it, Religious

Kings spit at it; & the Chronicles of all times record it, for such an Antichristian stratagem, Romish Monster, and Popish prodigie, as neuer might endure the sight of any Sunne, but was strangled in the birth, ere it could bee borne, and kild in the blade, ere it came to any growth.
                  Strangled (I say) and killed, by no other hand then the hand of God, and euen then when the deuisers deemed it done: for the Vault was readie, the Powder was laid, the traines were made, the match was prepared; Fercy was busie, and Faukes was bloudie in resolution to giue the charge, with a Crucifix about his neck, & haire about his loines, to tell you of what tribe he was; yet euē then, and in the rage of all this furie, the Lord said: Stay thy bloudy hand the sacrifice is not pleasing.
                  
                     For what hath England done, to deserue so heauy a iudgement? I am their God, they are my people, and for my great name sake, I will bee propitious, and make them glorious by deliuerance: The Sunneshine is theirs, and the gloomie day is yours: your designes are vpon your owne heads, your Daggers are turned vppon your selues, and sheathed in your owne bowels; yee haue beene fighters against God, 
                        •
                     ee will not be warned,Acts 5.39. that ye might bee armed: Wherefore now Discite iusticiam moniti non temnere diuos.
                  
                  Your owne Letters shall discouer the Treason, and the writing of your owne hands shall betray the mischiefe of your own hearts; I will fight against you with your owne weapons, and I will wearie you in your owne waies.
                  The old Florentines had a Bell,

which they called their Martynella, and they rung it euer before the siege of any Citie, to warne the besieeged, eyther to yeeld, or die. It was a mercie, to preuent a miserie. But your Martynella hath giuen no such warning to vs: and therein were you lesse mercifull then the Florentines; How be it, so it is, that your Bell hath rung your passing Peale, and the Lord hath turned your owne writings, to be death to you, and life to vs: blessed be his name therefore.
                  One saith well, Vbicunque fuerit prouidentia, frustrantur vniuersa cō
                        traria, Where the Lord hath a prouidence, all other encounters are defeated; If his prouidence be vpon the fire, it burneth not: If vpon the seas, they swell not: If vpon the windes, they blow not: If vpon the aire, it infecteth not: If vpon the Lions, they deuoure

not: If vpon the Sunne, it goeth not, but standeth still in Gibeon,
                     Iosua. 19.12. &c. and the Moone in the valley of A
                           •
                        alon: If, I say, his prouidence be vpon the graues, they detaine not, but yeelde to deliuer their dead, and Lazarus must come forth.
                  How then should any creature stirre to the subuersion of so blessed a State, whilest the prouidence of God houered ouer it, like the wings of the Cherubims ouer the mercie seate: yea his prouidence it was, to preuent vs with mercie and louing kindnesse, and ere euer wee praied, to be propitious, to thinke vpon vs, ere wee thought vppon him, to deliuer vs from the blow, before wee saw the danger. And to conclude, it was his mercifull prouidence to turne your praiers into our bosome, a crosse to that you meant it, ominous to you, but glorious to vs. I hope

(saith the Writer) God will giue you the grace to make good vse of it; and what better vse could euer haue beene made, either to Gods glorie, the good of his Church, the safetie of the King, Queene, and Prince, with all their Royall issue (I say) what better vse could euer the receiuer haue made to shew his loyaltie to his Prince, and loue to his Country, then by dealing as hee did? for which hee shall be honourable in this generation,Eccle. 44.8. &c. wel reported of in his time, and be of them that haue left their name behind them, so as his praise shall be spoken of.
                  I may conclude with Zacharie, and make good the Lords prouidence ouer this English Nation, to the great comfort of al the godly, and the astonishment of the wicked elsewhere in the worlde: Cease your attempts against the

Truth, for the hands of Zorobabel haue laide the foundaiton of this house, his hands shall finish it:Zach. 4.9. &c. and who seeing the stone of Tinne in the hands of Zorobabell, shall despise the day of the small things?
                  The house is the Church of God here in England, Zorobabell is our Christ here in England, hee hath laid the foundation in England, hee will also finish it in England: And who seeing the line in his hand to build by, which is his worde, in England, and the stone of Tinne to build vp, which is his people of England, dares euer despise the day of the small thinges? small to the siely and sensuall eye of flesh and bloud, despicable to the worldly Monarchies, and of small beginnings, yet precious to God, and now made glorious by deliuerance.Psal. 149.4. His prouidence is ouer all: And as the Prophet saith,

these seuen are the eyes of the Lord,Zach. 4.10 11. &c. that goe through the whole world; his graces still abound, and are a continuall current in his Church, like the two Oliue branches, emptying thēselues through the golden pipes into the gold.
                  Golden Prince, golden Peere, golden Prophet, golden people, fined from the drosse of sinne, and superstition, to bee pure mettall, and as it were spangles of gold in the holy Sanctuarie of your God: Emptie, O emptie your praises, pipe by pipe, from the highest Maiestie, euen to the lowest of the people, and giue God the glorie.
                  And thou virgin daughter London, write vpon thy walles, Peniel, and say the face of God was towards me:Gen. 32.30 Thou princely Pallace Westminster write vpon thy seats of Iustice, and high Court of Parliament, write vpon thy Vaults,

Cells, and Sepulchers; write vpon thy doores, posts, and passages, Beer-lahai-roi, and say; Thou God lookest on mee, Thou Emperiall seate of great Brittaine,
                     Gen. 16▪ 14 fragrant for thy flowers, and for thy Coller of Mirtles twisted with the Roses of both houses, dignified with the Diadem of Rubies, wreathed with the armes and supporters of both kingdome; (I say) thou great Brittaine, famous as at the first for thy old name, honorable now for thy new birth, and euer blessed for thy happy and so desired an vnion, whereby our former ruines are repaired, streames of bloude are stopped, old malice is worne out, and deadly fude is forgotten: for all which abundant great mercies, as also for this thy late deliuerance, write Ruhamah, Ruhamah, Mercy, Mercy.Hose. 2.1. Write vpon thy Ports, Holds, and Castles, Mercy.

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
Write vpon thy Towers, Townes, and Temples, Mercy. Write vpon thy fields, waies, and wastes, Mercie. Write vppon thy Corne, Coine, and Cattle, Mercy. Say, the Lord hath had mercy vpon vs, hee hath had pleasure in his people, and hath made the meeke glorious by deliuerance.Psal. 149.4.
                  
                  For all which Mercies say, God is my King of old,Psal. 74.13. the helpe that is done vpon the earth, hee doth it himselfe.
                  Say with Eliphas Iob his friend, but Great Brittains Prophet;Iob. 22.29.30. When others are cast downe, then shalt thou say, I am lifted vp, and God shall saue the humble person: for the innocent shall deliuer the Iland, and it shall be preserued by the purenesse of thine hands.
                  Innocent King, innocēt Queene, innocent Prince, Peere, Prophet, and people;Gen. 18.23 if not for fiftie sa
                        •
                     e,

yet for fortie: If not for fortie, yet for thirtie: If not for thirtie, yet for twentie: If not for twenty, yet for ten iust persons, the Lord hath put by this terrible blow of these wicked Shebaes: For should not the God of al the world do according to right?
                  Pleade thou our cause (O Lord) with them that striue with vs,Psal. 35.1.25. and fight thou against them that fight against vs: Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we haue it: neither let them say, We haue deuoured them. Which and if they had, then might wee haue said with the prophet;Esay 24.11.12. There is a crying in the streetes, all our ioy is darkened, the mirth of the world is gone away, in the Cittie is left desolation, the gate is striken with destruction.
                  Then might we haue sung with Dauid,
                     2. Sam. 19.19. &c. the mournfull Lamentation

hee vttered of his King to his Country; O noble Israell, hee is slaine vpon thy high places, how are thy mighty ouerthrowne! Saul and Ionathan, were louely in their liues, and at their deaths they were not diuided.
                  Then might wee haue said, that vpon the fift day of Nouember, we should neuer haue kept merrie feast, the day of the dissolution of so blessed an estate.
                  We might haue said indeede, that this yeere 1605. had beene a yeere of Reuolution, and that Tuesday were our dismall day, Criticall in Scotland, the fift of August, for Cowry his treason: and dismall in England, the fift of Nouember, for Faukes his designe, plotted by bloudy Papists, the bane of Christendome: and Dolmans dogges now warranted by a new doctrine to barke at Kings, and bite the

Lords annointed, if they be not pleasing to their deuotions.
                  And here a little pardon me in your patience, if in further detestation of Popish Impietie I let you see a strained Paradox, of that enormeous sect; who to make good their foule fault of parricide (for what are Kings but nursing fathers to the Church of GOD) haue brought in a doctrine to maintaine, that the Pope may depose, & subiects may depriue their kings both of life and liuelihood, if they faile in faith, or obedience to the Apostolike Sea: as may appeare by Dolman, Cymanca, Rosseus and Feu-ardentius, belowes aduanced to blow the fire of distempered spirits, & pointing at nothing more then woefull desolation, if by distraction of parts, and dissolution of the whole, they might bring into Christian states confusion,

the mother of ruine and all mischiefe. Surely if not to pray for a king be an vndoubted sinne, it is a greater sinne to thinke vpon the killing of a King; to commit the murther, and doe the deede, is double to that: but to traduce and draw the lawfulnesse thereof into a doctrine, thereby to poyson the posterity, is a treble sinne, and wel deserueth a double death.
                  But it is no wonder to see such workes flie abroad from Italienated spirits, who haue filled the world with the froth and furie of their owne madnesse: one is not ashamed to write a book in praise of Sodomy, another to put out proiects and pictures of shameful villany; and why not Dolman with the rest of his ranke and rabble, Authoritate Apostolica, to write books in praise of Parricide? and that not of meane men, but of

Magistrates, yea euen of Kings, and of the Lords annointed. But good Lord how long? and what will be the title of their next treatise? surely some Popish Pamphlet or other, of mentall reseruation, to maintaine a moderne mischiefe, by a Popish paradox; but we will leaue them to the lust of their extrauagant thoughts, and still follow the streame of the Lords many goodnesses and mercies towards vs: and as of the present, so with some memorie of precedent mercies; whereof we may say, that if euer any people vnder heauen felt the royall presence, the particular prouidence, or stable promise of their GOD in familiar sort, it is, and hath beene, this English Nation.
                  The time was when Tullie said of our pouerty to Trebatio: In Britannia nihil esse audio neque auri neque

argēti: I heare there is nothing in great Brittaine, either of gold or siluer; but were Tullie now aliue to see how the Lord hath enriched this Nation with his hidden treasures, and made it of more esteeme, then those hills of robbing Rome, he would cease to mocke at our pouerty, and admire our plenty, whose earth is an Eden, and Clowdes drop downe fatnesse.
                  The time was when a Pagan Poet plaide vpon our barbaritie, ioyned vs with Scythians, put vs out of the world, and said: Britanni diuisi ab orbe; but were he now aliue to see how God hath softned our hearts with the sweet rellish of his heauenly science: Quae Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros: he would cease to say, Orbis in vrbe, and thinke the whole world were within our continent.
                  
                     The time was when all our garments were tumbled in bloud and as in Troys destruction so in ours, bright burnings gaue vs light, when diuers conquests, sundry inuasions, the Barons warres, with the destruction of the houses of Yorke and Lancaster, and many a foughten field betweene the two Kingdomes rent our state, and wasted it with much fire, and wofull hostilitie: But now by the prouidence of almightie God, our Riuers runne milke, the houses with the Kingdome are both vnited in a peaceable Prince, and blessed Progenie, the only remaine of our religious hope.
                  Nor hath the Lord yet failed vs in his prouidence, but his mercie towards vs is stretched out stil; fortie foure yeares wee enioyed a peerelesse Prince, and a Maiden Queene, as was her name, so was

her nature ordained of GOD to giue vs his peace; for so is Elizabeth, euen Gods rest: But when her glasse was runne and done, she must to demurre with death. Then I say, euen then, if the Lord had failed vs in the right of succession, we might haue said as Be
                           •
                        seba did to Dauid, in the like extremitie: If thou Lord doe not appoint a successor, I and my sonne Solomon shall be reputed vile; I say, if any Romish Adonias had succeeded Elizabeth,
                     1. King. 1.20▪ 21. all the Protestants in the Land ere this had beene reputed vile, but thou Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, hast not failed vs: but appointed a man ouer the congregation, to lead vs out and in, that the congregation of the Lord, shoulde not bee as sheepe which haue no shepheard. And as Moses praied for Iosua, so doe we for thine annointed: O giue him

of thy glorie, that all the congregation of the children of Israell may obey.Num. 27.20.
                  
                  And so to come and close with the rest I ayme at, hauing passed by the Lords prouidence so many Iordens of dangers, and hauing enioyed so many merciful refreshings, like the sweet running waters of Shiloas that goe softly by Sion; hauing I say bene made blessed by so many deliuerances of old and now by this of new, the greatest of all: (endangered by men, but deliuered by God) now let vs ioyntly giue him the glory, who hath made vs so glorious by deliuerance.
                  Dread Soueraigne, deare Queene, sweet Prince and progenie, cast downe your Crownes at the feete of your Sauiour, and say; Wee haue beene saued by thee. Earles, Nobles, and Barons,

lay by your Robes of estate, with your ensignes of honour, praise him who hath preserued you, and say; We haue beene saued by thee. You officers in Court resigne vp your staues into the handes of God, and say, We haue beene supported by thee. Ye learned Bishops, and Fathers of the Church, slide from your Consistories, and say to the great Bishop of your soules, Wee haue beene kept by thee. Ye Knights, Squiers, and Gentry of the Land, vnarme your selues, and with your Crests lay your Lawrell in the lappe of Christ, and say, Wee haue conquered through thee. Thou high Court of Parliament, dissolue for a time, and say, O Angell of the great Counsell, we will consult with thee. And lastly, Thou Lord God of Gods, and preseruer of men, let there bee silence in heauen,

for the space of halfe an houre,Reue. 8.1. &c. till these Saints praises and praiers be offered vp.
                  So shall wee sing with a godly Ouation, and a grace in our hearts, Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes, & al Iudges of the world,Psal. 148.1▪ &c. yong men and maides, olde men, and babes, praise the name of the Lord; for his name onely is excellent, and his praise aboue heauen and earth: hee hath exalted the horne of his people; & his Saints shall praise him, euen the children of England, whom he loueth and hath made so glorious by deliuerance.
                  Praise the Lord, O virgin daughter London, Praise thy God O England, the glorie of Kingdomes, and beauty of all Europes honor,Psal. 147.2. &c. for he hath made fast the barres of thy gates, and hath blessed thy children within thee, hee hath set

peace in thy borders, and satisfied thee with the flower of wheat: Let the praise of God therefore bee euer in thy mouth, and a sharpe two edged sword in thy hands, to be auenged of the Heathenish Atheist,Psal. 149.6. &c. and to rebuke the bloudie Papist; such honor haue al Saints.
                  And now to speake to you Authors and Abettors of these desperate Treasons, Cease your Rebellions, lay by your bloudie designes, recount with your selues your former, both faithlesse, and fruitlesse attemptes, against the Lord, and against his annointed; Reckon with your selues your former losses, in the yeere 1588. whē the windes, the Seas, Rocks, and Shelues fought for vs, when the Riuer Kishon swept them away,Iudg. 5.20.21. from our English Coast, to Dingie Cush in Ireland, with a Beesome of such destruction to their great

                     Armadae
                     ▪ and frighting to our English Fugitiues abroad, & of their fauorites at home, as by the grace of God hath brought them out of all heart, out of all abilitie, and possibilitie euer to attēpt the like.
                  Learne what it is to fight with GOD, Wee must increase,Ioh. 3.30. Reu. 18.2. &c. Gen. 41.32. you must decrease; for Babilon is fallen, so told you by the Angel, as a thing already past and done, and doubled in speech like Pharaos dreame, to tell you of the certaintie, and expedition thereof. Cease, O cease to prouoke the Lord any longer, and ende your mallice against his Saints, ere malice end you; lest hee say vnto you, as he did vnto Mount Seir: Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast put the Israell of God to flight by the force of the sword in the time of their calamitie,Ezec▪ 35.56 when their iniquitie had an end: Therefore

as I liue, saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee vnto bloud: and bloud shall pursue thee: except thou hate bloud, euen bloud shall pursue thee.
                  God is witnesse, before whom I stand in the sight of men & Angels, that I speake not this to seeke the bloud of any, their bloud bee vppon themselues, and theirs, till they haue dried it vp by vnfained repentance: I wish the conuersion of all (viis & modis) by all good meanes. I wish our Lawes may still be written in milke, and that his Maiesties Royall heart, may continue a depth of rare mercie. I wish our preaching may sauour peace, and that the Magistrate may still strike with a trembling hand.
                  Yet giue me leaue to pray withall, that the rage of the enemy neuer grow so sower as to turne our

milke into bloud, mercy into iudgement, peace into war, sythes into swords, and them to be hallowed in the bloud one of another; which I feare, both must & will ensue, if they grow so great in the contempt of God, so grieuous to their Soueraigne, and so intollerable to the State: which if they doe, then be wise O ye Kings,Psal. 2.10. &c. Psa. 85.10 be learned, ye that be iudges of the earth. Let mercy and truth meet together in you: Let righteousnes and peace kisse each orher. Take the sword into your owne hands, and strike, O ye Worthies of Israell, for Zeba,
                     Iudg. 8.20.21. and Zalmana will neuer be killed by the weake hands of Iethro: for as the man is, so is his strength: The Minister may speake, & the inferior Magistrate may strike: and both with a trembling heart and hand, like the child Iethro: but assure your

selues, that Romish Zeba, and Popish Zalmana, will neuer die till you rise vp, and with your owne hands fall vpon them, as Gedeon did: for as the man is, so is his strength.
                  
                     Sit in vobis materna pietas & paterna seueritas: exhibete vos matres fouendo, patres corripiendo: extendite vbera, sed pro
                           •
                        ucite verbera: that is, Let there bee in you a motherly pitty▪ & a fatherly seueritie; shew your selues Mothers in cherishing, but Fathers in correcting: Lay out your brests, but withall draw forth your rods; and euer so Vt nec vigor sit rigor, nec mansuetudo dissoluta, as neither your force be rigorous, nor your forbearing re
                        •
                     chlesse: but say with the Orator in the temper of both: Natura me clementem fecit, Respub▪ seuerum postulat: sed neque natura, neque resp. me crudelem efficiet:

Nature hath made me mild, the Common weale requires I should be seuere: yet neither Nature nor the Common weale, shall euer make me cruell.
                  And if any man shall scandalize thee of crueltie in thy iust seueritie, and say, O where is loue! I answere: Ne timeas contra charitatem esse, si vnius scandalum multolum pace conpensaueris. Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas, Neuer feare the breach of charity, where with the scandall of one, ye may recompence the peace of many; for better it is that one die of many, then that the vnity of all be dissolued.
                  He was wise that sayd it,Pro. 25.4.5 and I hope the wisedome of this age wil approue it; Take the drosse from the siluer, and there shall proceed a vessell for the Finer: take away the wicked from the king, and his

throne shall bee established in righteousnesse: but beware of delayes, for they are dangerous: and in the execution of iustice, they are deadly dangerous: according to that; Because sentence against an euill worke is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to doe euill.Eccle. 8.11
                  
                  Witnesseth Ely his impunity towards his children, which lost him the Priesthood with his life, and brought vpon him and all Israel so heauy a iudgement as Phinehas wife dying,1 Sam. 4.21.22. left the memory thereof for all succeeding ages, when she bore a sonne, and called him Ichabod: that is, the glory is gone from Israel.
                  Haply Ely 
                     
                        •
                     pared them, for that they were his children, and out of his loue and fatherly affection towards them. Hee deemed it

lesse sinne to shew some indulgence; but one saith well: Iustitia non nouit p
                           •
                        trem, non nouit matrem, non nouit seipsum: Responde mihi Iudicium, dixit Nathan, & sic Dauid dedit iudicium contra seipsum: Dauid gaue iudgement against himselfe in a Plea of faith, and fact.2. Sam. 12.5. &c. How then may Princes spare others, if they be found guiltie in either of both? Hierome is more peremptorie in a case of like importance, When he saith; Licet paruulus ex collo pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine, & scissis vestibus vbera (quibus te nutriuit) mater ostendit, licet in limine pater iaceat, percalcatum perge patrem, & sicc
                           •
                        s 
                           •
                        culis ad vexillum cruc
                           •
                        s euola; solum pietatis genus est in h
                           •
                        cre esse crudelem Gladium tenet hostis, vt me perimat, & ego de matris lacrimis cogitabo? Propter Patrem, Christi militiam deseram, cui etiam sepulturam Christi causa non

debeo: which I may English thus▪ Although thy little Grandchilde clinge about thy necke, and say spare father; Although thy mother come forth, with spred haire, and torne raiment, and shew thee the pappes, where once thou sucked thy life, with her loue, & say; spare sonne: Although thy father cast himselfe downe vppon thy threshold to keepe thee in; treade vppon thy father, and with drie cheekes fly to the execution of thy profession. It is an onely point of godlinesse in this case to be cruel, and a soueraigne Pittie, to be pittilesse. Shall the enemie hold vp his hand to wound the Church? and shall I thinke vpon the teares of my mother? Shall I because of my father, cease to fight for my Christ? to whom I owe no buriall, for the cause of my Christ, but am to leaue the dead, to bury the dead,

whilest I follow him.
                  Wherevpon I may well say, that mercie may haue it excesse, and pittie may bee great crueltie: especially then, when it ouerfloweth to the good mans danger: mistake me not, I like of loue, but when it is tempred with feare, I like it better. I know it may doe much with the better sort, but not with the greater: according to that of Augustine, Meliores sunt quos dirigit amor, sed plures sunt quos corrigit timor: They be better whom loue directeth, but they be moe, whom feare correcteth: and therefore the temper of both is melodious in the eare of a sanctified and setled State.
                  And so to draw towards an end, and at last to conclude, out of that which hath beene spoken, both of former Popish cruelties, & out of our happy deliuerance from their

last entended Treasons, powdered with so many mischiefes: (I say) in caution of future perill by men of that generation; Take heede of Poperie, take heede of Papists, and tollerate neither their cause nor person: for if you tollerate the person, it will credit the cause: therefore to tollerate neither of both, in a state so sanctified as ours is, I hold it safest. What then is to be done, will some say? Away with both head, and taile: for Poperie kept vnder, will practise treason: if it get aloft, it will play the tyrant: therefore no way to haue it, is safest, and with least danger.
                  Further my aduice is, that you trust them as little as you may, and neuer conuerse with them but for their conuersion; and if after once or twice admonition they grow refractarie, Deuita, knowing that hee that is such is peruerted, and

sinneth, being damned of his own selfe: I say, trust them not, for they are faithlesse, and holde it for a doctrine, that fides non est seruanda cum Heriticis; in which Ranke, they reckon all the Protestants of this land to be.
                  Againe, take heede of them, for they are busie bodies, and walke inordinately amongst you: they are impatient of our profession, great peace, & much plenty; they compasse Sea and Land,Ma
                           •
                        . 23.15 to make one of their profession, and when hee is made, he becomes two-fold more the child of hell, then he was before.Reu. 14.11▪
                      These busie bodies take no rest; and to haue no rest day nor night, is proper to such as worship the beast and his Image, and to whomsoeuer receiueth the print of his name.
                  Beware of their blinde guides, Iesuites, Seminaries, and Seedsmen,

who to betray the truth, sow the tares of all treasons, at all times, and in all places. They are the Frogs of Egypt, that leape into kings chambers, and busily possesse the Courts of Princes, and mighty men, either to poison their hearts with the enchanted Cup of Romish superstition, or to bereaue them of their liues, if they fashion not to their deuotions: they leaue the Pulpits, they fly from the hornes of the altar, they disclaime the Oratories, and they become men of State, managing the Empire, and marshalling the common-weale of Princes: so as I may well say of these new Nouices, as was said of the Monkes of old;
                  
                     Quicquid agit Mundus, Monachus vult esse secundus; Where euer the world is one, the Romish Cleargy will be another.
                  Lastly, beware of mixture, and

shun the sinnes of Samaria, who were a mixed people, and of a confused Religion, tollerating both the persons and causes of Idolatry: As you may reade in the 2. of Kings. 17. vers. 24. for the persons. And vers. 23. for the cause. And the Iewes in the daies of Christ, thought it as greeuous an imputation as they could deuise, to lay vpon him, when they said: Say we not well,48. that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a diuell? And surely so it is; for to be of two religions, is to be of no religion: and to tollerate both, is to confound all, either in a kingdome, or in a conscience.
                  It is memorable, and it may go for a Caution to all Christian Kings and Princes, what is recorded in this case, of the vnconscionable offer of great Chan, the Tartarian Prince: of whom Lipsius reporteth,

that when Stephanus, that mightie King of Poland was dead;Lips
                           •
                        i mo
                        
                           ••
                        a & Exemp. Pol
                           •
                        t. 3. lib. 20.11. hee amongst others, sent his Legat to the assembly where the new Creation was, with these three motiues, to moue them to make him King.
                  1 First, that hee was mightie, and could bring myriads of horsemen out of his owne lands, either for the defence or inlarging of their kingdome of Poland.
                  
                  2 Secondly, that he was frugall, and could liue in time of famine, onely with horse flesh.
                  3 Thirdly, for the Religion, (wherof he heard there was much dispute among them) that he was indifferent, saying; Tuus pontifex meus pontifix esto: tuus Lutherus meus Lutherus esto: Your Pope, shall be my Pope: and your Luther, shal be my Luther. It was the Tartarians sinne, to be so indifferent, and so

readily to offer a tollerance: and it was the Polonians sinne, so long to suffer a mix
                        •
                     ure of many or moe religions then one in one Kingdome. And yet how euer, either feare or folly, moued the Polonians for the time to endure it, and to staine both their kingdome and conscience with so great a brand of wickednesse, (notwithstanding the Emperours large offers otherwise:) yet that of Religion was thought so idle, as they reiected it with laughter, saying; Ecce hominem paratum, omnia sacra & deos deserer eregnandi causa.
                  
                  But good Lord, how inestimably are wee beholding to thee our good God, for so great a mercy, as to giue vs a King in thy loue, when wee were a people not to be beloued! whose Princely relish sauouring true pietie, did so much distast either an alteration of the religion

wee haue: or a tolleration of any other, as in publique he did contest against both, in these wordes: I doe protest before God and his Angels, that I am so constant for the maintenance of the Religion publikely professed in England, as that I would spend my dearest blood in defence thereof, rather then the truth should bee ouerthrowne: And if I had ten times as many moe Kingdomes as I haue, I would dispend them all, for the safety and protection therof. And likewise, if I had any children, that should yeeld either to the Popish faith or faction, I desire of God, that I may rather see them brought to their graues before mee, that their shame may be buried in my life time, neuer to be spoken of in future ages,
                  
                  
                     Deut. 22.11.By the Law of God, no man may weare a coate of Linsey-wolsey: If I may not weare a garment so wouen vpon my backe, may I

weare a Religion so twisted within my heart? May Princes tollerate it in their Kingdomes? may fathers in their families? It were a greeuous imputation to either of both, and that which the aduersary himselfe would neuer yeelde vs: they will neither tollerate vs nor ours; and why should we endure either them or theirs? 
                        •
                     f the euil will not yeeld to the good, why should the good yeeld to the euill?
                  Doe but mention a tolleration of Religion in Rome, and Rome will be ragious: doe but speake of such a thing in Spaine, and it will be thought prodigious▪ 
                     France is fearefull in deliuering it Edicts, and whole Italy is resolute neuer to yeelde either to our cause or persons. Why should we then endure either them or theirs in their knowne Idolatry?
                  Were the Law of GOD on

foote, that Idolaters should die the death,Deut. 13.9. soone would the controuersie be determined, and motions for tollerations in Christian common-wealthes, would seldome be mentioned: but whilest wee demurre vpon the point, and stand a disputing, whether Papists bee Idolaters, whether Rome bee Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, his Religion Antichristian, and whether his louers and friendes be enemies to the State, and dangerous to a Kingly rule: (I say) whilest we demurre vpon such doubts, and are a debating the Question, Poperie will increase, and presume to gaine, if not an alteration, yet a tolleration: if not a tolleration, yet a conniuence: and if not that, yet such a perpetual respect, and fauour of some, as wil endanger the state of all, if wee endure it any longer.
                  
                     By the lawe of God, the Idolater (I say againe) must die the death. Exod. 22.20. And if an Israelite will goe in, and dally with a Midianite, before Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation: zealous Phinehas, with his speare in his hand, may enter the Tent, and thrust them through, that the plague may ceasse from Israell Numb. 25.6.
                  The Lord hath sworne that hee will warre with Amaleck, from generation to generation Exod. 17.
                  And amongst other ordinances laide downe by God for his people, this was vrged againe to bee remembred, thus: When the Lord hath giuen thee rest from all thine enemies, and the land for an Inheritance to possesse it, then shalt thou put out the remembrance of Amaleck from vnder heauen; forget it not. Deut. 25.19.
                  
                     And 400. yeares after, Saul was plagued for sparing Agag of the Amalekites,
                     1. Sam. 15. and not executing of that lawe.
                  The Lord (I can assure you) requireth a through conuersion from sin: and why not a through subuersion of sinne? The Tabernacle of GOD hath it Censer, Snuffers, and Beesome, to purge the Sanctuarie, and sweepe away the filth: and if you build, the rubbish must be remoued ere you lay the foundation: be the bodie neuer so healthfull, it will decay, without an euacuation: and vntill you take away the drosse from the siluer, ye can neuer make a vessell for the Finer.
                  It was Ieremies moane at Anathoth,
                     Ieremie 6.29.30. in the land of Beniamin: The bellowes are burned, the leade is consumed in the fire, the founder melteth in vaine; for the wicked

are not taken away. As if hee should say, All our labour is lost, and it is in vaine, that wee haue wearied our selues, with our praier and Preaching; if the wicked be not taken away.
                  And it is apparant this day by the baser sort of these audacious Rebels, too much emboldened by his Maiesties most gracious & godly clemency, which they haue abused; and whom if they had requited with such an vnkinde kisse of killing crueltie; yet might he haue said with the Orator, Non vitium nostrum, sed virtus nostra nos afflixit.
                  
                  Yea and to speake from a more powerfull spirit, his maiesty and Senate, being then about a worke of so great consequence, both for the good of the Church and common-weale; If that Court then had beene their coffin, and they

had dyed so doing, yet might they haue sayd in the silence of their soules; Happie is the seruant, whom when the master commeth he shall finde so doing.
                  And now if any man shal say, to blot out the memory of this so memorable a mischiefe: O it is done, let it die, sith the danger is past, and the deliuerance is now old: let that man know, Conuenit laudē Dei esse perpetuā, Seemely it is that the praise of God should bee perpetual. And if by this deliuerance, England then, England now, England euer be made blessed, we had neede rather to write it in Marble, with the point of an Adamant, to continue, then with the clawe of a Crow in the dust of obliuion, to be forgotten.
                  Whē the Lord turned againe the captiuity of Sion after 70. yeares bondage in Babylon, it is memorable 
                        〈1… pages missing〉
                     
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   