
      
         
            
            
            GREAT BRITAINES,
Great Deliuerance,
from the great danger of
Popish Powder By way of Meditation, vpon the late intended
Treason against the Kings most excellent Maiestie,
the Queene, the Prince, and
all their Royall issue: With the high Court of Parliament at Westminster, there
to haue bene Blowne vp by the Popish Faction, the
fift of Nouember, 1605. If God of his great
mercy had not preuented the
mischiefe.
            
               Psal. 5. vers. 11. Destroy thou them, O God, Let them perish through their owne imaginations:
Cast them out in the multitude of their vngodlines, for they haue
Rebelled against thee.
            LONDON
Printed for Arthur Iohnson, at the Signe of the white
Horse, ouer against the great North doore
of Paules. 1606.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH AND MIGHtie
Prince, Henry: by the grace of God, Prince
of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, Earle of Chester:
and Heire apparant of the Crowne and Diademe,
of this Kingdome of Great Brittaine,
France, and Ireland.
            
               PArdon me (my gratious good Lord,
and deare Prince) if out of a loyall heart
I present vnto your Princely viewe,
what I conceiued vpon these late intended
Treasons, in solace of my soule, after
the Lord had made the land so glorious
by deliuerance: I say Deliuerance
out of the hands of cruell enemies, who
strooke at our fairest tree, to haue cut it downe: both roote,
bole, and branches, if the Lord had not beene propitious.
And because your excellency is the highest straine in all
expectance, and Heire apparant to that Crowne and dignitie,
whose vndoubted right, they haue so wronged by sinister
thought, word, and worke, as in former ages the like
was neuer deuised in any Nation, nor (by the grace of God)
euer shall. I haue made bold in these fewe leaues, and lines,
to lay open the danger, with the deliuerance; and the rather
to your Highnesse: for that in feeling sort, you may iustly
say, Quorum pars magna fui; I haue had my part of both: for
man hath endangered me, but God hath diliuered me. If in
the deliuerie and proiect of this my speech, your Highnesse
shall find lesse Method, then Matter, I hope your clemency
will beare with my passionate heart, more affected to grieue
for them, who deuised the mischiefe, & to ioy for our selues
that missed it, then I can well expresse without a troubled
stile. One saith well, Vt luctus sic laetia, loquntur leues, ingentes
stupent. As are our sorrows, so is our-solace, in their mediocrities:
they speake, but in their extremities they are silent,

and say nothing. What maruell then: if this our rauishment
of so great ioy for the deliuerie, and deepe griefe of
horror because of the danger: either enioyne me silence, or
if I speake, make me to vtter my thoughts with such passion
as little passeth of the Method, so it meete with matter, to
expresse the meaning of a melting heart, Nescit ordinem amor,
Loue is lawlesse: and a loue thus boiling, how can it but
shed ouer, & keep no current, other then in your Royal acceptance,
euer seasoned with such heauenly sufferance, as is
gracious both to God & man: Digna prorsus & rara virtus,
humilitas honorata; It is a rare vertue when humilitie is honoured,
and honour is humbled: the blaze whereof I saw in
your Princely countenance, when at your Highnesse
Court at Saint Iames, it pleased your excellencie to licke 
                  •
               p
the dust of the Sanctuarie there, (vpon the Lords day:) and
after the Sermon ended, to yeeld such grace in publicke to
the Preacher, as that he might kisse your Princely hand:
which euer sithence hath strucke so great an impression of
exceeding loue, and loialtie in my poore heart, as by the
grace of God, I shall neuer leaue to pray for your Highnesse,
as I am most bounden: and also by all meanes, studie,
how either my loue, or life, may expresse the seruice and
dutie I owe for so gracious an aspect. Gold and siluer I
haue none: such as I haue, I giue: in the name of Iesus Christ
of Nazareth, be you established. Yet if it please your good
grace to receiue this simple New-yeares gift, with the least
acceptance, and as the first fruit of my labours in your highnesse
seruice: It may be I shall with Ianus, looke backward
to the old yeare, & out of my smal store, offer a pearle of an
higher price. Til when, and euer, I pray God safely to keepe
your Royall person, to his glory, your owne comfort▪ and
Englands ioy.
            
               Your Graces Chaplaine, most humble
at command:
W. Leigh.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Great Brittaines, Great Deliuerance, from
the great danger of Popish Powder
            
               THe Papists of these our daies, falsly
called Catholicks (vnles it be in this,
that they be vniuersally euil) haue
euer since the first yeare of Elizabeth,
our late Queene of famous
memory, euen to this day, endeuoured
the subuersiō of their dear
Country, to set vp their Babel of all confusion: And
haue sought by all possible and potent meanes to
make this Church & Country, (the noblest of Nations)
an Akeldema, or field of blood.
            Witnesse all their Rebellions that haue bene raised
since that time, either in England, Ireland, or Scotland,
euer fed with the grosse Viands of Popish Bull,
and Indulgence, fetched from Rome, by Saunders, Morton,
Felton, Edmond Campion, and Robert Parsons, most
or all factious Priests & Iesuites, and since spred and
divulged by the poysoned breath of thousandes of
their Seminaries, vermine of the Church, and bane
of Christendome.
            These haue done much, and deuised more against
the state then euer was thought vpon in elder

times, and not so much by open hostilitie, as secret
treasons, excommunications, & cōfiscations, against
the liues, soules and goods, both of Prince & people,
who were not pleasing to their deuotions.
            But of all that euer were, this last deuise of Gun-powder
to blowe vp all, was most detestable, diuellish,
& damnable, as wherin hel was shakē, with all it
furies, to haue effected their thrice bloudy practise,
with this firy resolution, of their angry Goddesse Iuno.
Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta mouebo.
            
            If God will not,2. King. 8. 11. 12. &c. the diuel shall. Wherevpon when
I do thinke, it is with me, as it was with Elisha, when
hee looked vpon Hazael his person, and sawe in his
countenance his entended crueltie toward the Israel
of God, he looked vpon him stedfastly, till Hazael
was ashamed, and the man of God wept, & Hazael
said; Why weepeth my Lord? Wherevnto the Prophet
answered, Because I know the euil that thou
shalt doe to the children of Israel: for their strong
Cities shalt thou set on fire, and their young men
shalt thou slaie with the sword, and shalt dash their
Infants against the stones, and rent in peeces their
women with childe. Then Hazael said; What is thy
seruant a dog, that I should do this great thing? And
Elisha answered; The Lord hath shewed mee that
thou shalt be King of Aram.
            
            We haue stedfastly looked vpon you, O ye Romish
Aramites, more cruell then Hazael, and lesse
compassionate then he, we haue wept ouer your tyrannie
as Elisha did, and ye are not ashamed, as Hazael
was, the prints of your former cruelties haue
pierced our hearts, but this last impression hath

euen wounded our soules, wherin we see nothing
but traces of blood, and (as it were) the blacke face,
and countenance of confused desolation.
            King, Queene, Prince, with all their Royall issue,
the onely remaine of our religious hope, Councel,
Peeres, and Prophets, the next support of our happie
estate, graue Iudges, and learned at Lawes, with
the Knights of the Parliament, and Commōs there
assembled, a third pillar bearing vp the kingdome,
all these our honors had gone in a day. Woe vnto vs
that euer we sinned, to deserue the hazard of so great
a iudgement.
            Which once accomplished to their full, then had
we felt (to our wofull experience) how speedily, the
mischief wold haue spred it self into the body & bowels
of all the kingdō, wherin nothing should haue
bene heard, but rumbling of shot, and chrashing of
armor, outcries of mothers, and yelling of children:
nothing seen but sacking of cities, burning of towns,
racing of towers, & wasting of the land, with destruction
of parts, and desolation of the whole: Quorum
animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit. And yet
as all this were nothing, or not enough, we should
haue seene these miscreants, neuer sated with the
bloud of the Saints, til they had changed our religiō
for superstition, our knowledge for ignorance, our
preaching for massiing, our subiects for Rebels, our
Councellors for conspirators, and so haue brought
vpō vs, and ours: A most wofull Sabaoth, whē both
the lawes of God & man (which are the sinewes of a
sanctified state) had bene dissolued, and silent.
            
               
Now if any shall say as Hazael did, Am I a dog,
that I shall do this great euil? I answere with Elisha,
though in differing tearmes, yet in equall sense, The
Lord hath told me, & experiēce hath made it good,
that where Romish Hazael is King, there is crueltie.
            
               Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri. The first
walles of Rome were laide in blood, and euer since
they haue bene symonted with such morter, as is
euident, by the ten cruel persecutions of Emperors,
in the first 300. yeares after Christ, and by the crueltie
of Popes euer sithence, wherein Emperors haue
bene Dogges to bite, but Popes haue bene diuels to
deuoure, and make hauocke of Gods Saints, nay
worse then diuels, and more audatious, according
to that, Non audet stigius Pluto tentare, quod audet effranis
Monachus, plenaque fraudis Anus. Vnbrideled
Monke dare vndergoe, what diuel himselfe hee
dare not do.
            And here might I seasonably taxe the perpetuall
hatred, and intollerable crueltie of that Roman Antichrist,
toward the professors of Gods truth and Religion,
of whom I may truly say, as the Prophet did
of the Babilonians, that they are and euer haue bene
a people vile in name, and sore in affliction.
            Graues are pregnant, and would bring foorth
their dead to plead their iust cause against their cruelties,
and Abels innocent blood crieth vengeance
out of the earth against these cursed Canites, & from
vnder the Altar, me think I heare the soules of them
that are killed for the word of God, and for the testimony

which they maintained, cry with a loude
voice, saying; How long Lord, which art holy and
true, doest not thou iudge and auenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth.
            Of many, take these fewe for all, Et leonem ex vnguibus,
Nor will I kallender any but moderne cruelties,
and such as are yet fresh bleeding in the memories
of men liuing, of this age and clymate.
            
               Mariana tempora, Anglicana stigmata. Maries times
are English staines, and who gaue the dye, but that
Romish red Dragon, bloudy beast, and whore of
Babylon? not sated with the blood of the Martyrs
then liuing, but ransacked the bones of their dead,
and burned them, to glut vp their crueltie. Witnesseth
the buried bones of Paulus Fagius, and Martin
Bucer.
            
            
               Andwarpe and Naples, can witnesse like crueltie
vpon a mother Queene, and Prince of great hope,
whose Funeralls as some say, were solemnized both
in one moneth. At Naples with ioy, and at Andwarpe
with griefe, done by that Sanguinary Inquisition of
Spaine,
               Reuel. 9. 17. Romish red Dragon, and bloody beast of
Babylon, whose Horses mouthes fume nothing but
fire, smoke, and brimstone.
            
               Paris and France, doe yer streame with the blood
of the innocent, murthered and slaine in that cruell
massacre on Bartholomew day, 1572. wherein the
Shatilian was slaine, and diuers others, noble & excellent
men, with all the flower of the Gentry, and
Protestants in France, to the number as is thought of
100. thousand, all done & deuised by the two Cardinals

of Lorraine,
               See the Mutabilitie of France, for the nū
                  ber. and Peluey, conntenanced by the
Queene mother of France, aided with her Guisian
faction, & executed by Mandolet, with such crueltie,
that out of the Court of the Gaile called the Archbishoppes
prison, the bloud was seene in the broade
day-light, to the great abhorring and feare, of many
that beheld it, runne warme, and smoking into the
streets of the Towne, and so downe into the Riuer
of Scene.
            
            So great a dishonor, and so great an infamie to
that nation, as the most part of them are ashamed at
this day of their owne Countrey, defiled with two
most filthy spots of Popery, falshood, and crueltie, of
the which, whether hath bene the greater in that religion,
it is hard to say.
            I passe, to speake of the Butchery of Henry, late
King of France, by two Iacobin Friars, with poisoned
kniues in their handes, and Popish Bull in their bosomes,
which Guignard the Iesuite was not ashamed
to call an heroicall act, and a gift of the holy Ghost.
            I say nothing of Parry his stab of death, & Lopas
his Pill of poyson, intended against Queene Eliza:
of famous memory, by their owne confession, the
best natured and quallified Queene, that euer liued
in England: yet this may I say, that the dagger was
sharpened, and the Pill was poysoned with the venome
of Popery, else Benedetto Palmio, and Hanniball
Codrotto, two factious Iesuites, had neuer bene traduced
as bellowes to blowe the fire, and kindle the
coales of so great a mischiefe, with this warrantie, to
enflame their hellish hearts, that the fact was lawfull
and meritorious.
            
               
But if all these were clapt in one, they may not
ballance with the waight & woe, of our late entented
dismall day, if God of his great mercy and wonted
clemency had not put by the deadly blow.
            For a day of death, like that of doome, in Ictu
oculi, had put out the light of Englande, King,
Queene, Prince, Peere, and people; All had perished,
and all at once.
            Seruants had ruled ouer vs:Lamen. 5. 8. &c. & none could haue
deliuered vs, out of their hands: our inheritance had
bene turned to the straungers, and our houses, to the
Aliants: our Fathers had beene childlesse, and our
children fatherlesse: In our English Rama, had bene
a voice heard mourning & weeping, and great howling:
Mothers weeping for their children, and children
for their mothers; and neither had bene comforted,
because they were not.
            We should ere this,Lamen. 5. 4. &c. haue drunken our water by
measure, and eaten our bread by waight, our skinne
had bene blacke as an Ouen, because of the terrible
famine, they had defiled our women in Sion, and
our maides in the Cities of Iuda, our neckes ere this
had bene vnder such persecution, as we should haue
bene weary of our liues, & neuer haue had rest when
our soules had bin put into the hands of so viperous
a generatiō, who would haue shut vp our liues in the
dungion,Lamen. 3. 5. 3. & cast a stone vp vs: I say so generall a iudgment,
so speedie and so bloudie, had neuer bene in
any kingdome.
            Nay more, that deadly blow at once, and in Ictu
oculi, ere this, had takē the elder from the gate, & the

yong men from their songs, it had silenced the Prophets,
and dissolued the lawes, both of God and the
Nation, I say still, as formerly I haue said, so general
a iudgement, so speedie, and so bloudie, had neuer
bene seene in any kingdome.
            The Royall Pallace of Westminster, Citie, and
Sanctuary there, built by the Noble Kings of this
Land, and now honoured with the presence of as
mighty a Monarch as euer went before, with as wise
a Councel as euer England had, with as full a Senate
of Nobles as euer satte there, with Bishops for learning,
gifts, and graces, equalling (if not aboue) the
reach of former times, and with Knights and Commons
of the lower House of Parliament, in all respects
sutable, this Royall Place and Presence, with
all the Honor, Puissance, & Pietie therof, to haue bin
blowne vp at once, and in Ictu oculi, I say still, so generall
a iudgement, so speedie & so bloudie, had neuer
bene seene in any kingdome.
            O vnnaturall and degenerate Englishmen, how
could you euer endure, to thirst after the destruction
of so sacred a Senate, and sweete an assembly?
how could you finde in your hearts to seeke the destruction
of so benigne a Prince, and so Royall an
issue, with the vtter subuersion of so glorious a state
                  •
               
by bringing into the bowels thereof that Romish
Apolion, mentioned in the Reuelation, who where
he is victorious,Reu. 9. 11. staineth the earth with bloud, the
aire with blasphemy, and the heauens with his abominable,
and luxurious incontinences.
            
               
The old worthy Romanes the two Decij, thought
it the most heroicall thing that might bee, to vowe
themselues to death for their Country, and euen to
spend their liues in defence of their Altars, Temples,
and Monuments, of their Elders, but you seeke to
see your Countrey bathing in the bloud of your
Prince, Peeres, and Prophets, in the bloud of your
parents, kindred, and friends, to see the cities, graues,
and temples, of your predecessors, consumed with
fire: to see your Records burned, your Actuaries
destroyed, your virgins deflowred, your women rauished,
and finally, to bring the noblest of Nations
to a perpetuall slauery, and seruitude, by as deadly
and dolorous a blow, as euer was deuised, or done,
in any kingdome, except in that kingdome of darknesse,
where is nothing else but hell, horror, and all
confusion.
            Surely, surely, for this your entended mischiefe,
and your former murthers, the worme that neuer
dieth, will gnaw your rebellious hearts, and the furies
of hell which neuer giue rest, will haunt you in
your habitations: where euer ye goe, they wil speak
in the voice of those Kings, Queenes, and Princes,
with whose bloud you haue embrewed your trayterous
hearts, and hands, as it is said Caesars ghost did
to Brutus and Cassius, whom in the Senate they murdered
with such crueltie.
            O vnkinde Countrymen, and cruell Caitiffes, I
haue bene your blesse, but you are now my bane: I
haue bene your mirth, and you are now my moane:
I haue bene your wealth and shadow in a florishing

Empire, but you are now my want and woe: in a
decaying estate, I haue preserued your wiues to
your comfort, and your children to your great ioy,
but ye haue made my wife husbandlesse, and my
children fatherlesse, to their vnspeakable griefe, I
cloathed you with scarlet, and hanged ornaments
of gold vpon your apparell, spotted with the purest
Armines, but you haue couered my dead corpes
with a Carpet of greene grasse, diaperd with my
dearest bloud. Finally, I haue kept your Daggers
within your sheathes, and you haue sheathed them
within my heart: Fie, fie: Flee, flee: And whither
can you flee, but the Hagge will euer haunt
you? nor can you euer fare well, till the Fury, finde
you faultlesse. Interim nos ad sepulchra vadimus. We
sleepe in peace.
            The Lord deliuer our Church & Country from
all such Brutish & Cassian cruelties, so as neuer they
be able either to touch the Lords annointed, or do
his Prophets any harme, and praised be the Lorde
which hath not now giuē vs a praie vnto their teeth,
for our soule is escaped, euē as a bird out of the snare
of the Fowler, the snare is brokē, & we are deliuered.
            Let this suffice for the danger deuised by men, but
vndone by God, and if any would know by what
men, and of what Religion) I answere, by Englishmen,
and of the Popish Religion: Nor will I say that
all of that faction were priuie to the practise, yet may
I say, that none (for ought I yet heare) were of the
conspiracie, but the popishly affected, & so branded,
which when God hath the glorie, and the truth is

knowne, then will it appeare how farre the humour
hath spred it self into the bodie of all the kingdom,
too much (God wot) decaied with that deadly maladie.
            Yet I hope well in time, if such be the fruits of popish
Religion, that fewe will gather Apples of that
blasted tree, a tree of Sodome▪
                faire in sight: but in
truth, and touch, nothing but Cindars, and rottennesse,
and of all the staines that euer Popery had, I
am perswaded that this is of the deepest die.
            For in stead of blowing vp vs, they haue blowne
vp themselues, & their Religion, with such a wound
to their Cause, as will neuer be cured by any craft,
being blotted with one of the horriblest Treasons,
that euer was contriued, and such as God & Nature
could neuer brooke to be amongst the cruellest Cannibals,
Turkes, or Scithians, that euer were. No maruell
then▪ if Ciuil states abhorre it, Christian Nations
detest it; Religious Kings spit at it; and the Cronicles
of all times record it: for such an Antichristian
stratagem, Romish Monster, and Popish prodigie,
as neuer might endure the sight of any Sunne,
but was strangeled in the birth, ere it could bee
borne, and kild in the blade, ere it came to any
growth.
            Strangled (I say) and killed, by no other hand
then the hand of God, and euen then when the deuisers
deemed it done, for the Vault was readie, the
Powder was laide, the traines were made, the match
was prepared; Percy was busie, & Faukes was bloudie
in resolution to giue the charge▪ with a Crucifix

about his necke, and haire about his loines, to tell
you of what Tribe he was, yet euen then, and in the
rage of all this fury, the Lord said, Staie thy bloudie
hand, the sacrifice is not pleasing.
            For what hath England done, to deserue so heauie
a iudgement? I am their God, they are my people,
and for my great name sake, I will be propitious,
and make them glorious by deliuerance: The Sunshine
is theirs, and the gloomie day is yours: your
designes are vpon your owne heads, your Daggers
are turned vpon your selues, and sheathed in your
owne bowels, ye haue bene fighters against God, ye
will not be warned,Acts 5. 39. that ye might be armed: Wherfore
now Discite iustitiam mouiti non temere diuos.
            
            Your owne Letters shall discouer the treason,
and the writing of your owne hands shall betray the
mischiefe of your owne hearts, I will fight against
you with your owne weapons, and I wil weary you
in your owne waies.
            The old Florentines had a Bell, which they called
their Martynella, and they rung it euer before the
siedge of any Citie, to warne the besieged, either to
yeeld, or die; It was a mercy, to preuent a miserie.
But your Martynella hath giuen no such warning to
vs: and therein were you lesse mercifull then the
Florentines; How be it, so it is, that your Bell hath
rung your passing Peale, and the Lord hath turned
your owne writings, to be death to you, and life to
vs, blessed be his name therefore.
            One saith well, Vbicun que fuerit prouidentia, frustrantur
Vniuersa contraria, Where the Lord hath a

prouidence, all other encounters are defeated; If his
prouidence be vpon the fire, it burneth not: If vpon
the seas, they swell not: If vpon the winds, they blow
not:Iosua. 10. 12. &c. If vpon the aire, it infecteth not: If vpon the
Lions, they deuoure not: If vpon the Sun, it goeth
not, but standeth stil in Gibeon, and the Moone in the
valley of Agelon: If I say, his prouidence be vpon the
graues, they detaine not, but yeeld to deliuer their
dead, and Lazarus must come forth.
            How then should any creature stirre to the subuersion
of so blessed a state, whilest the prouidence
of God houered ouer it, like the wings of the Cherubims
ouer the mercie seate: yea his prouidence it
was, to preuent vs with mercy and louing kindnesse,
and ere euer we praied to be propitious, to thinke
vppon vs, ere wee thought vppon him, to deliuer
vs from the blow, before we saw the danger. And to
conclude, it was his mercifull prouidence to turne
your praiers into our bosome, a crosse to that you
ment it, ominous to you, but giorious to vs. I hope
(saith the Writer) God will giue you the grace to
make good vse of it, and what better vse could euer
haue bene made, either to Gods glory, the good of
his Church, the safetie of the King, Queene, and
Prince, with all their Royall issue (I say) what better
vse could euer the receiuer haue made to shewe
his loyaltie to his Prince, and loue to his Country,
then by dealing as he did?Eccle. 44. 8. &c. for which he shall be honourable
in this generation, well reported of in his
time, and be of them that haue left their name behinde
them, so as his praise shall be spoken of.
            
               
I may conclude with Zachary, and make good
the Lords prouidence ouer this English Nation, to
the great comfort of all the godly, and the astonishment
of the wicked elsewhere in the world: Cease
your attempts against the Truth,Zach. 4. 9. &c. for the handes of
Zorobabel haue laide the foundation of this house,
his hands shall also finish it: & who seeing the stone
of Tinne in the hands of Zorobabel, shall despise the
daie of the small thing?
            The house is the church of God here in England,
Zorobabel is our Christ here in England, he hath laid
the foundation in England, hee will also finish it in
England: And who seeing the line in his hand to▪
build by, which is his word, in England, & the stone
of Tinne to build vp, which is his people of Englād,
dares euer despise the 
                  •
               ay of the small things? small
to the 
                  •
               e
                  •
               ly and sensuall eye of flesh and bloud, despicable
to the worldly monarchies, & of small beginnings,
Psal. 149. 4yet precious to God, and now made glorious
by deliuerance.Zach. 4. 10. 11. &c. His prouidēce is ouer all: And as the
Prophet saith, these seuen are the eyes of the Lord,
that goe through the whole world, his graces still abound,
and are a continuall current in his Church,
like the two Oliue branches, emptying themselues
through the golden pipes into the gold.
            Golden Prince, golden Peere, golden Prophet,
golden people, fined from the drosse of sin, & superstition,
to be pure mettall, and as it were spangles of
gold in the holy Sanctuary of your God: Emptie, ô
emptie your praises, pipe by pipe, from the highest
Maiestie, euen to the lowest of the people, and giue
God the glory.
            
               
And thou virgin daughter London, write vpō thy
walles Peniel,
               Gen. 32. 3
                     •
                  . and say the face of God was towards
me: Thou Princely Pallace Westminster, write vpō
thy seates of Iustice, and high Court of Parliament,
write vpon thy Vaults, Cells, and Sepulchers, write
vpon thy doores,Gen. 1
                     •
                  . 14 posts, and passages, Beer-lahai-roy
                  
                     •
                  ,
and say, Thou God lookest on me, thou Emperiall
seate of great Brittaine, fragrant for thy flowers,
and for thy Coller of Mirtles twisted with the Roses
of both houses, dignified with the Diadem of
Rubies, wreathed with the Armes and supporters
of both kingdomes, (I say) thou great Brittaine, famous
as at the first for thy olde name, honourable
now for thy new birth, and euer blessed for thy happie
and so desired an vnion, whereby our former ruines
are repaired, streames of bloud are stopped, old
mallice is worne out, and deadly fude is forgotten:
for all which abundant great mercy, as also for this
thy late deliuerance,Hose. 2. 1. write Ruhamah, Ruhamah, Mercy,
mercy. Write vpon thy Ports, Holds, & Castles,
Mercy. Write vpon thy Towers, Townes, & Temples,
Mercy. Write vpon thy fields, waies, & wastes,
Mercy. Write vpon thy Corne, Coine, and Cattle.
Mercy. Say the Lord hath had mercy vpon vs, he
hath had pleasure in his people,Psal. 149. 4 and hath made
the meeke glorious by deliuerance.
            For all which Mercies,Psal. 74. 13 say God is my King of
old, the helpe that is done vpon the earth, he doth it
himselfe.
            
               
Say with Elephus Iob his friend,Iob. 22. 29. 30. but Great Brittains
Prophet, when others are cast down, then shalt thou
say, I am lifted vp, and God shall saue the humble
person, for the innocent shall deliuer the Iland, and
it shall be preserued by the purenes of thine hands.
            Innocent King,Gen. 18. 23. &c. innocent Queene, innocent
Prince, Peere, Prophet, and people, If not for fiftie
sake, yet for fortie: If not for fortie, yet for thirtie:
If not for thirtie, yet for twentie: If not for twentie,
yet for ten iust persons, the Lorde hath put by this
terrible blowe of these wicked Shebaes: For should
not the God of all the world do according to right?
            Pleade thou our cause (O Lord) with them that
striue with vs,Psal. 35. 1. 25. and fight thou against them that fight
against vs: Let them not say in their hearts, there,
there, so would we haue it: Neither let them saie,
We haue deuoured them. Which and if they had,
then might we haue said with the Prophet,Esay 24. 11. 12. There is
a crying in the streetes, all our ioy is darkened, the
mirth of the world is gone away, in the Citie is left
desolation, the gate is strucken with destruction.
            Then might we haue sung with Dauid, that
mournfull Lamentation hee vttered of his King to
his Country;2. Sam. 1. 19. &c. O noble Israel, hee is slaine vpon thy
high places, how are thy mighty ouerthrowne, Saul
and Ionathan, were louely in their liues, and at their
deaths they were not diuided.
            Then might we haue said, that vpon the fift day
of Nouember, wee should neuer haue kept merry
feast, the day of the dissolution of so blessed an estate.
            
               
We might haue said indeed, that this yeare 1605.
had beene a yeare of Reuolution, and that Tuesday
were our dismall day Criticall in Scotland, the fift of
August, for Gowry his treason. And dismall in England,
the fift of Nouember, for Faukes his designe, plotted
by bloudie Papists, the bane of Christendome:
and Dolmans dogges now warranted by a new doctrine,
to barke at Kings, and bite the Lords annointed,
if they be not pleasing to their deuotions.
            Thus endaungered, and yet thus deliuered; endangered
by men, but deliuered by God: Now let
vs ioyntly giue him the glorie.
            Dread Soueraigne, deare Queene, sweet Prince
and progeny, cast downe your Crownes at the feete
of your Sauiour, and say, We haue bene saued by
thee. Earles, Nobles, & Barons, laie by your Robes
of state, with your ensignes of honor, praise him who
hath preserued you, and say, We haue beene saued
by thee. You Officers in Court, resigne vp your
staues into the hands of God, and say, We haue bene
supported by thee. Ye learned Bishops, and Fathers
of the Church, slide from your Consistories, and
say to the great Bishop of your soules, Wee haue
bene kept by thee. Ye Knights, Squiers, and Gentry
of the Land, vnarme your selues, and with your
Crests lay your Lawrel in the lap of Christ, and say,
Wee haue conquered through thee. Thou high
Court of Parliament, dissolue for a time, and say, O
Angell of the great Councell, We will consult with
thee. And lastly, Thou Lord God of Gods, and preseruer
of men, let there be silence in heauen, for the

space of halfe an houre,Reue. 8. 1, &c. till these Saints praises and
praiers be offered vp.
            So shall we sing with a godly Ouation, and a grace
in our hearts, Kings of the earth, & all people, Princes,
and all Iudges of the world, yong men, & maids,
old men,Psal. 148. 11. &c. and babes, praise the name of the Lord, for
his name onely is excellent, and his praise aboue
heauen and earth: hee hath exalted the horne
of his people, and his Saints shall praise him, euen
the children of England, whom he loueth, and hath
made so glorious by deliuerance.
            Praise the Lord, ô virgin daughter London, Praise
thy God ô England, the Glorie of Kingdomes, and
beautie of all Europes honor,Psal. 147. 12. &c. for he hath made fast the
barres of thy gates, and hath blessed thy children
within thee, hee hath set peace in thy borders, and
satisfied thee with the flower of wheat, Let the praise
of God therefore be euer in thy mouth, and a sharpe
two edged sword in thy hands, to be avenged of the
heathenish Atheist,Psal. 149. 6 &c. and to rebuke the bloudie Papist,
such honor haue all Saints.
            And now to speake to you Authors, and Abetters,
of these desperate Treasons, Cease your Rebellions,
laie by your bloudie designes, recoūt wc
                your selues;
your former, both faithlesse, and fruitlesse attempts,
against the Lord, and against his annointed; Recken
with your selues your former losses, in the year 1588.
whē the windes, the Seas, Rocks, & Shelues, fought
for vs,Iudg. 5. 20. 21. whē the Riuer Kishon swept them away, from
our English Coast, to Dingle Cush in Ireland, with a
Beesome of such destructiō to their great Armado, &

frighting to our English Fugitiues abroad, and of
their fauorites at home, as by the grace of God hath
brought them out of all heart, out of all abilitie, and
possibilitie euer to attempt the like.
            Learne what it is to fight with God, VVe must
encrease, you must decrease, for Babilon is fallen, so
told you by the Angel,Io. 3. 30. as a thing alreadie past and
done,Reue. 18. 2. &c. and doubled in speech like Phan
                     ••
                  s dreame, to
tell you of the certaintie and expedition thereof.
Cease,Gene. 41. 32. O cease to prouoke the Lord any longer, and
end your mallice against his Saints, ere mallice end
you, lest he say vnto you, as he did vnto Mount Seir,
Because thou hast had a perpetuall hatred,Ezec. 35. 56. and hast
put the Israel of God to flight by the force of the
sword in the time of their calamitie, when their iniquitie
had an end: Therfore as I liue, saith the Lord
God, I will prepare thee vnto bloud: and bloud shall
pursue thee: except thou hate blood, euen bloud
shall pursue thee.
            God is witnesse, before whom I stand in the
sight of men and Angels, that I speake not this to
seeke the bloud of any, their bloud be vpon themselues,
and theirs, till they haue dried it vp by vnfained
repentance: I wish the conuersion of all (vijs
& modis) by all good meanes. I wish our Lawes
may still bee written in milke, and that his Maiesties
Royall heart, may continue a depth of rare
mercy. I wish our preaching may sauour peace, and
that the Magistrate may still strike with a trembling
hand.
            
               
Yet giue me leaue to pray withall, that the rage
of the enemy neuer grow so sower as to turne our
milke into bloud, mercy into iudgement, peace into
warre, sythes into swords, and them to be hallowed
in the bloud one of another, which I feare, both
must and wil ensue, if they grow so great in the contempt
of God, so greeuous to their Soueraigne, and
so intollerable to the state: which if they doe,
then be wise ô ye Kings,Psal. 2. 10. &c. be learned, ye that be Iudges
of the earth: Let mercy and truth meete together
in you:Psal. 45. 10 Let righteousnes and peace kisse each
other.Iudg. 8. 20. 21. Take the sword into your owne hands, and
strike, ô ye Worthies of Israel, for Zeba and Zalmana
will neuer be killed by the weake hands of Iethro:
for as the man is, so is his strength: the Minister may
speake, and the inferior Magistrate may strike: and
both with a trembling heart and hand, like the child
Iethro: but assure your selues, that Romish Zeba, and
Popish Zalmana, will neuer die till you rise vp, and
with your own hands fall vpon them, as Gedeon did:
for as the man is, so is his strength.
            
               Sit in vobis materna pietas, & paterna seueritas: exhibite
vos matres fouendo, patres corripiendo: extendite vbera,
sed producite verbera. That is, Let there be in
you a motherly pittie, and a fatherly seueritie; shew
your selues Mothers in cherishing, but Fathers in
correcting: Laie out your brests, but withall draw
forth your rods, and euer so, Vt nec vigor, sit rigor,
nec mansuetudo dissoluta, as neither your force be rigorous,
nor your forbearing retchlesse, but say with
the Orator in the temper of both, Natur a me clementem
               
               fecit, Respub: seuerum postulat. sed neque natura, nequeresp:
me crudelem, efficiet: Nature hath made mee
mild, the commō-weale requires I should be seuere:
yet neither Nature, nor the common-weale, shall
euer make me cruell.
            And if any man shall scandilize thee of crueltie in
thy iust seueritie, & say, ô where is loue! I answer: Ne
timeas cōtra charitatē esse, sivnius scandalū multorūpace
cōpensaueris. Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas, Neuer
feare the breach of Charitie, where with the
scandall of one, yee may recompence the peace of
many; for better it is that one dye of many, then that
the vnitie of all should be dissolued.
            He was wise that said it,Prou. 25. 4. and I hope the wisedome
of this age will approue it, take the drosse from the
siluer, and there shall proceed a vessell for the Finer:
take away the wicked from the King, and his throne
shall be established in righteousnesse: but beware of
delaies, for they are dangerous: & in the executiō of
iustice they are deadly dangerous: according to that;Eccl. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an euill worke is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of
men is fully set in them to do euill.
            Witnesseth Ely, his impunitie towards his children,
which lost him the Priesthood with his life,1. Sam. 4. 21. 22. and
brought vpon him and all Israel so heauie a iudgement,
as Phinchas wife dying, left the memory thereof
for all succeeding ages, whē she bore a sonne, and
called him Iuabod: that is, the glory is gone frō 
               Israel.
            
            Happily Ely spared them, for that they were his
children, and out of his loue and fatherly affection

towardes them. He deemed it lesse sin to shew some
indulgence, but one saith well; Iustitia non nouit patrē,
non nouit maetrem, non nouit seipsum, Responde mihi Iuditium
dixit Nathan, & sic Dauid dedit inditium contra
seipsum. Dauid gaue iudgement against himselfe
in a Plea of faith,2. Sam. 12. 5. &c. and fact: How then may Princes
spare others, if they bee found guiltie in either of
both. Hierome is more peremptorie in a case of
like importance, When hee saith; Licet paruulus excollo
pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine, & scissis vestibus
Vbera (quibus tenutriuit) mater ostendit, licet inlimine
pater iaciat, percucatum perge patrem, & siuis oculis ad
vexillum crucis euola, solum pietatis genus est in hacre
esse crudelem, gladium tenet hostis, vt me perimat, &
ego de matris lacrimis cogitabo? propter Patrem: Christi
militiam deseram? cui etiam sepulturam christi cause
non debeo, which I may English thus; Although
thy little Grandchild cling about thy necke, and say
spare father; Although the mother come forth, with
spred haire, and torne raiment, and shewe thee the
pappes: where once thou-sucked thy life, with her
loue, and say; spare sonne: Although the father cast
himselfe downe vpon thy threshold to keepe them,
tread vpon thy father, and with dry cheekes fly to
the execution of thy profession. It is an onely point
of godlines in this case to be cruel, and a soueraigne
Pittie, to be pittilesse: Shall the enemie hold vp his
hand to Wound the Church? and shall I think vpon
the teares of my mother? shal I because of my father,
cease to fight for my Christ? to whom I owe no buriall,
for the cause of my Christ, but am to leaue the
dead, to burie the dead: whilest I followe him.
            
               
Whereupon I may wel say, that mercy may haue
it excesse, and pittie may be great crueltie: especially
then, when it ouerflow 
                  ••
               to the good mans danger:
mistake mee not, I like of loue, but when it is
tempred with feare, I like it better: I know it may do
much with the better sort, but not with the greater:
according to that of Augustine, Meliores sunt quos
dirigit Amor, sed plures sunt quos corrigit timor. They
be better whō loue directeth, but they be moe, whō
feare correcteth: and therfore the temper of both is
melodious in the eare of a sanctified & setled estate.
            And so to draw towards an end, and at last to conclude,
out of that which hath bene spoken, both of
former Popish cruelties, and out of our happie deliuerance
from their last entended treasons, powdered
with so many mischiefes: (I say) in caution of
future peril by mē of that generation; Take heed of
Poperie, take heed of Papists, and tollerate neither
their cause nor person: for if you tollerate the cause,
it will infect the person: if you tollerate the person, it
will credit the cause: therefore to tollerate neither of
both, in a state so sanctified as ours is, I hold it safest.
What then is to be done, will some say, away with
both head, and taile: for Poperie kept vnder, will
practise treason: if it get aloft, it will play the tyrant:
therefore no way to haue it, is safest, and with least
danger.
            Further my aduise is, that you trust them as little as
you may, & neuer cōuerse with thē but for their cō
               uersiō,
& if after once or twice admonitiō they grow
refractary Deuita, knowing yt
                he that is such is peruerted

and sinneth, being damned of his owne selfe: I
say trust them not, for they are faithlesse, and hold it
for a doctrine, that fides non 
                     •
                  st seruanda-cum Hereticis,
of which number, they reckon all the Protestants of
this land to be.
            Againe, take heede of them, for they are busie
bodies, and walke inordinately amongst you: they
are impatient of our profession, great peace, and
much plentie,Mat. 23. 15. they compasse Sea and land, to make
one of their owne profession, and when he is made,
he becomes two-fold more the child of hel, then he
was before.Reue. 14. 11. These busie bodies take no rest, and to
haue no rest day nor night, is proper to such as worship
the beast and his Image, and to whomsoeuer
receiueth the print of his name.
            Beware of their blind guides, Iesuits, Seminaries,
and Seedsmen, who to betray the truth, sowe the
tares of all treasons, at all times, and in all places; they
are the Frogs of Egypt, that leap into kings chambers,
& busily possesse the Courts of Princes, & mightie
men, either to poison their hearts with the enchaunted
Cup of Romish superstition, or to bereaue them
of their liues: if they fashion not to their deuotions,
they leaue the Pulpits, they flye from the hornes of
the Altar, they disclaime the Oratories, and they
become men of estate, managing the Empire, and
marshalling the common-weale of Princes: so as I
may well say of these new Nouices, as was said of the
Monks of old.
            
               Quicquid agit Mundus, Monachus vult esse secundus;
Where euer the world is one, the Romish Cleargie
will be another.
            
               
Lastly, beware of mixture, and shun the sinnes of
Samaria, who were a mixed people, and of a confused
Religion, tollerating both the persons and causes
of Idolatry: As you may reade in the 2. of Kings. 17.
vers. 24. for the persons. And vers. 23. for the cause.
And the Iewes in the daies of Christ, thought it as
greeuous an imputation as they could deuise,Ioel. 8. 48. to laie
vpon him, when they said, Say we not wel, that thou
arta Samaritan, and hast a diuel? And surely so it is,
for to be of two religions, is to be of no religion: and
to tollerate both, is to confound all, either in a kingdome,
or in a conscience.
            It is memorable, and it may goe for a Caution
to all Christian Kings and Princes, what is recorded
in this case, of the vnconscionable offer, of great
Chan, the Tartarian Prince, of whom Lipsius reporteth,
that when Stephanus, that mightie King of Poland
was dead; he amongst others, sent his Legat to
the assembly where the new Creatiō was, with these
three motiues, to moue them to make him King.
1. First, that he was mightie, and could bring myriads
of horsmen out of his owne lands, either for the
defence or inlarging of their kingdome of Poland.
2 Secondly,Lipsij monita & Exemp. that he was frugall, & could liue in time
of famine, onely with horse flesh. 3. Thirdly, for the
Religion, whereof he heard there was much dispute
among them,Polit. 3. lib. 20. 11. that he was indifferent, saying; Tuus
pontefex meus pontefex esto: tuus Lutherus meus Lutherus
esto. Your Pope, shall be my Pope: and your Luther,
shall be my Luther: It was the Tartarians sinne, to be
so indifferent, and so readily to offer a tollerance: and

it was the Polonians sinne, so long to suffer a
mixture of many or moe religiōs then one in a kingdome.
And yet how euer, either feare or folly, moued
the Polonians for the time to endure it, and to
staine their kingdome and conscience, with so great
a brand of wickednes, (notwithstanding the Emperours
large offers otherwise) yet that of Religiō was
thought so ydle, as they reiected it with laughter, saying;
Ecce hominem paratum, omnia sacra & deos deserere
regnandi causa.
            
            
               But good Lord, how inestimably are we beholding
to thee our good God, for so great a mercy, as to giue
vs a King in thy loue, when we were a people not to
be beloued: whose Princely relish sauoring true pietie:
did so much distast either an alteratiō of ye religiō
we haue: or a tolleratiō of any other, as in publique
he did cōtest against both, in these words. I doe protest
before God and his Angels, that I am so constant for the
maintenance of the Religion publikely professed in England,
as that I would spend my deerest blood in defence
thereof, Rather then the truth should bee ouer throwne:
And if I had ten times as many moe Kingdomes as I
haue, I would dispend them all, for the safetie and protection
thereof: And likewise, if I had any children,
that should yeelde either to the Popish faith or faction,
I desire of God, that I may rather see them brought to
their graues before me, that their shame may be buried in
my life time, neuer to bee spoken of in future ages.
            By the Lawe of GOD,Deut. 22. 11. no man may weare
a coate of Linsey-wolsey: If I may not weare a

garment so woven vppon my backe, may I
weare a Religion so twisted within my heart? May
Princes tollerate it in their Kingdomes? May fathers
in their families? It were a grieuous imputation
to either of both, and that which the aduersarie
himselfe would neuer yeelde vs, they will neither
tollerate vs nor ours, and why should wee endure
either them or theirs? If the euill will not
yeelde to the good, why should the good yeeld to
the euill?
            Doe but mention a tolleration of Religion in
Rome, and Rome will be ragious: doe but speake of
such a thing in Spaine, and it will be thought prodigious.
France is fearefull in deliuering it Edicts, and
whole Italy is resolute neuer to yeelde either to
our cause or persons. Why should wee then endure
either them or theirs in their knowne Idolatrie?
            Were the Law of God on foote,Deut. 13. 9. that Idolaters
should die the death, soone would the controuersie
be determined, and motions for tollerations in
Christian common-wealthes, would seldome bee
mentioned: but whilest we demurre vpon the point,
and stand a disputing whether Papists be Idolaters,
whether Rome bee Babilon, the Pope Antichrist, his
Religiō antichristiā, & whether his louers & friends
be enemies to the state, and dangerous to a Kingly
rule, (I say) whilest we demurre vpon such doubts,
and are a debating the Question, Poperie will encrease;
and presume to gaine, if not an alteration, yet
a tolleration: If not a tolleration, yet a connivence:

and if not that, yet such a personall respect, and fauour
of some, as will endanger the state of all, if wee
endure it any longer.
            By the lawe of God, the Idolater (I say againe)
must die the death. Exod. 22. 20. And if an Israelite
will goe in and dally with a Midianite before Moses,
and in the sight of all the congregation: zealous Phinehas,
with his speare in his hand, may enter the
Tent, and thrust them through, that the plague may
cease from Israel. Numbers. 25. 6.
            The Lord hath sworne that hee will warre with
Amaleck, from generation to generation. Exod. 17.
And amongst other ordinances laid down by God
for his people, this was vrged againe to be remembred,
thus. When the Lord hath giuen thee rest from
all thine enemies, and the land for an Inheritance to
possesse it, then shalt thou put out the remembrance
of Amaleck from vnder heauen, forget it not. Deut.
25. 19.
            And 400. yeares after Saule was plagued for sparing
Agag of the Amalekites,
               1. Sam. 15. and not executing of
that lawe.
            The Lord (I can assure you) requireth a through
conuersion from sin: And why not a through subuersion
of sinne? The Tabernacle of God hath it
Censer, Snuffers, & Beesome, to purge the Sanctuarie,
& sweepe away the filth: & if you build, the rubbish
must be remoued ere you lay the foundation, be
the body neuer so healthfull, it will decay, without
an euacuation: and vntill you take away the drosse
from the siluer, ye can neuer make a vessel for the Finer.
            
               
It was Ieremies moane at Anathoth, in the land of
Beniamin,
               Ieremy. 6. 29. 30. the bellowes are burned, the lead is consumed
in the fire, the founder melteth in vaine, for
the wicked are not taken away. As if he should say,
All our labour is lost, and it is in vaine, that we haue
wearied our selues, with our praier and Preaching;
if the wicked be not taken away.
            As it is apparant this day by the baser sort of these
audatious Rebels, too much emboldened by his
Maiesties most gracious and godly clemency, which
they haue abused, and whom if they had requited
with such an vnkinde kisse of killing crueltie; yet
might he haue said with the Orator, Non vitiū nostrū
sed virtus nostra nos afflixit.
            
            Yea & to speak frō a more powerfull spirit, his Mastie
and Senate, being then about a worke of so great
consequence, both for the good of the Church and
common-weale; If that Court then had bene their
coffin, and they had died so doing, yet might they
haue said in the silence of their soules; Happie is the
seruant, whom when the maister commeth, he shall
find so doing.
            The Lord direct all, as may be most for his glory,
though neuer so much to our triall; and keepe vs: O
keepe vs Lord from this ill kind of men:Psal. 12. 7. Roote out
Poperie from the hearts of this people, set vp thy
truth ô Lord, & saue thine annointed: In Sionis gaudium,
& Anglo papistarum luctum. Lord saue thine annointed,
that he & his,Isaiah. 32. 2. &c. may be still vnto vs and ours,
as an hiding place from the wind, and as a refuge for
the tempest: as riuers of water in a dry place, and as

the shadow of a great-Rock in a wearie land.
            Then shall our-land take vp this prouerbe against
the King of Locusts,
               Isaiah. 14. 4. and all his crawling Agents: It
shall say as Israel and Iuda did of their Luciferian
tyrant. How hath the oppressor ceased, & the goldthirstie
Babel rested? the Lord hath broken the rod
of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers, which
would haue smitten this Land in anger with a continuall
plague, and ruled our Nation in their wrath:
but thy pompe ô Lucifer is brought downe to the
graue, & the sound of thy vialls: The worme is spred
vnder thee, and the wormes couer thee, while England
is at rest and quiet, ô sing for ioy, and sing to the
praise of God in all your flockes and families, the
Psalme. 124.
            
               Dauidica sentit, qui Dauidica patitur; Sing it with
Dauids passion, and it will be Mel in ore, in aure melos,
in corde Iubiseus, honie to the mouth, musicke to the
eare, and a ioy to the heart.
            And thou Lord God almightie, maker of heauen
and earth, and preseruer of men, so blesse vs out of
Sion, as wee may see still the beautie of our Church
and Countrey, the Soueraigne safetie of our King,
Queene, Prince, and Royall progenie, the honourable
Bench of our worthy Councellors, Peeres, and
reuerend Fathers, with the subuersion of Antichrist,
and peace in this our Israel. Amen, Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   