
      
         
            
            
            A Crucifixe: OR, A Meditation vpon Repentance, and, The holie Passion.
            
            Written by CHRISTOPHER LEVER.
            Nocet indulgentia nobis.
            
            AT LONDON
            Printed by V. S. for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at the great south doore of Paules. 1607.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THe Writings of Men, as they are divers, so are they diuersly affected: yet euer in this inequalitie; that mo to the bad, than to the better be disposed. The reason is, corruption in Iudgement, dulnesse of Vnderstanding, blindenesse in Election, and a deprauednesse in the whole frame of Nature: whereof it commeth that many deceiue themselues in their choise, neglecting what is of neerest consideration, yet embrace that (with strong appetite,) which is most pernitious, and pestilent. I write not this to offend any one, but to remember all: for I had rather profite than please: and to giue friendly admonishment is better than silence. That great Apostle Saint Paule defired to knowe nothing but Iesus Christ, and him crucified, and dooth detest to reioyce in aught saue in the Crosse and sufferings of his Lorde and Maister. A lesson woorthy so great a Doctour, and worth our immitation. This is that one thing which is onely necessary; whereof, who hath true knowledge, hath all knowledge. This Crosse, this Crucifix, and this Passion I present thee (gentle Reader) not in their exact formes, (for that exceedes the power of Mortalitie) but in a little resemblance: wishing thee to reade, not for Mirth, but for Matter; and with holy Paul, faithfully to apply to thy soule, the glorie and reioycings of the holy Passion. Farewell.
         
         
            
            
            To the most reuerend father in God, RICHARD (by Diuine prouidence) Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitane of England.
            
            
               My singular good Lord and Patron.
            
            
               RIght Reuerend Lord) There is a disease in the Natures of men, most powerful in the vulgar and base multitude, to mis-interpret, (yet to interpret) all mens proceedings: Therefore the best cause doth most neede protection, lest otherwise, it receiue wrong in their iniurious and false constructions. For this particular; the frame and disposition is my owne, and therefore I willingly submitte that to a mercifull Iudgement. The Subject is not mine, but Gods, being extract from sacred Authorities; and therefore of it selfe able to resist all opposition. Here-hence I deriue my comfort, that the worthinesse of the Subject may giue supplyment to my verse, that wants woorth: and that in the opinion of good men, I shall be thought to haue done more, in giuing a religious matter this poore forme, than others (that with much industry and arte) haue painted the deformed face, of profane and idle Inuentions. The reasons (my good Lord) that moue me to this dedication, are these; First, the many testimonies I haue of your Lordships gratious respecting me, which earnestly presse me, to returne this little demonstration of thankes, where I haue receiued so much fauor. Next, your Lordships trauell, to continue

the body of Religion vnited; or rather, to make vp the rent and diuision. Wherein God hath made you prosperous▪ giuing you spirite to enterprise, and victory to finish a care of that religious importance. And because this Crucifix I present, is a Meditation of the sufferings and death of Christ, represented to vs in the ceremony of the Crosse, (in the holy vse whereof, your Lordshippe hath fortunately trauelled.) I haue therfore thought this Dedication (of right) to belong vnto your Grace, assuring my selfe, that where the Shadow, there the Substance; where the Figure, there the Trueth; and where the Crosse, there the Christ, shall finde gratious and glad acceptance. The which, with all respects of duety and humblenesse, I offer vnto your Lordship: beseeching God to giue you to support the reputation of Learning, (helpfull to both the States of Church and kingdom:) and after this life▪ perpetuity with the holy Angells and Saints.
            
               Your Graces in all duety and seruice.
CHRISTOPHER LEVER.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A CRVCIFIX, OR A Meditation vpon Repentance, and the holy Passion.
            
               
                  THere is a griefe, which farre exceedes the skill
               Of many learned spirits to define:
               And this deriued is from doing ill;
               Yet doth it rectifie, and much refine,
               The blurred Image, of that power diuine.
               Which in our purer soules, at our creation,
               Made vs beloued, and of estimation.
            
            
               Such is the terrour of a wounded Soule,
               Stretched vpon the painefull racke of try all,
               Presented with that blacke accusing scroule,
               The register of sinne, the Lords espiall;
               Authorities, that ne'r admit deniall.
               For when our Conscience doth display our sinne,
               Then true affected griefe, doth first beginne.
            
            
               It were in vaine, I labour'd to expresse,
               The just proportion, and the qualitie
               Of horred griefe: nor what amazednesse,
               Attends this court of lawe, and equitie,
               The Soule▪ must here implead impietie
               Against the Soule. The Iudge that here preceedeth
               Against himselfe, himselfe the law impleadeth.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   that haue 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   for your sinnes▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   bath▪d your 
                     〈◊〉
                   in your repentan
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  eares▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   when your reformation first beginnes
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ur 
                     〈◊〉
                   harts, tell me what feares▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   horrednesse, remorsefull conscience beares:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   rather, doe confesse, as doth my verse;
               There is no power of words, can it reherse.
            
            
               The Father Iudge, that sits his Sonne to trie▪
               
               Cannot resist the torture of his minde:
               When he denounceth sentence (thou must die)
               Examples may be fitted to this kinde:
               But to resemble ours no like we finde:
               For here the Iudge, that giues the dying word,
               Condemnes himselfe: euen of his owne accord.
            
            
               
               The eye, condemnes the sight, the sight the eye;
               The power of speach, our much offending tongue:
               All qualities, their instruments envie;
               And say, their aptnesse to offence and wrong,
               Impels the sence; the weaker by the strong,
               Is capt
                     •…
                  uate: And sinne that hath the reynes;
               The common wealth in man, to sinne constraines.
            
            
               Like as that Bull, Perillus fram'd of brasse;
               To be a wond'rous instrument of woe:
               Within whose wombe, when the offendor was▪
               
               In brutish sort, he as a Bull did lowe,
               The organe of the beast, did cause it so.
               Right so our bodies, beastlie by our sinne;
               Doe bestifie the soule, that liues within.
            
            
               In opposition to this formall plea;
               The body, to the soule againe replyeth.
               The state of sinne, hath his estate in thee:
               Our soules without, sinne in our bodies dyeth;
               Nature to liuelesse things, all act denyeth.
               For as the Ayre, is mooued with the wind,
               So are our subject bodies, by the mind.
            
            
               Who euer yet accus'd the murderous knife,
               As actor of that horrible effect:
               The agent, must be somewhat that hath life.
               It is the liuing hand, that doth direct
               The mortall blade: Nor is there had respect,
               To instrumentall causes of offending:
               For in the agent, guilt hath his depending.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   of ho
                     •…
                   contention:
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉
                   himselfe diuide.
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   which jud
                     •…
                  ment hath descride:
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   the conscience anght can hide▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   state of wretchednesse doth dwell
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   them my verse 
                     〈◊〉
                   tell
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   cup of pleasure;
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   in nothing but expending▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉
                   fall his treasure▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   shame with much commending,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   your 
                     〈◊〉
                   liues▪ shall ne're haue ending.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   remembrance of repentant teares▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   inlarge your feares.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                  , where death is eminent▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   bubble of this life, cannot secure thee:
               There is an after-state, most permanent,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   in honour, o
                     •…
                   in death assure thee▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   to honour, now to die mure thee:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   he, whose life will mortifie no sinne,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   finde the gate of Mercie shut to him.
            
            
               Thy life is truely by resemblance said
               To be a shadowe: shado
                     •…
                  es from the Sun
               Deriued be: for sure there is no shade,
               Where 
                     
                        •…
                     haebus doth not guild our horizon:
               So we may say, the pride of life is done,
               When as the Sunne of Glorie shall denie,
               To giue the beames of his resplendent Eye.
            
            
               
               Change your corrupt opinions of delight.
               Sometime delight in teares, in bitter woe.
               To launce and cut, oft heales the wounded Knight.
               If we to heauen; we must as Pilgrims goe:
               It is a Christian pleasure to doe so:
               For he that doth appoint al times for pleasure:
               To his repentance can admit no leisure.
            
            
               Were it, that he that over-loads the sense,
               In surffetting the much forbidden tree,
               Could with the habite of his sinnes dispense,
               Whilst he might view his soules enormitie,
               And with the judgement of Discretions eie,
               Sentence his vaine, exorbitant delight,
               And all his pleasures that doe sinne invite.
            
            
               Then might he see the powre of much offending,
               The little powre of him that so offendeth:
               That warre of soules that never can have ending,
               Where sinne in opposition, death intendeth,
               To him that (prodigall) in sinne expendeth
               His very selfe, and like a traitor thiefe,
               In his owne treason makes himselfe a chiefe.
            
            
               Who ever sawe a Generall in Armes,
               Whenas the day determineth the warre;
               To be imprison'd in the treacherous armes
               Of such as neerest to his person are,
               Vnto himselfe may make a like compare:
               For such are we when our delightfull pleasure,
               Vpon our soules (like traitors) make a seasure.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   like, as when the man reported borned,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   chased by the seruants of his pleasure;
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  hen by monstrous sinne, we are deformed,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   finde offensiue, what we held our treasure▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ame affects (like dogges) doe make a seasure
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  on our soules: and like the hunted Deere▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   our loud yelping sinnes, we stand in feere
            
            
               When we can truelie, thus suruey our sinne,
               Our state of death, our death in our offending:
               The warre intestine, that we haue within;
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   infinite of griefe, thereof depending;
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   little power we haue, of our amending.
               When this we know, we know our stat's not well:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   doth the sicke, that heares his passing bell.
            
            
               
                  
                     •…
                  hen in the ballance of suspence, we say,
               Our little hope, the mountaine of our care.
               The scale of seare, by much doth ouer sway▪
               
               Our owne assurances, that nothings are:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   makes, this sicke man of his health despaire
               And were it not, that grace did vs auaile,
               We should not stand, the triall of the scaile.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   had I neede▪ a new to inuocate,
               That all sufficient, to direct my verse:
               My selfe much sinfull, cannot sinne relate.
               Whose largenesse dis
                     •…
                  inables my rehearse.
               O giue me power to beautifie the hearse
               Of Penitence: which then is said to die.
               When men liue most in their securitie.
            
            
               
               If euer thing of greatest admiration,
               Could draw the vulgar eye, for to admire it;
               Then let the subject, of this poore relation,
               Be powerfull in their harts, that shall desire it:
               It is a heauenly act, for to inspire it.
               For though our penance, be a crabbed tree,
               Yet is the fruit, of rare proprietie.
            
            
               Suppose thy selfe, araigned at the barre,
               Laden with fetters of thine owne offence;
               Thy crying sinnes, thy aduerse Lawyers are▪
               
               The Diuell, doth his action here commence,
               And for his witnesse, hath thy conscience.
               Suppose this court-house, in thy soule to be,
               Thy selfe to plead, thy selfe to answere thee.
            
            
               That part, which best remembers, plaies the Clarke,
               Who, when the word of silence, is proclaim'd.
               Intreates, that great assemblie well to marke
               Th'inditement of that Traytor: who asham'd,
               Stands at the barre of death: and being nam'd,
               Holdes vp his guilty hand. The Clarke then readeth,
               Those treasons, which my vtterance much exceedeth▪
               
            
            
               Yet as I may: This I suppose was said.
               (Traytor) thou art more ancient in thy sinne
               Then in thy dayes: It cannot be denai'd,
               But when thy first fore-father did beginne,
               To listen to his wifes solliciting:
               Thou in him then, didst with him giue consent,
               To further, that his treasonous intent.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   Patents did produce thee,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   thy soule more blinde.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   to execuse thee.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  n 
                     •…
                  y minde:
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   bodie, can
                     •…
                  t thou finde
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   Fathers generation.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   not giues it limitation.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   thy 
                     〈◊〉
                  , so doe thy sinnes augment:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , they ou
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  trip thy time in forwardnesse.
               
                  
                     •…
                  or long before thy childishnes be spent,
               Thou wil
                     •…
                   be aged in thy wickednesse.
               Childrens first aptitudes doe well expresse,
               Whether the progresse of their liues intend▪
               
               For like beginning, often hath like end.
            
            
               
               What though thy Parents in their prouidence,
               Couet to better thee, by education.
               Yet is their trauell, but a vaine expence,
               Thy time of youth, will giue an intimation,
               How much vnlike thou art thy first creation.
               Neuer could any precepts from the wise,
               Er'e rectifie a mans infirmities.
            
            
               Thus dost thou make gradation in thy sinne,
               Till thou attaine, the vtmost step of life;
               And like Report, when it doth first beginne,
               Is then the least; yet when it waxeth rife,
               It doth inlarge it selfe: So sinfull life,
               By custome, and continuance in sinning,
               Men are much worse, then in their first beginning.
            
            
               For when their time doth bring them to that state,
               That makes a man; the strength of nature then,
               Doth their injurious parts corroborate.
               The length of yeares, doth euer giue to man,
               Habilitie in wickednesse: and whan
               Depraued man, hath meanes of doing ill,
               He makes them serue, his much depraued will.
            
            
               Like as the neighbour Riuers to the Sea
               Cannot support vpon their shallowe backes;
               The huge proportion of an Argosie,
               
               Because the little currant water lackes:
               Yet when the Sea (that all resistance wrackes)
               Shall fill the emptie channell with his Tide;
               
               The greatest vessell with great ease may glide.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   are the first vnable yeares of man,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  eake 
                     •…
                  n moouing the huge bulke of sinne:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   when the 
                     •…
                  ide of yeares approcheth, than
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   more impudent in their committing;
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ceiue the mightiest vessels in,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ha
                     •…
                  bour, in their little streame of Time,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  nd, shall cut their little twine.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   a wondrous taske to make relation,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   grieuance in particular:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  nes of bloud, of wanton agitation.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  inite in euerie kind they are,
               Hearts may suppose; but Speech cannot declare.
               For when that man in Nature is most strong;
               He is most powrefull then, in doing wrong.
            
            
               See, if thy time grow aged with expence
               Of many yeares, be lesse in thy offending:
               T
                     •…
                  me is the giuer of experience:
               Old age will preach to youth, their youthes offending;
               
                  
                     •…
                  et 
                     •…
                  outhful sinnes, in youth haue not their ending.
               For when old men are stepping to their graue,
               
                  
                     •…
                  n youthfull sinning, strong desires they haue.
            
            
               
                  
                     •…
                  ld age, (though colde) can neuer quench the fire
               Of 
                     •…
                  full youth▪ Though age be in thy flesh,
               Yet in thy thoughts, thou dost maintaine desire;
               
                  
                     •…
                  hich in performance, thou canst not expresse,
               By reason of thy bodies 
                     •…
                  eeblenesse.
               Yet know, that when Desire is in thy hart,
               It is as much, as thou an Actor wert.
            
            
               
               This thy Desire, incends the noble parts
               Of reason, and blunteth thy discretion.
               Makes a combustion in obdurate harts;
               Depraues the sence, and blindeth thy election;
               Dries vp repentant teares, (thy soules refection:)
               And sure that man, eternallie shall die,
               Whose hart will not giue water to his eye.
            
            
               Thus (O thou worst of Gods creation!)
               Thou dost reuerse the ordinance of Nature.
               All other Beings, keepe their ordination;
               
                  Obedience liues, in euery other creature;
               Only in him, that hath the goodliest feature.
               He that from God, most blessings hath deriued;
               He against God, most treasons hath conspired.
            
            
               Search the immence circumference of Earth,
               The many wondrous mouers in the Sea,
               The Element of Ayre, wherein we breathe,
               The regiment of Heauen, and sympathy
               Of moouing orbs, and starrie deitie.
               In all the parts of this circumference,
               No one like man in dis-obedience.
            
            
               If God command the Seas to patience:
               They still their noise, and smooth their horred face.
               Let him againe be mooued to offence,
               The raging wind, the swelling billowes chase,
               Vnto the daring rockes that doe imbrace
               Their violence, and there doth bound the Seas,
               Vntill a calme, their troubles do
                     •…
                   appease.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ommand 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  owdes 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  eare the Avr
                     •…
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   in the 
                     •…
                  lade.
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  Time 
                  
                     •…
                  o giue the yeare▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  oures for her distinction.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊◊〉
                   Time well ordered were▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  nd Time to Ordination;
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   vnto Gods creation▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  at Times 
                     •…
                  nconstant are;
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   they are more certaine farre.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  he Sea-deuouring 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  oore 
                     
                        •…
                     onas to the shoare.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   Eg
                     •…
                  pt doe auaile▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   warre: 
                     •…
                  ay more.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   chamber 
                     •…
                  ore,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   person, of a mightie King,
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   they had a warranting.
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                   his sacred breath on 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   countervaile the Angels that erst fell:
               
                  
                     •…
                  ing thy soule of his Eternitie;
               Yet thrust thy betters, for lesse sinne to hell.
               Did God refuse those Spirits that excell
               In holy worship; to partake thy nature?
               He did, for thy redemption this (O Traytor)
            
            
               
               If God command let this, or that be done;
               The little Creature, that is bid to doe it,
               Is wondrous quicke in execution:
               Yet vnto man, that hath the power of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               And in the verie place of God doth sit:
               Is giuen a law, the which was neuer kept▪
               
               By any one: (The sonne of God except.)
               
            
            
               Now to inlarge the huge proportion
               Of thy offence (Traytor) thou didst attempt,
               That treason, which exceedes comparison:
               Whose horrour did bed imme the Element:
               Both Heauen, and Earth in wonders did consent;
               To point it out, for greatest admiration,
               Which farre exceeds the power of all relation.
            
            
               This little out of much. God to redeeme,
               The lost integritie, of man his creature.
               Did his defaced Image so esteeme,
               As he inuested in thy humane nature,
               The sonne of God, (the word that made each creature▪)
               Eternall Christ, who in his flesh did merit,
               Eternall life, for each beleeuing spirit.
            
            
               See how thou dost returne him recompence.
               Thou gau'st him pouertie, that was a King:
               Iustice it selfe, yet blam'st his innocence:
               Great majestie, had but the poore attending:
               Nor had thy treasons, in these wrongs their ending.
               But didst with (wicked Iewes) conspire his death,
               That first did giue, thy first fore-father breath.
            
            
               
               And didst preuaile. Thy tongue did sentence him;
               Thy hands (O wicked instruments of sinne)
               Bound the most free, and tortur'd euery lim;
               Nor so content, labour'd to vex within
               His sacred Spirit, with most vile profaning▪
               
               And last, to please the spirits of thine eye,
               The Holy Lambe betweene two thieues must die.
            
            
               Was this enough, or art thou still more great
               In thy offence? O still thou dost augment it:
               Thou want'st not sinne, but I wordes to repeate
               Thy infinites: thy soule cannot repent it;
               For thy delight is euer to augment it:
               Witnes thy horred customary swearing,
               Wherewith each day his body thou art tearing.
            
            
               
                  
                     •…
                   Here let the Conscience make some little pause,
               Whilst that the Diuell that intends the plea,
               Produceth witnesses to prooue the cause;
               Shewing large recordes of impietie:
               And with a wondrous skill in Sophistrie,
               Giues a proportion to his sinful state,
               Hoping to make the Guiltie desperate.
            
            
               Hoping to make the guiltie desperate,
               He doth augment the Volume of our sinning▪
               
               Adding inlargements to exasperate
               The Iudge, that stands to sentence our offending:
               Euen from our birth, to these our dayes of ending:
               It hath, and will be still his exercise,
               Against our happy beings to deuise.
            
            
               
               Witnes his enuy at our first creation,
               That did deny our state of innocence,
               A little breathing rest from his temptation;
               But with the smoothed face of faire pretence,
               Suggests into our natures his offence:
               Witnesse againe this time of our repentance,
               How he incites the Iudge to cruell sentence.
            
            
               No one (howeuer skilfull in his Art)
               Can giue more fit expressing formes to sinne.
               He makes a priuie search within the heart,
               And laies that open that was hid within;
               And with most curious workemanship doth limme
               The vgly formes of our impieties;
               And then presents their Terror to our eyes.
            
            
               This, and much more this enemy of man,
               And then the Conscience doth againe beginne;
               
                  (Traitor) how ist, this thy accuser can
               Produce these certaine probats of thy sinne?
               Speake; canst thou cleare thy selfe of guilt heerein?
               Thy cause will not finde help in thy deniall,
               For in the court of Conscience is thy triall.
            
            
               Like vnto him, that in a mighty throng,
               Labors to hasten to some businesse,
               With heate and sweate doth vex himselfe among
               The moouing multitude, that in their prease,
               Arrest his haste, and stoppe his forwardnesse:
               So doe our sighes, our teares and griefe within,
               Arrest our words, when gladly we beginne.
            
            
               
               (Alas) what else, but Guiltie in the weake!
               Which he, in broken accents would relate.
               He puffes it out in sighes, that cannot speake;
               The sence of sinne, doth so exanimate
               Those faculties, that on our soules doe wa
                     •…
                  te:
               As with a lawfull warrant, may be said,
               In this estate, our verie Soules are dead.
            
            
               Our Reason then, demandes our guilty spirit;
               What for our justice we can argument.
               Whether our Iudgement correspond our merit;
               Or if corruption in this parlament,
               Heere in thy owne free holde, we doe conuent;
               The Iurie, that doth sentence what thou art,
               Are of thy Tenants, dwelling in thy hart.
            
            
               Nothing (alas) the Conscience can replie.
               Nothing (indeede) nor no word to excuse vs;
               Where all is Sinne, ther's no integrity.
               All our cuasions, in this case refuse vs;
               Nothing in vs can comfort, but accuse vs.
               For he that hath this sorrowe in his flesh;
               Hath least of joy, and most of heauinesse.
            
            
               The judgement then (for judgement must be just)
               Denounceth sentence of our condemnation.
               (Traytor) thy flesh, shall first returne to dust;
               The matter of thy first formation)
               Thy Soule transported to that strange vexation;
               Whereas the soules of damned doe beginne,
               To act the wofull parts, of tragike Sinne.
            
            
               
               This is the law, and thus we sentence thee;
               Our power extends not for to moderate;
               This court is Iustice, Iustice we decree.
               The seate of Mercie is predominate,
               And liues in God, he that did first create
               Thy Innocence. To him thou must appeale,
               If this our Condemnation thou repeale.
            
            
               ¶ Thus farre the law: Now to our worke of Grace▪
                  
               
               To wash this Moore, and giue him Innocence:
               To reobtaine what 
                     •…
                  r'st he did deface,
               Integritie: To cancell his offence;
               In lieu whereof, to giue him excellence.
               To make that glorious, that before was base,
               (Doubt those that list) It is a worke of Grace.
               
            
            
               
                  Of Grace? me thinkes th'vngratious will replie,
               I rob Gods Image of his worthinesse.
               Because to sinfull man, I doe denie
               Innatiue power to worke his holinesse.
               Will you (O men deceiued) I confesse,
               That God will share the glory of his name,
               With men, whose liues dishonour most the same.
            
            
               Here is the world, in great dispute and strife,
               Whence doth arise, this penitentiall fire,
               That purgeth Sinne, and rectifies the life:
               Some will deriue it from their owne desire:
               Others, the blessed Angels doe inspire;
               Some in their Friends, and many in thei
                     •…
                   
                  Priest,
               
               In Errour all, in God they place it least.
            
            
               
               When God did giue a spirit vnto man,
               He did but gently breathe it in his flesh;
               But if he once call backe the same againe,
               He speaketh loud, and groanes with painefulnesse:
               
                  Adam, and Lazarus doe well expresse,
               That he that can determine sinfull strife;
               Doth somewhat more, than he that gaue vs life.
            
            
               It were a well deseruing worke, to set
               The kirnell that's a prisoner in the shell:
               Which, when the Sunne doth warme, and heauens wet▪
               
               Receiues a life, yet doth it farre excell
               In curious Art, to make that prosper well;
               Which (like a rotten member of a tree)
               For fewell fit, for Grace vnfit to be.
            
            
               Me thinkes, I heare the Mutinous repine.
               And blame the hard construction of my verse:
               And to the fire condemne this discipline;
               Or wish, my recantation to reuerse,
               The doome I censure on this vniuerse.
               (Thus these repiners) God should wrong our spirits▪
               
               To giue vs Lawes, and take away our Mer
                        •…
                     .
               
            
            
               Thus may your earthen vessels make dispute,
               And aske, how hap the Potter made them so?
               Doe you not know, that God is absolute?
               Nor giues a reason for his doing so?
               Shall God out of himselfe for wisedome goe?
               How dar'st thou argument with God maintaine,
               Being his vassaile, he thy Soueraigne.
            
            
               
               To make it best, thus I compare thy state,
               Like to a Candle wel prepar'd for light:
               The reason why I thus doe estimate,
               Is thy Discourse, thy Reason, and Delight
               To vnderstand each cause. But the insight
               Of that which neerest doth concerne thy minde▪
               
               In this thou art not sighted, but starke blinde.
            
            
               Suppose ten thousand torches in the night;
               They giue no light, vnlesse thou giue them fire:
               So is thy Reason, and thy judgements sight,
               Blind in it selfe, if Grace giue not desire.
               It is the God of Spirits, doth inspire
               Thy soule with Grace, For when it wants his light;
               It is more blacke, then is the darkest night.
            
            
               And in this darknesse, this our man of Griefe,
               (Whome we proportion,) is in darknesse placed.
               Within himselfe, he cannot finde reliefe:
               What was diuine in him, is now defaced.
               The pride of his deseruings is disgraced.
               And when a man in this dejection lyeth,
               He wastes in sorrow, and in teares he dyeth.
            
            
               And die he must, in his repentant teares,
               Before his reformation can beginne:
               The graine must die, before the blade appeares;
               New birth is gotten, by the death of sinne.
               When thus we die, our spirit that's within,
               Respires a life, that neuer will deceiue vs;
               Whereof, nor Time, nor Enuie can berea
                     •…
                  e vs.
            
            
               
               The manner how: This out of my report.
               When man is ouer-charged with the cares
               Arising from the judgement of this Court.
               And when within himselfe he much despaires;
               The holy Spirit, then to him repaires,
               And brings his Pardon, testified good,
               With this subscription (IESVS) writ in blood.
            
            
               And thus (this sacred instrument of life)
               (Poore man) we adde not, to thy heauinesse:
               To speake in anger or contentious strife;
               Mercie is only in our businesse:
               We come to make thy much affliction lesse;
               And offer to thy neere despairing spirit,
               The Psalme of Mercie. Mercie best can merit.
            
            
               See here, the booke of Life I do present thee;
               Wherein thou maist Eternitie behold.
               Thou canst not reade, before thou first repent thee;
               Thou must first know thy selfe, and then vnfold
               This sacred volume. The Spirit then doth hold,
               Before the darkned spirits of his eye,
               A Representment, how his Christ did die.
            
            
               Said I, a representment, and no more;
               It is much more, then in my wordes can be▪
               
               My soule conceits, a verie Christ before;
               Spreading his sacred bodie on the Tree.
               
               Me thinkes, his verie torments I doe see▪
               
               This Crucifix, is that most sacred booke,
               Wherein each happy Spirit needes must looke.
            
            
               
               And this the holy Ghost presents the eye,
               And bids vs reade our penitentiall verse:
               If we can (Clarkely) reade this mystery,
               He promiseth, our judgement for to trauerse,
               And all our condemnation to reuerse:
               But Sinne (alas) so darkned hath the minde,
               As in this holy learning we are blinde.
            
            
               Like when th'vnlearned Fellon hath his booke,
               Without a Prompter, he no letter readeth;
               Although with much desire, he thereon looke,
               Euen so our Soules, as much (vnlearned) needeth,
               The help of that sweete comfort that proceedeth.
               For if that God assist vs not the better,
               We vnderstand, no sence, no word, nor letter.
            
            
               In this condition, this our man of sinne,
               Cannot reade mercie in these misteries,
               Before Gods holy spirit doe beginne,
               To cleanse the soule of his impieties.
               To moue the hart, and cleere the darkned eyes:
               When once this grace, in vs hath but a being,
               In holy secrets, we haue perfect seeing.
            
            
               The leaprous man, to heale his filthinesse,
               Must seauen times water his contagious skinne▪
               
               Is holy water of that worthinesse?
               Then with repentant teares let vs beginne,
               To wash the leaprous body of our sinne.
               Seauen times is nothing, multiply thy seauen,
               We must wash cleane, ere we can enter heauen.
            
            
               
               This is our first degree of holinesse;
               Which at the first, (as all beginnings are)
               Little (in trueth) but large in hopefulnesse.
               He that beginnes this sorrow with a teare,
               Vnto a better worke doth but prepare.
               And when in vs this grace hath but beginning,
               We liue to hope, and die vnto our sinning.
            
            
               Take for an instance him whom we proport:
               No more of sinne, but now the childe of Grace.
               As he wastes teares, his benefits resort;
               The bad thrust out, the betters haue the place,
               What was delightfull now he doth deface:
               When thus he hath a new begotten minde,
               His eyes are open, that before were blinde.
            
            
               No sooner open, but with eagernesse,
               They gaze vpon that sanctimonious tree
               The holy Crosse, (O sacred Worthinesse!)
               That beares the fruit of Immortalitie:
               And with a greedy appetite doth eie,
               This Crucifix, this Christ, thats nailde thereon,
               This God, this man, this our redemption.
            
            
               Not so
                     •…
                  m'd in mettle, or with curious paint,
               Nor hallowed with earthen sanctitie;
               We estimate not much, a woodden Saint,
               Nor can a Painter learne the mysterie,
               To make a Christ, or giue diuinitie.
               Thus then of all I would be vnderstood,
               This Crucifix, nor mettle, paint, nor wood.
            
            
               
               But very Christ, which with a faithfull eie,
               This sonne of Grace reuiews with good affection:
               In euery part he earnestly doth prie
               For sacred bloud, which is the soules refection:
               For without bloud we seale not our election.
               Now giue him wordes, or else we doe him wrong,
               To giue him much Desire, and not a Tongue.
            
            
               ¶ Sacred (he saith) most glorious, most diuine;
               Thou Word that mad'st, thou Christ that sav'dst all;
               Thou Sonne that euerlastingly dost shine,
               Coequall God, and consubstantiall;
               Thou Gate of mercy, way to life Eternall:
               O sith thou giv'st me sorrow for my sinne,
               Open thy Mercy gate, and let me in.
            
            
               Thou art that Foode, and ever-liuing Spring,
               Whereof who tastes, shall neuer thirst againe.
               O I am thirst, with my much sorrowing;
               Euen as the parched land that gaspes for raine:
               Do not thy heauenly droppings then detaine.
               If that my soule this holy water want,
               What thriueth it, I set, I sowe, or plant?
            
            
               But want I cannot, if I but desire it;
               Thy mercy doth preuent my forwardnesse:
               Thou giuest grace before wee can require it.
               If in our hearts there be but willingnesse,
               Thou com'st vnto vs, ere we can expresse
               What we determine. In this, scarce one
               Of mortall rase, loues imitation.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
               This, and tenne thousand testaments of Loue,
               T'vnworthy men, are daily multiplide,
               Which might their blunted vnderstandings moue
               To Loue and Honor, whom they crucified,
               Their King and Sauiour Iesus is denied.
               For euer be it hatefull in the Iewes,
               To choose a villaine, and the Iust refuse.
            
            
               
                  Pilate, thou canst not wash in Innocence;
               Nor Cayphas, how er'e in holy place,
               You give a monstrous sinne, a faire pretence;
               Your greatnes cannot countenance the case:
               Both Prince and Prelate, and the vulgar base
               Conspire in one. These discords can agree
               To plot, and practise this conspiracie.
            
            
               Traitors, hold off your blacke and treasonous handes,
               Touch not his pure and neuer-tainted flesh:
               Villaines, your King, must he be lockt in bands?
               How prodigall you be in wickednesse!
               To buffet, binde, and whippe his sacred flesh.
               Let me my sinfull body interpose,
               The sinne was mine, let me beare off the blowes.
            
            
               See how his bloud spirts from their cruell stripes;
               (O sacred blood, O sacred body bleeding.)
               These Iewes haue lesse compassion than their whippes,
               To sp
                     •…
                  ll that blood, which is the holy feeding
               Of blessed soules▪ O cruelty exceeding!
               Traitors, you little know one drop of blood,
               Would be enough to doe all sinners good.
            
            
               
               (Sweete Ies
                        •…
                     ,) may thy seruant begge this grace,
               To be a vessell, to receiue this spilling.
               The earth my Lord's a farre vnworthy place;
               A place of bloud, a slaughter-house of killing▪
               
               Sith I haue woundes, O Iesu be thou willing,
               That some of this, these Iewes shed on the ground▪
               
               I may reserue, to cure a mortall wound.
            
            
               In this aray, their God, our Christ they bring
               Vnto the place of execution:
               His enemies entitle him a King;
               Yet that is done in their derision.
               The Stage is Calueri
                        •…
                     
                   they act vpon;
               
                  A place of Skulles, the morall may be this:
               We are but rotten bones without his blisse.
            
            
               Looke, as a Pyrate roauing at the Seas,
               When by aduenture hitting on a prise;
               Doth first vpon their stoage make a sease,
               Then on their victor'd liues doth tyrannise:
               These hel-houndes so their envie exercise.
               First, they doe strippe our Sauiour of his cloathing,
               Then of his life, and thus they leaue him nothing.
            
            
               Is it not wonder this rebellious rout;
               Trauells in sweat, to worke their fatall woe?
               See, with what painefulnesse they goe about
               This horred act; herein they are not slowe,
               That to a worke of Grace could neuer goe.
               They dragge, they binde, they na
                     •…
                  le, they fasten on;
               Our holy life, but their damnation.
            
            
               
               Betweene two malefactors they did place him;
               In scorne of his most perfect innocence.
               These Theeues there set, of purpose to disgrace him,
               Yet did these Varlets faile in their pretence;
               Their neerenesse, could not gi
                     •…
                  e him their offence.
               For that is said to be the vertuous meane,
               That on each hand, hath neighbour'd the extreame.
            
            
               Now they haue reared vp this Crucifix,
               
               See how their resting time they entertaine.
               Some vinegre and gall togither mix;
               Others deride, and all of them disdaine,
               In scorne they call him, Lord, and Soueraigne.
               The souldiers, that aboue the rest doe raue,
               Doe cast the Dice, who should his garment haue.
            
            
               My Lord is now in other businesse,
               Building the frame of mans saluation:
               These drops of bloud, and water doe expresse
               His inward griefe: he giues a demonstration
               Of torment, that exceedeth all relation.
               For, he that would bring merit vnto man,
               Must suffer more, then any other can.
            
            
               O what is man whome thou regardest so!
               A stayned cloath, a beautie withered.
               Yet did my Lord his greatnesse humble so,
               As he inuests our Nature that was dead;
               He brings againe what erst was perished.
               Now by his Bloud, and euer by his Grace,
               
               He makes vs worthie that before were base.
            
            
               
               What though they heape iniquitie on sinne?
               He layeth not his sauing worke away:
               He helpeth most, when they most torture him;
               To giue vs life, he doth his owne defray.
               
                  (Lord Christ) thou didst for thy tormentors pray,
               
                  Father forgiue them, (thus thy innocence)
               
                  Forgiue them (gratious Father) their offence.
               
            
            
               The horror of this act, did blind the Sunne,
               Remoue the Earth, the holy Temple rend:
               Dead bodies from their Sepulchers did runne;
               And preach to many how these Iewes offend:
               All things reprou'd, and nothing did commend.
               The Sunne, the Earth, the Temple, and the Graue,
               Haue more of Grace, then these Tormentors haue.
            
            
               The Sunne doth hide his euer-burning face,
               Abhorring to suruey their damned fact.
               The Earth did shame it, as her owne disgrace;
               Because vpon her body they did act.
               The Graues disclaime, and dis-alowe the fact▪
               
               The holy Temple doth it selfe diuide,
               Because a holier they haue crucifide.
            
            
               Now giue me breath (O sacred breathing spirit!)
               With faithfull affectation to applie,
               This Death, this Christ, this compotence of merit
               Vnto my soule; that in it selfe would die,
               If not supported by the hand of Mercie.
               How helpeth it the hurt-man to be sound,
               Vnlesse the Salue be plasterd to the wound.
            
            
               
               And as the holy Prophet that did spread,
               His liuing body on the liuelesse corse,
               And so brought backe, the spirit vanished,
               And made a contract where there was diuorse:
               So, when our soules are mantled with this crosse;
               That life of Grace, we erst had lost with sinning▪
               
               Hath then a second time in vs beginning.
            
            
               And to make sit for good digestion
               This bread of life; we must the loafe diuide;
               Our faithfull soules in morsels feeds thereon,
               So by degrees my Lord was crucified.
               In Ciuill fellowship it is denied,
               To gobbet vp a supper at a bit,
               When we haue time and leisure for to sit.
            
            
               It were good order we beginne the lowest,
               When we this Iacobs ladder would ascend;
               In happie progresse we attaine the rest,
               And then we giue our trauells happie end.
               This only co
                     •…
                  nsaile I doe recommend:
               That he that would ascend these holy staires▪
               
               Must to his footing first direct his cares.
            
            
               Then with his blessed Feete let vs beginne,
               That now are stayned with the streaming bloud
               That 
                     〈◊〉
                   from the Naile, that stickes therein.
               O that my eyes, would doe my hart that good,
               To be as mo
                     •…
                  st, as is the swelling floud!
               For holy 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   doth instruct my teares,
               To wash, and then to wipe them with my haires.
            
            
               
               These holy passengers doe neuer haste,
               To guilty bloud, nor vnto lustfull fire.
               No little minute of a time they waste,
               To minister to any vaine desire.
               In enuy therefore did the Iewes conspire,
               To naile those holy moovers vnto wood,
               That were such forward instruments of good.
            
            
               Their trauell was, to trauell to the weake;
               Bring comfort to the vnrespected poore;
               To giue the lame to goe, the dumbe to speake,
               And 
                     •…
                  it applyments vnto euery sore;
               A greater yet than what was saide before:
               They brought the newes of Peace vnto our spirite.
               And therefore our acceptance they doe merite.
            
            
               See how his sacred Knees be markt with praire,
               A demonstration of his sanctitie.
               To Adulation they vncustom'd are;
               Nor fawne they with officiall flatterie.
               Giue me (sweete Lorde) these merites to app
                     •…
                  :
               These markes are no disgrace vnto my skinne▪
               
               Better be markt with holy Prayer, than Sinne.
               
            
            
               Now let me reach my meditation higher,
               And touch my Lords most blessed Heart that bleedeth:
               This bloud cannot extinguish holy fire;
               That in this holy principall exceedeth:
               He warmes with Zeale, and with his Blood he feedeth
               Our spirites that are cold and hunger-starued,
               Wanting this Grace we men haue not deserued.
            
            
               
               This Heart is not the nursery of Pride▪
               
               Of Murther, Lust, of Mammon, and Debate:
               Within his secrets there is not implide,
               The new inuention to Equiuocate.
               
               This Heart must thinke what ere his wordes relat
                     •…
                  
                  ▪
               
               Lying is sinne, all sinne is from the Deuill,
               The Art of Reseruation then is euill.
            
            
               No sin had ere admittance in this place,
               (O place, most sanctimonious, most diuine!)
               The Presence-chamber, and the seate of Grace,
               
               Whereas his soule in majestie did shine.
               How can it be the Holiest should incline,
               To entertaine into his Chaire of State,
               The 
                     •…
                  east of euills we can estimate?
            
            
               May I (sweet Iesu) view in euery part,
               The secret closet of thy thoughts within;
               The Spea
                        •…
                     e hath made a passage to thy Heart;
               
               The entrance then is open; let me in
               To see the merite that hath vanquisht sin.
               Do not thy mercy gate against me locke,
               For I will euer at thy Mercy knocke.
            
            
               See, here is nothing that presents my eie,
               But Loue, but Fauour, and Compassion:
               In euery quarter Mercy I espie;
               
                  Mercie's the briefe of all I looke vpon;
               
                  Mercie the cause and meanes of my saluation.
               O, sith there is such mercy in thy hart,
               (Sweete Iesu) giue my grieued soule a parte.
            
            
               
               Like to a Prince that in his royall throne,
               Bethinkes what may his people benefit;
               Sends this his good determination,
               To such as at his Counsaile Table sit,
               That by their Wisedomes they may order it:
               So dooth the Heart determine first the deede,
               Then sends it to the counsaile in the head.
            
            
               Let me alittle higher now ascend,
               Whereas my Lord his holy Armes doth spread,
               This moralles how his Mercy doth extend;
               Invites to save what would be perished:
               Come vnto me all that are wearied,
               I will support your life, vnloade your cares,
               Infuse my Grace, and wipe away your teares▪
               
            
            
               Then sith I am inuited to this Grace,
               
               (Sweete Iesu) giue my spirite entertaine;
               I would vnloade my burthen in this place,
               Whose weight is more than I can well sustaine:
               (Lord Iesu) ease thy seruant of this paine:
               Take off this heauy bondage of my sinne,
               Thy yoke is easie, let me liue therein.
            
            
               These Hands (O sacred instruments of health!)
               That neuer failed yet in any cure;
               The sicke mans comfort, and the poore mans wealth:
               Whose holy vertue euer shall indure,
               And euer for to help will them inure:
               Why doe the Iewes these holy helpers wound,
               Whose very touch made the diseased sound?
            
            
               
               These mercifull and free bestowing Hands,
               
               Are euer reaching their beneuolence:
               He giueth aught to any that demands;
               Neuer respecting gainefull recompence;
               His bounty is not wasted with expence.
               For as the Springs supply the wasting Streames,
               So hath his Grace supplyment from the heauens.
            
            
               His Flesh they wound, and mortise it in wood,
               T'vnfit my Lord, from healing any more;
               As they strike in, out starts the sacred blood,
               That cureth more than did his hands before:
               One dramme of this will helpe the greatest sore.
               These people in their purpose (then) did faile,:
               For heere is Vertue which they cannot naile.
            
            
               This holy Vertue (might my Lord be pleasd,)
               T'infuse my Soule, all hackt with mortall sinne;
               Wounded, and sore, in euery parte diseasd;
               I should my restauration then beginne.
               My hands haue blood, that ouer-spreads my skinne
               With sinfull Guilt▪
                   O let thy blood diuine
               Exp
                     •…
                   my guilt, and then my blood refine!
            
            
               Now I arriue my much desired Port;
               The Orbe wherein all holinesse doth moue,
               The place whereto all wisedome doth resort,
               The Court of Mercy, Majestie, and Loue,
               Furnisht with all acquirements from aboue.
               Such is my Lords most sacred holy Head,
               
               With all these rich induments furnished.
            
            
               
               This is that one and vniuersall Head,
               That ouer all hath true preheminence;
               Who seekes a second, from the first is dead:
               Two Vniuersals haue no excellence.
               Who can corriuall Christ without offence?
               
                  (Lord Sauiour Christ) it doth my soule content▪
               
               To be a member in thy regiment.
            
            
               From this First head deriued is all Grace;
               
               That giues the members life, and holy being▪
               
               The head is said to be the fittest place,
               Where our immortall spirits be decreeing,
               How to repaire this house of flesh; then seeing
               The lower parts to Reason are but dead,
               They must repaire for wisedome to the Head.
               
            
            
               See how these Iewes this Head doe dignisie;
               His temples, with a crowne they doe adorne.
               They call him King, yet this their King must d
                     •…
                  
                  ▪
               
               They giue him state, but that is done in scorne,
               A Diademe they fashion him of thorne.
               Yet know (you Traytors) when it toucht his head,
               Neuer was Crowne so richly garnished.
            
            
               A crowne of thorne? O let their great offence,
               Re-eccho backe my indignation!
               Were ye (good people) at this great expence,
               To solemnize his coronation,
               That was the King, that gaue all Kings creation.
               See you these drops, that trickle from the thorne?
               They damne your deede, but doe his Grace adorne.
            
            
               
               His holy Eyes, (O sacred lamps of light!)
               The busie searchers of all mens distresse:
               Whose seeing is not letted by the night,
               In naked formes they all things can expresse▪
               
               They haue all knowledge, and all holinesse.
               These Pla
                        •…
                     s that are mouers in this Heauen▪
               
               Haue better Constellation then the Seauen.
            
            
               (Lord Iesus) let thy holy Eyes reflect
               Their influence, vpon my earthen state:
               Thy heauenly presence is a faire aspect;
               There doth my soule delight to speculate.
               For by those Starres, I best can calculate
               My lot of Grace: which neuer is deni'd
               To him, that viewes this Christ thus cruci
                     •…
                  i'd.
            
            
               But O the organe of his holy Speech;
               
               That breatheth life to euery faithfull eare!
               This holy one, his holy word did preach:
               He gi
                     •…
                  es for nothing what would cost vs deare;
               And makes assurance, where before was 
                     •…
                  eare.
               (Lord Iesu) giue me knowledge in thy teaching,
               I shall lesse neede these Times contentious preaching.
            
            
               His breath he formeth into holy prayer▪
               
               Which doth ascend the thro
                     •…
                  e of maiestie.
               For vs poore men, all his petitions were;
               He aduocates for vs perpetuallie.
               Thinke ye, the Father will his sonne denie?
               What neede I for moe Int
                        •…
                     rcessors care,
               When holy Christ doth interceede his prayer?
            
            
               
               Thou Splendor of thy Fathers majestie.
               Thou God of God, thou man, all mens Redeemer.
               Thou King of Iewes, thou Christ they crucifie.
               Thou one, wherein all graces treasur'd are.
               Thou mercifull, thou all, thou euery where.
               To thee (O Sauiour Iesus) I repaire,
               Exhibite (Lord) my pardon in thy prayer.
            
            
               
                  Pardon my youthfull sinning, and my old;
               
                  Pardon my secrete, and reuealed 
                     •…
                  nes;
               
                  Pardon my Errours, that be m
                     •…
                  old.
               
                  Pardon committings, and omitions.
               
                  Pardon my Nature stayned with corruptions.
               (Lord) pardon all, in all I haue offended:
               
                  Thy pardon's free, to all be it extended.
            
            
               Now (holy Ioseph) helpe me to interre
               This sacred Corse: my hart's a fitting place,
               Wherein thou maist, his Sepulchre prepare.
               Digge deepe (old man) this Graue will not disgrace
               My willing hart, but dignifie the place.
               (Lord Iesu) if this resting place may please,
               Not three daies (Lord) but rest here many threes.
            
            
               God forbid that I should reioyce, but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world.
               Galat. 6. 14.
            
         
      
   