
      
         
            
            
            THE HOLY
PILGRIME,
Leading the way to
HEAVEN.
OR
A Diuine Direction in the way
of Life, containing a familiar exposition
of such secrets in Diuinity, as may
direct the simple in the way of their
Christian Pilgrimage. In two Bookes. The first declaring what man is in the misery
of himselfe. The second, what man is in the happines
of Christ.
            Written by C. L.
Nostrum in coelo negotium.
            
            LONDON,
Imprinted by Bar: Alsop for William Barringer,
and are to be sold at his shop
at the great North dore of S. Paules
Church. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE
WORSHIPFVLL, MASTER
NEWTON, TVTOR
to the Prince, and Deane of Durham▪
Master Murrey, Tutor to
the Duke of York, & Master
of Sherborne house, and to
the Reuerend Society
of Prebends of the
Church of
Durham.
            
               MAy it please you, Charity
is the great office
of Christianity and
humanity: for the
lawes of God and nature
inioyne all men
the workes of common profite. Therefore

is action better then contemplation,
because this doth respect our priuate
onely, but that doth giue it selfe
into the common Treasure of mens
prosperities.
            This cause hath made mee vndertake
these paines. For though I am yet
vnprofest in any particular place of
charge, eyther in the Church or state,
whereby I might imploy (my little) to
more aduantage, yet my very being a
Christian doth challenge from me the
best performance I can, for the commō
good.
            The reasons of my dedication are
these. First, there is non of you to whom
I owe not some respect of duty, but to
you two Principals, principall respects;
the whole Kingdome being in debt to
your labours, which God make prosperous
to his glory; and for the honour
of (this our little world) great Brittaine.
Againe, I did purpose you a booke,
which might haue done some seruice
to your princely charge, and in whose
argument I did professe to bee much
more able then in this. That beeing

(for a time) stayed from printing, by
their authority in the State, that may
commaund mee, I haue presumed with
this (such as it is) intreating you to giue
it your allowance of fauour, because I
freely cast it into the common Treasure.
            God make all your labours respect
the glory of his name, that you may
liue in the honour of his seruice, and
obtaine the reward of faithfulnesse.
            
               Your worships in the double
bonds of duty and loue,
CHRISTOPHER LEVER.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            The Preface to the
Reader.
            
               
                  CHristian Reader, the visible
Church is compared to
a Vineyard, God is the master
of it, his Ministers are
his Labourers, his people
his vines. Our great Maister God, giueth
his entertainement to none but labourers:
yet in this Vineyard are both loyterers and
lookers on. The true Labourers are they
who in that sacred profession faithfully endeuour
their best diligence. And these blessed
ones shall receyue from God, this happy
sentence: It is well done, good & faithfull
seruants,Mat. 25. 21, 23. yee haue been faithfull in
little, I will make you rulers ouer much:
enter yee into your Maisters ioy.
            The loyterers are halfe labourers. These
are like the Scribes and Pharisees, that sitte
in Moses seate, but walke not in his stepps.

And their voice is Iacobs,Gen. 27. 22 
               but their hāds
are Esaues: their words are holy, but their
workes are prophane, they can deliuer the
doctrines of the Gospell, but not liue in the
duties of the law. And to these will God
be terrible in the day of tryall, & tell them
that though they haue cast out Diuels, and
done wonders in his name; yet he wil deny
them for his,Mat. 7. 22. 23. & bid them depart (because)
they are workers of iniquity.
            
            The lookers on are of two sorts, they are
either nolentes, or non valentes. The
first sort are such as can, but will not labor
in their spirituall office; these are they that
loue 
                  •
               ase, and fat themselues with prosperity,
and then (like Acsops hen) they are
so fat they cannot lay, and like that rich
foole in the Gospel, that said vnto his soule,
Soule,
               Luk. 12. 19. 
               thou hast much goods layd vp
for many yeers, liue at ease, eate, drink,
and take thy pastime. But God will deride
such folly, and tell them that their life
is but a dayes length. For at night their
soules shal be taken from them,
               Verse 20. 
               & then
whose shall all those thinges bee that
they haue prouided?
            
            The last and least worthy in Gods vineyard,

are such as neyther will nor can discharge
the dutyes of their place. These idle
Priestes, are like Idoll Gods t
                  •
               at represent
those things which (indeed) they are not.
And to these will Christ say, as in the Parable
of the marriage:Mat. 12. 12 
               Friends how came
yee in hither, which haue no wedding
garment? And doubtlesse it cannot but
bee a very desperate presumption to vndertake
this charge without some conuenient
proportion of sufficiency. Now if any man
aske mee how came these thinges thus to
passe? I will answere with the Gospell. The
enuious man hath done this.
               Mat. 13. 28. The Diuel
that wretch enuying the prosperity of the
Gospell,Verse 30. hath sowne his tares among Gods
wheate, which must grow vp together, vntill
the day of the generall haruest.
            By this little of muc
                  •
               , mayest thou vnderstand
(Christian Reader) in what fashion
the world is now suted: the greater number
of men, turning their eyes of care from
God and Religion, to looke to things of
this world, with affectation. But bee thou
perswaded, that whatsoeuer he bee, of what
estate, degree, or condition soeuer, that doth
not respect God, and the common cause of

religion, more then his owne priuate, hee
may happly haue the name of a Christian,
but doubtlesse, he hath the mark of a reprobate,
and God will both despise and iudge
him in the generall day. For in this case are
men disposed as Iobs cattell were: His
Oxen were plowing,
               Iob. 1. 14 
               and his Asses feeding.
So the better sort of men do euer trauell
the common cause, but the worse their
owne particular onely, and therefore worthy
a worse comparison then Iobs asses.
This knowledge haue I thought fitte to giue
thee by way of admonition, that thou mayest
pitty the common cause, and bee zealously
affected in thy self with a desire of thy own
reformation. God succeede thee in all thy
works of holines, and may it be his pleasure
that these poore labours of mine may bee
some cause of thy reducing. 
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The Contents of the Chapters contained
in this Booke.
            
               The first Booke.
               OF God. Chap. 1
               Of the creation of the World, Chap. 2
               Of the Angels, their nature, theyr fall. Chap. 3.
               Of man his first beginning, & the state
of his innocence. Chap. 4
               Of the state of mans innocence before
his fall. Chap. 5.
               Of originall sinne, the fall and apostacy
of man. Chap. 6.
               Of the morall law of God, the ten commandements.
Chap. 7
               Of the accusation of conscience. Chap. 8
            
            
               
               The second Booke.
               OF the Gospell, the new couenant,
or the couenant of grace. Chap. 1▪
               
               Of Christ Iesus, the summe of the Gospell.
Chap. 2
               Of repentance, the sorrow of the soule
for sinne. Chap. 3
               Of Mortification. Chap. 4
               Of Regeneration or now Birth. Chap. 5.
               Of Iustification. Chap. 6.
               Of the temporary death, and of the seuerall
estates of saluation and damnation.
Chap. 7
               Of Gods glory. Chap. 8.
            
         
         
            
            O happy life when vaine affections die,
            And when our hearts can holy works desire:
            And when our soules with meditation flie
            To God, who did them in our flesh inspire,
            How base is earth to heauen that is aboue?
            How vilde we value all, when God wee loue?
            Potest miser dici, qui non potest esse. Seneca.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  THE FIRST
PART OF DIVINE DIrection,
declaring the variable
state of man, from the time of
his Creation, to the time
of his Regeneration.
               
                  Of GOD. Chap. 1.
                  
                     WHen I first beganne to vnderstand
of GOD, I had
this imagination: that
God was a general power,The generall knowledge of GOD.
with-in whose Circle all
things are, without whom
nothing; by whome all things were made,
and to whome all men owe theyr seruice.
                  This learning was taught mee by the
wisedome of my Naturall soule, and
by the common example of Christians:
for all men acknowledge a God,

and all Christians this dutie. This is
the common knowledge, but not the
profitable; more commendable in Philosophers
then Christians: being without
vse,How to know God, with vse. without application. I haue
therefore better endeuored my selfe,
and studied to know God my God: to
knowe him in his Diuine nature, in the
Trinitie of persons, and in their offices;
for thus to knowe,To know Gods nature. and then to apprehend
and applie, is saluation. To know
GOD in his nature,His attributes. wee must know his
attributes; all which may bee reduced
to these two generals, Iustice and Mercie:
in all which we must consider him
to be infinite; infinite in wisedome, infinite
in fauour,The Trinitie. infinite in power, infinite
in time. The Trinitie is the distinction
of persons without diuiding
the substance or nature of God: the Father,
Sonne, and holie Ghost, though
they bee three distinct in Name, they
are one in power, without diuision,
without inequalitie. The Sonne begotten
as ancient as the Father; the holie
Ghost proceeding from both, equall
with both; no prioritie in their omnitencie;

but all of them being alike able
in all things, alwayes conspiring one
end without discord.The foundation of Religion. This diuine mystery
is the foundation of Christian religion,
without which there is no faith,
no saluation.
                  It is further necessary to know the Trinitie
in their seuerall offices; for though
the Godhead be so vndeuided,The seueral offices in the Trinitie. as that
no one person in the Trinitie doth
work without cooperation, the Father,
Sonne, and holy-Ghost conspyring in
euery acte of euery seuerall person; yet
in the wisedome of their owne Decree,
they haue determined to the seuerall
persons of the Trinitie,The Trinitie conspire in euerie worke. seuerall executions
of Offices: wherein though the
whole TRINITIE cōspire, yet some
one Person in the Trinitie hath the
name of Principall:The Creator. therefore we say,
GOD the Father made the World, the
Sonne redeeemed it,The Creation ascribed to God the Father, the Sonne, and holy Ghost, cooperating. the Holie Ghost
doth gouerne it. The Creation of the
world is ascribed to God the Father, yet
hee made the world, and the workes
therein by his Word. This Word was
God, the second person in the Trinitie,

who did cooperate & worke with God
in the Creation. The holie Ghost also
moued vpon the Waters, to diuide the
Seas and distinguish light: all of them
ioyntly and seuerally executing the Decrees
of their owne diuine councell.Redemption ascribed to God the Sonne.
                  
                  The worke of Redemption is properlie
ascribed to Christ, the second Person,
who descended his Maiestie, and in his
owne person came to make a conquest,
of Sinne,The Father and the holie Ghost cooperating The holie Ghost doth gouerne the Word. Hell, and Death: Yet in this
most gracious work, the Father and the
holie Ghost were not absent, but gaue
diuine assistance to our Blessed Sauiour
IESVS. Christ when hee ascended,
left the holie Ghost to be a patrone to
the Catholique Church, the which in
all occasions doth support euery member
of the same; yet the Father and the
Sonne haue their hands of prouidēce,The Father and the Sonne assisting. at
all times working with the holy Ghost,
in this diuine gouernement. Therefore
howsoeuer they haue seuerall assignements,
by themselues appoynted,One labour, one honour in the Trinitie. yet
they all conspire in euery worke of holinesse,
all of them participating one labour,
one honour.
                  
                     Thus to know God is needfull for euery
soule that desireth happinesse, or
that coueteth to haue part in the righteousnes
of IESVS CHRIST, without
whom there is no Saluation.
                  
                     The Vse.
                     
                        GOD beeing then of a Nature infinitely
good,The vse▪
                         infinite great, it ought to
moue in euery soule a double affection,
loue, and feare: to feare him because he
can destroy: to loue him, because hee
will not. It ought also to prouoke all
men to an imitation of GOD: that such
to whome God hath giuen greatnesse,Men must liue in Gods imitation.
they vse it with the moderation of mercie,
which only is able to make the great
good, and the honourable in place, honest
of condition. For as GOD is, so
good men, their soules are his Images,
and their actions, his imitations.
                     Againe,Vse 2. 
                        GOD is a power, distinguished
in three persons; the power is not
deuided; euery Person in the Trinitie,
hauing the Deitie equally, and in iust
comparison; all of them but one God▪
                        
and euery person GOD, all of them conspiring
the same ends from Eternitie to
Eternitie. This ought, but is not the
condition of men. Princes and the
great on Earth, are called Gods; these
ought (like God) to combine themselues
in holy action,Psal, 82. 6. and to bend their
power against the enemies of God and
man, sinne and the sinnefull; and not
with implacable displeasure to destroy
themselues,Such as are meerely politicke, and respect greatnesse without goodnes. their estates with ciuill disagreements.
For though God say,
they are Gods, hee saith, they shall dye
like men: and if euill men, they are
then no Gods, but diuels, enemyes to
God, enemies to the good. And as in
the nature of God, mercy doth triumph
and hath preheminence: so in all the
godlie, there is a gratious pittie, with
which they are most affected,Mercie the best proofe of goodnes. and God
himselfe best pleased.
                  
                  
                     Speciall Application.
                     When I had thus considered the nature
of God,Speciall application. his omnipotencie, his mercie,

and other attributes,This care is euery mans dutie. it caused me to
question my owne life, and search the
records of my owne actions; whereby
I vnderstood the truth of my miserie;
that I was guiltie,Mans deserrs. and deserued death
and torment, and that the Iustice of
God would giue sentence against mee.
Then was the knowledge of Gods Maiestie
a terror to me,The effects of a guiltie conscience. I conceiued in my
feare the very formes of his indignation,
and I beganne to feele in my soule
the very torment of condemnation; as
if God had giuen sentence, and my
soule in the sense of execution. In this
astonishment I remembred mercie,Mercie giues hope in greatest extremities. and
that God was so delighted in the vse
thereof, as that hee carefully watcheth
cause and opportunity to giue it. I did
therefore acknowledge and submit my
selfe to fauour: God did descend his
greatnesse,Acknowledgementmost necessarie. accepted my acknowledgement,
and gaue me the allowance of his
mercie; then I reduced to memorie
what my Sauiour had done for the redemption
of mankinde, what hee had
promised the Faithfull, what the penitent.
I belieued, receyued strength,

and had my Hope established:The promises that belong to the faithful, and penitent onely. and
growing bolde with these encouragements,
I desired & obtained the Sonne
of God, to restore mee the Spirite of
God, to continue mee restored, reformed.
Then could my soule receiue content
in Diuine meditations; then I
could despise the earthly profites, and
the vaine pleasures of men:How to vnderstād the world. call them,
and esteeme them as dongue, filthy, and
that maketh filthie. Then I could
iustly value the honours off this life,
weigh them with Vanitie, and esteeme
them lighter. Then I could discerne
Vertue in Pouertie,How to iudge of good and euill. and Holinesse in a
contemptible degree of Fortune. I
could see the Patient beare theyr loade
with alacritie, and secretly scorne at the
base estimation of Earth.The benefite of patience.
                     
                     Thus a reformed iudgement can teach
to knowe and loue, know and hate: let
me loue,To loue & hate. and be beloued of GOD: let
me hate, and be hated of the world.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of the Creation of the World.
Chap. 2.
                  
                     THe creationThe Creation. of the world
hath bene the admiration
of all men that knew
not GOD,
                     The reason why the Creation is not beleeued of the-infidels. neyther beleeued
Scripture: the
reason was, because theyr vnderstandings
(wanting Diuine light,) were not
able to comprehend the knowledge of
so high a secret. Therefore the Philosophers
haue vainely and diuersly disagreed
in their seuerall constructions of
the beginning of the World:The vaine opinions of Philosophers. Some denying
that the World euer had beginning,
but that it was deriued (by the power
of Nature) from all Eternitie,Their fond arguments. Epicures. and
had eternall perpetuitie. To maintaine
which absurditie, they would demaund
how GOD made the World; what instruments
hee vsed in the building of so
wonderfull a frame,The answer. &c. Wherein may
appeare theyr grosse misvnderstanding
of God his Nature, that hee (like man)
could not worke without the helpe of

meanes and instruments: others more
learned, more trew, concluded that of
necessitie the world must haue beginning,
and that there was a power Eternall,
which made, moued, and gouerned
all things, and that the world was
not eternall: they had this sufficient argument,
that the World did suffer detriment,
and decay in it selfe: the Elements
had lost the puritie of their Nature
which they had in the beginning:
the mouings of the Spheares and Celestiall
bodyes, (which of all worldly
things are most constant) had endured
some alteration;All worldly things subiect to alteration. so that nothing in the
world but did suffer and change, which
could not bee if it were eternall. This
grounded reason did cōuince the common
opinion of the Worlds eternitie:
and did preuaile with them that could
not be perswaded but by the power of
Reason. This I write, not to perswade
Christians, but Insidels and Epicures:
that they, who denye the iudgement of
Diuinitie, may bee iudged by Reason,
and the wisedome of Nature;The iudgement of Reason. which
alone is able to Conuince all opposition.

But to Christians I will onely
write what GOD saith:How to satisfie & perswade Christians. for that may
serue to informe and satisfie euery one
that is Faithfull. Moses the seruant, the
witnesse of Almighty God, being inspired
by the Holie-Ghost, hath left recorded
to all posteritie, the manner of the
Creation of the World:The Scripture able, and onely able to satisfie to which authoritie,
(not onely my selfe) but euery
Faithfull Christian doth confidentlie
adhere,Gen. 1. disclayming all contradiction,
all diuersitie.
                  In the story of the Creation, is principally
considered the Creator, GOD;
and the Creatures, the worke of Gods
creation. In the Creator is considered
his power,A compendious vnderstanding of the creation. his purpose; his power in being
able by his Word to finish a worke
of such admiration. His purpose (not
that hee needed any thing that hee had
made, to supplie any defect in his Diuinitie)
but for the vse of a creature which
afterwards hee was to make, euen man:
to whome hee gaue the Heauens,The World was made for man, & man for GOD. the
Earth, and all the hoast of them for seruants,
reseruing man for the seruice of
himselfe only. In the Creatures is considered

their original or matter of their
Creation: and the order wherein they
were created.The matter of the creation, nothing. This Originall was nothing:
for God created all things by
the power of his Word, without matter,
there beeing nothing, whereof to
make anything.The order God obserued. The order obserued
in the Creation was, that God determining
the World and the workes therein
for the seruice of man, would (before he
made man) store the world (mās house)
with euery needefull prouidence,The World mans house. that
man (at the very instant of his being)
might knowe himselfe to bee in the fulnesse
of Gods fauour: nothing wanting
which might eyther administer to
his pleasure or necessitie.The seuerall dayes work. Againe, in
the Creatures themselues,1. Light: God obserued
a speciall order. First, hee created
Light, without which the workes of his
greatnesse had not beene visible. Secondly,
he created Heauen,2. Heauen. giuing that
prioritie for the excellence and dignitie
of the place.3 The separation of waters. Next, he made a separation
of the Earth and Waters, and gaue
the Earth a generation of all Plants,
and Trees bearing seede. Then hee

placed in the Firmament, the Planets,
and Fixed Starres,4. Hee sto. reth the Firmament the which serue not

                        〈◊〉
                      for Light, and to distinguish seasons,
but also (by their influence) for the
generation and gouernement of liuing
creatures. Then God furnished the
two Elements of Water and Aire,5. Fish and Birds. with
creatures of that kinde. Last of all, hee
stored the Earth with the Creatures
which liue on that Element;6 Creatures liuing vpon the Ea
                           •
                        th. and when
hee had finished the Creation of all
things, hee then made Man after his
owne similitude, and gaue him the possession
of the World,When and how man was made. and the creatures
hee had made: giuing him interest in
all, and power ouer all,The power God gaue him. without exception.
This knowledge of the Creation,
is necessarie in the vnderstanding of
euery Christian of carefull conscience;
with which knowledge, the lesse Learned
may satisfie themselues:The euill of curiositie. auoyding
the curious search of such nice questions,
as may distract the simple, and auaile
not to saluation.
                  
                     
                     The generall Vse.
                     The Knowledge of the power of
God, in Creating the World doth admonish
and remember all men:The Vse. that
seeing GOD created all things, by the
power of his Word, therfore the maine
interest, and principall claime to all
things created, remaineth to God onely;
hee being the absolute owner without
competitor;The maine interest of all things is in God. and that man hath only
the vse and communication of Gods
creatures, and that only with condition
and limitation of time. Secondly, it
doth perswade a reuerence to the Maiestie
of God, and a feare of his displeasure:
for that GOD, who is able by his
Word to create of nothing any thing,
is able also by his Word to destroy any
thing, and make it nothing, or worse
then nothing.
                     The purpose of the Creation of the
world by God,The purpose of Gods creating the World. beeing for the vse & seruice
of man, doeth remember all men,
that the measure of the loue of God to
mankinde, is infinite, who of his owne

election, did please to make a Creature
of such noblenes,The infinit measure of Gods loue. as to be called his Resemblance
and Image; giuing him a
soule of such Diuine nature, as nothing
but God can be more: for whose sake
God made the world, & stored it with
the plentie of all things which might
be fit eyther for vse or Ornament: all
which God hath giuen man,Euery thing Created, is eyther for vse or ornament. onely requiring
acknowledgement and thankful
seruice; which condition if a man performe,
God will then a thousand folde
double his fauours. And whereas these
are but transitory & passable pleasures,
God will make them eternall and vnexpressable,
both in number and worth:
For hee that proueth a faithfull seruant,
God will make him a Sonne, & crowne
him with the glory of his Saints,God, will make his seruants his Sonnes. in the
Kingdome of glorie, where there is a
perpetuitie of all happines.
                     Secondly,Secondly. the purpose of Gods creating
the World, for the vse of man, doth
admonish all men to vse the Creatures
of GOD with moderation and Christian
iudgement;How to vse Gods creatures. not to despise them because
they are Gods creatures, not to adore

them, because they are but Creatures:
but so to vse them, as they may
supplye that purpose for which GOD
created them.
                     Thirdly,Thirdly. seeing GOD created the
world for mankinde, it doth remember
vs not to appropriate the Creatures of
God to our owne priuate endes, but to
communicate their vse with all such as
shall need them:All men haue propriety in all Gods creatures. for God gaue not the
world to Adam onely, but to his posteritie
also: therefore euery man is lawfully
interested in the enioying of
Gods creatures, if by lawfull and allowable
meanes hee can attaine them. Againe,
if a Christian mans necessitie require
releefe, and fauourable supportation,Note.
he hath a righteous claime to some
part of the superfluous possessions of others:
and he that shutteth vp his compassion
against such necessitie, is guiltie
of iniustice, and must answer the faulte
at the barre of Death. For God he maketh
his Sunne to shine vpon all indifferently,God gaue the world to mankind and not to any particular.
and hee hath giuen the World
and the Creatures therein to mankinde
generally, and not to one man, one Family

or one kingdome. This may
reach and iudge the mercilesse, who
can see and not relieue the extremities
of men, of Christian men.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     The meditation of this power, of this
loue of God, in crauing a World of
creatures for the seruice of man,Speciall application. and
seeing it hath pleased him to make mee
a reasonable soule, and a sharer of these
infinite blessings: I haue aduised with
my soule to declare my selfe in all
dutifull demonstrations to my God:
and to vse the creatures hee hath giuen
mee, with that moderation hee hath
commanded: I haue made a Couenant
with my soule,We ought not to appropriate that which God hath made common. that I will not appropriate
that to my priuate, which God
nath made common. If God giue me
aboundance, I will open my liberality,
I wil giue as God doth, to all, but carefully
to the wants of faithfull men. I
will remember that what I haue, I must
vse, what I vse not I must bestow, least

Gods talents bee without imployments,
and so God discharge mee of
trust. If God giue me wisedome and
knowledge more then others, I will
not bee silenced,How to imploy Gods talents. I will not obscure the
grace and gift of God, I will not denie
God, I will not deny the world my seruice,
but in whatsoeuer God shall inable
me, in that I will be industrious. If
I can do nothing of desert, or common
profire, yet I will waste my howres in
holy meditation.A holy life is a continuall trauell. I haue vowed I will
still trauell in holy exercise. When I
cannot profite generally, I will pray generally.
We are all the creatures of one
God, the word of God gaue forme to
euery creature: therefore euery thing
that presents my eye, shall moue my
holy meditations.How to occasion an holy meditation. When I behold the
wonderfull frame of heauen, I shall reuise
on the creation, and admire God
his mercy, his maiesty. I shall remember
the happinesse of heauen, and refresh
my aduersity with hopefull confidence.
When I consider the earth,Where to repose our hope. I
shall remember the basenesse of my beginning,
what I was in sin, what I am

in grace. This shall teach mee to deny
my selfe,To deny our selues is to gaine our selues. and wholly to depend on the
fauour of God. When I see vnreasonable,
noysome, or euill creatures, I shall
haue cause of acknowledgement: for
God might haue made me so, or worse.
Lastly, when I shall see wicked men
proude themselues in their vanities, I
shall both pitty and glory:Pitty can respect our enemies. pitty the
misery of their soules, & glory the Fortune
of my owne. And thus with these
and such meditations my soule shall
breath content.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Of the Angels, their Nature,
their fall.
Chap. 3.
                  
                     THat the angels were created
is most certaine:The creation of Angels is supposed to be the first day of the Creation. the
time of their creation is
not certain, but doubtful
& diuersly beleeued: many men spend
their iudgements in coniectures: all
such are more curious then Wife,

because the truth thereof cannot certainely
bee determined: neyther if it
could, were the knowledge thereof
necessary, or materiall to saluation:
for whatsoeuer knowledge is necessary
for the happinesse of our soules,Note. is
by God himselfe taught in the testimony
of holy Scriptures. This knowledge
of the time of the creation of Angels,
being not taught by God, doth make
the search thereof vnprofitable,Ignorance is better then vnprofitable knowledge. Gods denying is a forbidding. vnlawfull:
for God doth nothing at peraduenture,
but all thinges in iudgement,
and with the aduise of his diuine wisedome.
God then hauing denyed this
knowledge, doth forbid the search of
this vnknowne, vnprofitable knowledge.
That which I desire to know,
which I desire to teach, is contained in
the testimony of holy Scripture; the
which denying me this knowledge of
the creation of Angels, I forbeare to
search the knowledge of Gods secrets;All necessary knowledge to salvation is contained in the scripture.
and bee content rather to bee thought
ignorant, then audaciously bolde with
forbidden knowledge.
                  That which is needfull to be known

of Angels,The nature, the office of Angels. The nature of their substance, Their quality. Power. Their office. is their nature, their office.
In their nature must be cōsidered what
they are in substance, what in quality.
Their substance is of the nature of our
soules; pure and spirituall, eternall (in
respect of ending) and without corruption.
In their quality is considered
their power; being at all times, and vpon
all occasions able for the execution
of Gods seruice. Their office is, that
they are Gods messengers; their imployment
is eyther in iudgements or
mercies. This compendium is the
knowledge of them all in general before
the fall and apostacy of Angels;
all of them,The good and euill Angels were all created in one nature. the Angels and those that
now are Diuels, being at their first creation,
of one quality, one power, and
one excellence of nature. After the fall
of Angels, who for their vnsupportable
pride, were cast from the presence
of God into enternall darknesse & damnation,
the Angels deuided themselues.
The better part keeping their
first estate,How the Angels were divided from the Divels. kept their entertainement
with God, and continued his fauour
and seruice. The worse deuiding themselues,

left the seruice of God,
                        
                           ••
                        at the Diuels la
                        
                           •
                        our. and the
fellowship of good Angels, bend their
whole endeuour against God, against
his blessed
                        •
                      Angells, and against the
Saints that loue and serue him. This
apostacie and diuision of Angels, hath
diuided thē in their natures, & in their
offices:The care of 
                           •
                        ood angels the good angels euer labouring
the good of men: the euill angels
to hinder and preuent the goodnesse
of God, and good angels; labouring
by all meanes to bring mankinde
to their owne condemnation. In theyr
offices likewise they disagrce;The full oposition of he good & 
                           •
                        ill angels. for God
dooth commonly imploy his good
Angels in his workes of mercy, and fauourable
protection. The Diuels he
employeth in his iudgements and corrections,
not that hee needeth their
seruice, but that hee forceth them
against their wils to his obediēce: these
seuerall imployments of the good and
euill angels, are not alwayes of necessitie
though very common: for God
doth often make his good angels destroy
and inflict vengeance: and the
Diuels he can vse in his workes of greatest

mercy. And this the Diuels do not
with content,God can apply the Diuels in the worke of his owne glory. but are eyther forced by
the vnresistable power of God, or else
they deceiue themselues in the end of
their owne workings, God making that
which they intend for euill, to reach an
end farre beyond,In his works of mercy. and contrary to their
expectation and purpose.
                  There is this difference also in the
executions of their seuerall offices;The difference in the. liberty of good and euill angels the
good Angels haue both liberty and
pleasure in the seruice of almightie
God; and they labour with content &
alacrity. The diuels haue neither liberty
nor pleasure, but being fettered with
limitations, cannot doe what they
would,And as good and euill angels, so good and euill men. but what they are onely licenced.
The angels are Gods seruants, the
diuels are his slaues: both labour in
his worke, but with great inequalitie.
Now to proue the substāce of this doctrine
by the testimonie of Scripture,
I might enlarge my selfe with the number
of authorities; the which because
they are frequent, I will produce only
somefew, such as may satifie doubt.
In the 104. Psalme, the Prophet admiring

and praising God for his wonderfull
creating and gouerning the Word,
in the fourth vers.Psal. 104. 4. he saith: God made the
spirits, (that is, the Angels) Messengers,
and a flaming fire his Ministers. This verse
is againe alledged by the author to the
Hebrewes: who to proue the preheminence
of the Sonne of God,Hebr. 1. 6. saith: that
all the Angels worship him, and proueth by
the testimonie of the Prophet Dauid,
                     Hebr. 1. 7.
that Angels are but Messengers, or Ministers:
& that they are of a substance
like fire or pure aire. By which testimonie
is proued both the nature and the
office of Angels: their nature, that they
are spirits like fire; their office, that they
are Ministers of Messengers. Their office
is againe repeated in the 14. verse:
Are they not all Ministring Spirites,
                     Verse. 14. 
                     sent
forth to minister for their sakes, which shall
be heires of saluation; by which is declared
the purpose of their ministration &
seruice: that is, for the benefite of Gods
Elect, both to preuent the enemie, and
to further them in their holie exercise.
To prooue the power of Angells, wee
may remember what God by an Angell

did for the Israelites in Egipt;
                     Exod. 14. what
he did when he brought them out by an
Angell.2. King. 12. 35. God destroyed of Saneheribs
Hoast in one Night 185000.Dan. 6. 16. An Angell
preserued Daniell from the Lyons:Act. 12. 7.
deliuered the Apostles out of Prison:Dan. 3. 23.
the three Children from the Fornace:
the Scripture is full of the demonstrations
of theyr powerfull acts, God working
his admirable effects by the seruice
of his Angells. Againe, if wee reduce
to memorie, the most memorable of all
Gods mercies, we shall finde that in the
execution, his Angels are eyther Ministers,
or Messengers, and often both.
                  To omit all other particulars, that most
worthie, most meritorious and happie:
the Redemption of mankinde, by the
birth, and by the death of Iesus Christ;
were not the Angells continuall workers
in that ministration? God sent his
Angell Gabriell to bring the first newes
thereof,Luk. 1. 26. &c. to the most blessed Virgin Marie.
                     Luk. 29.
Secondly,Luk. 2. 13. as soone as Christ was
borne of the Virgin, the holie Angell
did publish and preach it to the Shepheards;
multitudes of Heauenly Soldiers

praysing and magnifying God for
so great a benefite. How often did the
Angels visit and comfort our Sauiour?
The Diuell could acknowledge that
God had giuen his Angels charge to
prouide,Luk. 4. 10. 11. that his Son should not hurt
his foot (that is) should not perish in
the least particular. Christ being in
his agony vpon the mount, there appeared
an Angell to him, comforting him.
At his resurrection the Angels attend,
and are the first publishers of that blessed
newes.Luk. 22. 43. 44. Lastly,Luk. 24. 4. at his ascension the
holy Angelles attend to bring him
to the bosome of his Father,Act. 1. 10. 11. comforting
the Apostles with the promise of
his returne. Thus wee see by testimony
of Scripture, what the Angels are, what
their office is,The gracious disposition of good Angels. and how they are affected;
of so gracious a disposition, & so
inclinable to the good of men, that
they haue ioy and consolation in Heauen
among themselues at the Conuersion
of a sinner.
                     Luk. 15. 7. 10. Therefore in all respects
of noblenesse and excellency,
they are the most Soueraigne of all
creatures, whom God hath ordained

to be continual wayters in his holy presence.
                  It is by many doubted,A question. by some demaunded,
whether men may not lawfully
implore the fauor and assistance of
angels: for in their reasons it dooth
seeme equall, that seeing God hath giuen
his Angels the charge of his elect,
& hath made them ministring Spirites,
                     Heb. 1. 14. The angels haue a charge of holy men.
                     for their sakes which shall bee heyres of saluation,
that therefore they implore
their gracious protection, giue some
acknowledgement of thanks to the holy
Angels, by whom they haue helpe
& supportation, in the passage of their
Christian pilgrimage.The answer. First. To answer this,
there is a double doubt to be resolued.
First, I doubt whether euery faithfull
christian man & woman, haue one particular
Angell assigned them, and whether
that Angel he at all times continually
present. Secondly,Secondly, These doubts cannot be satisfied. whether the
Angels of God not present, can heare
the prayers of men directed to them.
The first, that euery man hath his Angell
assigned him, was neuer yet substantially
proued: and that angels absent

should be able to heare our praiers
present, is dangerous to acknowledge;
lest therby we take diuinity from God,We must not take from God to giue his Angels.
and giue it to his Angels. And whereas
they reinforce this argument with
some examples in the Scripture, as in
the 48. of Genesis, the 16. verse,
                     Gen. 48. 16. where Iacob
blessing the sonnes of Ioseph, sayth:
The Angell which hath deliuered me from
all euill,
                     An answere to an obiection. 
                     blesse the children, &c. It is answered,
that by Angell, Iacob here vnderstandeth
God. Againe, if the words
will not beare that construction, but
that it must bee graunted to bee an
Angel, the messenger or Minister of almighty
God;God giues his speciall favour to speciall and choyse particulars. it is not therefore granted,
that euery Christian hath the like
degree of fauour as Iacob had; he being
a speciall select, by whom God
would declare himselfe to be wonderfull,
giuing him extraordinary degrees
of fauour, and extraordinary protection.
Therefore the Angell of God did
oftentimes assist him,Quaere. both in his
griefe, and hopes; the Angell presenting
himselfe to Iacob in a visible form;
and Iacob wrastling with the Angel, the

which familiarity hath not been granted
but to some choyse particulars only.
And Iacob doth not direct his praier
to the Angell,We may pray to God, for the protection of angels, but not to the angels for Gods protection. but to God, that the
Angel might protect his grandchildrē;
and in praying for this extraordinary
blessing for his children, he doth not
conclude that therefore euery Christian
man hath the like extraordinary fauour.
They are therefore dangerously
deceyued, who for giuing the holy Angels
their demonstrations of thankes,
giue them adoration and diuine worship;
& so coueting to please, displease
the holy Angels that attend them.
                  This is one extremity; there is another,Another extremity.
and that is a remisnesse: when
men acknowledge no reuerence, no respect
to the dignity of holy angels. The
holy men of all ages at the sight of an
Angel would vse extraordinary respect
of humility & reuerence.A reverence due to holy angels. 
                     Abrahā
                      he bowed
himself in reuerence to the ground
and called the Angell Lord:Gen. 18. 2. 3. so likewise
in the example of all the godly.Obiection.
And though men obiect that in these
times the angels do not present themselues,

(as in the old world) in visible
formes; and therefore they neede no
reuerence,Answer. there being no knowledge
of their presence. I answer, that though
they appeare not in formes,The angels often present with vs in their spirituall nature. yet they
are notwithstanding, often present in
their spirituall natures: which though
our corporall eyes cannot discerne, yet
a spirituall iudgement and holy meditation
will remember vs. And this is
answerable to the iudgement of Saint
Paul, who would haue men and women
vse decency and respect, euen
because of the angels.1 Cor. 11. 10. 
                     Therefore (saith
he) ought a woman to haue power on her
head (that is to bee couered) because of
the Angels: for if there be a duety of reuerence
to men, with whom wee conuerse,
there is doubtlesse a reuerence
also due to the holy angels that conuerse
with vs.
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     This doctrine of the Creation, the
nature, the power, and the office of angels,
doth admonish and remember al

men to make these and such like profitable
vses.
                     First,Vse. 1. The angels are witnesses of Gods power. it doth remember vs the mighty
power of God, and that in a double
respect. First, in being able by the power
of his word, to create a Creature of
that excellence and power of nature: in
nature excellent, in number infinite.
Secondly▪
                        God attended by angels. in being serued and attended
by this infinite number of powerfull
creatures, one whereof is able (if
God please to commaund) to destroy
the world and all the generations on
earth. God then being of such infinite
power in himselfe, in his seruants the
Angels: it ought iustly to moue al men
to a reuerence of so great a Maiestie:
and to a feare to prouoke a power so
able and infinite.The second vse. Againe, the apostacy
of those angells that fell from theyr
obedience, and first state of happines,
doth admonish all men, that seing the
Angels, of such power, of such excellence,
and so neare God in his fauour,The fall of angels doth disswade security and presumption.
in his presence, were tempted to fall
from so great happinesse, that no man
therefore bee secure or presume in the

confidence of his owne trust; but dayly
to begge, and wholly to rely vpon
the mercy and providence of GOD,
without whom there is no safety, no
security. The greatest power in the
world being but weaknesse without the
strength of his supportation. Secondly,
as Saint Peter sayth:) If God spared
not the Angels that had sinned,
                        2. Pet, 2. 4. 6 
                        but cast
them downe into hell, and deliuered them
into chaines of darknesse, to bee kept vnto
damnation:
                        Their damnation doth conclude the damnation of euill men. neyther will hee spare the
transgressions of men, that of knowledge
and purpose offend him, For the
angels are greater then men,Vers. 11. both in
power and might: if God then spare
not the better, hee will not spare the
worse, but cast them likewise into
chaines of darkenesse, to bee kept vnto
damnation.The third vse. Againe, though the angelles
were of this excellency and
dignity of nature, and although many
of them did fal from their state of innocence,Christ did restore the falling man, not the falling Angels.
as Adam afterwards did: yet the
Redeemer of the world Christ Iesus,
did not vouchsafe to take their nature
and redeeme them, but left them in the

iudgement of condemnation, vndertaking
and finishing the worke of Redemption
for men and not for Angels.Heb. 2. 16. 17. 18.
And this ought to prouoke all
men to a zealous affection of loue towards
God, who gaue his onely begotten,
his onely beloued Sonne for the
redemption of men, preferring them in
his loue before the Angels that had offended.
Lastly,The fourth vse. in that the Angels of
God are commonly present with christian
men in their spirituall natures,Heb. 1. 14. being
sēt of God to minister for their sakes
that shall bee heyres of saluation: It doth
remember vs first, the wonderfull loue
of God to mankind, in being content
that his choyse seruants the Angells,
that wayte in his presence, neare the
person of his Maiestie, should be imployed
about men, in the seruice of
their saluation. Secondly,Secondly▪
                         it ought to
moue men to a precise reuerence,A respect due to the reuerence of Holy Angels. in
the common behauiour of their liues:
that they forbeare not onely the committing
of grosse and capitall sinnes:
but all vnseemelinesse both of words &
actions, (as Saint Paul sayth) for the

reuerence of Angels.1. Cor. 11, 10. For as Diuels
are banished frō the possessed by prayer,
and holy exercise: so the good Angells
then leaue our company,Note. when
we delight in wicked or vnseemely behauiour.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     This knowledge of the mercy,Speciall application. of the
power of God in creating the Angels,
and appointing them to minister to all
the children of grace, shall bind me in
the most assured bonds of duety and
thankefull acknowledgement to my
God.To repose in God is assurance of safety. I will also confidently repose in
the trust of Gods prouidence, being
assured that himselfe, that his holy Spirit,
that his Angels are my supporters.
I will neuer despayringly feare the euill
of men, of Diuels, or what euill power
soeuer; because I know whose I am,
and in whose company. I will reforme
the errours of my life, and watch my
behauiour, I will endeauour to auoyde
both sinne and vnseemelinesse in all

my actions; that thy holy Angels may
loue and not loath my fellow shippe: I
will so endeauour that my conscience
may assure me I am thine, appointed to
saluation;Heb. 1. 14. and therefore in the protection
of Angels I shall also receiue content
and a pleasure vnexpressable; that
thy holy Angels haue ioy in Heauen at
the newes of my saluation.Luk. 15. 7. Holy and
blessed spirites, they are so delighted
with the vse of mercy, as that they reioyce
and congratulate the prosperity
of men. O my God, I will acknowledge
thy greatnesse, and thy goodnes
in the creation of Angels: I will damne
their infidelity that beleeue it not: thou
hast sayde it, who dare question it? I
will therefore beleeue it, acknowledge
thy power, prayse thy mercy,The Saduces deny that there are Angells and
(with reuerence) remember
the office and ministration
of thy holy
Angels.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of Man his first beginning,
and the state of his
Innocency.
Chap 4
                  
                     WHen God had created
the world, & had giuen
being and proportion
to al creatures saue mā;
that he mightconclude
his labor with a work of extraordinary
admiration,Man the most excellēt of Gods worke. he then made man, giuing
him the possession of the world hee had
created: In this worke of God there are
these considerations. First,First. the aduise &
deliberation of the Trinity, in determining
this work:Gen. 1. 26. God said, Let vs make
man, &c. Secondly,Second. God made man of
a preexistent matter, not creating him
of nothing as hee did the other Creatures:
The Lord also made Man of
the dust of the ground,
                     Gen. 2. 7. &c. Thirdly,Thirdly. man

was made in the image of God, and
according to his likenesse. Gen. 1. 26.
Let vs make man in our image, and according
to our likenesse. Fourthly,Fourthly. the rule
and gouernment God gaue man ouer
all creatures; giuing him liberty ouer
all, to vse them in their kinde with moderation:
And let them rule ouer the fish
of the sea,
                     Gen. 1. 26. 
                     & ouer the sowle of the heauen,
& ouer the beasts, and ouer al the earth, and
ouer euery thing that creepeth and moueth
on the earth, vers. 26 Fiftly,Fiftly. is to be cō
                     sidered
the end of mans Creation
which is for the glory and honour of
God that made him.Isay. 43. 7. 
                     Euery one shall be
called by my name, for I created him for
my glory, formed him & made him. These
particulars are most materiall, and of
nearest consideration in the creation of
man, and because of their importance,
I will somewhat dilate vpon euery particular.
First of the aduise and deliberation
God vsed when hee formed man:
God sayd, Let vs make man.
                     Gen. 1. 26. When he
created the World, and the Workes
therein, he sayde, Let there be, and there
were; but when hee commeth to make

man, he sayth, Let vs make by whom he
putteth a difference betwixt man and
euery other creatur,The difference God made between man and his other c
                           •••
                        
                        tures. that as man should
excell all other in the excellency of
his nature, and in the purpose of his
end; so God would honour him aboue
all in the manner of his Creation. Let
vs, that is, the three persons in the Trinity,
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
the which at the making of man, are
personally vnderstood: at the creating
of the world, they are not personally,
but generally vnderstood, in the vnity
of their Godhead,Note. For so I vnderstand
the words of Gods creating, Let there
bee, to be meant by the Godhead indiuisible;
the words, Let vs make, to bee
meant by the persons distinguished.
And though no man can bee able to
giue a reason of the secret will of God:
yet this may bee imagined,A supposed reason of Gods secret will. that seeing
the world and all the creatures therein
(saue man) haue only a generall respect
to the honour of God, & therfore were
they by the generall power of Gods
diuinity created: but man (being determined
in the counsell of God) that

hee should bee an occasion that the
whole Trinity should haue diuine exercise
in the gouernement of his life;The Trinity haue divine exercise in the governement of man.
and euerie one in their seuerall assignements,
as should please themselues to
appoint: therefore God (in the Trinity
of persons) made man, because afterwardes
in the Trinity of persons
hee was to gouerne him. God he gaue
man a law,God the Father gaue man a law. which he being not able to
keepe, did condemne him. Christ the
second person, moderateth the law, &
giueth the Gospell,Christ moderateth the law, and giveth the Gospell. The holy Ghost moueth grace. promising saluation
to all that will beleeue. The holy
Ghost he moueth in the harts of Gods
elect, and giueth grace to apprehend
by faith, the meanes of saluation. Thus
are they personally busied in the gouernement
and preseruation of man;
thus were they personally at his Creation.The matter of mans creation. The difference God made in the creation between man and all other creatures.
                  
                  The second consideration, is the
matter of mans creation. And this in a
double respect is considerable, in the
person of God; first, God when he formed
other creatures, hee required no
matter, but gaue them beeing by his

word. But when hee formed man, hee
first prepared his matter, then gaue the
forme, and created man. Wherin God
doth vse a double care, a double diligence;
not that hee could not create
man of nothing as he had the rest of his
creatures, but he did it in the wisedome
of his diuinity,The reason why God made man of a preexistent matter. for respect and causefull
consideration. First, to expresse his
double, or rather his manifold affection
to that creature. Secondly,Secondly. to preuent
the proude imagination, man
might haue of the noblenesse of his
nature,The naturall pride of flesh. it being yet in the pride of our
flesh; to boast our descent, and to deriue
our families from antiquity and
greatnesse.
                  The third consideration is the distinguishing
forme of man,The forme of man his soule. his reasonable
soule, whereby God doth distinguish
him from all the Creatures of
earth, giuing him reason and discourse
to in able him for the gouernement of
the world. This is considerable in
these respects. First, the order God obserued
in the creation: God first made
the world, afterwards hee made man,

and gaue him the possession.The order God vsed at the making of man. So when
hee made man, he first framed the body,
then formed the soule, Hee made
not the body and soule at one instant,
but in their times, and in order: for
when hee had made the house, he then
put in the tenant, & not before. Secondly,
is considered the excellency of the
nature of our soules.The nature of our soules. Gen. 2. 7. For God neyther
made nor created our soule, but inspired
it by the vertue of his diuinity. Gen.
2. 7. The Lord God also made man of the
dust of the ground, there is the matter of
his body. And breathed in his face the
breath of life: there was the nature and
excellence of his soule; being the breath
of almighty God, diuine, spirituall &
eternall. And the man was (then) a liuing
soule:
                     The soule is the distinguishing forme of man. for before God inspired the
soule, was man onely framed and not
formed, his reasonable soule being that
which doth distinguish him from all other
creatures, being (in respect of his
soule) the nearest resemblance to Gods
diuinity.Gen. 1. 26 Man is Gods image in respect of his reasonable soule. For so God determining his
creation, sayth: Let vs make man in our
own image, according to our likenes. Mans

soule, being (in respect of reason & eternity,
a resemblance of Gods diuinity.
                  The fourth consideration,Fourthly. is the rule
and gouernment God gaue man ouer
all creatures. Gen, 1. 26.Gen. 1. 26. 
                     And let them rule
ouer the fish of the seas &c. First, it is considered,
that God by giuing man this
authority,With what cautions God gaue man government. doth not disinable himself of
the gouernment of his owne creatures,
but doth reserue to himselfe the Soueraigne
regality; giuing man a stewardship,
and superintendance onely.Psal. 24. 1 
                     The
earth (sayth holy Dauid) is the Lords, and
all that is therin, the round world, and they
that dwell therein. Secondly,Secondly in that
it is sayd, God gaue them rule, &c. there
is a double consideration. First, that
God communicateth his power to
mankind in generall, not to this or that
particular.The generall descent of power deriued vpō all. For God speaketh in the
plurall number, Hee gaue them, and not
him power, &c. So that the power is
deriued vpon all, and not vpon one,
or any number of certaine particulars.
Againe, these words, hee gaue them,
haue relation to the words, he created
them. Gen. 1. 27.Gen. 1. 27. 
                     God created the man in

his image, in the image of God created hee
him, he created them male and female. So
when he gaue man the gouernment of
the world, hee sayth, He gaue them that
is,The man and woman had a like authority in Gods creatures. the man and the woman: for as God
did not deuide them in their Natures,
so hee would not diuide them in the vse
and gouernment of his creatures, but
whatsoeuer is lawfull to the one, is lawfull
to the other; both of them hauing
equall and indifferent power in the vse
of Gods creatures.
                  Lastly,Fiftly. is considered the end of mans
creation,The end of mans creation. which is, that God may bee
glorified in the seruice of so noble a
creature. I say, 43. 7.Isay. 43. 7. 
                     I created him for my
glory, formed him and made him. God is
glorified or honoured in a double respect.Note.
First, in acknowledgement. Secondly,
in personall seruice. In acknowledgements,
when men haue a thankefull
remembrance of Gods mercy in
the creation, and in the Redemption of
mankind. This acknowledgement is
declared in the meditations, prayers,How we should declare our thanks to God.
thankesgiuings, and reuerence of
holy men, to the Name, the Memory,

and the maiesty of God. In the
15. of Exodus, the second verse, Moses
acknowledging Gods mercy in theyr
deliuerance sayth:Exod. 15. 2. 
                     The Lord is my strēgth
and prayse, and hee is become my saluation:
he is my God, and I will prepare him a tabernacle:
hee is my Fathers God, and I will
exalt (or honor) him. And the Prophet
Dauid hath it common in his holy meditations,
that he will honour God in
his acknowledgements; and condemneth
the hypocrisie of euill men, that
honour God with their lips, and haue
their hearts farre from him. And Saint
Paul in the heate of his zealous affection,
calleth this glory his reioycing, and
disclameth euery other obiect of glory,Gal. 6. 14.
but Iesus Christ, and him crucified.
Secondly,Secondly. God is honoured in the personall
seruices of men, and that is when
they carefully trauell in the exercise of
such Christian duties, as he hath commanded.How wee should glorifie God in personall seruice.
This hath relation to that
conditionall proposition of our Sauiour
Christ: If you loue mee keepe my
commandements. For if we neyther keep
nor endeuour to keepe his commandements,

we loue not; and whom we loue
not, we cannot honour. And as Christ
sayth of himselfe. The works which I
doe, be are witnesse of mee, &c. So the
endeuours of our liues,Ouractions witnesse our affections. witnesse what
we are, and whether wee honour God,
and loue him or not. These fiue particulars,
are the maine considerations to
be regarded in the creating of man. In
the creator is remembred his deliberation,
Let vs: in the Creation, the matter
and the forme; the matter earth,
                     A compendium of the chapter. the
forme Gods breath. In the creature, his
rule, his end: his rule, he was Steward,
and superintendent Lord ouer all: his
end, the glory and seruice of his creator
God.
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     The generall vse of this doctrine,The Vse is a
general acknowledgement of duty that
all men owe to God their creator,Man made noble out of basenesse. who
(of his owne accord) hath beene pleased
to make man so noble a creature, of
so base a matter; to endow him with a

soule so neare the nature of his diuinity,
to giue him such rule, to ordayne
him such an end, equall to the honour
of Angels,Note. equall to their happinesse
This may remember all men what
God had done for them, what God
doth expect from them. It may remember
all, what they were, what
they are, what they shall be, what they
should be. This knowledge may both
remember and admonish; it will also
preuaile in all their hearts that haue the
least mouings of Gods holie Spirite in
them. For he that knoweth this, considereth
it,The reprobate onely are carelesse in the state of their saluation. and is not mooued, doth
declare against himselfe, and doth
iudge himselfe to bee reprobate, who
fayling in the purpose of a Christian
life, doth not only disinherit himselfe
of Gods gift, which is earth, but of
Heauen, which hee would giue; and
doth by that act of disobedience, both
depriue himselfe of Gods fauor (which
is happinesse) and purchase to himselfe
a state of damnation,What hee gaineth that leeseth Gods fauor. infinite in time,
infinite in torment. Secondly, seeing
man was made ofso base a matter, of

the dust of the ground,The disgrace of ambitious and aspiring spirits. the basest part
of the basest element, it doth disgrace
the pride and ambitious spirits of men,
who vaunt themselues in the noblenesse
of their descent, or in the prosperity of
their fortunes. For God hath giuen
one and the same beginning to all
men; the honourable and the base, the
rich and the poore, beeing all deriued
from one first matter, a matter so base,
as nothing could be more, being the refuse
& of-scourings of the earth, which
all of vs were in our first matter,Gen. 3. 19. before
our creation; which all of vs shall be in
our graues, where we shal al be reduced
and brought backe to our first matter.
This being considered, how vaine a
folly is it for men to proud themselues
in their prosperities,Pride the vainest folly in mans nature. and disgracefully
to repute men for their difference of
fortune? for the best man is but base
earth, and the basest man is created in
Gods image; all of one nature, and in
one office, and all to one end ordayned.
Therefore in a Christian indgement,
there is no difference of men,
but the difference of good & bad. And

this inequality is not in their nature,What the true difference of men is. but
in the corruption and defect of nature.
And the fasest way to esteeme men, is
to compare them in their gifts of grace,
and not of fortune. For (with God)
the least spirit of grace,The difference of grace and fortune. though in the
lowest degree of fortune, doth out-value,
and is able to disgrace the greatest
state in the world (if not gracious.)
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     This knowledge of my creation,Application. shall
resolue me in my dutifull obedience to
God; that seeing his hands haue fashioned
me,1. Cor. 3. 17 A reformed resolution. and that his mercy hath made
my body a Temple or a Sanctuary
for his holy Spirit to dwell in, therefore
I will carefully keepe this body. this
temple from the filth of sinne, and indeuour
my selfe in such holy exercise,
that my soule may haue the perpetuall
fellowshippe of the Holy Ghost,
without which, there is no happines,
no saluation: I will refrayne to company
with the leprosie of sinne, lest I

runne into their danger, and defile my
body, this temple with diseased company.
I will hate the imitation of
mens vices, I will not bee tempted
with their Fellowship; because I know
that when I prophane my body, the
temple of the holy Ghost,Holy bodies Gods temple. I shal banish
that sweet society, frustrate my hope,
and wound the quiet of my conscience.
(O my God) of base earth thou
madest me a noble Creature; I had no
life, no soule before thou inspired it,
thou gauest me reason and vnderstanding
to inable mee fo
                           •
                         thy diuine seruice;
thou hast ordayned mee thy seruant;God that gaue grace, can onely continue it.
thou hast giuen mee entertainement:
continue mee (I besee
                           •
                        h thee)
in this seruice; let my soule, let my
body, let euery power, let euery part
thereof, haue theyr imployments: I desire
no change, I was thine from the
beginning, continue me for euer. Thy
selfe (O my God) inspired my Soule,What our soule is.
it is thy breath, and therefore precious,
it was thine before I had it, helpe mee
to keepe it in the time, and in the danger
of my pilgrimage, and when thou

shall call it home, I will gladly breath
it backe, for with thee there is onelie
safety, with thee there is happinesse
without time,How and where to repose our confidence. without measure. In the
meane time keepe me from the danger
of leesing: let mee walke in the directions
of thy holy Spirite. I am not able
to moue my selfe in an holy course, if
thy hand lead not, I shall eyther faint
or wander: O keepe mee from both;A needfull care.
that I may trauell the passage of my
life with alacrity and spirituall profite,
that this earth, this body of earth
may passe to his graue in hope, and
that this breath, this soule may returne
from whence it came with
confidence. This is the happinesse
for which I wil only endeuour,
for which I will alway
pray (O my God)
thou hast made me
resolute.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the State of mans Innocence
before his fall.
Chap. 5.
                  
                     THat man was created
good,Man created innocent. holy, & innocent
is euident by the testimony
of Scripture, neyther
is it doubted of the
christian world to whom I write. Therfore
I shall lesse need to trauell in the
search of authorities, neyther spend
time & words to proue a general grant.
For when God had ended the worke of
his creation, the holy Ghost saith, that

                        
                           •
                        ee viewed all that hee had made,
                     Gen. 1. 31. 
                     and loe

                           〈◊〉
                         was very good. For God being the fa
                     
                        •
                     her
and fountain of goodnesse,Nothing but good can be deriued from God. it was

                        •
                     ot possible that any thing that was e
                     
                        •
                     ill
should bee deriued from him▪ but

                        •
                     ike himselfe, so his worke was perfect
                     
                        •
                     y
good; no blemish, no defect. It is

                        •
                     herfore generally to be beleeued, that

                     Adam at his first creation was holy and
innocent, no defect of nature, no corruption
of sinne: and that God gaue
him the liberty of free will, and power
(if so he would) to continue his estate
of happinesse.Ecclus. 15. 14. 15. From this doctrine of
the free-will of man before his fall,Free-will. hath
risen much controuersie, and strife of
words, the knowledge whereof is more
dangerous thē profitable in the vnderstandings
of the simple and vnlearned:The euill 
                           〈◊〉
                        . of men.
all men being naturally desirous to
know or seeme to know those intricate
and nice questions, and few that haue
sufficient wisedome ey
                        •
                     her to deliuer
or iudge them. I will therefore sparingly
deliuer my iudgement.
                  
                     Adam in the state of his innocence,ADAMS condition in the state of his innocence.
had this condition of happinesse: First,
he was in the ful fauor of God, a ioy vnexpressable.
Secondly he had the world
& the creatures therein for his vse and
pleasure, all which were then perfectlie
good. Th
                        •
                     rdly, hee had power giuen
him of God to continue this happines
to himselfe and his posterity for euer.
The first, 
                        •
                     hat he enioyed the full fauor

of God is proued in the proofe of the

                        •
                     econd and third;ADAM rich in spirituall and temporall blessings. for the giftes both

                        •
                     emporall and spirituall which GOD
gaue him, doe well declare the infinit
measure of Gods loue to him: God
giuing him all that was created, and

                        •
                     ore then was created: a diuine soule,

                        •
                     nd with that such induments of grace,

                        •
                     s made him a creature most excellent

                        •
                     nd happy:Secondly For the second, that God
gaue him. the possession of the world,

                        •
                     oth for his vse and pleasure, is already
proued. Yet more, God for an extraordinary
demonstration of his fauour,
planted a Garden in Eden,
                     Gen. 2. 8. v. of admirable
variety,Ver. 9. both for vse and ornament:
For out of the ground made the Lord God

                           •
                        o grow euery tree pleasant to the sight (that

                        •
                     as for ornament,ADAM had all things needfull both for vse and ornament.) and good for meate
(that was for vse) the tree of life also in the

                           •
                        iddest of the garden, & the tree of know
                        
                           •
                        edge
of good and euill.
                  
                  These were there both for the beau
                     
                        •
                     y
of the place, and for the tryall of

                        •
                     ans obedience. And God gaue Adā
                     
                     
                        •
                     berty to eate thereof (freely) of eue
                     
                        •
                     e
tree in the Garden,ADAMS liberty and restraint. onely prohibiting

him to taste of the tree of knowledge.
These benefites, this bountie
was large; yet doth God still inlarge
himselfe in his fauour to Adam, and
deuiseth to make him an helpe fitt for
him;Gen. 2. 18 for he sayd, It is not good for man to
bee alone: As if God did labour his inuention
to deuise for the good, and for
the helpe of man.Ver. 20. Therefore hee caused
all the creatures to come before Adam, but
among them all hee found not an help meet
for him.
                     Vers. 22. 
                     Then God made woman, and gaue
her for the consolation of man. Thus did
God deriue his blessings by degrees
vpon man,The degrees of Gods fauor to ADAM. still inlarging the measur of
his bounty and goodnes towards him.
So as there wanted nothing, which in
the Wisedome of God was thought
fit for mans prosperity. Lastly, to all
these fauours,Free-will in ADAM before his fall. GOD yet giueth one,
more then all; and that was a free will
and power in himselfe to deriue these
infinite blessings vpon himselfe and his
posterity for euer; no mixture of griefe
to distaste them, no death to depriue
them; but themselues and these pleasures
to bee infinite and vnspeakeable.

And yet more, that all these and theyr
continuance,The easie condition betweene God and ADAM. was giuen vpon such easie
condition, as (in our imaginations)
could hardly tempt a reasonable man
to a small forfeit: An apple, perhaps no
better, or not so good in taste, as many
other in the garden, whereof Adam
might haue freely eaten, without feare,
without forfeit.Witnesses of Gods loue. All this doth but witnesse
the infinite loue of God to his
creature man, who gaue him so greate
a power, and had proposed so inestimable
a reward for so small a seruice.
Here I might inlarge my selfe with the
contētious opinions of men in this argument,Much needlesse controuersie in this argument.
all which of purpose I auoyd,
because I had rather speak to mens vnderstandings
with profite, then be vainly
curious
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     This (as doth the former) doth remember
all men,The Vse how surpassing the
loue of God was to mankinde, who
(notwithstanding man was made of a

matter so base and vnworthy, as nothing
like him: yet doth GOD descend
his Maiesty to dignifie his basenesse;
and did heape such honour, such
sauour vppon man, as made him the
most excellent, and the most happy of
all the creatures of God; giuing him
felicity and power to continue it;
which of all the blessings and gifts of
GOD was the greatest. For that is
thought to bee the greatest misery to
haue been happy,To haue been happy is a misery. and to be altered:
and the greatest happinesse is to bee
able to continue happy. Which power
God gaue to the liberty of man, to be,
or not to bee happy for euer. This extraordinary
degree of fauour to our
first Father Adam, doth deserue thankefull
acknowledgement from all men, because
the fauour did reach to all the
generations of Adam euen to vs, and
to them that shall succeede vs for euer.
All men being then in Adam, and Adam
then a compendium of all men: the
honour and the grace being conferd to
euery man in generall without exception
of any.
                  
                  
                     
                     Speciall application.
                     Seeing God hath thus honored my
father Adam,
                        Speciall application. inlarging his beneuolence
to him aboue the rest of his creatures:
and seeing this was not giuen to Adam
onely,Whatsoeuer was giuen to ADAM, was giuen to euery particular. but to his posterity for euer, euen
to my selfe being a sonne of Adam,
and deriued from his beginning: I do
therefore acknowledge my selfe in as
great a debt of beholding to my God,
as Adam my Father, to whom God
gaue these blessings by name, and in
speciall manner, my selfe being interested
in the benefite, as well as Adam:
nor Adam being able to out-trude mee
from this fauour, and continue himselfe:
but as his sinne made himselfe &
me both alike miserable, so a constant
continuing in his innocency hath made
vs both eternally happy, without feare,
without hazzard, no interruption. I
will therefore aduise with my selfe,A Resolution.
what honour, what thankes, what seruice
is due from Adam vnto God: I

will compare the infinite greatnesse of
God to Adams nothing;Note. I will measure
them in the infinite distance of their
worths;God was only moued to fauour by himselfe. I shall study to know what desert,
what moouing cause could prouoke
God to those degrees of fauour.
I will search this desert in the excellence
of mans nature. I shall doubtlesse
fayle, though I search there with
diligence. I will then resort to the mercy
of God, and there inquire; there I
shall rightly vnderstand this knowledge.
For thy selfe (O God) did moue
thy selfe to these effects. Thy mercy did
moue thy maiesty,Mercy doth moue maieiesty. thy fauour thy power.
Thy goodnesse did perswade thy
greatnesse, thy greatnesse did effect
what thy goodnesse caused. Thus was
God tempted by himselfe, to dignifie
my Father Adam. Adam could bee no
cause of his owne honour,ADAM no cause of his owne good. because it
was in Gods decree before Adam had
being. Therefore had Adam the greater
cause of thankefulnes; that God did
please (without cause) thus to aduance
him. Adams honour was mine, Adams
duty is mine. I am as strictly bound in

my obligation to God, as Adam my
father was.Resolution. I will therefore (with my
best diligence) endeuour to bee constant
in that duty wherein hee fayled,
And though Adam hath disinherited
both mee and all his posterity, of that
power which he had to performe this
diuine acknowledgements: yet will I
striue with my nature, to reforme
my errour, and to come as neare as
I can in the imitation of Adams innocence.We must contend against our own nature.
Thus let mee euer be resolued
to contend against the corruption of
my nature, and (with an holy ambition)
to couet to equall, or exceed the
honour and happy state of my Father
Adam in his innocence. Againe, seeing
God did make mee so wonderfull
in my frame, so excellent in my Nature,
I will therefore (with modesty
and reuerence to God) esteeme my
selfe.How and for what wee ought to esteeme our selues. I will vnderstand, and remember
that God hath made me a creature
of note, ordayned for holy endes, and
made the mayster of infinite other creatures.
I will remember that my soule
is the diuine breath of God, my body

a Temple for his holy Spirite. I will
therefore bend my endeuour to fashion
the gouernement of my life (in
some proportion) to this excellence
of nature. I will hate the company and
imitation of euill, because God hath
created me good: I will value the prosperity
of my soule, before the possession
of the whole world: I will bee iealous
of my selfe, and will carefully feare
to giue entertainement to any euill
cause,How Christians should bee affected. that may depriue or corrupt me:
I will loue my owne saluation before all
but God; because God did honour me
aboue all but himselfe, in my creation.
Thus may I lawfully (with religious
modesty) esteeme my selfe. God did
grace me in my creation, God
will double that grace in my
saluation. For this I earnestly
expect, I
pray.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Originall sinne, the fall and
apostacy of Man.
Chap 6.
                  
                     WHen man was in the
height of his prosperity,
hauing all things requisite
to make him
both happy and great,
and wanting nothing
that might administer the fulnes of cō
                     tent
to his desire: he is then suddenly
(by himselfe) cast from these pleasures
into a state most miserable,Man did degrade himselfe. depriuing
himselfe and posterity, not onely of the
pleasures, but of the vse-full necessaries
of this life, and that which is infinitely
more worth then the rest, the fauour &
presence of God, which of it self (without
addition) is able to make the enioier
most absolute in his felicity.Gods fauor the highest benefite. Thus in
a trice, was Man (the glory of Gods
workmanship) by sinfull disobedience

spoyled of his innocence; which when
he wanted, his very nature then endured
alteration;A strange alterarion. and hee that but latelie
was made Lord of all the World, is
now made subiect to all extremities.
This one touch of sinne, being of that
infectious nature, that (like a leprosie)
it spreades ouer his whole nature; his
body,A generall decay. his soule, his workes, nay his very
affections are infected with this venome,
his holinesse, innocence, and all
his diuine graces abandon his nature,
not daigning to comfort in the fellowship
of sinne. God (also) who had made
him so wonderfull, and had so wonderfully
enricht him with benefites,What bitter effectes sinne causeth. takes
off the maiesty & ornanaments he had
giuen him, inuesting him with pouerty,
and extremities of fortune. And
whereas before hee had made him immortall,
hee now makes him subiect to
the stroke of death, and in this array,
thus altered, hee excludes him his sacred
presence:ADAM being a compendium of all, brought destruction on all when hee sinned. this sinne, branding
not onely Adam with this disgrace, &
these deformities, but himselfe and
his posterity for euer, being all disgraced

from their innocence, and degraded
from their excellence of Nature.
Now would I chalenge the best
inuention in the World, to describe
Adam in the griefe of this alteration. It
is not in the power of any mans inuention
to doe it,An vnutterable measure of griefe. there are not words, nay
imagination hath not thoughts to conceiue
it. For to fayle in the search of
prosperity, i
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     n admirable degree of
griefe; but to be depriued is a torment,
and doth require extraordinary patience.
Thus much in generall.
                  In the fall and Apostacy of man,Considerations in this argument. is
principally considered these particulars.
First, from whence hee fell. Secondly,
to what hee fell: the infinite
variety of questions depending necessarily
vpon these two particulars; the
which (of purpose) I contract, for order,
and for the easie vnderstanding of
the simple.First from what ADAM fell. First, is to bee considered,
from what hee fell; and that was from
the fauour of God, considered in the
excellence and innocence of mans nature:
in his large induments of grace,
in his power, and in his possession of

pleasure:ADAM had an absolute measure of pleasure. in all which respects, Adam
(the first man) was so aboundantly fauoured,
as that his soule could desire
no inlargement: God hauing giuen
him so manie and so great demonstrations
of his loue, as made him distinguished
from all other creatures. This
doctrine is aboundantly proued in the
Chapters before of the Creation of
man,Gen. 2. and of his innocence: I will therefore
forbeare to multiply arguments in
so plaine a proofe,Secondly. To what ADAM fel. For the second, to
what esta
                        •
                     e hee fell, this is familiarlie
knowne in the experience of euerie
mans life; the most fortunate of euery
mans life, beeing full of the markes of
this misery For to vnderstand our
selues, is rightly to vnderstand what
Adam was in his sinnes;The miseries of this life. and the miserable
change he endured by the alteration
of his Fortunes, doth giue vs particular
knowledge in the misery of our
owne condition. Adam our Father by
generation, was the Father also of our
corruptions;ADAM, the parent of our corruption. and wee his generation,
deriuing our Substance and Natures
from him, haue with them deriued

his sinne, and the punishment thereof;How wee are guilty by ADAM.
the which as they were inseparable
in the nature of Adam, at, and after
his fall: so are they necessarily descended
downe vpon vs his posterity: 
                        •
                     he
trespasse being in him from whom wee
are all deriued, makes that wee are all
guilty of the sinne of Adam, and all deseruers
of the like punishments. This
is Saint Paul his iudgement.Rom. 5. 12 
                     Rom. 5. 12.
Wherefore as by one man sinne entred into
the world, and death by sinne, and so death
went ouer all men: for as much as all men
haue sinned. As Adam was, so are wee:
such a father, such children. To know
him, wee must view our selues, and to
know our selues we must view him. The

                        •
                     est way to vnderstand our nature, is

                        •
                     o consider it in Adam; but to vnderstand
his fall and the miserie thereof,ADAMS misery is palpable in our calamity. it

                        •
                     s palpably euident in the knowledge
of our owne particulars, the torments
of our transitorie life are sufficient arguments
to perswade and resolue vs.
Here I might spend much time in the

                        •
                     epetition of much misery, and rip vp

                        •
                     he wounds and sorrowes of our mortall

life:The variable turnings of fortune. the knowledge is necessary, but
not in this place, beeing commonlie
taught in the common experience of
our liues, where the extremities of fortune,
and her variable turnings, remember
all men the miserable condition of
sinfull man; there being no man but
doth sometime taste the bitternesse of
mortall life: all men being at all times
subiect to all extremities. In the booke
of Ecclesiastic. 40. there is a catologue of
the miseries of mans life,Ecclus. 40 from the 1. verse to the twelfth. all which happen
to vs for the sin of Adam, because
we are his sonnes, and were with him at
the committing of his sinne. And this
to Adam might iustly bee one torment
in his misery, that by his sinne, hee did
not onely depriue himselfe of the inestimable
worth of Gods fauour:ADAMS torment. but
also brought the like condemnation
vpon his seede, and theyr seed for ouer,
by his one sinne ouerthrowing the blessed
estates of many millions of people,
as if at one blow he would haue cut off
the heades of a world of people. And
doubtlesse but the sorrow for leesing
the fauour of God, Adam could not

haue a greater then this,Note. because there
is nothing doth more moue griefe and
pitty in gentle minds, then a compassion
of generall calamities,The nature or compassion. especially
then when they are caused by their misfortune,
that haue the grace to pitty
them.
                  If I should vndertake to ranke the
calamities of our sinnefull life, and report
them in order as they are inflicted
on man for the sinne of Adam, I should
both ouercharge my selfe with much
businesse, and but write that which is
nayly taught in the fortunes of euery
mans life. I will therefore omitte the
great number, and insist somewhat
vppon that which is the greatest
in the number: and that is the
displeasure of God,Gods displeasure the greatest calamity. which is damnation,
a misery infinite in time, infinite in
torment; a iudgement denounced against
all men for the sinne of one man,
because at the committing of sinne, all
men were then personally present in Adam,
and with him did both combine

                        •
                     nd conspire in the trespasse.1 Cor. 2. 15. 22. By sinne
men did Adam bring a generall destruction

on his nature, and made himselfe
and all men not onely subiect to death,
but to an euerlasting death, causing an
euerlasting damnatiō to inflict eternall
and vnexpressable torments on the bodies;
on the soules of men. It is not in
my power to describe the torments of
damnation; for as they are infinite in
time, they are infinite also in their number
& greatnes,No man can describe at full the torment of the damned there is misery without
hope torments without number, without
measure, without end: they are aboue
our strength, aboue our patience
to beare them: they are not vtterable
for number, not sufferable for torment:
the very soule though eternall,How the soule is said to die. is continually
wasted with that afflictiō, neither
could it last in such extremities,
but that God hath made it eternall. Againe,
it is not onely infinit & eternally
great in personall sufferings; but also in
griefe & spiritual discontents & vexations,Discontent the sicknes of the soule.
the soule that is damned grieuously
afflicting it self with rage & intestine
displeasure, when it considereth from
what dignity it is fallen, and the honor
and felicity it might haue had, if it

had continued in the fauour and
presence of Almighty GOD:The nature of our enuie. it will
also (enuiously) remember the prosperity
of others, what glory, what
happinesse they enioy for theyr constancy
and holy trauell: and that
it selfe, and the damned shoulde
haue had the same degrees of happinesse,
if (like them) they had been
constant and faithfull in theyr duety
and seruice to GOD.Note. And this is
a greater torment to the damned then
that which they shall endure in their
personall afflictions; the remembrance
whereof dooth so distract the very
powers of their soules,The damned soules inflict vpon themselues. as that (desperately)
they inflict their owne vengeance,
and execute vpon themselues
the punishmentes of their condemnation.Note.
For (in our natures) we haue
lesse patience, and more affliction,
when by our owne default wee leese
prosperity, then when for our desert,
wee endure any personall punishment.The reward of disobedience.
This is the reward of Adams
disobedience, that himselfe and his
posterity did by sinne, disinherite

himselfe and his of the infinite treasure
of Gods fauour, and did thereby purchase
a life, whose dayes are consumed
in vexations and miserable change, and
whose end doth not end his misery,Death is the life of torment to the damned but
renew and inlarge it with addition and
perpetuity of torment.
                  This is the plaine and necessary
knowledge of the fall of man from the
state of innocence, in which argument
the ouer-curious wittes of men
haue trauelled in the search of many
intricate questions;Vnnecessary knowledge is vnlawfull in diuine directions. the which because
they are not necessary in the knowledge
of the vnlearned Reader, I
thought them necessary to be auoided:
for it is often seene that in discussing
such secrets in Diuinity, as are not apparently
proued by direct testimony of
Scripture, but by a consequence of
reason,Note. and obscure argument, that al
such trauell, doth rather occasion strise
and doubt,A dangerous inconuenience. then giue satisfaction to the
modest and indifferent Reader. It is
dangerous (also) in them of weake and
slender iudgements to enter the search
of such thinges as are not necessary to

theyr saluation, because it is easie to deceiue
their iudgement: for they groslie
apprehend what is proposed them, and
often mistake themselues in their opinion
of reason, and then (like him that
looketh against the Sunne) blind themselues
with theyr presumption. I will
therefore forbeare to report the number
of mens opinions, onely this may
seeme of necessary importance, that
whereas God did create man so excellent,
and gaue him vprightnesse and innocence,
a free will and power also to
continue his innocence and happines,
it is doubted whether Predestination
and the decree of God,Predestination. did (necessarily)
lead men to this apostacie,Obiect. because
all things that are and shall bee, are in
Gods decree, neyther can any man do
any thing contrary to the pleasure of
Almighty GOD.Answer. To this I answere,
it is true that nothing is done against
the will of God, he being able to commaund
all occasions. The will of God
(therefore) must bee thus vnderstood;Gods will how it is to be vnderstood.
his will is eyther secret or reuealed:
his reuealed Will is the Scripture, his

secret will is his decree or secrete
councell, and in this will, are all thinges
that euer were: are or shall bee. This
will is againe distinguished: for in
Gods secret will, there is Gods act,Gods act.
there is also his consent: God doth
personally in his owne Nature decree
all goodnesse,Gods consent. as his owne act. God
dooth also consent, and suffer that euill
bee done: but hee himselfe is not
the doer: yet can hee glorifie himselfe
in the sufferance of euill,God can receiue honour from mens euill action. and
make it worke the purpose of his holy
will. To apply this Doctrine to our
purpose, before GOD created man,
he had decreede euery circumstance,
both in his Nature and Life: hee also
did foresee the fal of man, and was content
(for the secret worke of his glory)
it should bee so. So that whatsoeuer
was good in man, was in Gods decree
as his act: whatsoeuer was not good,How to vnderstand Gods decree.
was in Gods decree, as his permission.
If it bee demaunded, why God foreseeing
the fall of man, would not preuent
it, and giue Adam diuine grace to
support him: to such a question I would

answere with Saint Paul.
                     Rom. 9. 20. 21. 
                     Who art thou
that pleadest against God? shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it: Why
hast thou made me thus? verse 21. Hath
not the Potter power of the clay? &c. and
shall not God bee as powerfull as the
Potter?Ier. 18. 6. If he make vs for honor, we can
not boast it, if for dishonour wee can
not iudge him. This is the answere that
the Scripture giueth such questions. If
God doe any thing, it should silence all
question, and satisfie all doubt. Therfore,
whosoeuer shall heare the iustice
of God called in question,Gen. 18. 25. let him
confidently answer with holy Abraham:
Shall not the Iudge of all the World
doe right?
                  
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     This Doctrine of the fall of Man,
from his first state of innocence,The vse. doth
remember all men, what the mise
                           •
                        able
condition of our nature is, what glory
we haue left, & into what degree of aduersity
wee are fallen: wee that were

the most excellent of Gods creatures,
are now the most miserable; prouoking
(not onely) God to bee our enemy,
but the creatures of God also, to hate
and dread vs,By sin, not onely God, but his creatures are made enemies. because (for our disobedience)
God did curse them: and
that for our annoyance, God did suffer
the goodnesse of their nature to bee altered,
insomuch as they that before sin
entred our nature, were our seruants,
are now becom our enemies, & we that
then were their Lords, and had power
to commaund them, are now in the
bondage of feare,A miserable alteration. and dread theyr power.
For that supremacy and power &
gouernement, which Adam had ouer
all the world, was conferred to vs that
are of his posterity. He had it and lost
it by sinnes, we should haue had it, but
are preuented by sinne: sinne beeing
the cause both in him and vs, why we
are degraded from our dignity, and
cast into this contempt and disgrace of
fortune. Whensoeuer therefore God
shall please to punish any mans prospetity,
and to tempt his patience with the
burthen of aduersity, his care must be

to search the cause of his affliction,Sublata causa, tollitur effectus. and
when he hath found the cause, to labor
by all means to remoue it: for diseases
are not cured before their cause bee
both knowne and remoued; and as the
diseases of the body are not ingendered
without their corrupt cause, no
more our spirituall afflictions are not
inflicted without their euill cause, which
is sinne, the originall and continuall
cause of all our euill.Sinne the cause of euill. Thus ought Christians
to iudge themselues, and to vnderstand
the miseries of their life, to
enquire at their owne hearts, and to
search their owne actions, and theyr
owne transgressions: for there (and but
there) they shall finde the true cause of
all misery. And not as doe the wicked
and foolish, who when as they haue extraordinary
discontents,A false and foolish order. or misfortunes,
blame their Natiuities, and
search the motion and coniunction of
the starres and celestiall bodies, as if by
their influence and constellation, their
grieuous alterations were occasioned.
Such fondnesse is ridiculous, and to little
purpose, & they are much deceiued,

who seeke for that farre off, which is to
bee found (only) at home, euen in their
hearts; in their sinfull natures, and in
their sinfull actions. Againe, the fall
of Adam from his innocence, because
of sinne, doth instruct euery man in the
knowledge of GODS diuine nature;The nature of holinesse.
for GOD is so respectiuely holy,
that hee will not entertaine familiarity
and nearenesse with any Creature
that hath the least touch or spotte of
sinne Therefore did he banish the Angels
out of his presēce,The Angels damned for sinning but in thought. though they offended
(as some think) but in thought.ADAMS tempters.
                        Adam also though it was his first sinne,
and not of his owne election, but doubly
tempted by his wife and the Diuell;
yet could not the holy presence
of God endure him, but cast him out
of paradise into misery and tribulation.
Therefore ought all men to make conscience
of all sin; and to feare the committing
of the least; because there is
no sinne, (bee it neuer so little) that
GOD will dispence withall:All sinne is in Gods hatred. but as
himselfe, so is his affection, hee is holy
without staine, without imputation,

and his fauour towards them only, that
with al their power endeuor themselus
in all the workes of his commaundements.
                     Lastly,Lastly. seeing the sinne of Adam did
so deface the excellence and innocence
of our Nature, as that the corruption
thereof did descend from him
to all posterity, this ought to abate the
pride of all men, that no man dignifie
or exalt himselfe in the pride of his nature:
for all men are of one and the
same nature;A generall condemnation. and all men in one, and
the same condemnation: there beeing
no power in any mans Nature to
rayse himselfe to the dignity of Gods
fauour;God onely powerfull in mans restoring. that beeing onely in the power
of him that first created vs holy
and innocent, who (againe) will restore
vs, when wee faithfully spend our
indeuours in holy action. Againe, it
ought to moue all men to beare indifferent
fauour to all the Children
of God,How to value men. and not to despise any, eyther
for the defect of nature or fortune, but
to pitty and commiserate common calamities;
because there is no iudgement

or punishment inflicted on any man,How to iudge calamities.
but it is generally caused by all men,
all men hauing offended God with Adam,
and all men (for that sinne of Adam)
being subiect to all misery. For
those calamities (and greater) are due
to vs,Gods fauour is giuen, and not deserued by any mā saue Christ Iesus onely. though other men endure them;
and those benefites which wee enioy,
and others want, we haue them not of
desert, but of beneuolence from
the fauour of God, who giueth them
according to the pleasure of his will,
without respect of person.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     Seeing that Adam, who had such extraordinary
induments of grace, and
whose nature God had so adorned
with excellence, as that hee delighted
his company, and seeing that hee was
innocent, & his nature vnstained with
corruption or infirmity; did notwithstanding
runne in contempt of Gods
commandement, and thereby did purchase
Gods indignation: I will therefore

be extraordinary carefull to withstand
all prouocations that may tempt
me to any sin. For my nature is much
more easie to be tempted then his, his
being in innocency holy, mi
                           •
                        e in corruption
stayned:We more easie to be tempted then ADAM hee hauing power in
himselfe to withstand his tempter; I hauing
no power in my nature to resist,
but rather an appetite and affectation
to euill, (naturally) neglecting that
grace which should make mee able to
resist temptation. And because my nature
is thus depraued,The deprauednesse of nature. and that my
owne blind directions would but lead
me to condemnation; I will therefore
(with humble confidence) implore the
fauour of God,How to preuent the power of temptations that his Spirite may
giue me directions; and that his hands
may support mee against the power
of all temptations. For I know that my
strength is but weakenesse; and if God
take his hand of fauour from me, I shall
fayle in the conquest of my tempters,We must first deny our selues, before wee can affy in God.
and remayne their spoyle: for (if Adam
in his innocence) was vanquished, I (in
my sinne) cannot bee able to preuayle.
I will therefore deny my selfe; and repose

my confidence in the strength of
thy arme, for it is thou (O God) that
sauest vs from our enemies, and puttest
them to confusion that ha
                           •
                        e vs. Thus I
shall practise against my spiritual tempters,
thus I shall preuayle.
                     Againe, seeing God hath not spared
Adam nor the Angels that sinned,2. Pet. 2. 4. who
(in their natures) were much more excellent
then my self, but (for their sin)
gaue them ouer to condemnation:
how much lesse will hee spare mee, if I
continue in the committing of sinne,
and endeauour not my selfe with all diligēce
in godly exercise? This (assuredly)
shall make me fearefull to commit
any sinne with consent or knowledge,
but I will flie sinne, as I would death:
because the seruice of sinne is certainly
rewarded with death: sinne and
death being inseparably vnited in fellowship:The wages of sinne is Death.
for the soule that sinneth must
dye the death; and no soule dyeth but
the sinnefull. Therefore (O my God) I
will resort in my prayers to thy holy
presence,Resolution. I will earnestly intreate that
thy prouidēce may direct me in a holy

course to an holy end; I will auoyde al
acquaintance with sinne, I will hate it
in my selfe,Charity wil pitty misery wheresoeuer it be. I will hate it in others, pitty
their misery, & pray for their conuersion:
I will professe my selfe a vowed
enemy, and practise in that profession:
thus I perswade, thus I am resolued.
Lastly, seeing Adam and his posteritie
were not cast into condemnation without
hope,Man was not cōdemned as the Angells without hope. without mercy, as the Angels
that sinned were;An admirable witnesse of Gods loue. but had a hope
giuen him to be again restored to the
fauour and blessed presence of God, by
the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, the
Sonne of God: this admirable degree
of the loue of God to mankinde,
shall keepe all my actions in awe, and
make mee carefully feare to offend my
God, who hath so farre exceeded to
mee in the fauours of his Loue. I will
now (not onely) feare him because
hee hath power to destroy mee:A filiall. feare. but I
will feare him for the reuerence of his
loue; and preferre his loue (euen) beefore
my soule, My meditations cannot
present to my soule, a greater heauen
of ioy, then to vnderstand my selfe to

be beloued of God,To meditate God and his fauours. neyther can I haue
more delightfull action, then to meditate
his loue, and to loue him againe.
For to loue him for the safety of our
owne soules, is necessary: but to loue
him for his loue (onely) is more commendable,
and declareth a notable degree
of Christian zeale. Thus did Moses
loue the Israelites;
                        Exod. 32. 32. thus Saint Paul
the Iewes: and thus will I my God, by
whom I was created, by whom I am
restored.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Morall Law of God,
the ten Commandements.
Chap. 7.
                  
                     THe law of God,The morall law of God and the law of nature is all one. though
it was not giuen to man
with solemne promulgation,
before the time
of Moses, yet was there a

generall sense thereof giuen to Adam in
his creation. For when God gaue him
his nature, & endued him with the vse
of reason & discourse, hee gaue him capacity
to vnderstād his duty, the which
duty is nothing else but the obseruatiō
of the law of God. And therefore when
Adam had transgressed the commandement
of God, and eaten the forbidden
fruite;Conscience can preach the law to them that know it not. the reason of his naturall soule
could tell him his offence; and then his
conscience iudging him, he was afraid,
and hid himselfe from Gods presence.
If we compare his sinne with the commandements
of the Law, wee shall find
it to be a direct breach of som, & a consequent
breach of all. Gods first commandement
saith:Exod. 20. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Thou shalt haue none
other Gods but mee: Adams sinne doth
contradict Gods commandement, and
sayth: nay, but my wife and I will both
be Gods for with this perswasion the
Diuell tempted them,Gen. 3. 1. and they did
eate. Againe, Cain the second man, he
committed murther,Gen. 4. 13. and thereby directly
broke the sixt commandement:
which when God and his conscience

made him to vnderstand, hee made a
desperate acknowledgement of his sin.
So that the law being nothing but a
reasonable duetie, which the Creature
oweth to his Creator: there was therfore
a generall knowledge of this law
in the reasonable nature of man at his
creation, and so in the succession of
them of the old world, vnto the time
that the Law was giuen to Moses by the
ordinance of angels. The old world (thē)
from Adam to Moses,
                     Gal. 3. 19. were not lawlesse
& free from the seruice of law; but had
the law of nature for their direction,The law of nature, the same with the law of the x. commandemēts.
which being grounded vpon reason.
was euen the very same with the law of
the x. cōmandements. The law then of
the x. commādements before it was giuē
to Moses, was in the ages before going
commonly transgressed, and that
law did both iudge & condemne them:
the which law God gaue man when he
gaue him his nature, euery man hauing
the knowledge of this law in the naturall
vse of his reason. This was the state
of the old world before Moses,
                     The state of the olde world. all sinned,
and all were iudged by the law of

nature, the morall law, euen before the
promulgation thereof in mount Sina,
condemning the transgressions of men
that were directly against the seuerall
commandements.
                  Now when iniquity beganne to be
strong in the hearts of men,The promulgation of the law. and that
their consciences became senselesse of
sin, neyther would admonish, & iudge
their transgressions,Reasons why. then God thought
conueniēt to publish to al mankind this
law, binding the consciences of men to
a dutifull obseruation of euery particular
statute in that law,Deut. 23, 10. denouncing the
iudgment of condemnation to al them
that transgresse against the least branchBaruch. 4. 1.
or particle of those commandements.2. Reasons.
                  
                  A second reason why God ordayned
the law, was that men might rightly
vnderstand themselues, & therby know
in what degree of holines they were, because
that men are often partial in their
own iudgment, & willingly blind them
selus in the view of their own calamity.
Wherfore then serueth the law?
                     Gal. 3. 19. 
                     it was added
because of the trāsgressiōs, that by the
law men may know wherein they haue
transgressed.
                  
                     A third reason of the ordination of
the law,3. Reason. is to prouoke men to indeuor
themselues with all diligence to trauell
in godly exercise, & to auoid both euil
action and idlenes; the lawes giuing euery
man sufficient matter of imployment,
wherin he is boūd to suspend his
houres, his dayes, nay his life in carefull
sernice,2. Esd 9. 31. 2. Esd. 9, 31. For behold I sow my
law in you, that it may bring forth fruit in
you, & that ye may be honored by it for euer
                  
                  A fourth reason of the Law, is, that
by the seuerity thereof, wee might bee
disciplined, and made fitte for the mercy
of the Gospell;The vse of the law. for the iudgement of
the law will humble vs, make vs vnderstand
our misery, and prouoke vs to
implore mercy. Therefore is the Law
sayd to be a Schoolemaster, by whose
directions wee are led to our saluation
Iesus Christ. Gal. 3. 24.Gal. 3. 24. 
                     Wherefore the law
was our schoolmaster to bring vs to Christ
that we might be made righteous by faith.
                  
                  Lastly,4. Reason. the law was giuen for the glory
and maiesty of God, that all the
world might bee iudge of his infinite
mercy to mankind: In this respect,

that notwithstanding, all men are
iudged, and condemned by the law of
nature, and by the law of his commandements:
yet in the greatnesse of his
loue,Gods admirable mercy. he is content to forgiue the trespas,
and the iudgements; and finally to
entertaine these transgressors his enemies,
into the bosome of his mercy;
giuing them mercy for iustice, and
life when they deserued death with
extremity. Rom. 5. 20.Rom. 5. 20. 
                     Moreouer the
Law entered thereupen that the offence
should abound, neuerthelesse where sinne
abounded, there grace abounded much
more, Verse the 21. That as sinne had raigned
vnto death, so might grace also raigne
by righteousnesse vnto eternall life, through
Iesus Christ our Lord. And this is an admirable
degree of loue in the person of
God,Vers. 21. that hee will descend his Maiesty
to miserable, wretched, nay, sinfull
creatures, and exercise his mercy, in
restoring and aduancing vs,Note. that haue
abounded in transgressions. For these
causes was the Law deliuered, God
commaunding euery mans absolute obedience
vpon the forfeyture of his

soule to the paines of euerlasting condemnation.Deut. 27. 26
                  
                  In the law of the ten commaundements,
is to be considered the substance
which is the matter of the law; and the
circumstance, which is the manner of
deliuering it. The matter is contained
in ten commandements, the first foure
directly instruct vs in our duty to God;The matter of the commandemēts.
the sixe latter our duties to men. This
learning of the commandements, how
to vnderstand, and how to diuide them.
is in the knowledge of euery Childe of
carefull education, it being commonly
taught at the catechizing of Christian
children. I shall therefore spare the
large trauel this Argument requireth,
and refer the desirous Reader to the
learned expositions of other men. In
the manner of giuing the Law, we may
principally consider these circumstances.
 First, the principall giuer of the
 law, God. Secondly, the seruants attending
this office, the Angels. Thirdly
 to whom it was giuen, Moses. Fourthly,
 for whom, for the children of Israel,
then the people of God; and by consequence

to euery people that professe
themselues his seruants. These are the
maine particulars in the circumstance
of giuing the law. First, God hee was
the principall author of this worke,1 God the giuer of the Law. to
giue it countenance and authority: for
who dare quarrell his Worke, and the
operation of his hands? Therefore did
God himselfe speake all the wordes of
the commandements; hee also spoke in
a terrible and fearefull manner,Exod. 20. 1. to gaine
the businesse reuerence,Exod. 19. 19 and a fearefull
estimation he spoke in the hearing of
the people, that they might know it
vvas Gods owne act:Exod. 19. 9. and to preuent
the distrust they might haue of his seruant
Moses.
                     Secondly, The angels attend at the giuing of the law. Secondly, the Angells
they attend this holy seruice, to declare
the most excellent Maiesty of
God, who in all his occasions is serued
and attended by an infinite number
of that excellent Nature. Againe,
the Angells were there, because they
are most desirous of the good of
mankinde:Heb. 1. 14. and doe willingly attend
the seruice of our saluation: Hauing
ioy amongst themselues in heauen,
                     Luk. 15. 7. 10.
                     
                     at the conuersion of a sinner. They were
there also to bee witnesses betweene
God & his people, that the couenants
might remayne established for euer.
And therefore sayeth Saint Paul,
                     Gal. 3. 19. 
                     The
law was ordained by Angels in the hand of
a Mediator: not that the Angells did
principally giue the Law, and appoint
the couenant, but that the seruice was
onely attended by their holy Ministration.
Thirdly,Thirdly, The law was giuen by MOSES. the Law was giuen by
Moses; that is, God gaue it Moses to
giue the Israelites, because the spirite of
God had so sanctified Moses, that hee
was able to stand in the presēce of God:
the which the host of the Israelits could
not do, but became astonished, and exceedingly
afraid at the voyce of Gods
thunders. And therefore they desired
Moses that hee would negotiate for
them,Exod. 20. 19 betwixt God and them, they being
not able to endure the presence of
his Maiesty. Againe, it was giuen by
Moses, because God would honor him
aboue the rest of his brethren:Note. he hauing
been most industrious & constant
in the seruice of God. And therefore as

God had giuen them deliuerance out
of Aegypt, by the hand of Moses, so
would hee giue them by the hand of
Moses the couenants of his euerlasting
loue,The promises of the law are now gained by the Gospell. and deliuerance from the bondage
of sinne: all which grace was promised
vnto them that would liue within the
compasse of these lawes, and is now giuen
to them that faithfully endeuour,
though they fayle in the maine performance:
For the Law was giuen by Moses,
                     Ioh. 1. 17.
                     but grace and Truth came by Iesus Christ.
Iohn. 1. 7. Lastly,Fourthly, The Law was giuen Israel. the Law was giuen (by
name to the Israelites; but in the purpose
of God to all men, all men beeing
vnder the bondage of the Morall law of
God, and the Law being able to iudge
and condemne all men. It was (by
name) giuen to the Israelites, because
then they were the choyce and select
people of God; for whome hee had
done his wonders, and to whome hee
had promised a faire inheritance. It is
also deriued downe vpon vs,The Law was deriued downe on vs, & not to the Iewes onely. and vpon
all posterity, all men hauing entred couenant
with God, to endeuour themselues,
in the faithfull keeping of the

commandements of the law. All these
circumstances, are necessarily considered
in the manner of Gods deliuering
the law. From this may bee generally
obserued,Obseruations in the Law. that God in all his actions
hath principall respect to holinesse, and
that no prophane circumstances assist
him in his actions, but as himselfe is
most holy, so his delight is in holy actions,
and hateth al prophanation both
of matter and circumstance. In the
law may be generally obserued,1 An impossibility in the strict performāce. first
an impossibility in the precise performance
thereof, no man beeing able
(without fauour) to make an euen reckoning
with the Law: the Law being
able to conclude vs all vnder sinne. It
is an Argument of Saint Peter, Acts. 15.
10.Act. 15. 10. 
                     Now therefore why tempt yee God, to
lay a yoke (that is the performance of the
law) on the Disciples necks, which neither
our father nor wee are able to beare? Saint
Paul also to the Galath.
                     Gal. 2. 16. concludeth an
impossibility to be iustified by the law:
By the workes of the Law (saith he) no flesh
shall be iustified. So that no man ought
to repose his iustification in the law, yet

euery man ought to endeauour his vtmost
performance. Secondly,Secondly. 
                     Men
are iudged by the law to bee guilty,
                     Gal. 3. 22 
                     and deseruers
of eternall damnation. This generall
iudgement of the Law against all
flesh,All men are iudged by the Law. dooth conclude all men in the
state of damnation, no man being able
to deliuer himselfe from this iudgment,
before the Law be fully satisfied: which
could not bee done by other meanes,Gal. 4. 5.
then by the righteousnesse and death of
Iesus Christ the sonne of God, and the
redeemet of the world.
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     This doctrine of the seuerity of the
law of God,The vse. hath this double generall
vse. First, in the person of God, it declareth
what wonderfull desire hee
hath for the good of his people, in
that hee daigneth in the power of his
Maiesty to present himselfe with man,
whome before hee had (for his sinne)
cast out of Paradice, and from

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
the fauour of his presence, and to constitute
such ordinances, and such lawes
as might direct them that were desirous
to please God, the way and meanes of
his fauour. For howsoeuer no man can
so obserue the ordinance of the Law as
thereby to be righteous,Gen. 3. 11. and to deserue
the promise; yet did God accept the
faithfull endeuours of men, and supply
their defects by the grace and operation
of his holy Spirite. And therefore
at the deliuering of the Law, when the
Israelites promised Moses, that they
would doe whatsoeuer GOD should
command them:Deut. 5. 2. God seemeth to expresse
a passion of his loue, & to require
lesse then the law; for the law commanded
a precise performance vpon paine
of damnation, but God promiseth the
blessing of his fauour to all them that
zealously endeuour to keepe the Law:
Therefore sayth God to Moses,
                        Deut. 5. 29, 
                        O that
there were such an heart in them. to feare
mee, and to keepe all my commandements,
that it might goe well with them and
with their childrē for euer. And this doth
preuent and obiection, which all men

might make that are dis-obedient against
God and his law: for else they
might thus obiect;Obiection. that seeing the law
of God doth require a greater dutie
then is in any mans performance, and
that seeing the law doth condemne all
them that faile in the least particular
duty of the law:God is mecifull, in his seuerest iustice. therefore God might
seem to be mercilesse in the seuerity of
his Iustice; and their labour fruitlesse
to attempt that which was vnpossible.
Both which are wickedly false 3 for
though the law condemne euery man,Answere. God is aboue the law, because he made it.
yet God that made the law is aboue
the law, and doth often graunt his dispensation,
and pardon them whom his
law condemneth. Secondly, though
no man can performe the law, yet all
men may endeuour it, the which endeuour
(beeing faithfull and industrious)
is accepted of God, as if it were performance.
And this doth take from all
men, all matter of argument, whereby
they would excuse their disobedience,He that endeuoureth the law, hath the promise.
and neglect: for (as I haue said)
though no man be able to doe the law,
yet all men are able to endeuour it.

And this doth necessarily admonish
the christian people of these times,Men may not presume on the liberty of faith. who
presume ouer-boldly on the liberty of
faith, that because Christ Iesus the Sauiour
of the world, hath satisfied the
Law, and wrought righteousnesse to all
them that shall faithfully beleeue, and
apprehend his merites, therefore they
despise the workes of the Law, (holy
and charitable exercise) & repose them
selues on the bare confidence of faith
onely.A fruitlesse faith profiteth nothing. The which being altogether
fruitlesse in the workes of the law, is but
presumption and a vain confidence, &
will (dangerously) deceyue all them
that affy therein. For though Christ
Iesus hath abolished the ceremoniall
Law, & satisfied the iustice of the morall
Law (the which is auaileable to all
them that shall bee heyres of saluation)
yet his righteousnesse in obseruing the
Law, doth not destroy the substance of
the law,Christ hath not destroied the lawe, but qualified. and make it vse-lesse; but doth
rather command our imitation; that as
he hath performed the law in all righteousnesse
and sincerity, so wee should
endeuour a strict imitation of his vertuous

doing:Works the testimony of faith. for such faith onely hath
the benefite of the righteousnesse of Iesus
Christ, as is approued by the testimony
of holy life, and hath the witnes
of vertuous liuing. Therefore it doth
needfully behoue all men carefully to
endeuour in the exercise of the law of
God: for though no man can be iustified
by the workes of the Lawe:Note. so no
man can declare and approue himselfe
to be iustified, but by the workes of the
law. Againe, the knowledge of the law
of God, may giue euery man a true vnderstanding
in the state of his life,By the sentence of the law we may iudge our selues.
whereby to know in what condition
hee standeth, whether in the fauour or
displeasure of almighty God: for the
law is Gods reuealed will, to which al
men owe conformity vpō grieuous forfeit.
And therfore whosoeuer shall examine
the behauior of his life, and compare
his seueral committings and omittings
with the duties of the Law, (for
so ought all do) shall be well able to vnderstand,
and iudge himselfe: for
the law is the patterne of our liues, to
which we ought to square our actions:

so that when wee finde a dissimilitude
betwixt the Law and our liues,The Law a patterne of a Christian life. we can
not but iudge our selues disobedient,
and rebellious to God and his law, and
(consequently) to forfeite our soules to
the state of condemnation. This iudgement
ought to cause a humiliation;
and so it will in them whom God shal
make gracious. Who when they know
their soules to be in the disease of sinne,
and that the Law doth wound them
with guiltinesse,How the Law doth humble vs. and that themselues
haue a naturall pronenesse, rather to
cause then to cure theyr infirmities:
this maketh them to deny themselues,
and theyr owne power, which is but
weakenesse; and with humblenesse to
resort to the mercy and merits of Iesus
Christ the Sonne of God,Christ, the Physition of soules. and the Physition
of our soules, who onely hath
been able to satisfie the iustice of the
Law, and who onely hath been able to
worke the redemption of Mankinde:
and to repossesse them of Gods fauor,
who had lost it by theyr transgressions.
And this our Redeemer hath done by
assuming our nature, bearing our sins,

satisfying our contempts,Christ hath fulfilled the law for vs. and finishing
our neglects: who (in our nature) hath
fulfilled the law for vs, that could not:
who hath victored sinne, and made a
conquest of hell, and by his death hath
slaine death, which (but for him) had
seized our soules into euerlasting condemnation.
Thus will the knowledge
of the Law admonish, thus remember
vs.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     This knowledge presents my soule
with matter of serious Meditation:Speciall application.
wherein I may haue a full view of the
miserable condition of my life: what
strength is in my nature, what indeuour
in my actions: for when I finde an
impossibility of my dutifull & strict obedience
to the law, I shall thē acknowledge
my defects, & the corruption of
my nature: when I examine the particulars
of my life, and compare them
with my duty, I shall acknowledge the
neglects of my indeuours: and that I

haue fayled, not onely in the mayne
performance of the law of God; which
my nature could not, but in my desires
and carefull endeuours to doe well,
which my nature might.The effects issuing from the meditation of the law. In the reprobate. And from
this meditation doth (necessarily) follow,
one of these two effects. In the
reprobate and gracelesse, it causeth desperation
and a hopeles distrust of their
saluation: for when the diuell and their
Consciences expose before them the
Iustice of GOD, the seueritie of his
Law, and the infinite measure of their
offence, the extreme terrour and sence
of their wickednesse, dooth so confound
their vnderstandings, that often
they execute vpon themselues torment
& death, despising & despayring of Iesus
Christ; in whom if they had reposed
trust, and had beleeued and apprehended
his righteousnesse, their sin had
not beene imputed, neyther had their
soules perished.In the regenerate. But in the children of
grace, this meditation dooth produce
a contrary effect: for when they (by
the law) vnderstand the misery whereinto
their sinnes haue brought them, it

causeth a wonderfull degree of feare,
but not desperate. For though the diuell
present their sinnes in most vglie
formes, and vrge them to a desperate
apprehension:God supporteth his elect against temptations yet the Spirite of God
(in them) doth withstand this temptation,
and giueth them holy motions to
deuise the meanes of their saluation;
presenting them (in their spirituall sorrowe)
with Iesus Christ as he was crucified;
then giuing them grace to vnderstand
the mystery of his death, and the
promise of the imputation of his righteousnes:
which whē the grieued sinner
vnderstandeth, he allayeth his sorrow,
& affyeth in the merits & mediation of
Iesus Christ his Redeemer.The di
                              •
                           or effects of the Law. Thus the
law produceth a contrary effect in contrary
spirites it damneth the reprobate
without hope; the elect it condemneth,
but instructeth also and giueth
hope: them it iudgeth without mercy,
these it admonisheth, and is theyr
Schoole-maister, to bring them vnto
CHRIST. Therfore, though the law
condemne mee, it shall not condemne
my hope▪
                        Resolution. for though I cannot my selfe

performe the righteousnesse of the law;
yet there is one hath done it for mee,
my Lord and my sauior Iesus, in whom
I repose hope,The worke of faith. and respire new life, because
I know that his righteousnesse is
mine by imputation: and that my sinne
was nayled to his Crosse, and suffered
death (with him) when hee wrought
my redemption. I will therefore enlarge
my loue (without limites) to this
my Sauiour, who for my saluation hath
beene pleased to vndergo so great a trauell.
I will admire the admirable degree
of his loue, that for my sake did
descend his Maiesty to take (and dignifie
the basenesse of my nature. I will
with vnspeakeable ioy meditate his
most holy sufferings,Christ hath freed vs frō the iudgement of the law. whereby I am released
from the condemnation of the
Law. I will despise my selfe and my
own vnrighteousnes, & apprehend him
the staffe of my confidence.To whome repentant sinners should resort. I wil neuer
despayre hope, because I know that my
saluation liueth; but in all the extremities
of my life, and in all the sorrows
of my conscience, I will resort to Iesus
the Physition of my soule, I will enquire

for him at the mercy of his Father,Where to find Christ.
I will enquire at his owne righteousnesse,
I will seeke him in his holy
sufferings, I will seeke him on the
crosse of his death;How to implore his fauours. and when I haue
there found him, I wil expose my griefe
and implore his fauour, I wil shew him
what the law hath done vnto me, what
wounds, (and how dangerous) it hath
giuen my soule; I will confesse my
sinne, and professe my faith. I will
promise also to correct the errours of
my life, I will carefully endeuour euery
circumstance hee hath commaunded:
and beeing thus rectified in my
resolution,How to apprehend him. I shall reach my hands
of faith to my saluation, apprehend
him, and apply him to
my wounded soule, and by
this blessed meanes satisfie
the law, and
restore my
Soule.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the acousation of Conscience.
Chap 8.
                  
                     EVery man that would
preuent the dreadfull
danger of Gods generall
iudgement, must in
this life while hee hath
time, arrest his own soule, examine his
particular actions;Conscience and by the euidence
of his conscience, iudge himselfe and his
transgressions against the law of God:
for as Gods iudgement doth begin at his
house,
                     1. Pet. 4, 17. because his principall care is for
his owne;Prou. 11. 3. so should men iudge themselues,
and haue principall care to examine
their own particulars. And as S.
Paul sayth,1 Cor. 11. 32. 1. Cor. 11. 32. When we are iudged
we are chastned of the Lord, because we
should not bee condemned with the world:
so likewise wee must iudge our selues,
lest we be condemned with the vvorld

For as the Israelites,Iudg. 27. 8. because they wanted
Iudges, became Idolaters: so our
liues when they are not examined and
iudged by our consciences, we become
remisse, disobedient, and Idolatrous,
and desperately run on with lawlesse
appetite, in the common and curious
committing of sinne.
                  And this necessary iudging of our
selues, is well knowne to our reasonable
soules; vvho, vvhen vvee haue
committed sinne) prouoke our consciences
to accuse and iudge vs,By iudging our selues, we preuent Gods heauy iudgement. as if without
this iudging of our selues, we could
not preuent the iudgement of God:
which would proue much more terrible.
The manner of this iudgement
is thus:The manner of iudging our selues. whē the spirit of God shal moue
in any mans heart, a desire to vnderstand
themselues, the soule assembles
the powers of his vnderstanding, and
exerciseth the seuerall faculties in seuerall
assignements, and vvithin himselfe
(by meditation) can frame the
order of a Court. The man, bodie
and soule, hee is the Prisoner at
the Barre: hee is also the witn
                        •
                     sse

and the iudge,Conscience our accuser. the matter of his inditement
is sinne: his conscience is his accuser,
his memory doth produce the
witnesse, his iudgment doth denounce
the sentence, and the Diuell attendes
the execution. Thus are the faculties
of the soule disposed in iudging of it
selfe: the soule against the soule producing
the Law, prouing the forfeit, and
vrging the penalty.
                  Now that which hath most busie
care in this spiritual & most serious examination
and iudgment of our selus, is
the conscience, by which the soule hath
true vnderstanding in what condition
it is; and by whose authority the iudgement
of that spirituall Court is swayed:
the conscience giuing testimony of all
our actions, good and euill, whereby
our iudging part is directed (without
error) to make a iust proceeding without
all partiality. And therefore saith
the Wise-man. Blessed is he that is not
condēned in his own cōscience:
                     E
                           •
                        clus. 14. 2. for if there
be any iust matter of condemnation against
vs, there is no fauour can bribe
our conscience, but that will to our

selues accuse our selues of euery sinne,
and reduce to memorie, many of our
finfull actions, which but for our conscience
we could not remember. And
therefore the Scribes & Pharisees that
brought the woman taken in adultery,Iohn. 8. 9.
to Christ, and demaunded what iudgement
shee deserued, were remembred
and accused by their consciences of
their incontinence (whereof they seemed
to be innocent or ignorant) when
as Christ sayde: Let 
                           •
                        im that is without
sinne,
                     Ver. 7. 
                     cast the first stone at her. So that
they that were so busie in the condemnation
of another, were condemned
themselues by the testimonie of their
owne consciences: their consciences
making them apply their accusations to
themselues, which but then they had
vrged against another.The spirituall power of the conscience. And doubtlesse
it is a wonderfull degree of power the
conscience hath in the spirituall tryall
of our soules, in these two respects. First
it knoweth all our sinnes, no man being
able to hide from the knowledge
of his conscience, any sinne, no not
his most secret sinnes. Secondly,Secondly. it

spareth no man, neyther any sinne, but
without respect of any it vrgeth all sin,
against all men, our very thoughts hauing
no priuiledge, but euen their
sinnes are both in the knowledge and
in the hatred of conscience. Therfore,
sayth Saint Paul:
                     Rom. 2. 15. 
                     Their conscience bearing
witnesse, and their thoughts accusing
one another, or excusing, Rom. 2. 15. And
Almighty God when hee shall gather
together all flesh to iudgement, and
expose before the Angels and Saints
the seuerall actions of euery mans life,
whereby they may bee iudged (accordingly)
eyther to mercy or iustice, he
hath deuised (in his wisedome,) that
euery one shall haue a witnesse in himselfe,Our consciences shal reproue vs in the day of iudgement.
(which is his conscience,) the
which in our life time doth register
both our good and euill actions, and
at our iudgement doth witnesse & declare
them. And therefore the Holy
Ghost calleth the conscience a Booke,
euery man and woman hauing one,
wherin is writ a true story of euery circumstance,
of euery particular action,
of euery mans life. And these bookes,

these consciences are they that giue euidēce
for, and against our soules at the
barre of Gods generall iudgement, Reuel.
20. 12. And I saw the dead both great
                     Reu. 20. 12.
                     and small stand before God, and the bookes
were opened, that is, all mens consciences,
wherein was writ the report of al their actions.
Thus wee see what the office of
our conscience is, both in respect of
our owne spirituall iudginges, which is
our reformation; and in respect of the
generall iudgement of GOD, which
must be to euery one, eyther eternall
saluation or damnation.The maner of the accusation of conscience. Now the maner
that conscience vseth in this ministration
is worthy of our consideratiō;
and to vnderstand this, we must remember
first this generall doctrine; that all
men generally haue a conscience, the
which GOD hath vnited inseparably
to our reasonable Natures. And therfore
not only they that are of christian
beleefe,All men endure or shall endure the griefe of conscience. and haue the rules of religion
to teach them; but men meerely naturall,
and ignorant of diuine Worship,
suffer the affliction of their offended
conscience, which though it be in

a farre inferiour degree to that of vnderstanding
Christians; yet doth it (in
some proportion) exercise a iudgment
on the soule, and doth both remember
and terrifie them that grosly offend against
the law of nature; which to them
is the law of reason and religion. This
is proued by that place of Scripture I
before alledged:Reu. 20. 12. That the Bookes of
all the dead were opened; the word
(all) excluding none from the accusation
of conscience, All then are afflicted
by conscience, but not all alike,
nor all alike effectually. The Infidels
that know not God, but onely as they
are taught by the wisedome of nature,The difference in the conscience of Christians and Infidels.
haue a conscience; but it remembers
the offender his great sinnes onely, and
that sparingly and with fauour. A christian
conscience is more seuere, for it
remembers all men, all sinne, without
fauour, without exception. There is
this difference also; that of Infidels and
wicked men doth often remember the
offendor his sinne; but afflicts him
not, neyther prouokes him to repentance:
but the conscience of Christians

doth fearfully remember sinne,A Christian conscience euer hath griefe. and
doth wound the soule of the offender,
with sorrow and spirituall griefe; making
him pursue the meanes of his
owne reformation, and hate the cause
for which his conscience doth so afflict
him. And this is the differenee betweene
the conscience of a Christian
and an Infidell.The differēce of conscience among Christians. Among Christians
also, there is great difference of Conscience:
For as in the common number
that professe the Christian religion,
the greater part is (by much) the worse;
the true worshippers of God beeing
onely a few choyce particulars,Gods number the lesse. drawne
out from an infinite number of people:
so also, though all that haue Christian
name, professe to haue a Christian
conscience, yet their conscience is no
better then their Christianitie: onely
a bare name,The conscience of a reprobate. whereof they haue no spirituall
comfort nor vse. Conscience
in the Reprobate is eyther silent or outragious:
the silent conscience of the
Reprobate is, when custome and long
continuance of sinning, doth dull the
sence of conscience; and this is when

men giue ouer themselues to commit
sinne with affectation and appetite,
and oppresse their consciences with the
multitude of their committings, so that
such conscience doth not remember vs
our sinne; but when it is assisted by externall
demonstrations. Such a conscience
had Saul the reprobat king, who
prosecuted his sinfull intentes against
holy Dauid with all his endeuour: yet
when Dauid gaue him that notable demonstration
of loyalty, shewing him
by direct euidence,1. Sam. 24, 12. that God had shut
him vp in his power; and notwithstanding
hee had saued the life of his enemy,
that sought his destruction, This
notable testimony of Dauids good conscience,Verse 18.
did stirre vp the dead spirits of
Saules euill conscience to acknowledge
his sinne,The outragious conscience of the reprobat and (for a time) to forbeare
and repent his vninst vexations: The
outragious conscience in the reprobate
is when the conscience hath (for a
time) been silenced, and hath giuen the
sinner an vnchast liberty in his vngodlines;
yet so, as that once apprehending
the knowledge of his sin, and knowing

the state of condemnation wherein it
is, it breaketh out into a violence which
wanting moderation,Desperation caused by a violent conscience. vrgeth the sinner
to execute vppon himselfe some
desperate vengeance. Such was the
conscience of Iudas the traytor,Iudas. which
slept all the time he was plotting and
practising his treason: but when his sin
was brought into act, then his conscience
(though euill) did vpbraide his
sinne with such violence, as made the
griefe vnsupportable: and the Traytor
(not able to endure the torment
of his conscience) thought (as Cain)Caine.
that his sinne was greater then the mercy
of God, and so despayring mercy,Mat. 27. 3. 4. 5. he
desperately hanged himselfe. Such are
the consciences of the reprobate: their
conscience is sleepie, and doth reproue
but seldome: yet when it dooth reproue,
it is then most terrible, and
without all comfort. And though
in this life they neuer afflict for sinne,
but seeme senselesse and dead in theyr
appointed offices: yet at the day of
iudgement,Reu. 20. 12. 
                     when the booke of euerie
mans conscience shall bee opened, then wil

their consciences that in this life haue
beene most silent, bee most lowd and
terrible in their accusations, denouncing
iudgement, and inflicting a greater
torment on the soule, then the
damned can haue patience to beare:
This is the office and end of an euill conscience.
                     Wisd. 17 10.
                  
                  Now the conscience of the childe of
grace is in full opposition to the conscience
of a reprobate:A good conscience. For when God
shall please to call his seruants to a
knowledge of himselfe, and to a detestation
of sinne; the grace of his holy
Spirit moueth in the heart of such a
one, and first awaketh the conscience,
and giueth it sence to vnderstand the
calamity of the Soule; and Spirit, to reproue
and admonish it in needfull directions.
And this grace of God,How God moueth the conscience. giuing
the conscience sence to vnderstand sin,
and Spirit to reproue it; is the first degree
of our reformation, and the preparation
to our spirituall conuersion:
GOD himselfe beeing the prime and
principall Author thereof. This beginning
of the grace of God spreads it self

into very large proceedings;When God doth stirre our conscience, it continueth that holy motion to our reformation. for when
our conscience is once touched with
this godly desire to examine the errours
of our life, God doth not there
leaue vs, but giueth vs a continuall assistance,
to finish that needefull care,
without despayre; without fainting.
The manner may bee thus considered.
The conscience (beeing instructed by
grace) vnderstandeth that the soule is
in danger of Gods iudgement: this
knowledge causeth a desire in the soule
to examine the particulars of our life:The manner how a good conscience worketh.
then doth it compare our seuerall actions,
with the seuerall duties of the
law, and thereby is made euident the
many and great defects of our life, and
that therfore our soules and bodies are
guilty, and stand in the danger of condemnation.
From this knowledge
dooth arise the griefe of a wounded
conscience:The cause of the griefe of conscience. for the Statute lawes of
God condemning vs for the trespasse
of our liues; the conscience then (whose
office is to accuse, or excuse) vpbraideth
our sinne, and denounceth the
iudgement of the law against vs, which

is eternall damnation. And in this
case wee may compare our soules to
fellons at the Barre, who hauing
pleaded guilty, and receyued the sentence
of the Lawe,Note. abandon all hope,
and onely prepare themselues for the
stroke of execution: yet the soueraigne
Iudge, being pleased to descend mercy
to these poore condemned Prisoners,
offers them the benefite of their
Clergie, promising mercy to all them
that shall bee able to reade the lines
proposed them. So our soules beeing
arrested for sinne, and standing
at the barre of our owne iudgement,The guilty soule like a condemned fellon.
beeing accused by conscience, and
hauing the Law against vs, to condemne
vs; wee are then in a much
more grieuous condemnation then
fellons, because they feare but a
temporall death, but we eternall. Neither
can wee (more then they) free
our soules from these extremities,
vntill GOD (who is the Iudge of all
the world) shall please to offer mercy,
and the benefite of his Clergie;
which is nothing else but the storie

of the meritorious sufferings of IESVS
the Lambe of GOD,
                     Christ the booke of life. which storie
is written in spirituall Characters,
vppon the Crosse of his death. And
this booke (the spirituall crosse) beeing
writte with the bloud of the most righteous,How to quiet the trouble of a grieued conscience.
God presents to all the world,
all the world (in respect of themselues)
beeing guiltie, and condemned: promising
Remission of sinnes, (a generall
Pardon,) to all them that with
theyr eyes of Faith, shall reade this
booke of life, and apprehend and apply
(IESVS) the contents therof to their
saluation.
                  Thus (and but thus) is it possible to
quiet the trouble of a grieued conscience,
the conscience being neuer satisfied
for sinne, before the Iustice of God
be satisfied, by the apprehensiue righteousnesse
of Iesus Christ.
                  And therefore saith Saint Paul;
                     Rom. 5. 1.
(Beeing then iustified by Faith,) wee haue
peace towards GOD, through our Lord
IESVS CHRIST. Rom. 5. 1.The conclusion of this first part. And
thus farre I haue proceeded in the first
part of this Tract, viz. the death of man:

for the whole passage of the old Testament,
from the Creation of man, to
the incarnation of the Sonne of God,
doth onely humble vs with the knowledge
of our own vnworthines, & therby
make vs fit to apprehend and apply
the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ: for
before wee can liue to God, wee must
dye to our selues: neyther is there a
spirituall regeneration, where there is
not first a spirituall mortification, And
where grace would enter, sinne must
voide, for he thar would follow Christ,
must deny himselfe. And therefore
let no man presume to apprehend the
mystery of the righeousnesse of the
Crosse of Christ, before hee hath reformed
his actions,No man can bee able to apprehend Christ before his conscience hath thus prepared him. quieted the clamor
of his conscience, and vtterly denyed
the strength of his owne nature. For
how shall hee beare the Crosse of
Christ, that is laden with his owne
infirmities? or how shall hee be benefited
by the promises of the Gospell,
that doth not first iudge himselfe by
the comma
                        •
                     ndements of the law? For
hee that knoweth not his disease, seeketh

no physicke; and Christ came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     This doth admonish al men carefully
to watch the behauiour of their liues;The vse.
for if the conscience of euerie man beReu. 20. 1. 2
a booke, wherein is writ the recordes of
all his actions, good and bad; and that
seeing this booke must bee read at the
day of iudgement in the audience of
all the world, before God, and before
his holy Angels and Saints, what maner
of men ought all to bee in godly
conuersation? This ought to moue in
euery one a double care. First,First. that
they auoid (carefully) all vngodlinesse,
both in thought and action; whereby
they may suffer disgrace before GOD
and all his Creatures, at the generall
iudgement, when the booke of theyrSecondly▪
                        
conscience shall bee opened to euerie
ones eye. Secondly, it doth perswade a
a diligence in all godly exercise; and

that all men contend (with an holy emulation)
to exceede in godly action▪
whereby they may receiue applause,
and generall reputation in the general
assembly of God and all Creatures. For
as in the affayres of earth, men couet
most desirously to gaine reputation &
generall name, because it argueth an
extraordinary degree of desert in him
that hath it: so in contending for this
spirituall Garland (Heauen,) it cannot
but be an extraordinary degree of content,There is no ambition lawfull, but the couetous desire of heauen.
and spirituall pleasure, to bee named
in the ranke of best deseruers.
And as malefactors that suffer publike
punishment for their offence, esteeme
the shame more then the paine
of theyr corrections: so ought all
men to feare the shame they must endure,
if theyr conscience disgrace them
before so great a presence, as will be at
the generall iudgement. For let al men
bee perswaded,The booke of co
                              •
                           cience cannot be defaced but onely by the precious bloud of Christ. that all their faultes are
so writte in the booke of theyr consciscience,
that there is no meanes to obscure
their knowledge, & to raze them
out; neither wil the conscience (though

it be our owne) bee corrupted, to conniue
and dissemble with God, but (euen
to our owne faces) it will produce
all our sins, whose memory is not blotted
by the righteous bloud of the Son
of God. Againe, seeing the witnesse of
our conscience is that euidence, wherby
we are all iudged eyther to life, or
death,Not to offend our conscience. wee all ought most carefully auoyde
the doing of ought that may offend
our conscience: but rather to liue
in feare and awe of conscience, because
our eternall state dependeth vpon the
report of our owne conscience. This
ought to preuent all vnconscionable actions,
& to haue a detestation of euery
sin; because when wee haue committed
sins, wee haue hired against our owne
soules, so many witnesses to vrge our eternal
condemnatiō. Lastly,The silent 
                              •
                           onscienre will be most lowd at the day of iudgement. seeing that
that cōscience which in this life is most
silent, will notwithstanding at the day
of iudgemēt be most terrible & clamorous;
it admonisheth all men not to rebel
against their cōscience, & to run on
without checke in the committing of
sinne; but rather to yeelde themselues

to the correction of their consciences,
lest by their customary sinning, they
dull the sence of conscience,Customary sinning dulleth conscience. and so
runne on in the race of all vnlawfulnesse:
for though the reproofe of conscience
bee very terrible to him that
rightly vnderstands it, yet ought it to
bee carefully apprehended, and respected
as a mouing cause to repentance,
and reformation. And let no man encourage
himselfe with common example,Evill examples ought not to moue vs from the duty of conscience
that because the common sway of
mens actions respect greatnesse more
then goodnesse; and craft more then
conscience, that this can warrant any
ones imitation; but rather wheresoeuer
we see vnconscionable dealing, if in our
friends, we our selues ought to be their
conscience and admonish them; if in
our enemies, wee must hate the sinne,
but pitty the sinner, and labour (not
his imitation,) but if it be possible, his
conuersion. And this direction is both
Wisedome and Charity:The office of charity. for hee that
is wise, will bee armed, and not harmed
by ill example: and hee that is
charitable, will doe the good he can,

and wish the good he cannot doe.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     I will therefore constantly endeuour
to reduce to memory the seuerall actions
of my life past:Speciall application. I will then compare
them with the duty of my conscience,
and therby vnderstand in what
degree of sinne I am, what my conscience
shall appro
                           •
                        e, I will continue;
what it condemneth I will hate:Good conscience is in hatred with all sinne. bee it
my pleasure, bee it my profite, be it my
nearest or my dearest sinne, if my
conscience call it sinne, I will despise it.
There is nothing shal make me alter or
suspend this resolution, I am constant
in the loue of conscience; what I haue
done I will reforme by conscience:
what I haue to do, my conscience shall
iudge it lawfull before I do it. If my occasions
present me profite, I will despise
it if it be not honest, if pleasure, &
not lawfull, I will loath it. I will vndertake
no action,To consult with conscience. entertaine no 
                           •
                        auour,
but I will consult with conscience in

euery iudgement, and in all actions, I
will be led by the voyce of conscience,
If the world commend a sinne, and
my conscience condemne it, I will
condemne the world, and commend
my conscience: I will credite my conscience
more then common example,
because my conscience must iudge me,
and not example. If my conscience secretly
accuse me of sinne. I shall certainely
know there is cause; I will therefore
then examine, and as my conscience
shall direct, I will rectifie. I will
not silence my conscience from all reproofes.
I will onely auoyde the cause
of reproofe (sinne) and that carefully;
when my conscience shall vrge me the
law, my sinnes, and the condemnation
I haue deserued. I will not therefore
despise my conscience, nor despayre
mercy; but direct my eyes of faith to
Iesus the strength of my saluation: by
whose fauour I shall satisfie both the
law and my conscience. The hope and
comfort I haue in his righteousnesse,
will quiet the trouble of my conscience
and hee that hath reconciled God andRom. 5. 1.
                        
mee will also reconcile me to my conscience,Conscience that did accuse will comfort.
and make it that was my accuser,
my Comforter This direction I
propose my selfe, and perswade all
men as I propose and purpose, that
in all our actions and consultations,
we iudge nothing conuenient
that is not lawfull, and
that nothing may bee
thought lawfull, but
that which hath the
warrant of good
conscience.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     THE
SECOND
PART OF THE HOly
Pilgrime, leading the way
to new Ierusalem.
                     OR
A Diuine direction in the Way of
life, declaring the order and causes of
mans happinesse, attained by the
imputation of the righteousnesse
of Iesus Christ.
                  
                  
                     LONDON,
Imprinted by B. A. for William
Barrenger. 1617.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  Of the Gospell, the new Couenant,
or the Couenant
of Grace.
Chap. 1.
                  
                     THE story of the Bible,
from the first beginning
to the birth of our Sauiour
Iesus,The Gospell. doth for the
most part declare the
miserable condition of mankind, how
he hath faln from the innocency of his
nature, which God gaue him in his first
creation; and how he hath continued in
sinne, and in the curse of God for sin:
hauing no power in himselfe to satisfie
the iustice of GOD, or to reconcile
him selfe to his fauour. Therefore did
God giue the law of the ten commandements
(the particulars of his reuealed

will.How to vse and apply the Scriptures.) both to prouoke men to endeuour
in the exercise of all godlinesse,
and also that by the knowledge
of the Law, men might know theyr
owne defectes, and by their humiliation
to bee prepared, and made fitt for
the mercy of the Gospell. For though
Iesus Christ the substance of the Gospell,
was (in the counsell of GOD
from all beginnings) determined to
be the Redeemer of mankinde, being
also promised to our first Parents,
and by whome all the faithfull before
his incarnation,The faithfull, before the incarnation of Christ, were saued by Christ. The difference betweene the Law and Gospell. had the pardon of
theyr sinnes, apprehending (by faith)
the promise of his righteousnesse:
yet was not this grace declared them
in such plaine and direct euidence, as
now it is in the preaching of the
Gospell: it being then deliuered onely
in shadowes, Ceremonies, prophecies,
and in the mysticall sense
of Allegories, so that few had capacity
and grace (rightly) to vnderstand
them. All which difficulties
are now vanished in the preaching
of the Gospell, the Gospell presenting

vs (in most familiar and easie demonstrations)
the substance without
the shadow, and the truth without
the figure, withall giuing directions
and infallible rules, not onely to know
the means of our saluation; but how to
make it ours, to apprehend and apply
it to our owne particular comfort. And
this grace doth the Gospell giue with
such fauour, as that the necessary doctrines
exceed not the vnderstandings
of men of meanest capacities; but that
all that will (without respect or exception)
may reach their hands of faith,The great fauour and liberty of the Gospell.
to the Crosse of Christ, and freelie
apprehend the meanes of their saluation,
which is the Lord Iesus, triumphing
at the Conquest of his
death, ouer sinne, hell, and damnation.
                  This is a blessed alteration in the state
of the world:A happy alteration. for in the time of the law,
when the grace of the Gospell was hid
in the clouds of the ceremonies, the obseruers
of the ceremoniall law, did seldome
vnderstand the mysticall sense of
the ceremony, which did allude to som

particular grace in the Gospell.)The ceremonies of the law did allude to the graces of the Gospell. And
therefore though God was pleased to
accept their carefull endeuour in their
religious obseruing the ceremonie,
which was but a figure of the truth included
in the ceremony; yet they wanted
a great part of that spirituall comfort,Tit. 2. 11.
which wee haue in obseruing
the couenant of grace (the Gospell)
the grace of God appearing to them
as God himselfe did to the Israelites
their Fathers at the deliuering of the
law in cloudes,Exod. 19. 16. in fire, in smoake and
thunders: but to vs hee dooth appeare
more familiarly, Iesus Christ his
Sonne, and the most liuely representment
of himselfe, assuming our nature,
and conuersing with vs, did wound our
sinne, and heale the woundes sinne had
made in our soules; in whom God was
(personally) present, whose wordes
taught saluation, and whose actions
wrought it. This is the difference betwixt
the law & the Gospell. The Law
commandeth vs to doe and liue,What the law commandeth. What the Gospel. if not,
to dye; the Gospell (all mercy) requireth
to beleeue onely, and line: and

this is a wonderfull degree of Gods
fauour, that because wee are not able
to keepe the couenants of his law, is
therefore pleased to yeeld to our infirmities,
to alter our obligation, and
to enter new couenants with vs:The couenant of Grace. the
couenant of Grace, whereby God doth
indent with man, and bindes the iustice
of his law in the bonds of his mercy,
promising saluation to all them that
faithfully beleeue in the merites and
mediation of his Sonne Christ. Thus
doth God allure vs by easie meane, &
fayre promises to inherite euerlasting
life, which the law denyeth to all men:
no man being able to satisfie the iustice
of the law. If it be obiected then,Obiection. that
the grace of the Gospell doth destroy
the workes of the law, because that
mercy is giuen of grace, and not of deserts,
I answere,Answere. that the Gospel doth
not destroy the substance of the Law,
but doth onely abate and mitigate the
rigor thereof: as God when he preserued
Daniel in the Lyons denne,Dan. 6. 16. did not
destroy the Lyons, but onely shut their
mouthes, and bound theyr power, that

they might not hurt Daniel: So hee
hath not destroyed the law, but dooth
onely restraine the violence thereof
from hurting his Daniels, that is, the
faithfull.
                  And as when Darius tooke Daniell
from the denne,Dan. 6. 24 and cast in his accusers,
the Lyons then had the maistry,
and deuoured them; so the reprobate
shall not auoyde the condemation
of the Law, notwithstanding the promise
of the Gospell, and the new couenants
of grace; because no man hath the
benefite of mercy, but hee that (first)
is the childe of faith.The difference of respect GOD hath to his seruants, and to his slaues. And therefore
the great King of all the World shall
take his faithfull Daniels from the power
of the Lyons (the law,) but leaue
the reprobate in the state of theyr
destruction. Thus much in generall
of the Gospell, and of the generall
difference betweene that and the law,
and betweene them that liued vnder
the bondage of the law, and vs that
liue now in the Liberty of the Gospell.
                  The purpose of the Gospell is the

saluation of men. And therefore the
Angel that was the first preacher of the
Gospell, tolde the Sheepheards that
hee brought them tidings of great ioy:
                     Luk. 2. 10. (indeed)
a greater could not bee then to
bring them the newes of their saluation.
The matter of the Gospell is the
life,1. Cor. 15. 1. 2. 3. the death, & the doctrines of Iesus
Christ; for they are the only meanes by
which wee attaine to the fauour of saluation:
his doctrines were directions,
his life examples, and his death was, &
is life to all that apprehend him, In the
circumstance of the Gospell is principally
considered; First God, who of
himselfe & of his owne election,The circumstance of the Gospell. without
cause in man, did enter this couenant
of grace, being moued only by the
pleasure of his owne will, and by his
own gracious loue to his creatures. For
so saith the holy Ghost:Ioh. 3. 16. 
                     God so loued the
world that hee gaue his onely begotten son,
that whosoeuer beleeued in him should not
perish,
                     The loue of God, the mouing cause of the couenant of grace. 
                     but haue euerlasting life. Whereby
it is euident that the loue of God was
the onely cause that moued him to this
effect: for God cā glorifie himself aswel

in the damnation, as in the saluation of
men: for hee needeth no addition of
honour, that is infinite both in greatnesse
and goodnesse; but as his mercy
is most eminent ouer all his attributes,
so in this new Couenant of the Gospell
hee doth giue vs the greatest demonstration
of his mercy that can be, in giuing
his onely begotten Son to dye on
the crosse for the redemption of mankind:
in euery word whereof there is an
emphasis or a passion of loue (infinitely)
beyond al comparison:Secondly. where it seemeth
that God doth (as it were,) put
off his Maiesty, and descend himselfe in
his care to pitty, and redresse the ruined
state of sinfull man his enemy. Secondly,
in the person of Christ (who is
the cause both mouing & finishing the
couenant of the Gospell) there is matter
of most worthy and admirable consideration.
For Christ is not onely to
bee vnderstood,How to vnderstand Christ in the Gospell. as the instrumentall
cause, whereby this couenant of grace
betweene God and man was effected,
but also as the first mouing cause and
deuiser of it, it being impossible to assigne

him offices without his owne appointment,
he being equall to God the
Father, and the holy Ghost: and they
all hauing but one diuinity vndiuided.
This the vnbeleeuing Iewes could not
comprehend, and therefore they derided
Christ when he said:Ioh. 8. 5. 8. 
                     Before Abrabam
was, I am, not knowing that he was
God equall and coeternall with his Father,
and was begotten before all beginnings.
                  It is therefore most wonderfull in
the person of Christ, that hee being
God, and the Lord of all the World:
that he would leaue the bosome of his
Father,Strong witnesses of the loue of Christ. and (for a time) to put off the
presence of his diuine Maiesty, and to
take our nature vpon him in humilitie,
and in a base estate, and to vndertake
(not onely) to satisfie the law, & make
good our defects, but also to beare the
displeasure of his father, and to suffer
the malice of wicked men to preuayle,
euen to his death, and that he hath endured
all this for the good of man, a
creature that by sin had brought himselfe
in disgrace with God. And which

is most of all; that hee hath done al this
by his owne appointment,Christ suffered of his owne will, and not by constraint. without eyther
commaund or direction, there being
no power aboue him, by whom he
could be commanded. This incomparable
loue is able to astonish a Christian
meditation, and to make it admire
& say with holy Dauid: Lord what is mā
that thou hast such respect vnto him, or the
sonne of man; that thou so regardest him?
Psal. 144. v. 3. Thirdly, is considerable
the officers in the holy ministration of
the Gospell,Psal. 144. 3. Thirdly. The ministers in the office of the Gospell. by whose endeuour and
vigilancy, the spirituall graces of the
Gospell are distributed to the children
of faith, for whose sakes the couenāt of
grace is given. The first officers (in this
kind) were the twelue Apostles, of purpose
chosen by the Lord Iesus himselfe,Apostles.
that they might be the faithfull witnesses
of the whole passage of his life,
and that (after his ascension) they
might plant in mans hearts a knowledge
of this Gospell; and by theyr
praiers, preachings, and godly exhortations,
to dispose the holy seed of
grace in their harts, whom God should

make capable to entertaine it with profite.The profite of their labours.
These holy labourers being assisted
by the holy Ghost, trauelled in Gods
husbandry, with such profite, as that
the Gospell (in their times) spreade it
selfe into very large limits. And building
vpon the foundation of the rocke
Christ, they haue erected such a frame
as shall remayne to all posteritie.
These holy Ministers were the conducts,
whereby God did conferre his
spirituall waters of life into all the parts
of the world, who spreading themselus
(in their painefull trauell) ouer all the
knowne world, spread the Gospell as
they went; & left in euery place where
they came, a memory of their Lord and
maister Christ Iesus. After thē succeeded
others in their example, who both
taught the gospell,The state of the primitiue Church & confirmed it with
the testimony of their death. These are
the holy officers in the ministration of
the gospell, & all that liue in the church
of God in their office, & in their example,
shal with them receiue the wages of
faithfulnes,A question in much controuersy Here is offered a large occasion
to dispute a questiō in cōtrouersie,

who are they that are the true Ministers
of the Gospell.The Papist. The Church of
Rome challenge to be onely able to deriue
a true ministery, because (say they)
they haue continued one and the same
succession from the Apostles downewardes.The Protestants opinion.
The Protestants misproue their
Ministery, and plead intrusion of ceremonie,
and corruption of errour, and
professe to haue reduced a Ministery
in most neare proportion to that of
the Primitiue Church. The Brownist
is peremptory against them both, and
fondly pleads against the names and titles
of the ministery.The Puritane and Brownist. And therefore as
these quarrels are vnplacable and out
of hope to be reconciled, I wil leaue thē
in their strife, with this admonition to
my reader: That we despise not Christ,
because vpon his Crosse hee did hang
with theeues; neyther that wee honour
theeus, because they hang with Christ:
for that which is but neare truth,Truth between two extremities of errour. Fourthly. is no
truth, and the best vertue is placed betweene
two extremities.
                  Lastly, is to be considered, to whom
the benefites of the Gospel appertaine;

and that is to the elect, namely such
as are most industrious in the faithfull
execution of the law; for as I haue sayd
God hath not giuen the Gospell to
destroy the Law, but to preserue and reuiue
it, that men may be allured by the
sweet promises of the Gospell to endeuour
with alacritie and hope in the exercise
of the law. And therefore Christ
himselfe sayth: If yee loue mee, keepe my
commandements: that is, endeuour to
keepe them with all diligence: for he
that is carelesse in the seruice of God,
is not to hope that God will bee carefull
of his saluation. This is also approued
in the parable of the Labourers
in the Vineyard.Mat. 21. 1. &c. The Mayster of the
Vineyard is God, the Vineyard is the
world, the Labourers are the faithfull
and painefull Christians, their wages is
the benefite of the Gospell. So that not
the lookers on, but the Labourers in
Gods Vineyard shall receyue the wages
of euerlasting saluation.
                  These considerations are most weighty
in the generall vnderstanding of the
Gospell, to which I will adde this admonition:

That all men esteeme worthilie
and reuerently of the Gospell of
Iesus Christ,2. Th
                           •
                        s. 2. 10. 11. 12. because God doth iudge
the contemners thereof to be guilty of
deserued damnation. And that if God
present them the meanes to communicate
with the benefites of the Gospell,
that they neglect (rather) all the profites
in the world, then the treasure of
the Gospell. For that is that one thing
which is only necessary, and that pearle
of price, for which wee are aduised to
sell all that we haue,
                     Mat. 13. 45. 46. 
                     that we may purchase
it. For he that hath that iewel, hath sufficient
wealth; & he that hath al thinges
but that, he hath nothing, if he hath not
that. For what will it aduantage vs to
win the whole world, if wee leese our
soules? and what inlargement can hee
desire, that hath the treasure of the gospell
in his heart, whereby he hath continuall
comfort; and is led in the path
of his saluation.
                  
                     The generall Vse.
                     First, this doth generally remember

all men the admirable degree of Gods
fauour to mankind; that notwithstanding
our apostacy from the seruice of
God, & our continual trade of sinning
which might incēce the iustice of God
to destroy vs at once, and for euer; yet
doth he continue himselfe in his owne
kind, a God & a father most compassionat;Pitty in God is most naturall.
who inclineth rather to pitty then
to punish our infirmities. And therefore
did almighty God take from man
the burthensome condition of the
law, and promise him euerlasting life,
vpon much more easie Couenante:
the which grace doth challenge from
all men a dutifull thankes to GOD,The duty of thanks due to God.
who hath taken from theyr necks the
vnsupportable burthen of the Law, giuing
a greater liberty and ease in the
worke of their saluation. Secondly,Secondly.
it doth admonish all men carefully to
apprehend the grace of the Gospell,
and not to neglect the present and the
precious opportunity that GOD hath
giuen them;The danger of forfeyting the covenant of grace. because hee that shal
breake this couenant of grace, shall
doubtlesse forfeyte the estate of his

body and soule vnto eternall damnation.
For this new couenant of the gospell,
as it is the greatest of all the fauours
of God, so it is the last; and tha
                           •
                        
being neglected, there is not another
to hope for.
                     Thirdly, seeing the Gospell doth
not destroy the substance of the Law,The gospell doth not destroy the law.
but onely mitigate, and sweeten the
seuerity thereof, by a gracious dispensation
from the extremity of iustice; it
behoueth all men bee (equally) as carefull
in the performance of the duties
of the law, as if there were no other couenant
but the law to iudge vs. For
there is no man fit for the grace of the
Gospell,The law doth fit vs for the Gospell. Gal. 3. 24. but hee that is first schooled in
the law of Gods commādements. And
therefore is the Law sayd to be a Schoolmaster
to bring vs vnto Christ, because it
doth humble vs in the knowledge of
our own infirmities.
                     Fourthly,Fourthly. seeing the purpose of the
Gospell is the saluation of men, it behoueth
all men to respect the Gospell as
they would their saluation; and to labour
by all meanes (not onely to aduance

the prosperity thereof,Our duty of respect to the Gospell. but also
to auoyde euery cause that may occasion
the slāder or disgrace to that sacred
profession,
                     Fiftly,Fiftly, A reuerence to the story of the Gospell. seeing the matter of the Gospell,
is the story of the words & workes
of Iesus Christ our Sauiour, while hee
was vpon earth, it doth binde euerie
mans conscience to haue a reuerend
and a confident opinion of the truth
thereof; and that all men labour by all
conuenient meanes to maintaine the
memory and reputation of those sacred
writings, the which are onely able
to guide vs without errour in the way
of our saluation.
                     Sixtly,Sixtly. seeing that God of his owne
fauour did without desert, nay without
hate, enter this couenant of grace, binding
himselfe in the suerty of his Word
to giue saluation vpon the easie condition
of the Gospell: and that seeing
that Christ Iesus the Son of God, did
please to appoint himselfe, and to descend
his maiesty in great humility, to
establish our saluation in the merites of
his holy workes: what manner of men

ought all of vs to be in thanks and godly
conuersation?
                     Seuenthly,Seventhly seeing the officers appointed
and chosen by Christ, for the
ministration of the Gospell, were the
holy Apostles, and after them the reuerend
Martyrs in the primitiue Church,
by whose diligence the Gospell spread
it selfe ouer all the knowne World;A remembrance to the Ministers of these times.
this doth admonish all them that eyther
are Ministers of the Gospell, or
that haue power to make them, what
choyse there is to be made of their vprightnesse
and godly conuersation,
and what diligence is required in their
spirituall trauels; all which ought to
fashion themselues as neare as they can
to the example of the holy Apostles.Eightly. The promises of the Gospell belong to the faithfull onely.
Lastly, seeing the promises of the Gospell
belong to the faithfull onely, that
are industrious in the seruice of the
law; this ought to prouoke all men to
contend in godly exercise to exceede
one another, and to stir vp theyr dead
desires with the hope and promise of
the Gospell, and that they thinke not
the law burthensome, being now made

easie by the grace of the Gospell, and
therefore to trauell in the duties of the
law with alacrity and spiritual comfort,
hauing their confidence & eyes of faith
vpon the promise of the Gospell.The difference betweene Sinai▪ and mount Sion. Thus
if men dispose themselues and theyr
affections, they shall finde the happie
difference betwixt mount Sinai, and
mount Sion, the law and the Gospell; in
both which the gracious may find comfort,
but with great inequality.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     Therefore the Gospell beeing a couenant
betweene God and my soule,Speciall application.
my first care shall bee rightly to vnderstand
this couenant, left by misunderstanding
& false construction, I breake
the couenant of grace, and so runne my
saluation into a dangerous hazard.The most needfull search of Scripture. I
will therefore search the sence of
the mysteries of the holy Gospell; if
they exceede my vnderstanding, I will
compare them with the holy writinges
of the Prophets and Apostles: if these

exceed my capacity, I will consult with
the learned expositions of reuerend fathers
of the Church. If all these satisfie
not, I will then resort to the dayly seruants
of this ministration,How to labour to vnderstand them. and by diligent
obseruing their Sermons, expositions,
and spirituall exhortations, I
shall both learne what is the Couenant
I haue entred with God, and the means
I must vse to keepe couenant; when I
haue attayned this forwardnesse, and
hope of better knowledge, I will (carefully)
anoyde the daungerous inchantments
of Heretiques,What we must avoid. Schismatiques,
and all false Teachers. I will not taste
theyr poyson, though they present it
in cuppes of gold, their baite shal make
mee suspect their hooke, and their faire
and holy pretence, theyr fowle and
wicked purpose: for hauing found
Truth, (the Lord Christ) who is the
s
                           •
                        ale of Gods couenant with me,Christ the seale of th
                              •
                            couenant of Grace. I will
preserue that truth from all defacing,
and laying that for my foundation, I
will build thereon the whole frame of
my life, and fashion all my actions as
the rules of the Gospell, and as the example

of my Christ shall commaund
me, that so I may keepe couenant with
my God, and obtaine the promise of
the Gospell (which is the saluation of
my soule.)Gen. 45. 28 And then (with holy Iacob)
I will boast my fortune, and say vnto
my soule: I haue enough, and desire no
inlargement.
                     Againe, when I meditate the matter
of the Gospell, that is, the wordes
and workes of our Sauiour,The delight we ought to haue in reading the story of the Gospell. then it shal
moue me to a very reuerend esteeming
of the story of the holy Gospell, and
make mee delight to exercise my time
in the often reading and conferring
thereof: for if they that haue estates in
temporall possessio
                           •
                        s, bee most carefull
to preserue such euidence and writings,
as is deliuered them for their security,The worldly care.
and oftentimes spend a greate
part of their wealth and labour to confirme
and continue such estates, and
such euidence: shall not I then (much
more) spend my best diligence and
meanes to vnderstand (rightly) the
writings of the holy Gospell, which are
the deedes and euidence betweene

God and me, touching the euerlasting
state of my soule, and carefully to
keepe such Couenantes as giue mee
claime and interest in the possession
of a Kingdome?All wealth is beggerly, in respect of Gods favor. Shall men giue their
substance to lawyers to maintaine their
beggerly possessions, in respect of
heauen but beggerly, though it were
the possession of the whole earth,) and
shall I neglect the couenants of euerlasting
life, and may haue law without
fee? I will neuer doe it, I will neuer
giue such testimony of madnesse:
but I will seeme to doe good by their
euill example; let them labour theyr
earthly possessions, I will labour the
possession of heauen: let them waste
theyr substance on Lawyers, I can haue
law and lawyers much more reasonable:Who are a Christian mans lawyers.
the Prophets & Apostles are (and
shall bee) my Councellors, their hands
are not corrupted, their iudgementes
cannot erre: I will therefore affi
                           •
                         in
their confidence, & endeauour as they
direct me.
                     Lastly,Lastly. when I meditate the particulars
of the story of the Gospel, I despise

all other histories,The difference betweene the writings of God and men. in comparison of
this and the olde Testament. For the
writings of men doe commonly labour
vile and vnworthy arguments:
and those of them that trauell a good
cause, yet are they defectiue eyther
in matter or forme; but the Gospell
and other holy Scriptures being writte
by the direction of Gods sacred spirite,
they are (not onely) holy in their matter,
but excellent in their forme, able
to giue the desirous reader infinite variety
of content. Therefore, when I
desire to reade of maiesty,The variety of delight in the story of the Scripture. and greate
action, of Empire, Warre, Conquest,
gouernement, policy, & infinite of this
kinde that depend on greatnesse; I can
find both stories and examples in the
Scripture, many and vnmatchable. If
I desire the stories of mercy, loue,
peace, humanity, ciuill action, and the
rest that depend on goodnesse; euery
page in the holy Gospell, can furnish
me, eyther with some story, or some
example of that kinde: if I desire
wonders & miracles of most admirable
credence, they are in the scripture most

frequent, yet most true; in other writings
not common, yet commonly
false. Therefore the holy Scripture,
and especially the holy gospell, which
is the couenant of my saluation,A Christian resolution. shall
bee my continuall exercise, I will exercise
my pleasure in reading the meditating
the excellent variety of matter,
and maiesty of the phrase, (being the
thethorique and eloquence of the holy
Ghost:)The best eloquence. I will also exercise my profite
in studying (rightly) to vnderstand
the couenant of my saluation, to keepe
which couenant, I shall be often admonished,
by promises, threates, and by
example. In all which, the knowledge
and meditation of the holy
Gospell will instruct me. For
these respects I will enter couenant
with my soule, to be
most carefull in keeping
my couenant with
GOD.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Christ Iesus, the summe of the
Gospell.
Chap. 2.
                  
                     IEsus Christ is the sum
or compendiū of the
gospell,Christ the summe of the Gospel. in whose actions
& holy sufferings
the main execution of
the gospell, was (only
&) wholly finished: for hee being the
seale of the couenant of grace; the couenant
was onely promised, not performed,
vntill Christ himselfe came in our
nature,Christ hath payed our debts for vs. Why the Gospell is called the new Testament. who did first discharge the former
debts we ought the iustice of God;
before he did seale and ratifie the new
couenant of the gospell. Therefore is
the holy gospell called the new Testament
of our Sauiour Iesus, because the
interest and title of saluation, could not
be deriued of the children of God, but
by Christ the testator his sufferings, &
death in his humane nature. It is also

called the last will of Iesus Christ,Why the last Will. because
God hath fully determined that
this Testament, this couenant shall remayne
(vnalterable) to all posterity;
there being no purpose in God, no power
in mā to alter or repeale, or change
the forme of this Couenant: but being
determined by the whole Trinity,The Gospel the last refuge for mē. from
before all beginning, to be the last refuge
for sinfull men: and the onely and
most safe meanes of their spiritual deliuerances:
it was also in the fulnesse of
time, perfectly finished by Christ, as
was before determined in the coūsell of
the trinity. And from this doctrine doth
issue this foundation of Christian religion,
that the Couenant of grace was
purchased onely by the righteousnes of
Iesus Christ,A foundation of Christian religiō. who in our nature satisfying
our cōtempts, & in our nature working
righteousnes, did in our nature, &
in our behalfe indēt with God & enter
these couenants; & lastly, to ratifie al, he
did die in our nature; & with the bloud
of his sacred hand subscribe & seale his
Testament our couenant, whereby it is
made vnquestionable true, and vnalterable

to all times. It is euident then that
the matter of the Gospell is wholy contained
in the only work of Iesus Christ,The works of Christ. The matter of the Gospell.
and that Christ is a contract compendium
of all such particulars as are contained
in the couenant of mans saluation.
And that therefore the Canons
and decrees of Councels, and ecclesiasticall
states, nay, the very writings of
the Prophets and Apostles,How to vnderstand holy writings that interpret Scripturs. adde not
any matter to the substance of the couenant
of grace: but are rather to bee
vnderstood as interpretations and plain
expositions of such secrets, as the wisedome
of Christ Iesus thought good to
folde in allegories and dark vnderstanding.
For Christ left not his worke defectiue
and imperfect, wherby it might
require correction, but in a most exact
performance.1. Cor. 3. 11. 12. Therfore saith Saint Paul,
Other foundation cā no man lay, then that
which is laid, which is Iesus Christ:
                     Vers. 12. 14. 14. and he
assureth a reward to thē that build vpō
this foundation, & not to thē that lay a
new foundatiō, or alter this that is layd.
Christ then,The words. The workes of Christ. the foundation of christian
religion, & the substance of the Gospell

did execute his diuine office with a
double diligence, his word, his worke:
by his word I vnderstand such spirituall
doctrine, as hee dayly deliuered to his
hearers, whether it were direction, admonition,
reformation or interpretation;
in all which our Sauiour hath so aboundantly
trauelled, as that not onely
particular men,The wordes of Christ giue all mē sufficient divine direction. but the Catholique
Church also may receyue ample & sufficiēt
directiō, both for diuine doctrine
and spirituall discipline. By his works
I vnderstand euery act, & al the passage
of his temporall life, from his incarnation
to his death on the crosse, in all
which time hee was continually working
somwhat that was auaileable & necessary
for the redemption of mankind.A generall vnderstanding of Christ.
Thus is Christ generally to bee vnderstood,
as hee was the principall matter
of the Gospell, and the onely working
meanes of our saluation. To make this
doctrine familiar and profitable to
Christian men of easie vnderstanding
I will subdiuide this double care of
Christ into particulars. The wordes
of Christ, the time of his Incarnation

did instruct vs the duties of our soule,
and the duties of society; the duties of
the soule,The duties of the soule are all those thinges that are
needfully required in the state of Christianity,
whether we respect the necessary
faith of the Church, the necessary
orders in the Church; or the necessary
obedience to the Church. The duetie
of society is ciuill action,The duty of society. and humanity;
that is▪ a louing, charitable and orderly
conuersing of Christian men.
And this Christ Iesus hath called the
great commandement; great indeede,
and of great consequence, because
without this duty of humanity, wee can
not performe our duty of diuinity: for
hee that first loueth not his neighbour
whom he hath seene, cannot loue God
whom hee hath not seene. And these
duties of the soule, and society, comprehend
generally the substance of such
doctrines as Christ Iesus himselfe hath
deliuered. The workes of Christ are
also of the matter of the Gospell, and
comprehend such thinges as were necessary
to be done by Christ, and necessary
to be knowne and beleeued of

vs being the price of our redemption,Necessary in respect of his own decree.
without which it was impossible wee
should be reconciled to Gods fauours,
and by which the couenant of the gospell
is both obtained, and confirmed
vnto vs. All which workes of Christ I
reduce to these three principals; to his
birth,
                        
                           1. The birth.
                           2. The life.
                           3. The death of Christ.
                        
                      to his life, and to his death: what
he did by assuming our nature, what he
did & suffered by liuing in our nature,
and what he did by suffering, when hee
dyed in our nature.What hee did in being borne. And this (I take) to
bee the most orderly vnderstanding of
the Workes of our Sauiour Christ.
When Christ did assume our nature,
& was borne of the blessed Virgine, he
did an act of great loue, and of great humility:
of great humility, in that hee
daigned to descend his Maiesty, and to
take our nature vnto his Diuinity,
whereby hee became subiect to a temporall
death,Heb. 2. 9. and in (that respect) A
little inferiour to the Angels, his owne
creatures.
                  Secondly, it was an act of wonderfull
goodnesse, because the end thereof
had not respect to any meanes that

might enlarge the honour and felicitie
of Christ himselfe, in whome there is
(naturally) an infinite measure of all
happinesse,The respect but had respect onely to
poore and sinnefull man, that by this
meanes hee might repossesse the fauor
of God, from which hee had cast himselfe
by his owne disobedience.Obiection. Now it
may be demanded, that seeing the nature
of man is so poysoned with hereditary
sin, as that all the descents of mankind
haue a naturall corruption deriued
on them, the which like a generall leprosie
deformes the ancient beauty of our
nature, & presents vs in vgly formes before
the maiesty of God: how thē could
Christ take such a nature, so deformed,
without imputation of sin, and without
fowling the exact holines and sincerity
of his diuine nature.Answere. Christ took our nature but not the corruption of nature. I answere that
Christ tooke our nature, nay all our nature;
yet not those staines, nor that corruption
wherwith sin had deformed our
nature. For though sin bee deriued naturally,
yet is it not of the essence of our
nature, but a defect or an accidental deformity
which happened to our nature

not when God first gaue our nature,
but after it was giuen. And all those
staines and deformities which naturally
are bred in vs in the wombe, and at
our conception, were all voyded and
absent at the Incarnation of our blessed
Sauiour: the holy Ghost sanctifiing
and preparing the sacred Virgin,
ordayned for that holy office, whereby
shee was onely made able to deriue
her nature with her issue, immaculate,
without sinne, without corruption (but
not without infirmity.) And this sacred
deriuing of a sanctified nature
from the blessed Virgine,The blessed virgin. is not to bee
considered, as the act or power of the
holy Virgin, but of the holy Ghost; who
being God, coequal with the Father &
the son, was able to separate our nature
from corruption, & so to sanctifie the
sacred virgin, that her nature might be
deriued as innocent and spotlesse, as
God had created it.The holy Ghost the principall mo
                           •
                        er in sanctifying the blessed virgin. In which businesse
the holy virgine was meerely passiue,
and the holy Ghost the principall worker,
It is necessarily true then, that
Christ tooke not a part or a peece of

our nature, but our whole nature, euen
our infirmities, and auoyded onely the
sinne which accidentally did happen
our natures;Sinne not of our nature, but in our nature. the which being not of
our nature, but in our nature it was
not necessary that Christ should take▪
sinne when hee tooke our nature. And
therefore sayth the holie Scripture that
Christ Iesus was like to vs in all things,
onely sinne excepted.
                  Secondly,Secondly. What Christ did & suffered for vs. is to bee considered what
Christ did and suffered while hee liued
in our nature: that is, the time of his
personall and visible conuersing with
men here on earth: what he did, is comprehended
in this, that he liued (righteously
in the duties of the Law, and in
exact obedience to Gods commandements.
And this was necessary in the
office of Redemption, which Christ Iesus
had vndertaken; for it was not possible
to make good the Couenant of
grace,How Christ did satisfie our cōtempt before the contempts of the Law
were satisfied, which Christ di
                        •
                      by his
actiue and by his passiue Righteousnes,
By his actiue righteousnesse, when he liued
in a precise conformity to the Law

of God: by his passiue righteousnesse:
when hee suffered punishment for the
sins that men had committed, whereby
both the law and the iustice of God
had satisfaction for all former contempts.The Gospell the only true history of the life of Christ.
I shall not need to report the
particulars, what our Sauiour Christ
did, and what he suffered, the time of
his personall conuersing with men, the
holy story of the Gospell is best able to
giue satisfaction, wherein is registred
not all his life, but so much as the wisdome
of God hath thought conuenient
for a Christian knowledge, where
it is euident that Christ had a double
continuall exercise. First, the exercise
of his power. Secondly, the exercise of
his patience.The power and the patience of Christ. His power was exercised
in doing good, his patience in suffering
euill: what he did, it was for man, what
hee suffered it was from man: Christ
both did and suffered, that men might
not suffer: men did all they might, that
Christ might suffer.
                  Thirdly, is to bee considered what
Christ did by suffering, when he dyed
in our nature. Christ when he dyed in

our nature, did by death, ouerthrowe
death,What Christ did by suffering. and by suffring did an act of admirable
power and infinite glory: his
power and glory were declared in the
conquest hee made of sinne, hell, and
death, enemies that had wasted the
sons of Adam, now themselues wasted
and (for euer) vanquished by one Son
of Adam Death and hell are the seruants
of sinne, sinne their originall or
first cause,The servants of sinne. whom sinne marketh, death
destroyeth his body, hell tormenteth
his soule; yet is death, hell, and sinne,
swallowed vp in victory by one Christ,The victory Christ had of sinne and hell.
who in the forme of man, offering vp
himselfe a sacrifice to God his Father,
hath reconciled God and man, by the
righteousnes of himselfe, God & man:
leading into perpetual captiuity the ancient
enemies of our nature, sinne, hell,
and death, sealing the new couenant of
grace, with the Crosse of his death,
whereby hée hath opened the gates of
heauen, and remoued all difficulties,
that might let vs in the passage to euerlasting
happinesse.
                  
                     
                     The generall Vse.
                     The doctrine,The Vse whereby to know
the two natures of the Sonne of God,
his diuinity and his humanity vnited
in one Christ, is most necessary in the
knowledge of euery Christian, it being
in the main foundation of christian
Religion,The necessity of knowing Christ▪
                         whereupon all piety, and all
faith is grounded. For he that knoweth
not Christ in his natures, and in his
offices, cannot apprehend and apply
him for his saluation, because his assuming
our nature, and the execution of
his offices, are the only means of mans
saluation; without which God would
not be pleased, neyther could the Law
bee satisfied. And therefore this
generall knowledge doth geuerally belong
to all men, and that vpon necessity.
                     Secondly,Secondly. seeing the Sonne of God
was content for (our sakes) to vndergo
so great a trauell, and for our sakes, to
vnite our farre vnequall and most vnworthy

nature to his diuinity, wee
ought for his sake, to refuse no trauell
that may aduance his honour, or expresse
our thankes; but rather to despise
all things in comparison of so gracious
a Sauiour, by whose onely meanes our
soules haue deliuerance from eternall
captiuity.
                     Thirdly,Thirdly. seeing Christ Iesus is the
matter of the couenant of grace between
God and man, it doth also most
nearely concerne all men,A most needful care to indeauor
all possible meanes (by their eyes of
faith) to apprehend Christ, who is to
be apprehended by faith onely,) and so to
to receyue the forme and impression of
his sacred image, whereby they shall
be truly interested in the possession of
heauen: when those that want this
shall bee reiected of God, with this answere,
Away from mee, for I know ye not:
because yee haue not the marke and Image
of my Sonne.
                     Fourthly,Fourthly. seeing the whole matter
of the couenant of Grace, is fully contained
in the wordes and workes of
Iesus Christ, and that all things necessary

both to a ciuill and a Christian life,
are contained in the story of the holy
gospel, it behoueth all men to giue that
sacred word preheminence:All directions must be conformed to scripture. and that no
man, neither any state or fellowship of
of men whatsoeuer, presume to decree,
or ordain canons, or statutes Eclesiasticall
or ciuill, which may any way preiudice
the directions of Iesus Christ, deliuered
in the gospell; but that as Christ,
our Priest, our Prince, and our Prophet,
hath giuen vs (either by doctrine or example)
such needful directions, as are of
necessary and lawfull vse, eyther in a
christian church or state: so no christian
Church or State should dare to innouate
or alter those directions which
Christ our high Priest and great prince
hath left established; but in all directions
both of church & state, there must
be heedfull care, that euery particular
haue relation to the truth of holy scripture,How to iudge the lawfulnesse of euery statute ecclesiastical or ciuill.
or be conforme to the example of
Christ: for whatsoeuer direction, whether
it concerne the soule or society, if
it be not necessarily grounded, & haue
dependency from the word of God, is

altogether vnlawfull in a Christian
church and state, neither can dispensation
make it lawfull or tollerable. Therfore
by the square of the Scriptures all
men ought to measure the lawfulnes of
euery action,How to square euery particular action. and of euery direction: &
that whatsoeuer shall disagree from
God and the Scripture, may be iudged
error & intrusion of disorder: and therefore
of necessity to bee spewed out of
the Church & states of Christian men.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     The meditation of this doctrine and
those duties,Speciall application. shal make me serious in my
Christian care: I will
                           •
                         not now content
my selfe to haue (only) a generall knowledge
of Christ Iesus my Redeemer:
but I will labour to vnderstand him in
his double nature. For if I consider him
in his diuinity, as he is God onely, it is a
teror to my remembrance, when I consider
him in his double nature, it giues
me hope and alacrity;To consider God in his Maiesty onely is terrible. for the maiesty of
God is terrible to sinfull man; but his
mercy is cōfortable, and suporteth the
falling spirits of our soules, which wold

faint and dye in despayre, if the grace of
God did not supply to such extremities
Therefore as God doth most delight
himselfe in the vse of his mercy: so will
I delight my soule most in the contemplation
of his mercy.Christ the character of Gods mercy. And as Christ Iesus
is most liuely Character of his
mercy; so in the meditation of Christ
shall my cares be most busie. He is the
booke of Gods mercies: I haue eyes of
faith can both see and reade the Stories
of mercy: therefore I will direct my
labour, and endeuour my studies in the
most happy knowledge of my Sauiour
Iesus. In him I shall find infinite matter
infinite variety (all good:) in him I shall
search the cause of my redemption,Where to finde the cause of mans redemption▪
                         I
shall finde it in his will, I shall find it in
his workings; he did cause my good, he
did effect it also; in his wil was the cause
in his worke was the effect. This meditation
may kindle a dead zeale, & prouoke
holines where it is not; a God omniscious,
omnipotent, infinite in greatnesse,
in goodnesse infinite, to compel
himselfe to such a wonderful difference
of fortune. He that had happines in the

highest degree, br
                           •
                        athing inutterable
pleasure in the bosome of his Father; he
that made the heauons and the earth,
should descend from heauen to earth;Note.
& there assume the forme of wretched
man, and in that form worke such righteounes
as might satisfie God, satisfie
the law for the sinne of man; and in that
forme to be borne in pouerty, to liue in
contempt, and to dye in disgrace; and
all this to be done by the only begotten
Sonne of God, for the good of man, a
creature that was become an apostate,
a traytor to God, a rebell to his lawes,
and the very actor of his disgrace, death
& tragedy! O that I had wordes to expresse
the imaginations of my soule,
what formes of mercy I can see in my
Sauiour Iesus, what scantnes (nay what
fowlenes) of desert I finde in my selfe;
his good and my euill are both infinite.
Therefore I will do as I aduise, what I
cannot expresse in wordes or workes,Wee must meditate what wee cannot expresse. I
will deuise it in my thought: I will
know and beleeue my Sauiour to be infinit
good, though I cānot expresse his
infinite goodnes: what I can do to his

glory, I will endeauour what I cannot
do my selfe, I will perswade others: I
will doe any thing that may adde any
thing to the honour of my Sauiour: for
by gaining his fauour, I haue al fauour,
and in leesing him, I haue nought but
tribulation and misery. Hee is the seale
of the Couenant betweene God and
mee; if I want my seale, I shall want my
assurance, and so forfeyte my estate in
Gods fauour and heauen: I will therefore
sell all that I haue, to buy my sauiour,A dange
                           
                              •
                           ous forfeit.
I will leese all to gaine him. If
he subscribe not to my pardon, I am but
dead; the law hath cast mee, and without
him there is no grace, no hope of
fauour; I will therefore direct my eye
of faith to him,Resolution. and when I haue found
him whom my soule loueth. I will resort
to him in dayly prayer, winne his
fauour by indeauour & carefull obseruing
him, and so make him my saluation
that hath wrought salutation. Thus
I purpose in my owne particulars: thus
I wish to all in generall.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Repentance, the sorrow
of the Soule for
sinne.
Chap. 3.
                  
                     WHen Christian men
haue vnderstanding by
the Law of God, of
their miserable estate
(in respect of sinne)
what they were in innocency,
what they are in sin, & what
they shall be in iudgement, it bringeth
a general sadnesse on the soules of men,Repentance
and dulleth the spirite and delight they
haue had in their prosperous fortunes:God giueth the first grace to repentance.
For when God giueth grace to any one
to examine his life, and to view his own
deformities, the first knowledge & apprehensiō
of his misery is most terrible,
because his conscience dooth forcibly
check the former proceedings of his life
and violently hale him against the currēt
of his own affection: for as riuers are
not forced against their ordinary streme

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
but by the tide which is more forcible
then the streame; so our sinfull action,
(being in all men,The difficulty of repentance. a naturall and common
motion) is not reformed in vs,
but by the Spirite of God, a power aboue
our nature. Yet is it done, with
such contention in our flesh, and in
our nature, (as for the time) doth wonderfully
distract the soule of the party
repenting.The reason. And needs it must: for he
that hath wasted his time in the delicacy
of fortune, glutting himselfe with
variety of pleasures, and in the height
of this vaine prosperity is admonished
that hee hath fedde on poyson, and
thereby runne his life into a desperate
hazard,The sorrow of a repentant soule. will (doubtles) endure the extremity
of griefe that sudden feare
and amazednesse can lay vpon him
For so are sinnefull
                        •
                      men, who not regarding
the danger of their soules before
God and their conscience admonish
them,A sudden griefe is violent. are taken vnprouided with a
sudden griefe, which doth alway inflict
an vnexpressable measure of sorrowe,
and sometimes death and desperation.
Now as the Law teacheth vs to know

our sinne,What must cure diseased soules. our miserable condition, and
the disease of our soules: so the Gospell
teacheth vs the cure, both what
and how to administer phisicke to our
diseased soules: for else were the
knowledge of our sinnes an extreme
misery without profite, if wee shoulde
not also know the meanes of our recouery,
and know also how to administer
and apply them. For vertue hath no
vertue but in vse,The vse of vertue. and that physicke
which the sicke patient receyueth not,
cannot profite him, bee it neuer so excellent,
or standeth neuer so neare
him. But as in corporall, so in spirituall
sicknesses,The order in curing. the disease must first bee
knowne, the phisicke then administred;
for hee that administreth before
hee knoweth the cause, or knoweth only
the cause, and administreth not, can
neuer recouer his patient, be hee neuer
so industrious. In repentance therefore
and sorrow for sinne,) which is a sickenesse
of the soule) must be (necessarily)
considered these two particulars: The
cause,The cause of repentance. the cure. The cause is eyther the
materiall cause, or the mouing cause,

the materiall cause is sin; that being the
matter of our offence; for which wee so
sorrow and grieue all the time of our
repentance. This is proued in the examples
of all men that haue had the
grace of true and vnfaigened repentance;
euery penitent Child of grace
hauing sorrow and affliction in his
soule, because by his sinne he hath prouoked
his God, and his creator against
him. Thus did Iob and Dauid repent
them;Iob. 42. 6.
                     2. Sam. 12. 13. and so doe and will doe all that
would profite by theyr Repentance.
And here is necessarily to be obserued
that though our repentance haue respect
to the benefite of our owne
estates, as being a most necessary seruice
in our saluation:Note. yet the maine respect
is had to God, whose glory wee must
preferre,God must be respected before our soules. euen before the saluation of
our soules, making him the principall
and our selues but secondary respectes
of our repentance. And herein appeareth
the difference betweene true and
false repentance. The false or godlesse
repentance sorroweth for sinne, but for
this cause only, that for their sinne God

doth punish and afflict them.The difference betweene true and false repentance.
                     Exod. 9. 27
                     1. Sam. 15 24 25.
                     1. King. 21. 27. Therfore
their sorrow is chiefly for the punishment,
& but respectiuly for the sin. Thus
did Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, & Iudas repent
them, and so do all false and fained repenters,
that respect God for themselues,
and not themselues for God. A
true and godly repentance sorroweth
for sin,Mat. 27. 3. 4
                     For what cause a godly repentant sorroweth. because it is sin, and not because
it deserueth punishment: and heere the
main respect is had to God, and to our
selues onely for Gods sake. For though
the dread and feare of punishment, be
sufficient to mooue any mans repentance,
yet we must not make that the
cause of our spirtiual sorrow: but much
rather because we haue offended so gracious
a God, who hath declared himselfe
to vs in so many, & so great demō
                     strations
of loue, this ought to be more
sensible to our wounded soules thē the
horror we haue of our condemnation.
Thus are holy men moued in the griefe
& passion of their repentāce. The main
difference then betweene true and false
repentance is this: True repentance
is caused by a reuerence wee haue to

the loue of God, false Repentance by
the feare wee haue of Gods iustice: the
one is the office of a slaue, the other
the office of a sonne: both of them repenting
one matter,God is the moving cause in every office of grace. but for diuers respects.
Sin then is the materiall cause of
Repentance. The mouing cause is God
who mouing his holy Spirite in the
hearts of his Elect, presents them the
vgly formes of their sins, awakes their
conscience, and stirs them to a serious
cogitation of their wretchednesse; giuing
them still such proportion of
grace, as the degrees of theyr Repentance
and spiritual sorrow shal require.
And that God is the first mouing cause
of godly repentance, is euident by many
places of Scripture; by these namely,
2. Tim. 2. 25. where S. Paul aduising Timothie
to instruct them that are contrary
minded, hee giueth this reason:2. Tim. 2. 25 
                     Because
he shall thereby proue if God at any
time will giue them repentance, that they
may know the truth: Here repentance is
called the gift of God, which doth vtterly
barre man from all cause of boasting
his ability in this necessatie dutie.

Also in the 5. of the Act. 31. the Apostles
(prouing Iesus to be Christ & God
coequall to his Father) vseth this argument
before the councell of the Iewes:
That God had made him a Prince & a Sautour,
                     Act. 5. 31.
                     to giue repentance to Israel, and forgiuenesse
of sin, where the power of giuing
repentance, is made a proofe of
his diuinity, and interposed betweene
his office of Sauiour, and his power of
forgiuing sins. These places (out of many)
sufficiently proue, that God is the
first & principall mouing cause of fruitfull
repentance.Obiect. Now it may bee demaunded,
whether God moue repentance
in all them that repent for sin, or
in them onely that truly repent, and are
his chosē elect. I answer,Answer. that God moueth
this grace in his elect only because
they only make profitable vse of repentance,
& that such as Soul and Ahab that
repented for priuate respects,Saul and Ahab. were not
moued by the spirite of grace, but by
their politique & priuate regards only.
For wheresoeuer the holy Ghost shall
please to moue grace, it is not possible
that labour should be fruitlesse: neyther

doth God euer misse in the purpose of
his ends.Note. And therfore that repentance
which his holy Spirit causeth, he continueth
to maturitie & ripenesse of perfection,
neuer fayling, neuer fainting in
his vndertakings. Thus much of the
cause of our spirituall sorrow (repentāce.)
Now of the cure or means of deliuerance
from spirituall griefe.The cure. In the
cure is considered, first the preparing &
dressing of the wounded soule, wherby
it is made fit for curing. Secondly, the
matter to be applied to the soule. Thirdly,
the maner of applyment. In the
preparing of the wounded soule, there
are those 4. things necessary. First, a spirituall
sorrow for sin, that is, a sence of
sorrow in the soule, caused by a cogitation
of sin & guiltinesse. And this is a
necessary preparatiue in a repētāt soule:
for that soule cānot desire a spiritual refreshing,
that hath not first a sense of
sorrow, & a feeling of present calamity.
This first preparatiue to repentance,
was in the Iewes, that were hearers of
holy Peter, when hee declared to them
their sin in crucifying the Lord Iesus.

For the Text sayth:Act. 2. 37 
                     When they heard it,
they were pricked in their hearts, and
sayd: What shall wee doe? As if the presēt
sorrow did so astonish them, as they
knew not what to do, nor what to aduise
themselues. The next preparatiue
is humble acknowledgement, that is,
an acknowledgment of the soule of the
misery it is in,Humble acknowledgement. and an exposing of
such particular griefes as wee finde in
the register of our conscience. This also
is very necessary in the preparing of
our soules: for though God (the Physition
of our soul
                        •
                     s) vnderstand our sins
better then our selues, and can remember
them better then conscience; yet
is it but reason, that hee that desireth
the physicke of his soule, declare so
much of his griefe as hee can remember:
not to instruct or helpe the knowledge
of God, but to acknowledge our
selues and our dut
                        •
                     full desires. This acknowledgement
of sin, was comon in
the custome of holy Dauid, how often
doth hee confesse his sinne, and expose
his griefe before God?The example of holy Dauid.
                     Psal. 32. 5. for God
is so desirous of our good, as that

hee then readily helpeth vs, when wee
doe but (carefully) desire it. Therefore
sayth the Prophet Dauid: I sayd I would
confesse my sinne, and thou forgauest, &c.
Dauid did but say he would confesse,
God taketh his word, and forgaue him
his sinne. And certainely, humble and
vnfained acknowledgement in our
repentance, is an vndoubted testimony
that God doth giue vs grace, & that
hee will giue vs fauour. Here is offered
occasion to dispute a large controuersie
touching auricular confessiō, the
which being conten
                        •
                     iously disputed,Auricular confession.
hath kindled fire in the faith of manie,
many making that of absolute necessity
in all, which is onely conuenient in
some.Auricular con
                           •
                        ession rather policy then piety. For auricular confession (as now
it is vsed) is rather a state policy thē religious
piety, and therefore I dare not
command it, neyther will commend it.
The third preparatiue consisteth in holy
action,The third preparatiue. that is, when wee indeauour a
reformation of our selues, and declare
our Repentance in a conscionable discharge.
For though no man can
                        •
                      satisfie
the iustice of God for sinne; that being

possible for the Sonne of God onely:No man can satisfie God.
yet ought all men to endeauour so
much as they haue power giuen them
to satisfie men. As for example; hee
that stealeth or defraudeth, bee it by
force or by fraud,How farre euery man must satisfie. is of necessity bound
to make restitution (if he bee able) and
this the reformed Publican Zacheus
wel vnderstood, who pro
                        •
                     essing before
Christ his reformation & repentance,
to witnesse it to bee true and vnfained,
hee gaue this infallible token: Beholde
Lord (sayth he) the half of my goods I giue
to the poore, and if I haue taken from any
man by forged cauillation,
                     Luk. 19. 8. 
                     I restore him
foure folde. And the Text sayth in the
next verse, that then saluation was come
into his house. And so Zacheus by indeauouring
that hee could not, did at one
time entertaine both his Sauiour and
his saluation. Therefore though no
man can satisfie, yet euery man must
endeauour, otherwise his repentance is
idle and but vaine, neyther can he haue
part in the righteousnesse and redemption
of Iesus Christ.
                  The last preparatiue is praier, that is

a lifting vp of the heart to God, with
faith and hopeful confidence.Prayer. In the exercise
of praier there is a double office.Psal. 25. 1.
First, wee must expose our griefe. Secondly,
we must implore fauour: for as
in the ordinary cures of Surgery, the
patient must first suffer his woundes to
bee ript,Note. launst and searcht before the
playster can bee applyed to the sore:
so must we rip, and search the wounds
of our soule, empty the infectious matter;
and when we haue it out, wee must
vse it as Hezechiah did the blasphemous
letter of Rabshaketh,
                     2. Kin. 19. 14. 15. spreads all
before the Lord; and then with earnest
humblenesse, implore his fauour,
point out our sinnes vnto him, and
confesse that these are they that haue
wounded our soules, troubled our conscience,
for which we grieue, for which
we pray. When the soule is thus prepared,
there is ioy in our repentant teares,
pleasure in our griefe, and hope in our
spirituall sorrow: and then, (and
not before) are wee made fitte to apprehend
and apply the saluation of
our soules, Christ Iesus. The second

thing in the care of our soules,The matter of the cure of our souls. is the
soueraigne matter by which the soule
is cured. That is the most soueraigne
Balsame, the sacred bloud of the
Lambe of GOD, of the Sonne of
God, shed for the Redemption of mankinde:1. Pet. 2. 2.
for so sayth his holy Apostle
Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 24. Who his owne
selfe bare our sinnes in his body on the tree,
that 
                           •
                        ee being deliuered from sinne should
liue in righteousnesse, by whose stripes we
were healed. Our sinnes are taken
from vs, by his bearing them: our
woundes are cured by his wo
                        •
                     ndes:
our eternall death preuented by his
temporall death: for but the Sonne
of GOD (Christ Iesus,) there is no
Empiricke,No physick but the bloud of Christ can cure a wounded soule. no quintessence, no Physicke,
can cure a wounded soule: so
venemous is sinne, and so incurable
are the wounds of sinne: only the bloud
of the holy Lambe is able to deliuer
and heale; and that is both so certaine,
and present in vertuous operation, as
that one droppe (rightly applyed) is
sufficient to cure the wounds of a world
of soules. The last thing is the cure of

our soules, is the manner of applying
this most Soueraigne medicine Christ
Iesus,The maner of applying Christ. and that is by a true and a liuelie
faith,Heb. 11. 6. for without faith it is impossible
to please God: and without faith it
is impossible to apprehend the Sonne
of God. Neyther neede this seeme
strange to a Christian iudgement, that
wee should bee able by faith to apprehend
Christ, and apply him to our repentant
soules: for hee himselfe hath
taught vs, that whatsoeuer wee shall
aske in prayer (if we belieue) wee shall
haue it.Mat. 21. 22. Where hee maketh faith to bee
the couenant and condition of prayer,
and promiseth that such prayer shal
onely and alwayes preuaile, that is directed
by a liuing faith, against which
there is no resistance.No resistāce against a true faith. Therefore to apprehend
Christ Iesus, and to apply him
to our wounded soules, we must reach
our handes of faith to the bosome of
his Father, and by faith take him from
the altar of his Crosse, and by faith apply
his bloud, (nay, his bloudy body)
to our wounded soules. For hee
that doth it faithfully, doth it effectuly,

and shal doubtlesse find assurance in
himselfe, that the woundes of his soule
are cured; and that sinne is for euer
disinabled from doing his soule hurt,
that hath Iesus Christ his Redeemer
faithfully applyed vnto it. For where
hee is in his mercy, there is assurance,
and the 
                        •
                     afety of diuine protection,
And this is the order I aduise all christians
in their repentance and spirituall
sorrow.Note. First, that they prepare
their soules, and that then they apply
Iesus Christ their saluation, In whom
there is safety, without whome, none.
I might heere bee large in declaring
the manner and the causes of Godlesse
sorrow, and false repentance. Iauoide
them for their number and variety:
let the true iudge the false; and
let this true forme of Repentance I
haue prescribed, teach the Christian
Reader to auoide all dissimulation,Hipocritical sorrow in Gods hatred. and
hypocriticall sorrow for sinne: the
which hee may iudge by comparing
with this Doctrine I haue deliuered.
And let him remember that Godlie
sorrow causeth repentance, not to bee

repented of; but worldly sorrow causeth
death. 2. Corinth. 7. 10. 11.
                  2. Cor. 7. 10▪ 11
                  
                     The generall vse.
                     This doctrine of Repentance,The Vse. and
spirituall sorrow doth remember all
men many very needfull admonishments.
First,First. seeing that sinne is the
cause for which wee repent vs, and by
whose poysonsome meanes our soules
are so grieuously wounded, and so
fowly deformed; it ought to moue al
men to a loathing and detestation of
sinne, by which we are both grieued in
our selues, & brought in the hatred and
displeasure of almighty God.Note. For if we
carefully auoyd all such annoyances as
bring any little taste of griefe to our bodies,
or to our temporall life, wee ought
much more carefully to auoyde sinne,
which causeth such extremity of griefe
in our soules, and doth both depriue vs
of Gods fauour, & bring an euerlasting
destruction vpon vs. Secondly,Secondly. seeing
there is no repentance profitable to saluation,

but that which is caused in vs,
by the mouing of Gods holy Spirit,
it behoueth all men to bee serious in
their repentance, and not to content
themselues with a slender examination
of their sinnes, and then againe to return
to their former disobedience, and
remissnesse; but to be carefull to repent
al sinne, and to be constant in that care,
no alteration, no interruption, and that
our repentance respect rather a shame
and griefe to haue offended a gracious
God, then any feare of temporall or eternall
punishment: lest by such repentance
they gaine no more then Saul &
Ahab;
                        Saules and Ahabs repentance. the one nothing,1. King. 21 27. the other nothing
but a short temporall blessing:
both of thē leesing their soules by their
false and fained repentance. Thirdly, seing
the soule cannot be cured by repentance,
neither can apply or apprehend
Christ Iesus, vnlesse it bee first prepared
& made fit by the exercise of these duties,
it therefore behoueth all men to be
carefully precise in the office of these
duties, & not to satisfie themselues with
the exercise of one or two of them,

but to indeauour them all, because they
are al necessary in our true repentance
for as in the commaundements of the
law, he that fayleth in one, breaketh al:
so in these duties of repentanc, he that
neglecteth one, profiteth by none, but
annihilateth the purpose of his spirituall
sorrow. Let no man therfore flatter
himselfe with this presumption,The danger of presumption.
that if hee haue beene an extortioner, a
thiefe, or a godlesse person, that his repentance
will suffice him, if he be sorry
for his sinnes, and acknowledge them
to God, for those though they bee necessary
duties, they are not all the duties
of our soules in our preparation to repentance.
Therefore if he haue extorted,
or (as Zacheus did, taken by forged
cauillation,L
                              •
                           k. 19. 8. (that is by any indirect or
dishonest meanes) hee must repent as
Zacheus did, and make restitution (if he
can) and as farre as he can: otherwise
saluation can neuer come to his house.
Therefore as they are all necessary, so
they are ioyntly necessary, euery man
being bound to all these duties, as God
and grace shall inable him.
                     
                        Fourthly, seeing Christ Iesus is that
Empericke, and that onely salue which
is able to cure a wounded sinfull soule,
and that without him there is no working,
no cause, no meanes of spirituall
deliuerance from sinne, and from a
wounded Conscience: therefore it
most nearely concerneth all men to indeauour
all meanes,We must purchase Christ, though we sell al thing
                              •
                           
                         to purchase this
Christ their saluation, to sell all they
haue, that they may buy the treasure of
his bloud, & of his righteousnesse, nay,
and to despise all thinges in respect of
him their Sauiour, and the onelie
Soveraigne salue for their wounded
soules.
                     And that seeing wee haue Iesus
Christ the Sonne of God proposed vs
to be our saluation, who is alwaies ready,
and alwayes willing to bee apprehended,The willingnesse of Christ to be apprehended.
and to bee applyed to our
soules: by whom onely wee enioy the
peace of conscience, and the hope of
heauen; therefore no man ought to
haue confidence and affy in pardons,
dispensations, and such trash, wherewith
the besotted people of this world

wonderfully delighted, for such pedling
stuffe must not be thought to haue
equall vertue with the bloud of Christ,
or that they haue any power in the
cure of wounded soules,Note. but on the
contrary they surfette the conscience,
and poyson the soule,Vile Physicke. enlarging the
woundes both in number and griefe,
and making the soule vncapable of
cure, and most vnfitte to haue the
precious bloud of Christ applyed vnto
it.
                     Lastly,Fiftly. seeing there is no meanes
to apprehend and apply this Christ, the
physition, and physick of our soules, but
onely by a true, liuely and a iustifying
faith, therefore it most necessarily concerneth
all men,Christ can not be apprehended but by a true faith onely. to haue this means of
apprehending Christ; because (as I haue
sayd) the salue though most soueraign)
cannot profite the sore, vnlesse it be applyed,
that being the very maine act of
our spirituall health, alll other duties
and offices beeing but circumstances,
to assist and forward this act. Moreourr
the faith by which wee apprehend
Christ, must be more then a common

or a generall faith. For it profiteth not
to our health and saluation, to knowe
onelie that Iesus Christ is the present
cure of our soules, vnlesse wee also by a
confident and liuely faith, apprehende
and apply him to the sore of our soules.
Againe, seeing Christ is our onely saluation,
& seeing faith is the only means
of apprehending it, we ought not to appoint
other matter of saluation, neither
any other maner of applying it. And
therfore no man ought to ascribe righteousnesse
to himself, to his own works,Note.
or the supererogatiue workes of his
friendes, but onely to Iesus Christ, and
that this Christ is onely apprehended
by a sauing faith.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     I will often meditate this Doctrine
of true Repentance,Speciall application. what feare, what
care, what affliction is in the soule at
such occasion. I will practise it in my
selfe, I will pitty it in others: I will condemne
sin to be the great cause of such

misery, I will condemne my selfe to be
the onely cause of that sinne. When
I exercise this spirituall office of repentance,
I will bee carefully busie in all
the duties thereof:A necessary resolution. I vvill search the
woundes of my soule, empty the rottennesse
& putrifaction thereof, search
and dresse my wounds;How to dresse the woundes of a soule. search them by
a serious examination of my sinnes, and
dresse them by humble and hearty acknowledgement,
I will examine the actions
& the particulars of my life, I will
compare them with my duties, and
those that proportion not, I will call
them my errors, my sinnes, and the
wounds of my soule. I wil by the means
of prayer and faith, referre my defects
to bee supplyed by the most absolute
satisfactory righteousnesse of my
Sauiour.The righteousnesse of Christ must supply all our defects. What I find sinne, I wil call
sinne: I will not flatter my errours,
nor smooth my deformities, I will not
pretend health when I am sicke, nor
safety when I am mortally wounded,
I will not fauour any sinne, whether
it bee a sinne of profite, or a sinne of
pleasure.No sin must be fauoured. In this case I will despise

both pleasure and profite: I will therefore
be sorry for all, acknowledge all,
pray for the remission of all. If I haue
gayned possessions and wealthes by
theft, extortion, forged cauillation,
or any other indirect meanes, I will
restore as my present estate shall enable
me. I will be ashamed that Zacheus
the Publican, shall restore his extortions
foure-fold, and I a Christian,
not to restore the princiall. I will
shunne all such sinne, as a plague or
leprosie, because I know that saluation
will not come to him that hath
such defection.All sinne of necessity must bee cured. But as (of necessitie)
all sinne must bee cured, otherwise
there is no cure: so in my repentance
I will hate all sinne without dispensation
of any; otherwise I repent
not, but flatter my selfe in presumption,
and vaine confidence. And
because nothing can apprehend and
apply saluation to my Soule,Works must try our faith. but
the handes of a sauing faith onely, I
will therefore bee sure that my faith
bee such an one, I will trye it by the euidence
of my Workes: they wil testifie

what it is, and of what Nature.
For as my faith in Christ doth iustifie
mee in the sight of God, so the workes
of my faith iustifieth my faith in the
sight of men, and my selfe. If the
fruites of my faith (then) bee good,
my faith it selfe then must needes bee
good, and auaileable to apprehend
and apply Iesus Christ my saluation.Plentifull in good works and why.
I will therefore bee plentifull in
the exercise of all good Actions, that
my conscience may testifie my faith:
and that my faith may bee able
to execute the holy Office assigned
it.
                     When I haue the assurance of this
faith, I will then with confidence
looke vp to Heauen. I will seeke him
whome my Soule loueth, and when I
haue found him, I will expose before
him the calamity of my soule, and my
present condition. I will open my
woundes, discouer my sinnes, declare
my endeauour, and report my faith.
When I haue thus done, I knowe
what my Sauiour will doe: he will reioyce
at my recouery, and be glad of

my returne: hee will shew mee his
righteousnesse, shew me his woundes,
and shew me his death vpon the crosse:
hee will also willingly yeeld himselfe
vnto my faith,Apprehension of Chrst. and giue mee free liberty
in the vse of his righteousnesse.
Then will I busily apply my cares, I
will stretch my handes of faith to the
altar of his Crosse, I will (with reuerend
boldnesse) touch his wounds, and take
his sacred bloud; and with a wonderfull
degree of comfort, I will apply
it when I haue it: I wil open my wounds
wide, and will infuse his most precious
bloud, and with that bloud shall enter
the Spirite of health and euerlasting
safety.
                     Thus in an instant shall I finde the
happy alteration of my soule:The happy alteration of a soule and I
that (but then) was in spirituall griefe,
tribulation, and anguish, shall now
finde ioye and strength in my Soule:
and my soule that was wounded, deformed,
and full of the markes of sin, shall
now haue the marke of the righteousnes
of Iesus Christ, wherby I shal be distinguished
from vnrepentant sinners,

and haue the seales & assurances of my
saluation. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Of Mortification.
Chap. 4.
                  
                     HE that is resolued to indeuour
his godly repē
                     tance,Mortification.
and laboreth the
reformation of his sinfull
life, must labour
two thinges principally,
and of necessity; the first is Mortification,
the next regeneration. He
must first destroy his sinnefull estate,
before he can obtaine the state of grace.
For God and the gifts of God,Note. are so
absolute holy, as that they cannot admit
any mixture or cooperation with
sinne and wicked action. For as in the
curing of bodies infected with poysonnous
diseases, the Physition by seuerity
and strict dyet, bringeth downe the
body of his patient to extreme pouerty,

and leannes, and then in that extremity,
helpeth the weakenesse of Nature;
and by restoratiues, and requisite
dyet, bringeth a new flesh wholesome
and without disease, the former diseased
flesh being first wasted, and vtterly
consumed with the extremity of physick.
So he that is resolued in his repentance,
and hath a loathing and detestation
of his sins, and a desire to free his
soule from the contagion of sinne, must
resolue also to endure such bitter Physicke
and strict dyet,How to mortifie our diseased actions. as the iudgement
of spiritual phisick doth prescribe him;
whereby all the euill, depraued and corrupt
affections of his soule, may bee vtterly
wasted, and thereby his soule may
haue new and fresh indument of grace,
without taint, without disease, without
griefe. This was figured in the manner
of Gods calling Moses to his princely
and Propheticall office. For when Moses
made offer to come neare the presence
of God in the bush,Ex. 3. 5. God forbad
him: Come not hither (saith God,) put off
thy shoes of thy feet. That is before thou
presume to approch my presence, thou

must first put off thy shooes, that is,
thy sinnefull and corrupt affections for
hee that hath base and vile affections
is not worthy, is not fitte for the presence
of GOD. It was also in the
order of the Ceremoniall Law, that
they who were polluted (were it but
with the touch of any vncleane thing)
were for a time Prohibited the Sanctuary,
and the presence of God:
                     Leuit. 15. 2. &c. and had
a time limited to cleanse them, before
they were admitted and allowed for
cleane persons. All which Ceremonies
doe but note vnto vs the Nature of
holinesse, how vnpossible it is to bee
reconciled with sinne, that as the two
contrary Elements, Fire and Water,
cannot possibly bee in any one Subiect
without intestine strife: so God
and Beliall, grace and sinne, can neuer
conspire in any one particular: but
where grace is,No peace betweene God and Belial. sinne cannot be, and
where sinne is, grace will not bee: there
being in them a full opposition of Nature,
not to be reconciled. Therefore
it is necessary, that before wee
entertaine the graces of Gods Holy

Spirite, wee first discharge our sinnes,
which haue had entertainement in
vs, and before wee can bee regenerate,
and made the sonnes of GOD,
wee must mortifie our affections,
whereby we were made the seruants of
Sinne.
                  Saint Paul admonishing the Colossians
to an imitation of Christ,S. Paules direction. and
his holinesse, aduiseth first to Mortification,
as if without that meanes,
the other were impossible.Colos. 3. 5. 
                     Mortifie
therefore (sayth hee) your Members
which are on the earth, For nication,
vncleannesse, &c. And hee giueth a
reason of this direction, in the Epistle
to the Romanes,Rom. 8. 13. 8. 13. For if yee
liue after the flesh, yee shall die: but if yee
mortifie the deedes of the body by the spirit,
yee shall liue. By which place wee are
taught, what mortification is, and of
what necessity it is.
                  Mortification is a decay or perishing
the deedes of our flesh,What Mortification is. by the
grace and operation of Gods Spirite.
By the deeds of our flesh, is meant
not onely our euill actions, but our

desires and carnall affections also; the
which Saint Paul doth particularize in
the Verse before alleadged: where
he calleth their generall name members
on the earth. Mortifie therefore your members
which are on the earth,
                     Colos. 3. 5 
                     fornicatiō, vncleannesse,
the inordinate affection, euill
concupiscence, and couetousnesse, which is
idolatry. In which hee comprehendeth
(not onely) our actions, but affections;
nay, the very naturall concupiscence,
and deprauednesse of our Nature.
Not that any man is able to
performe these dueties exactly; but
exactly to endeuour them, and that
our defectes may bee in our power,To endevour exactly is exactly to performe.
and not in our purpose and endeauour.
And this is the meaning of that Apostle,
in naming (for the matter of
mortification) sinnes of action, sinnes
of affection, and sinnes of naturall descent.
                  Secondly,Secondly. mortification is an office of
the spirit,Question. & here importeth a question,
whether the word spirite in this place
is to be meant of the Spirite of God,
the Holy Ghost, or of the Spirite of

man our naturall soule. I answere,Answer. that
the Spirit executing this office of mortification,
is principally meant of the
holy Ghost, who giueth the first
motion of desire in euery Godlie
Act. It is respectiuely also meant
of the care and trauell of our owne
spirites or soules, not that our own spirits
can cause our owne mortification,
but being first caused by Gods Spirite,
it is entertained and continued by the
exercise of our owne Spirites, our
Spirites hauing no such strength in
theyr owne Nature,Note. but as they are
prepared by the Grace of the Holy
Ghost. For, as in the casting of a stone
or running of a Bowle, though the
strength of the arme giue the first motion
to the bowle or stone; yet afterwards
is the motion continued a competent
time, as wel because of the powerfull
mouing of the arme, as also because
of the naturall fitnesse of the
thing moued. So in the office of mortification,
and in all other diuine offices
of the Soule,No soule can moue it selfe to diuine action▪
                      though the Soule
moue not it selfe to these holy actions;

yet by reason of the spirituall nature
of our soules, when it is once moued
by the Holy Ghost, it then continueth
such motion, euen to perfection;
so that the prime houre of the holy
exercise of Mortification (and so of
all other spirituall offices) is wholy to
to bee ascribed to the power of Gods
holy Spirit, which moueth in our harts
enery act, and euery purpose of well
doing.
                  Thirdly, there is a necessary of mortification
imposed vpon euery man,Thirdly. vpon
the paine of condemnation. This is
implyed in the words of S. Paul in the
place before alledged, Rom. 8. 13. For
if ye liue after the Flesh, ye shall die, but if
ye mortifie the deeds of the body by the spirit,
                     Rom. 8. 13.
                     ye shall liue. Where the Apostle proposeth
life and death before the Romanes,
admonishing that of a necessity
they must chuse one,Life and death is proposed euery man. eyther to mortifie
the flesh and liue, or else to pamper the
flesh, and die; there being no meanes,
no cause of auoidance of this necessity.
And S. Paul hath admiration at their
simplicity, that cannot apprehend this

mystery, who in the Allegory of seede
prouing the resurrection of our bodies,
proueth also the necessary mortifying
of our flesh:1. Cor. 15. 36. 
                     O foole (saith he) that which
thou sowest is not quickned except it die:
For as the blade of seede corne cannot
appeare before the graine bee first
rotten in the Earth: and as there
cannot bee a Resurrection to Life, before
there bee first a separation and
rottennesse by Death: So there cannot
bee a Regeneration by Grace,
beefore there bee a Mortification to
sinne.No regeneratiō before mortification. For new-Birth is gotten by
the death of Sinne, and Mortification
is the Predecessor, and nexte
Parent to Regeneration, they being
necessary Relatiues: for where one is,
both are; and where both are not, neithe
is.
                  These thinges are most materiall in
the doctrine of Mortification.
                  First, it is generally necessary, al men
beeing bound to that duty vpon necessity.
                  Secondly,All men, all sinne. it is necessarily generall,
all men being bound to mortifie

all sinne, without fauour or dispensation
of any. Lastly, it is moued in
vs by the spirite of God, but is exercised
by our owne reformed Spirits, God
kindling the fire of zeale in our heartes,
which when it is once kindled, burneth
of it selfe, but not without diuine assistance.
                  
                     The generall vse.
                     The necessity of Mortification,The vse.
doth require in euery one an exact diligence
in that Christian office: for seing
the hazard of eternall life dependeth
vpon the death, or not dying of
sinne, and that necessarily, there is no
man of that simple vnderstanding, but
will thinke it expedient, nay, necessary
wisedome,Eyther men or their sins must die. rather to destroy his sinne,
then himselfe, for one of the two must
of necessity be mortified, suffer death,
and die. And if any man thinke to be able
to deuise a means to saue both himselfe
and his sinne, and in the reformation
of himselfe to ouerleape the duetie

of mortification, as a duty too precise
and of grieuous performance; and shal
thinke that mortification is not of necessary
substance, but rather a seuere
circumstance, which may bee safelie auoided;
to him I will say with indignation,
as S. Paul sayth to the Corinthians
with admiration:1. Cor. 15. 36. 
                        O foule, that which thou
sowest is not quickned, except it die. And
let him bee sure, that if he fayle, or
faint in his indeuour, there is no indeuour
can purchase him the fauour of
God,How to esteem God the soule, and sin. and the saluation of his soule.
Therefore it most neerely respecteth al
men, not to esteeme their sinne, which
is their enemy, & would destroy them,
more then God that is their friend, and
would saue them; nay, more then theyr
soules, and their owne saluation; but to
despise their sinnes,Man must warre vpon himselfe. nay themselues in
respect of God, and saluation. And
therefore let euery man make war vpon
his owne flesh, and let him be valiant
to conquer himselfe; & to triumph
in the spoyle and death of his sinfull actions
and affections. For there is no
Warr can gaine our Names a greater

glory, then to victor our selues, and he
is most redoubted and most valiant,
that can conquer his owne affections:
the which all men must doe, before
they can haue the garland of holy victory
from the handes of God. Againe,
seing that in our mortificatton there is
no respect of fauour had to any sinne,
but that all sinne must dye, the sins that
haue gayned vs eyther our profite,All sin must die. or
pleasure: for all sinne beeing in hatred
with God, all sinne is therefore commaunded
to die, without dispensation,
prouiso, or exception. It therefore behoueth
all to hate as God hateth, euen
all sinne,Men must hate as God hateth. because all sin is in Gods hatred;
least they prouoke GOD as Saule
did, and with Saule declare themselues
reprobates; God commanded Saule to
destroy the Amalekites,
                        1. Sam. 15. 1. a sinnefull and
Godlesse people, Saule performed his
commaundement but in part: For
though hee destroyed many, he spared
some, for the which GOD cast him
from his fauour, and rent his Kingdome
from him. Our sinnes are those
Amalekites, God hath commanded vs

to destroy them vtterly: if therefore
any man presume against Gods commandement
to spare any, God will certainly
cast him with Saul, from the hope
of saluation.Admonition. This dooth admonish all
to auoyde the common custome, that
men commonly hate the sinnes and
infirmities of others, but flatter and
feed their owne with saturity; The vsurer
he condemnes the prodigall, the
prodigall him: the drunkard condemneth
gluttony, the glutton drunkennes.
Age and youth haue particular sinnes,
yet they despise one another, and so euerie
particular, so that many can abhorre
those sinnes to which they are
not naturally addicted: but fewe doe
mortifie thē that are nearest & dearest
vnto them.Hypocrites. These our Sauiour Christ
calleth hypocrites, that point at little
sins in others, but flatter mayn ones in
themselues. This euill custome is farre
short of the duty of mortificatiō, which
requireth a detestation (nay a death)
not of some sinnes, and other mens, but
of our owne sinnes, and of all our own
without exception of any.
                     
                        Lastly, seeing the holy Ghost doth
moue this grace in our hearts and doth
giue vs spirituall power in the office of
mortification, it behooueth all men
to addresse theyr prayers to GOD,
that hee will giue them the direction
of his grace, in so needfull a performance,
and that when they finde in
themselues a desire to mortifie their
sinnes, and sinnefull affections, that
they yeeld their endeauour with all diligence
to doe as the holy Ghost doth
direct them,The holy Ghost the best directer lest by neglecting the admonishments
of Gods Spirite, they
bring vppon themselues a greater condemnation.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     Mortification beeing of such necessitySpeciall application.
in the ordinary meanes of my saluation,
as that not my selfe, or any can
be regenerate, before wee carefully discharge
this office of mortification; I
will therefore endeauour this dutie
with all diligence: I will denounce a

bloudy and a generall warre against
all my sins, I will entertaine fauour and
correspondency with none; but euen
those sinnes that haue been my delight
shall bee my hatred:Delights of sinnes must be in hatred I will not loue
them for theyr profite, because transitory:
I will not fauour them for their
pleasure, because in their pleasure there
is poyson. I wil not feare them for their
number,Reasons why wee should fauor no sinne. though infinite many, nor
for their valour, though they haue conquered
my selfe, and a world of people:
because I know whose I am, and who
is on my side. When I was victored by
them, I was their seruant, their slaue:
now I haue victored them, I will make
them perpetuall slaues: I will binde
them in chaines, cast them in prison,
and for euer destroy their euill power,
I will haue no pitty, no fauour, no
compassion on sinne, because (when I
was victored) sinne was mercilesse against
me. I will not (as did Saul) spare
any for their dignity or worth,Sin is most mercilesse. but
with Dauid, I will mortifie and destroy
all; in my youth I will hate the sinnes
of youth, and in my age, I will bee

also impartiall, prosperity shall not alter
me, neyther shal pouerty tempt me:
but hauing vndertaken to warre with
sinne,Warre is not ended but by victory. I will bee full in my opposition. I
will not end my warre without victory,
I will not interrupt it by truce, but
I will be resolute in my purpose, and
constant in my resolution. At all occasions,
and in euery distresse I will resort
to the Spirit of God: hee is my Commander,
and the Generall in this spirituall
warre. I will consult with that
Oracle, and receyue direction: I will
fight with that arme, and obtaine the
garland. For hauing God on my parte,Gods policy cannot bee preuented.
whom then shall I feare? His policies
cannot bee preuented; nor his power
(with victory) opposed. What I want
of spirituall power in my selfe, I shall
bee aboundantly supplyed by the infinite
power of the holy Ghost: For
by him,
                        Psalm. 18, 
                        I shall bee able to ouerthrow an
host of sinne; and by the strength of my
God, I shall auoide all extremities. Hee
is the maine battell of my power, I
am but the reare. He is my General,
I am his Souldier, his holy Crosse my

colours, his holy Word my weapons.
And being thus appointed, I dare confront
all the enemies of my soule, all
my sinnes: and the Diuell to helpe
them.A christian boldnesse. I dare vndertake their conquest,
spoyle theyr power, discipline their errours;
and by the perpetuall death of
my sinne, obtaine a perpetuall quiet of
my conscience, and a perpetuall peace
in my soule. Amen.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of Regeneration, or new
Birth.
Chap. 5.
                  
                     WHen all thinges were
first created,Gen. 1. 31. euery
thing was perfectly
good; no defect, no
blemish, no need of
correction. The first defection was sin:

the first sin was the sinne of Angels, the
next the sin of man. God punished the
sinne of Angels in their owne particulars
onely,The reason why God did punish the angels in their owne particulars only, but man, in him selfe and posterity. because they were not to
deriue their natures to posteritie by
generation and natural descent; and because
they were ordained for the seruice
of God in certain peculiar offices
in the gouernement of his Creatures:
the Creatures not being ordained for
their seruice. But man for whome all
thinges, (euen the Angells themselues)
were created, & from whom was to be
deriued a world of people, when hee
sinned, God punished man himselfe,
his posterity and the creatures hee had
made and giuen him, For as the sinne
of man had infected the whole house
of man (the whole World beeing then
his house) so the curse of God,Gen. 3. 17. and the
marke of his displeasure was seated on
that house (the world) all thinges being
subiect to alteration, & euil change. Frō
this cause is the necessity of regeneration,
al things being now (in their owne
nature) in the state of corruption, and
death. And therfore saith S. Peter, when

shall come to iudgment,2 Pet. 3. 10. 
                     the heauens shal
passe away with noyse, & the elements shal
melt with heat, & the earth with the works
that are therein shall be burnt vp: and that
there shal be a new heauen, and a new earth
according to Gods promise,
                     Vers. 13. 
                     wherin dwels
righteousnesse. So that nothing shall bee
able to abide the glory of Gods presence,
but that which is reformed, and
regenerate, not the elements, not heauen
it selfe,Sin deformed all, Grace reformeth all. but as all haue endured (for
sinne) the bad alteration, so they must
also endeuour (by grace) the good alteration:
all were transformed by sinne,
all must be reformed againe by grace,
or else remaine in their deformity. And
Saint Paul is peremptory in this opinion,Gal. 6. 1
                           •
                        .
                     For in Christ Iesus (saith he) neyther
circumcision auayleth any thing, nor vncircumcision,
but a new creature: that is, a regeneration
by an effectual faith, is only
necessary: all ceremony being insufficient
and not effectuall. And our Sauiour
Christ to Nicodemus preached the
necessity of regeneration, and affirmeth
his doctrine with a double asseueration.
Verily, verily I say vnto thee, except a

man be born again, hee cannot see the kingdome
of God. If not see the kingdom of
God, then not inheri
                        •
                     e it, And this may
suffice to perswade the necessary knowledge,No regeneration, no saluation.
and the necessary care of regeneration,
being that without which it is
impossible to be saued. Now it importeth
to know what regeneration is.
                  Regeneration is an act of the holy
Ghost in Gods elect,What regeneration is. whereby they are
admitted or entred into a constant and
faithfull exercise of a godly life. First, it
is an act of the holy Ghost: for, as I haue
before sayde, all grace is the gift of
God, and euery motion to goodnes is
caused by the spirite of God onely;Iam. 1. 17 our
selues being meerly passiue in all diuine
exercise, God himselfe being the actor,
and principall mouer. For as hee that
learneth to write,The Holy Ghost, our spirituall teacher. hath his hand first
led by the direction of his teacher, before
he can merit any little commendation:
so the holy Ghost (by whose directions
wee learne the vse of all spirituall
exercise) doth moue both our capacity
and power, to vnderstand the
knowledge & vse of necessary Christian

an performance, without which Master,
we should neuer bee able to comprehend
the rudimentes and first elements
of diuine learning. Regeneration
then being a Christian office of most
necessary performance, it must needes
bee caused in vs by the holy Ghost;
who is the first mouer of euer grace.
This doctrine Saint Peter concludeth1. Pet. 1. 3.
in expresse words: Blessed (sayth he) be
God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus
Christ, which according to his aboundant
mercy hath begotten vs againe vnto a liuely
hope, by the resurrection of Iesus Christ
from the dead: So that we are regenerate
or new begottē by God in Iesus Christ
at the motion & instance of his aboundant
mercy.
                  Secondly, this act of Regeneration
by the holy Ghost,Secondly. is caused in the
heartes of GODS elect onely. This
Doctrine is grounded vpon this Conclusion:
That GODS labour is
neuer fruitlesse;Iam. 1. 17. but what hee attempteth
is finished, there beeing no resistance
to his power, nor any greater to
countermand him. As holy Dauid saith:

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     The Lord hath done whatsoeuer pleased
him. And therefore this grace is moued
in the Elect onely, because the elect
onely haue the benefite of all grace.
And S. Paul chargeth all men that challenge
any part in Christ, that they become
new and regenerate. Therefore
(sayth hee,)2 Cor. 5. 17 
                     If any man bee in Christ, let
him bee a new creature, 2. Cor. 5. 17. As if
to be in Christ, and to bee a new creature,
were reciprocall, all that were in
Christ to bee regenerate, and all that
were regenerate, to be in Christ: the
elect beeing onely in Christ, and regenerate
onely.
                  Thirdly,Thirdly. by this act of grace they are
admitted and entred into the exercise
of godlinesse. For howsoeuer before
we are regenerate, & come to be made
(as it were) the very actuall sonnes of
God,Regeneration maketh vs the sons of God. by spirituall regeneration, wee
passe many dueties of holinesse which
may promise vs an extraordinary degree
of hope that we are in Gods fauor;
yet haue wee then our best assurance,
when wee are adopted his children by
regeneration: for then wee bring our

holy purpose of reformation into act,
and faithfully endeauour those dueties
which (before) we had only determined
And (therefore) S. Iames speaking of
this spirituall generation, saith: Of his
owne will begat he vs with the worde of
                     Iam. 1. 18.
                     truth, that we should bee as the first fruites
of his creatures, Iam. 1. 18. That is, when
we are regenerate, and made the sons
of God, we are then fruitfull, & not before;
we are Gods first fruites, because
we are then first fruitfull.
                  Fourthly,Fourthly. the exercise of good works
in the regenerate, must haue two special
properties: first it must be faithfull,
then constāt. It must be faithful because
of this ground:Rom. 14. 23 
                     Whatsoeuer is not of faith
is sin. Rom: 14. It must be constant because
of this: That not those that saint
in the race of godlines, but those that
run on with hope & alacrity shall obtaine
the garland: for so sayth the holy
Ghost by S. Iohn:
                     Reu. 1. 26. 
                     He that ouer commeth &
keepeth my works vnto the end, to him will
I giue power ouer natiōs. Not he that endeuoreth
the beginning, the middle, or
a part of his life, but he that endureth to

the end, hee shall bee saued. And the
Authour to the Hebrewes, admoninisheth
all men, that they run with patience
the race that is set before them, looking
vnto Iesus the Author and finisher of their
faith &c.
                     Heb. 12. 1. 2 forsaluation by Iesus Christ,
is that crowne of glory for which all
runne, which none can gaine but hee
that runneth the race of his life faithfully
and constantly.1. Cor. 9. 24 Therefore saith S.
Paul: So run that yee moy obtaine. That
is endeuour your strength with your
time to the vttermost, for though yee
begin well, it is nothing vnlesse yee also
end well.Qualis vita finis. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . For as the tree falleth so it lyeth,
and as men dye, so they shal rise to
iudgement, for the graue can giue no
holinesse, no perfection; but doth onely
continue vs in the state it found vs.
Now if any man obiect,Iohn. 3. 4. 6. as Nicodemus
did to Christ, How can these thinges be?
Can a man bee borne which is olde? Can he
enter into his mothers wombe again, and
bee borne? The answer that Christ made
to Nicodemus, may auswere such questions.
First. he sayth, that except a man be
borne of water & the Spiri, he cannot enter

into the Kingdome of God.
                     Verse 5. That answeres
the necessity. Secondly, to teach
him the manner of regeneration, how
the children of God be borne a new,
how it is caused by the secret working
of Gods Spirite in the Children of
grace, he maketh a familiar comparison
or giueth instance by the mouing of
the ayre. That as when wee heare the
whistling of the winde, wee know it
bloweth, yet cannot wee know from
whence: so in the act of regeneration,
when we feele in our hearts the motion
of Gods holy Spirite, breathing saluation
into our soules. And when our
workes, and consciences giue vs vndoubted
testimony,No man ought to search the secret workings of Gods Spirite. that wee are regenerate
and borne of God, it is then as
vaine a care to search the secret workings
of Gods Spirit, and by what actions
and circumstance God hath begotten
vs by the Spirite, as to enquirc
of the wind, whence it came, or whither
it would; this thing being not necessary
though regeneration it selfe bee most
necessary, & not to be neglected without
condemnation.
                  
                     
                     The generall vse.
                     Regeneration being of such absolute
necessity to saluation,The vse. as that beeing
not regenerate,
                        Ioh. 3. 34. 
                        and borne a new of water,
and the Spirit, we cannot be the sonnes, nay
the seruants of almighty God, though wee
neuer-so much endeauour in the seruice
of other Christian duties, this doth admonish
all men to haue principall care,Admonitiō
                        
to labour all meanes possible to haue
faithfull & sufficient witnesse from their
conscience, that they are the adopted
children of God, established in the assurance
of their saluation, being known
and sealed of GOD with the marke
of spirituall regeneration. For it must
needs bee sufficient to resolue a conscience
of Gods fauour, when wee know
that wee are his children, he our father,
when wee know that our Father must
iudge vs, and such a Father as loueth
mercy aboue all thinges.God loueth mercy aboue all thinges. It is a grounded
cause to make vs hopefull, nay,
confident in the trust of Gods mercy:

and safely without presumption to
conclude our owne ioy: that if we be
truely regenerate, we shall certainly be
saued; it being as impossible to seuer
saluation from regeneration, as God
from his Sonne. And therefore the holy
Scripture concludeth the necessitie
of their saluation that are regenerate
and borne of God: Whosoeuer (sayth S.
Iohn) is borne of God sinneth not, for his
seede remayneth in him, neyther can he sin
because he is borne of God. 1. Iohn. 3▪ 9.1. Ioh. 3. 9.
Saint Iohn sayth hee cannot sinne, that
is, not commit sinne of purpose,
but of infirmity: and such sinnes
God will not impute to his adopted &
regenerate children. And of this kinde
are those sinnes Saint Iohn meaneth,1. Ioh. 5. 17.
when he sayth: Al vnrighteousnesse is sin,
but there is a sinne not vnto death: and
that is the sinne of them that are regenerate,
who though they sinne, yet they
sinne not vnto death, theyr sinne being
onely a sinne in nature, and not a sinne
to condemne them.
                     This may prouoke all men to haue a
zealous care to bee regenerate: for by

being regenerate,The regenerate cannot sinne to death. he shall haue honour
with securitie; honour in being the adopted
sonne of God, securitie in that
hee cannot sinne to death, or fall from
the fauour of God: in which respect he
shall exceede both the honour and the
happinesse of Adam (and the Angels) in
his innocency; for Adam was but Gods
seruant, he shall be Gods sonne. Adam
had power to fall, & did fal from grace;
he neyther will nor can fall from grace,
the Spirit of God supporting him in a
sufficient strength of holinesse.
                     Secondly,Secondly. seeing regeneration is an
act of the Holy Ghost, euery man
ought so to rectifie and reform the errours
of his life, as that the Spirite of
God may not take loathing to enter
our soules; but rather that by mortification
and holy exercise, we may bee
prepared to entertain that sacred guest
into our heartes; least when hee commeth,
he find vs as God will find the reprobate
in the day of iudgement, vnprouided,
carelesse, and secure: and so
not seale vs for the sonnes of God, but
mark vs the children of death, and the

friends of Antichrist. Thirdly,Thirdly. seeing
the Elect only are regenerate, & made
the children of God, it ought therefore
to be the principal care of euery man to
be regenerate; because regeneration is
the vndoubted witnes of Election; and
S. Peter biddeth vs giue diligence to make
our Calling and Election sure,
                        1. Pet. 1. 10. which can
no way be better assured vs, then by assuring
our Regeneration, which is the
certificate & testimony of our election.
Fourthly,Fourthly. seeing regeneration is an entrance
into holy action, it remembreth
all men, that before they be regenerate,
all their actions, and all their endeuors
are but sinne: & that those works which
in a regenerate man are ornaments and
graces,The best actions of the vnregerate are sin. are in them blemishes and sin;
because before wee be Regenerate and
reconciled to God, God hath all our
actions in detestation. For so did God
in the time of the ceremoniall law, and
in the first Age: for though Caine and
Habel both offer vnto God,Hahel and Caine. yet God
accepteth Habel, and reiecteth Cain: because
Habel was in Gods Election, and
Caine was not: and so in regeneration,

when wee haue God our friend, our
father, then all our actions, though in
their nature sinnefull are accepted for
righteous. When God is not our
friend and father, then all our actions,Note.
(euen them wee account as righteousnesse)
are but sin, and so reputed, & accepted
of God. Therfore ought al men
to be most carefull to be regenerate, because
before that time they cannot
please God, neyther do well. They must
also endeuour in all godly action, otherwise
they can neuer be regenerate.
                     Lastly,Fiftly. seeing the workes of regeneration
must be both constant and faithfull;
(by constancy I meane perseuerance;
by faithfulnesse a choyse of lawfull
particulars) therefore euery man
must bee sure to exercise his deuotion
& zeale in lawful argument; and that he
runne in the spirituall race which God
hath proposed, & not in the by-waies of
errour,Constancy in holinesse commanded and false or selfe opinion; and
that in this course he faint not his spirituall
courage, but that he holde out the
race of his life, with a hopefull confidence
to win the garland of saluation,

which all shall both win and weare that
constantly and faithfully endeuour
themselues in godly action.
                  
                  
                     Speciall application.
                     Regeneration then being of excellent
worth and of absolute necessitie,Speciall application. I
will take of my cares & endeuors from
all worldly occasions, and apply them
to this holy purpose onely: for by being
regenerate, I shall both auoide the danger
of sin, & liue in the fauour of God,
and be graced with the honorable title
of his sonne, I will remember them that
proudly vaunt their pedegree, and their
descent from honourable parents, I will
pitty theyr error, and despise their vain
glory.No comparison betweene the dignity of the sonnes of God, and the sonnes of Nobles I will compare such honor with
the honour of Gods regenerate children,
I shall finde an infinite distance
in their worth, that to be transitory passable,
of short continuance, vaine and
full of bitter mixture: this to be eternall
and infinite, of infinite worth, & infinite
in time, nothing to preuent it,

nothing to alter it, I will therefore (to
gaine this) despise that: I will desire no
other honourable title,To gaine heaven, wee must despise earth. then to bee called
the child of God, that will giue me
sufficient reputation. For that (in the
least degree) will out-glory all earthlie
honour in the highest degree. I wil not
care how base the world repute it, nay,
I will not faint,Disgrace & persecution. though the world persecute
it. I know that my Sauiours
kingdome is not of this world, neyther
is my glory of this world; but hee that
hath regenerate and new begotten
me by the grace of his Spirite, hee is
my glory, and by him I am made honourable.The truly honourable.
This is that honor for which
I despise the world, and with which I
can disgrace all worldly honour. And
for this honour I will spende my
houres, spend my actions, my endeuours;
nay, I will spende all to make
this purchase. I will runne my spirituall
course with alacrity, seeing this
honour is proposed mee. And when
I haue it, I will esteeme it precious:
I will much rather leese my life then
my honour. For this honor being once

lost, is not recouerable: it was giuen
by grace,Grace cannot be redeemed by nature. it cannot be redeemed by nature.
I will therefore esteeme it as it is:
and hauing once got the honour to be
the child of God, I will carry that honour
to my graue, and with that honor,
I wil present my self in the day of iudgment,
before God my honourable
Father, and before the honorable company
of his Angels & Saints,The highest honour. and then
wil appear by direct euidence, & before
all the world, whether my honor (in being
regenerate and made the sonne of
God) which the world despised, or their
transitorie honour and prosperity of
fortune, wherin they gloried & proudly
exalted themselus, be of better proof,
when God shall call me his sonne, and
bidde mee enter the kingdome of my
ioy: and call them slaues, and bidde
them enter their bondes, prison, and
paine perpetuall.The priuiledge of the sonne of God. This will bee the
blessed priuiledge my honour will
then giue mee. And therefore to be
regenerate, and thereby to make God
my father and my friend, I will not
care what neglect, what scorne, & what

disgraces the world cast vpon vs, for as
those will vanish with time,The honor of Gods sons eternal so my honour
will be (as God my father is) infinite,
and I will infinitely esteeme it. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  Of 
                        •
                     ustification.
Chap. 6.
                  
                     IVstification is a gracious
forgiuing of sins,What Iustification is.
by imputation of the
righteousnes of Iesus
Christ. S. Paul expostulateth
this doctrine
with the Galatiās, whom he calleth foolish
for doubting it:Gal. 3. 2. 
                     This onely (sayth he)
would I learne of you, receyued ye the spirit
by the works of the law, or by the hearing of
faith preached? And in the next verse. Are
ye so foolish, that after ye haue begun in the
Spirit,
                     Ver. 3. 
                     ye would now be made perfect by the
flesh? Where he admireth their simplicity
that seek righteousnes in the flesh,

or in the law,Iustificatiō is of the spirite, not of flesh. but rather and onely by
the meanes of faith; because our iustification
is spirituall, & not of the flesh.
And this doctrine hee concludeth by
an inuincible argument in the 26. vers.
That seeing we are regenerate, & made
the sonnes of God by faith in Christ,
we are therfore also iustified and made
the seruants of God by faith.Gal. 3. 26, 
                     For (saith
he) wee are all the sonnes of God by faith
in Christ Iesus. And if faith be able to
make vs sonnes, it must also bee able to
make vs seruants; for that which is able
in the greater performance,The nearenes of iustification and regeneration. is able in
the lesse. Besides regeneration & iustification
haue such relation and nearenesse
to one another, as that they seeme
to be (almost) but one act, caused and
effected at one instant of time. For
when wee are regenerate, wee are then
iustified, and when wee are iustified,
we are then regenerate, and not before;
these two offices in our saluation being
distinguished rather by their names,
then by any speciall marke of difference
in their seuerall executions. Again,
the same Apostle in his Sermon at Antioch,
                     
concludeth both the negatiue and
affirmatiue part of this question:Act. 13. 38. 
                     Bee it
knowne (sayth he) vnto you men and brethren,
that through this man (that is
Christ) is preached vnto you the forgiuenesse
of sinnes, Verse. 39.Verse 39. 
                     And from all
thinges, from which yee could not be iustified
by the law of Moses, by him euery one
that beleeueth is iustified. So that he absolutely
denyeth the power of iustification
to the Workes of the Law, and
doth absolutely ascribe it to the power
of faith.Gal. 2. 21: And he giueth a reason of
this Doctrine, in the 2. 21. to the Galatians:
For if righteousnesse bee by the
Law, then Christ dyed without a cause:
So that the very cause why CHRIST
dyed, was, that righteousnesse might
bee imputed and apprehended by
Faith; seeing by workes it was impossible.Psal: 32, 1, 2
And therefore sayth the Prophet
Dauid: Blessed is hee whose vnrighteousnesse
is forgiuen, and whose sinne
is couered. And blessed is the Man,
to whome the Lord imputeth no sinne.
So that hee thinketh them most righteous,
that haue theyr vnrighteousnesse

forgiuing them; and them most
holy that haue their sinnes not imputed.
                  The fourth to the Romanes, the
whole Chapter,Rom. 4, is an earnest proofe
of this Doctrine, where the Apostle
laboureth by direct euidence to satisfie
all doubte: as if hee had foreknowne
the stiffe and vnreconcileable
Oppositions of these times against
his doctrine of Iustification.The controversie of iustification
                  
                  In which Chapter he maketh Abraham
his instance; in whome there was
as much righteousnesse, and as much
cause of boasting it, as in any other
particular (saue Christ Iesus onely,)
yet hee there prooueth,The example of holy Abraham▪
                      that this Abraham,
(vpon whome GOD had
founded his peculiar people) was
not iustified by the righteousnesse
of his Workes: but that his Faith was
imputed to him for righteousnesse:
And alleadgeth Scripture for this
proofe:Gen. 15. 6. And Abraham beleeued the
Lord, and hee counted that to him for
righteousnesse: The word That, hauing
a direct relation to the Word
                        •
                     
                     
beleeued. And this righteousnes by
faith, hee ascribeth not onely to Abrahams
particular: But to vs also, to whome
it shall be imputed for righteousnes, which
belieue in him,
                     Rom. 4. 24 25. 
                     that raysed vp Iesus our
Lord from the dead. Verse 25. Who was
deliuered to death for our sinnes, and is
risen againe for our iustification. So that
the matter of our iustification is the
righteousnesse of Iesus Christ onelie:
and the meanes of apprehending it, is
faith onely.
                  This doctrine, howsoeuer it is made
strong and vnresistable by many testimonies
of holy Scripture,The religions of these times. and though
it bee zealously maintained by men of
learned and religious iudgement, yet
hath it endured violence, and suffered
disgrace, both by ignorance and enuy:
this age maintaining such oppositions
of errour, as the ignorance of former
times first occasioned. Therefore is
it that the mayne controuersie of the
world is at this day in this Argument
of iustification: the one maintaining
iustification by faith: the other by
workes; that defending trueth, this

opposing it. And though I am most
willing to quarrell in defence of faith:Eph. 6. 16.
faith being my shield of defence against
sinne and the Diuell, yet know
I not how to giue addition of strength
to them that farre exceede mee, and
whose faithfull paines haue maintayned
this quarrell with valour and victory
against all opposition. Neither
is it in the purpose of this businesse to
dispute questions of truth,The purpose of this labour. but to deliuer
truth as it is, by admonitions and
plaine teachings, to men of simple &
easie vnderstandings: for whose christian
good, these pains are principally vndertaken;
and whose simplicities might
most easily bee confounded in the intritate
search of cunning Argumentes,
For these respectes, and because all
contention and strife of wordes, is
in the hatred of my Nature, I will sparingly
deliuer my selfe in a large Argument,
and strike onely one blowe
at the enemie of Faith, that I may be
knowne to bee an enemy of that enemy:
and that by a familiar proofe I
may instruct the knowledge of him

that is lesse learned. They that denie
iustification by faith, and approue it by
workes, would frame this argument
from the testimony of Saint Iames,
                     Iam. 2.
who speaking of a generall faith doth
vtterly disinable it from the office of
iustification.Vers. 17. And therfore he saith that
faith, if it haue no workes, is dead in it
selfe, and in the 26. verse:Verse 26. 
                     For as the body
without the Spirit is dead, euen so faith
without workes is dead. Therefore (say
they) that Apostle concludeth in the 24
verse,Verse. 24. 
                     That of works a man is iustifyed, &
not of faith onely. To this I answere, It is
most true that a fruitlesse faith is dead,
neyther can iustifie, and that works are
the spirit and soule of a liuing faith, that
as the body without the soule is not a
liuing man, but a dead carcasse, so faith
without workes is not liuing, is not
sauing,Faith without workes is no faith, but a bare name onely. nay is not faith, but onely a general
name, and with Saint Iames I dare
conclude against all such faith. But if
there be a faith that hath depending of
a necessity of good workes, as necessary
as the soule to the body, and the fruit to
the tree, and that this Faith declare it

selfe to bee plentifull in godly action.
the fruites of a liuing faith, I may then
with Saint Iames conclude against
them; for hee doth not (as they doe)
disinable all faith in the worke of iustification;Ver. 26.
but that faith onely which is
deade, and without workes, So that
both opinions implore a necessity of
workes, the one as the cause of Iustification,
the other as an effect in them
iustified. It were easie to bee large
in numbring authorities, and in reporting
such distinctions and shifts, as
the deceyued vse in supporting their
opinions: they are but inuentions,
and therefore without respect, I
passe them ouer:No vertue, no truth in extremity. but aduise my
Christian Reader to beware of both
extremities, and modestly and moderately
to vnderstand the meanes of
his Iustification, that his zeale carry
him to no extremity, but to the
vertuous meane onely; not to ascribe
all to faith and nought to Workes,
but to giue them both theyr necessary
respects. For as wee are not iustified
but by Faith, so our Faith is

not iustified but by workes.We are iustified by faith, our faith by workes. For if our
workes bee not faithfull, and our faith
working, we are not iustified, neyther
can bee saued. And thus may the seeming
difference betweene S. Paul, & S.
Iames be reconciled;S. Paul, S. Iames. faith doth iustifie
vs before God, but such a faith as Saint
Iames meaneth: and works doe iustifie
vs before men: but such works as Saint
Paul meaneth, workes deriued from a
true faith. For as wisedome is iustified of
her children, and as by our words we shall
bee iustified,
                     1. Mar. 1. 19. 
                     and by our words we shall bee
condemned:
                     Mat. 12. 37 So by our workes wee
shall bee iustified, that is, they shall be
our witnesses, what we are in heart, and
what in faith. But by faith onelie wee are
iustified, and made righteous in the sight of
God.
                     Rom. 4. 24.
                  
                  Secondly,Secondly. Iustification is proper vnto
Gods elect onely, so that all prophane
and godlesse people are out of
possibility to be iustified & made righteous
in Gods sight. This is proued by
the witnesse of Saint Paul, Rom. 8. 30.Rom. 8. 30.
                     Whom he predestinated, them also he called
and whom hee called, them also he iustified.
                  
                  
                     Thirdly,Thirdly. Iustification is a righteousnesse
in the sight of God, that is, such
as haue a true, a liuing, and a sauing
faith, and by that faith doe apprehend
the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, God
is content to accept such in the righteousnesse
of his sonne, to obscure theyr
sinne, and to make them appeare and
stand before him, as actually iust, by
this imputatiue righteousnes,Imputatiue righteousnes. as if they
had wrought it personally, and in the
practise of their owne liues. If any man
demaund, how can these things bee? I
answere,Rom. 8. 33. 34, 
                     It is God that iustifieth, who shal
condemne? Rom. 8.
                  
                     The generall vse.
                     Seeing that none can bee saued, but
they that are first iustified; and seeing
none can be iustified,The vse. but they that
haue a true, liuing, and a working faith,
it behoueth all men to haue principall
care to haue the assurance of this faith
that so they may be sure to be iustified,The necessity of faith.
and may be sure that they shal be saued,

and because that all men are naturally
prone to deceiue themselues,The nature of men. with
flattery and fauourable opinion of thē
                        selues,
and their owne actions, because
Saint Iames (and so the scripture in many
places) hath vtterly disinabled an
idle,The Scriptures disable an idle and dead faith. dead, and a fruitles faith from the
office of iustification; it therefore nearly
concerneth all men, seriously and
without priuate respect to examine
their faith, to compare theyr faith and
workes together, their workes being
good, those workes may iustifie theyr
faith to bee a liuing and a sauing faith.
And that they content not themselues
with a commo
                           •
                         historicall faith, the
which the Diuell and damned soules
may haue,The diuels faith. but that theyr fayth may be
approued good, by a sufficient testimony
of good workes, without which it
cannot bee good. For as the Tree is
knowne by his fruit,Workes the fruit of faith. & as it is impossible
to gather grapes of thornes; or figs
of thistles: so is our faith iudged by our
workes, & so it is impossible that good
workes should proceede from an euill
faith, or that a good faith should not

produce good works, good workes being
a most necessary dependance vpon
good faith. This ought to prouoke
all men to an emulation of godly exercise,
and to contend to exceede in holy
actions,A prouocation to godly action. to square and fashion all
their workes by their faith, and to make
euery act of theirs a testimony that
they are truely faithfull. For hee that
is not with vs, is against vs; and those
workes of ours; that witnesse not for
vs, will bee witnesses against vs, and
will condemne vs in the sight of all
men, that our faith is eyther not good,
or not at all: and that therefore wee
are not iustified,Note. neyther can bee saued.
And this may iudge all those actions
of men, that disproportion a
good Faith, and a good Conscience.
For though men flatter themselues,
and promise peace to their soules, and
thinke to bee iustified and saued by
a bare acknowledgement of God, and
theyr common historicall faith; yet (in a
time they thinke not on) theyr vngodly
workes will make warre vpon theyr
soules, and bring vpon them a sure and

a sudden destruction.
                     Secondly,Secondly, seeing such choyce particulars
onely are iustified, as were before
in Gods election preordained to
saluation: this ought to moue all men
to a thankefull acknowledgement of
Gods infinite loue,A duty of thanks to God, and why, who onely is the
principall and first mouing cause in euery
circumstance of our saluation, and
that wee acknowledge our selues in
great humility to be altogether defectiue
and vnable in the worke of our
owne saluation,All men are vnable in their owne saluation. that euery grace in vs,
is both caused and continued in vs by
the power of God: our selues beeing
meerely passiue, and moued to diuine
exercise, by the direction of the Holy
Ghost onely. And that therefore wee
ascribe the honour of euery good action
to God,God must haue the honour of all our actions. by whom it is caused; and
disgrace our selues in our owne estimation,
because Gods first decree doth
leade euery man to euery particular action
of goodnesse.
                     Thirdly,Thirdly. seeing by faith in Christ,
God doth both cancell our sinnes, and
repute vs righteous in his presence, it

doth remember all men the admirable
degree of Gods fauour,Gods favor. and the powerfull
operation of faith. First Gods fauour,
hee being pleased to forgiue the
deserts of condemnation; and to giue
and impute the most absolute rghteousnesse
of his Sonne Christ Iesus to
all men, vpon this easie condition of
faith, that such, who haue a true faith
to apprehend him, shall be accepted in
his fauour as sonnes; & shall appeare in
Gods presence equally as righteous, as
if themselues had actually performed
righteousnesse in their owne particular
persons.
                     Secondly, we are taught the powerfull
operation of true faith,The power of faith. that it is able
to enter heauen, and to apprehend and
apply Christ and his righteousnesse to
reconcile the fauour of God; and to
satisfie his displeasure, to wash off the
spots and leprosie of sinne, and to put
on the garment of righteousnesse, euen
Iesus Christ the Son of God, by whom
wee are iustified in the sight of GOD,
and by whom (also) wee shall be saued,
Amen.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Speciall application.
                     I will therefore carefully endeuour
my selfe in a constant exercise of all
godly action;Speciall application. not that I repose my
iustification in the vertue of my owne
workes, but that by the Testimony of
good works I may approue my selfe to
be faithfull, and that my faith is more
then a general or a common faith; euen
a liuing and a sauing faith, which is (&
must be) the onely means of my apprehending
Christ,Faith the only means of apprending Ch
                              •
                           ist who is the sufficient &
onely matter of my iustification. And
this shall be the glory and onely pride I
will haue of well doing; that this witnesse
of Workes shall gaine me the reputation
of Gods seruant, and that
Gods faithfull children here on earth
shall repute mee one of their fellow-brethren,
then which I shall neuer
desire a greater cause of boasting.A true canse of boasting. And
this iudgement of good men. must

needes rise from the testimony of good
workes, because there is an ineuitable
necessity of consequence, and necessary
dependance betweene Faith and
Workes, they being as inseparable as
heate from fire, and as necessarily depending
as the body & the soule. And
this shall prouoke me to a zealous forwardnesse
in all godly action, because
thereby I shall conclude the assurance
of my iustifying Faith,How to assure our iustification. and thereby satisfie
the desire of my owne Soule,
and that doubt which otherwise might
iustly bee had of mee in the common
opinion. For from this argument must
needes follow this conclusion: That
seeing I haue the fruites of Faith (good
Workes,) therefore I haue also the
cause of Workes, true Faith: And
that therefore this Faith thus working,A tree of Gods owne planting.
is a tree of Gods owne planting which
aduersitie may well shake, but neuer perish.
                     This is that vse, that comfort,
and consolation, which I will vnderstand
in the nature of my best deseruing
works. Thus I will esteeme them,How to esteeme our works modestly.
                        
and but this. I will therefore auoid that
daungerous opinion of meriting▪ by
workes: because it is better to want honour
then to force it from God by violence,It is better to want honor then to steale it frō God.
nay I will rather disgrace my selfe
then disinable my Sauiour Iesus. For
if righteousnesse be from our selues, it
is nor from him onely, and then would
follow that absurde and blasphemous
conclusion,A blasphemous conclusion. that hee is not the onelie
Sauiour, neyther hath perfected the
worke of mans saluation, I will therfore
doe all the good I can, but I will repute
my deed (though good) to be the effect
and not the cause of goodnesse in me:
I will also confidently holde, that nothing
is able to merite saluation,Nothing but Christ can merit saluation. but the
righteousnesse of Iesus Christ onely. I
will therfore disclaime my selfe, and my
owne power, which is nothing but
weakenesse) and ascribe all power, all
vertue to my Sauiour. For it is safer to
giue him honour, then to take it from
him; and it will better become my
Christian modesty to acknowledge my
infirmities, then proudly to aduaunce
my selfe aboue my deserts. If God therfore

(by the mouing of his holy Spirit)
mee faith,All must be acknowledged as Gods gifts: he will also giue me a desire▪
and a power in godly exercise:
(which) when it maketh mee growe
plentifull in the demonstrations of holinesse,
I will ascribe the glory to God,
to whome it is onely due, and acknowledge
my selfe to bee that instrument
onely, whereby his holy hand of grace
is pleased to worke. Amen.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the temporary death, and
of the seuerall Estates of
saluation, and damnation.
Chap. 7.
                  DEath is a separation, or absence
of the Soule from
the Body,What death is. whereby the body
is reduced to his first
matter Earth, and the soule

brought to a sence eyther of iustice or
mercy. To vnderstand this better, wee
must consider death in these respectes.3. Respects,
First, his original or first being. Secondly,
his powerful & general continuance.
Thirdly, his end, or the death of Death.
The originall cause that gaue Death
life, was sinne:1 Sinne the cause of death. and therefore when as
Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit, &
thereby committed sin, then had death
his first beginning. For though Adam
did not at the instant of the act dye, yet
at the very instant of the sinne, was hee
made mortall & subiect to the power of
death:When Adam was made mortal Gen. 1. 16. 17. for so God foretold him, that
whensoeuer hee did eate, he should dye; and
from this badde beginning was Death
first deriued.1 King: 17. 18: So the womā of Sarephath
could acknowledge that her sin was the
cause of her childes death: & so haue all
the Children of GOD vnderstood of
death, and of the cause thereof. And S.
Paul calleth Death the wages of sinne:
                     Rom. 6. 16. as
if it were a necessary care in the iustice
of God, that al that haue committed sin
should haue the recompence & wages
thereof, Death.
                  
                     Now the cause of this cause of death,The cause of sinne.
was the Diuell, who enuying the prosperity
of our nature, suggested his tēptations
to our first parents, by whose
disobedience wee are all made mortal.
So sayth Salomon:
                     Wisd. 2. 24. 
                     Through enuy of the
Diuell came de
                           •
                        th into the world, and they
that hold of his side, proue it.
                  
                  And from these two Parentes,The two parents of death. the
Diuell and sinne, was death deriued,
from whom hee had his being and beginning.
                  Secondly,Secondly: wee must consider death
in the passage of his life. or in his
powerfull continuance: That is euident
in this respect, that Death hath
a generall power ouer all flesh, the
which he doth execute vpon all, without
respect had either to the greatnesse
or goodnesse of any, And therfore is
Death called the way of all the Worlde,
and the way to our Fathers,
                     Gen: 15. 15 because as
our Fathers are gone the way of death,Ioshua, 23▪ 14.
so must wee after them; and our posterity
after vs, for euer. For though
death bee but one, and his office the
cutting off the liues of all the World;

yet it is but an easie performance, hauing
the diseases of our flesh,The power of death, and infinite
other occasions to attend him
in his deadly office. His power then
is generall ouer all, being limited by
GOD and time onely; who though
hee bring all flesh to corruption, yet
no flesh can corrupt him, or procure
fauour in the strict execution of his
office.
                  The ende,Thirdly, or the death of Death,
is the liuing righteousnesse of Iesus
Christ, which hee wrought by his
owne death, in his owne person. And
therfore saith the Prophet Hosea,
                     Hos. 13. 14. 
                     Death
is swallowed vp in victory.
                     1. Cor, 15. 25. And S. Paul
sayth: that Christ Iesus must raigne till
hee hath put all his enemies vnder his feet,
and that the last enemy that shall bee destroyed
is death.
                     Ver. 26. Therefore that Apostle
insulteth ouer death: O death (sayth he)
where is thy sting? O graue, where is thy
victory? Vers. 55.Verse 55, 
                     The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law. Vers. 56.Verse 56.
                     But thankes bee vnto God who hath giuen
vs victory through our Lord Iesus Christ.
                     Verse 57.
Wherefore it is euident that God by

his Sonne Christ, hath giuen man victory
ouer sinne and death.By whome wee haue victory ouer death. And
whereas before wee were all the seruants
of sinne, and the slaues of death,
wee are now made conquerours, that
were slaues; and despise them that
did commaund vs. This happy alteration
dooth reach benefite to all the
faithfull, but not to all men: therfore
is it limited and doth reach to such
particulars onely, as are in Gods election.The difference God vseth in the giuing of his giftes
For though God cast the beams
of his Sunne vpon euery mans face alike,
and distributes▪ his temporall
blessings (scatteringly as it were) without
any heedfull respect, where they
fall; yet those fauours that are eternall,
and import a perpetuity of happinesse,
hee giueth them to his beloued
elect onely, barring all the reprobate
from spirituall and eternall
grace.In what respect death is not destroyed, hut made immortall And, therefore though the
death of Christ hath disarmed death &
blunted his weapons that haue wounded
holy men: yet are those weapons
still sharpe, and that Death still liuing,
and made immortall against them

that haue not receyued the image of
the Lambe of God. For though al men
enter their graues alike, yet with different
condition,Mat. 9. 25. holy and good men
enter their graues, as their houses of
rest, wherin they quietly sleepe, and for
a time repose in rest and safety;In what case the wicked die. but the
wicked enter their graues as felons doe
their prisons, to be reserued to a day of
much more terrible iudgement. Therefore
sayth the wise man:Eccle. 41. 1. 2. 
                     The remembrāce
of death is very bitter to some, and acceptable
to other. For so the godly make it
their day of hope, but the wicked their
day of feare.Death is the day of hope and of feare. Death then in these diuers
respects of good and badde men,
hath a sting, and wants it; is deade, yet
liuing and by opening the gate of temporary
death,Death openeth the gate of life. doth admit the entrance
eyther of eternall life, or eternall death:
the one, the happy condition of Gods
chosen, the other the most miserable
state of the reprobate & damned. And
as this life we breath is but a sacrament
or little resemblance of that which is to
follow:This life a resemblāce of life eternall. so the terrour of a temporary
death, hath no proportion with the

torments of euerlasting death,Death a resemblance of life. wherein
both body and soule shall suffer such
ffliction, as is beyond the power of
imagination, infinite in measure,No man can report those ioyes, those torments. infinite
in manner. To vndertake to report
heauen and hell, saluation and damnation,
is not in my purpose, or in the
power of any man, This I know, that
both are infinite, heauen is infinite in
time and happinesse, hell is infinite in
time and torment.Heauen & hell are both infinite in time, infinite in measure. The one (as Gods
resemblance) is infinite good, the other
(as the diuels) is infinite euill: the one
is hoped, the other feared; to which two
all mankind must take their last resorte,
and by the gate of death passe theyr
temporall life to one of those two eternities.
                  
                     The generall vse.
                     First, seeing death was begotten by
our sinnes,The vse. and from our selues had
his first originall, it ought to humble
vs in our owne estimation, and to acknowledge

the great corruption of our
nature, which maketh vs powerful onely
in doing vs euill,Our naturall defect. and in producing
such effects, as cause our owne destruction,
And this may correct their
proud opinion, that vainely arrogate
such power as to bee their own meanes
in the cause of their saluation, fondly, &
falsely thinking, that their eyes of Nature
are not blinde in spirituall iudgement,The eyes of nature are blinde in spirituall iudgement.
but imagine to haue that vertue
and power, which they onely haue in
imagination. For if Adam by his sinne,
did produce and giue life to such a
monster birth as death is, what expectation
then can be had of our ability, who
are in all respects (but sin) Adams farre
inferiour, and (by much) lesse able in the
performance of any spirituall duty?
                     Secondly,Secondly. seeing death hath vniuersall
power ouer all flesh, and seeing
there is no partiality in his executions,
no dispensing of fauour, no lengthning
of time, but commeth most certainely,
& not certainely when this may aduise
all men to godly action,Deaths general power. and to a constancy
of such action: lest otherwise

death come vnexpected, & so preuent
their good determinations,Deathes vncertainty which beeing
determined onely, and not done, auaile
vs no other end but griefe and vnprofitable
repentance.
                     Againe, seeing all must die, and bee
reduced to earth,Thirdly, it doth controule the
proud ambitious natures of men, who
in this life insult ouer men of inferiour
state, and dignifie their owne estimation,Death admonisheth the insolent.
as if God had not made them of
earth, or that the graue could not make
them earth againe. These men that value
themselues rich, by hauing the beggerly
gifts of fortune,The gifts of grace and fortune, and despise the
most rich treasure of grace: where it
liueth in the banishment of poore fortune:
these that despise Death most
when they liue, and feare him most
when they die, are here admonished to
reforme this insolent behauiour,The condition of wicked men. and
to remember that themselues, howe
proud soeuer, must be humbled in the
graue,The graue will humble all. and that the wormes and corruption
will destroy theyr pride, and in
despite of greatnesse make them inferiour
to the meanest begger on earth.

And yet can death heape a greater calamity,
open them the passage to euerlasting
death, and afflict them with the
damned, in perpetuall and infinite torment,
                     Thirdly,Thirdly. seeing Christ hath by death
slaine death, and hath taken his sting
and dart from him, whereby he might
be hurtfull to Gods elect;Christ by death hath slain death. it doth admonish
a zealous duty of thanks to the
merite of the Lord Iesus our Sauiour,
by whose meanes Death is no Death,
but rather life and aduantage,Death is advantage to Gods elect. by whom
we haue the dore opened to euerlasting
saluation. For so ought wee to vnderstand
of death, as of the common Iailor
of all flesh.Death the common Iaylor. The world is our prison,
wherein wee are all shut. Death when
he openeth the dore, & deliuereth from
prison, leadeth the parties deliuered,
eyther to liberty or iudgement: For so
are all that dye, transported from earth
eyther to heauen which is their liberty,
or to hell the place of execution.The twofold state of all that die. Death
is that one key that openeth the double
passage, the one to heauen, the other
to hell: this leadeth to damnation,

that other to saluation.
                     Lastly, seeing death is a repose, and
rest from earthly labours,Death a rest from labours. it ought to
sweeten the sorrowes of this life, with
hopefull confidence, & with alacrity &
spiritual comfort, that notwithstanding
men repute the professors of holinesse
but base and abiect people, and deride
their simplicity in wicked worldly policies,
making holinesse a note of folly,
and their owne audacious impudence
the onely marke of wisdome and deepe
discretion,The insol
                              •
                           
                           ̄
                           
                              •
                            behauiour of wicked men. yet should not this discountenance
a good cause, but rather confirme
a Christian resolution, and giue
boldnesse and Christian courage, to
bear off with patience these contempts
of euill men, & secretly scorne at theyr
estimation,The godly repose hope in death. hauing their eyes still fixed
on the end of all thinges, with a setled
confidence, that death wil not only giue
them a rest from all aduersity, but admit
thē also into the blessed fellowship
of God, the holy Angels and Saintes,
where themselues shall see their proud
enemies cast into disgrace & obloquie,
and with miserable desperation, acknowledge

theyr neglects in Christian
duties. Thus the meditation of death,The vse of this meditation.
may giue disgraced and afflicted Christians
a life of hope, in the height of
their extremities.
                  
                  
                     Speciall Application.
                     Therefore I will not (as the wicked
do) feare to die; but hope to die,Speciall application. intending
the spirituall passage of my life so,
as that my end may giue mee comfort
without terror. I will reduce to memory
what the holy Prophets, Apostles &
Martyrs haue done in this case. How
carefull they haue bin to preserue their
liues in the memory of honest and holy
reputation, how careles also they haue
esteemed their liues for the reputation
of the Gospel, being content, nay carefull,The care of holy men.
not only to giue vp their liues, but
to giue them vp with torment, for the
testimony of Iesus my Sauiour.
                     To these men I will frame my imitation,
I will care for my life as they cared,A Christian resolution.
I will also care to dye as they cared.
In euery worke of my life, I will

remember my end, and at my ende I
wil remember my hope, & in my hope,
my God. While I liue I shall remember
that I am a prisoner, and in the bondage
of my flesh:All that liue are prisoners. when I die, I knowe
I shall haue my freedome. Death that
is cruell to others, will be fauourable to
mee; death that will kindle the fire of
their affliction, will extinguish mine; I
shall (doubtlesse) finde death much
more fauourable then men:Death mo
                              ••
                            fauourable then men. for by men
I was iniuried, had my Christian profession
disgraced, my opinions doubted &
opposed, my actions scanned, my endeuours
misinterpreted; and my name
in odious reputation. Death takes me
from all these iniuries, layes mee in a
peacefull graue,The mercy of death. makes mee sleepe in
that bedde of rest, protects my bodie,
silences my name, and carries my spirite
to his place appointed. I will not
therefore be moued by any example to
feare death;The godly feare not death. I will haue a Christian resolution
to abide it with courage, nay
with hope. When I see the sonnes of
fortune feare euery little sicknesse (the
serieants of death) I shall see the sonnes

of grace deride such folly, for they neuer
see death,The wicked see death in his vgly formes. but in his vgly forme:
but to these hee appeareth most beautifull
and of delightfull conversation.Death (in diuers respects) is both a Lyon and a Lambe.
Death is their Lyon, but my Lambe:
and his action (in their Sceane) is tragicall,
but in mine Comicall, and ful of
heauenly recreations. Whence this? It
is my Sauiour Iesus that hath thus caused
it, it is his hand hath done it: hee
hath tamed death, and taken his hurtful
sting from him;What Christ hath done for his servants. hee hath shut vp hell,
that hath gaped against vs, and hath
reconciled vs with our graues, wherein
wee may safely repose;Death doth secure vs till the day of iudgement. hee hath commanded
death that would perish vs, to
secure vs, and to present our ful proportion
before his iudgement seate.
                     This hath he done, that is able to do
all thinges, he hath done it also for me,
my faith so perswades mee; I will therefore
acknowledge my selfe in dutifull
thankes to my God my Sauiour, and
in euery time of distresse, I will looke
at Death,Hope in the mediration of death. and (with that meditation)
receyue a full portion of comfort. Amen.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Gods glory.
Chap. 8.
                  
                     GOd created all things,
by his power,Gods glory the purpose of Gods worke. but to
his glory: for that was
the holy end forwhich
he created all thinges.
For as waters that are
deriued from the sea, are againe directed
to the sea. So all things that are, being
deriued from the mighty power of
God, returne their duty, seruice & the
honour of all their actions to God, discharging
euery seruice in the main Ocean
of Gods glory. 
                        •
                     he which though
it receyue not augmentation of honor,
(being infinite) by the supply of any
creature, yet all creatures being his own
it doth please him to force euery creature
to giue some proofe and testimony
of Gods iustice or mercy, whereby
God may receiue glory in their acknowledgements.God is glorified in a double maner.
God then is glorified
in all his workes, but in a double maner,

he is principally glorified in the works
of mercy,God is glorified in a double manner. he is glorified also in his iudgments.
For the first, that he is principally
glorified in mercy, is testified by S.
Paul, where he sayth, that God, that hee
might declare the riches of his glory vpon
the vessels of mercy, which hee hath prepared
vnto glory.
                     Rom, 9. 23. By which place apeareth
that the riches of Gods glory cōsisteth
principally in the vessels of mercy,God is principally glorified in the worke of mercy. and
that God doth so loue his Saints, that
he esteemeth their glory, his glory, and
doth dignify himselfe in their aduancementes.
And therefore did not God
chuse the Israelites, and made them his
peculier people,Why God did chuse the Israelites. that by Gods most
powerfull deliuering them, and by their
demonstrations of duty and thankefull
seruice, God might be honored (in the
memory of his greatnesse) ouer all the
world,Dut. 26. 18. 19. and receiue glory in the report
of his admirable protection.God is glorified in his iudgementes. God is also
glorified in his iudgments. And therfore
the reprobate and damned, though in
their liues they rather care to dishonor
God their creator,God wil be glorified by the damned. yet wil God be
honored in the punishment of their
liues, & force them to giue demonstrations

of his iustice & holines: or God cā
turn their purposes to his own end, and
make that set forth his glory which was
intended against him. So saith holy Dauid;
                     Psal. 66. 10. 11. 12.
                     that the consultatiōs & determinatiōs
of the wicked turn to Gods glory. For God
wil be glorified in all, and those that wil
not giue him glory for mercie, hee will
cōpel them to giue him glory for iudgement:Note.
& thogh God esteem it the greater
honour to be glorisied in the witnesses
of his mercie, (because in Gods nature
mercie is preheminent, and doth
triumph:) yet is it much to the glorie of
God, that the witnesses of his iudgemēt,
shall be prompted by their lamentable
experience to acknowledge that God is
infinite,How the damned set forth Gods glory. both in power and iustice. All
men then are the Trumpets of Gods
glorie, all giue him glorie though not
all alike: the glorie of God beeing the
ende for which all things were created.
Therefore when the holy Angels (Gods
Messengers,) brought the blessed tydings
of Saluation,Luke. 2. 14. and a Sauiour, the
court of heauenly Assistāts praised God
with this acclamation: Glory be to God,
in the high Heauens, and peace in Earth,

and towards mē good wil.
                     Glory proper to God, In which place
the heauenly Souldiers commended to
men good will, to the world peace; but
glory to God, as a seruice proper & peculiar
to God onely. And S. Paul admonisheth
that euery circumstance of our
life be directed to Gods glorie:1. Cor. 10. 33. 
                     Whether
yee eate or drinke (saith he) or whatsoeuer
yee do, do all to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10.
31. And God by the Prophet Ieremie
forbiddeth al men to glory in anything
saue God; as if God were the only obiect
of al glory:Ier 9. 23. 24 
                     Let not (saith he) the wise
man glory in his wisedome, nor the strong
man glory in his strength, nor the rich mā
glory in his ricbes; but let him that glorieth
glory in this, that he vnderstādeth & knoweth
me, &c. Thus ought we both to glorifie
God, and to glory in God: for if we
glory in any thing but God, we are condemned,
& if wee glorifie any but God,To glory in glorifying God.
we are likewise condemned. He is our
strength, and the light of our countenance,
he hath ordayned vs for his glory;
and if wee glorifie him here on earth
with vs, he will glorifie vs with himselfe
inheauen; but if wee neglect to glorifie

him that is our glory, hee will glorifie
himselfe in our destruction, and make
vs (in the feeling tormentes of our condemnation)Those that glorifie God shall be graced by him.
glorifie him with this acknowledgment
that he is a God of most
soueraigne maiesty, and that he is most
gracious in his mercy,God is honoured in the acknowledgement of Diuels & wicked men. but most terrible
in his iudgmēt. And with this acknowledgement
will God bee honoured of
the Diuels, and the damned whose vnsufferable
torments in their condemnation
shall bee arguments of proofe to
conclude Gods glory.
                  
                     The generall vse.
                     The generall vse is this,The Vse. that seeing
God hath created all things for his own
glory, & seeing that he will be glorified
in the seuerall executions of his iustice
& mercy, in the saluation or damnation
of his creature: that therefore all men
must earnestly endeuour in this most
needfull performance,A most needful performance. & that in all the
actions of their life, they endeauour to
fashiō euery circumstance by lawfulnes
& holy rule,The rule of lawfulnesse. that God may receyue the
glory of their actions, as S. Paul doth

aduise the Philippians:
                        Phil. 1. 11. 
                        That we may (as he
saith) be filled with the fruits of righteousnes,
which are by Iesus Christ, vnto the glorie
& praise of God. For in all insensible
things there is a special nature, to which
they are obedient,Insensible things. obedient to nature. wherby they glorifie
God in finishing the end of their creation.
God hath cōmanded the motion
of the heauēs, the influēce of the starres
the natures of the elements, & the seuerall
natures of euery seuerall thing. All
these continuing their course & nature,
giue moste notable demonstrations of
Gods glorie, by whom they were created,
& thus disposed in nature. If these
things which are subiect to time, and
must perish, doe notwithstanding discharge
the duties of their nature, and so
by consequence approue themselues to
be instruments of Gods glory: shal men
whō God hath created for the like ende
of his glorie, & to whom he hath giuen
a soule of excellēt vnderstanding, & for
whom he hath created the World, the
most admirable worke of his own hāds,
shall these bee carelesse in this high dutie?
and shall the Elements & vnreasonable

creatures be carefull? Shall mē be
exceeded by beasts, in the execution of
their most reasonable seruice? God hath
not threatned theyr neglect with Hell,
nor promised to reward their diligence
with Heauen.Men lesse carefull then beasts God doth both promise
& threaten men, yet are men lesse carefull
then Beasts. This may worthilie
remember those men, (or rather those
beasts) who make a God of themselues,
or of their vnlawfull pleasures: & then
dedicate themselues, their labours,To what end men▪ cōmonly dedicate their trauell. and
the glorie of all their actions, to a prophane
and licencious trade of life.
                     These that will not doe it of choyce,
must doe it by force: For the time will
come when God will whip these slaues
with the rods of his iudgemēts, & make
them (in despite of their vngodlines) to
glorifie God,The woūds of hell and conscience. in suffering the torments
of hell and their conscience: and (without
profit) to acknowledge God, & the
terrible iustice of so great a Maiestie.
                     This may also remēber the children of
God,Secondly. that in all the cares of their Christiā
life,Gods glorie the maine of all our cares they haue their main respect to
Gods glory, & that God may haue place
in theyr heartes, euen before the desire

of their own saluation: & that their saluation
be desired, rather that God may
be glorified, then to desire to glorifie
God for their owne saluation:We must prefer it be fore our owne saluation. that so
God may bee the first in all our cares,
that we loue him, more then our owne
soules, and prefer his honor, before our
own saluation. For he that will not despise
himself (in respect of Gods honor)
doth but dissēble his loue, neither doth
willingly glorifie God; for thogh God
bee in his eyes, hee hath himselfe in his
heart,We must despise our owne selues for the loue of God. and though hee pretend to loue
God, it is for his owne priuate end, not
that God may be glorified. And thus to
glorifie God is to dishonor him, and so
to prouoke his indignation against vs.
                     Therfore let all men loue God for his
owne sake; loue him for his truth, loue
him for his mercie, loue him for his ius
                           ••
                        ce;We must loue God for his own sake.
& let this loue be so respectles of
all by considerations, as that neyther
heauen, hel, nor our soules, perswade vs
so much as the reuerence & zealous affection
we haue to the loue of God;To loue God, is to glorify him. for
he that thus loueth God, doth glorifie
him, and shall be glorified by him.
                  
                  
                     
                     Speciall application.
                     I will therfore discharge the shame of
all my actions,Speciall application. into this ocean of Gods
glory. I will propose, & persue that end
onely, I will not respect the vain purposes
of men:The vaine purposes of men. I wil remember that they are
transitory, & will leaue me, flatterers &
will deceyue me. I wil reduce to memory
the mighty monarks of the world the
most admirable induments, the most
fortunate in earthly prosperities, when
I examine their worth,The transitory estate of worldly states. I shall finde nothing
but names, & those neglected by
the power of time, themselues, and their
regards are vanished, all those thinges
perish, & are disgraced with the vse of
time; because their actions ran not this
holy race of Gods glory, but had diuers
& disagreeing ends.The power of death ouer the world. Death hath depriued
their soules, the graue their bodies,
the world their estates, and time theyr
names; & such destroying ends doe necessarily
follow such affectiōs.Note. For whē
Gods glory is not the absolute proposed
end of a mans life, there is nothing
can happen to such life but extreame

miserie; euen the bountie of Nature,
and the treasure of Fortune, are miserable
tormentors, that present themselues
with friendly faces,Resolution. but bring in their
hands dangerous and fearfull destructions.
Therefore in euery worke I vndertake,
I will first propose my lawfull
ende Gods glorie. And if the worke
I propose be fitting that holy businesse,
I will then with all possible endeuour,
continue my paines and purpose: if
not, I will countermand that determination,
and despise that practise, how
profitable so euer.No respect of worldly profites. For this I knowe
assuredly, that among all the seuerall
actions of my life, whatsoeuer doth not
directly intend Gods glorie, doth then
most directly intend my owne damnation:
and that euery particular of my
life, shall be a witnesse, eyther for mee,
or against me.
                     And therefore I will despise and pittie
their damnable mis-conceiuing,Our actions witnesses. that
thinke to runne one course two wayes;
to serue GOD and Beliall; that direct
theyr liues partly to God, partly to the
world: but rather I will runne on the

race of my Pilgrimage,
                        Resolution. with Hope and
Constancie, neuer retiring, neuer staying,
till with victorie I reach the staffe
of Gods glorie; To which happy
ende I will direct my spirituall
course with a constant and
faithfull Resolution.
Amen. Amen.
                     
                     FINIS.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   