
      
         
            
            
            AN EXCELLENT
TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN
RIGHTEOVSNES, WRITTEN FIRST
in the French tongue by M. I. de l'Eſpine, and
tranſlated into Engliſh by I. Feilde for the comforte
of afflicted conſciences, verie neceſſarie
and profitable to be reade of all Chriſtians, as
well for eſtablishing them in the true doctrine
of Iuſtification, as alſo for enabling them to
confute the falſe doctrine of all Papiſtes and
Heretickes.
            
               ANCHORA SPEI
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier
dwelling in the Blackfriers.
1577.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            Loe here the ioy of Chriſtians all,
            laid vp within this booke:
            To teache the way that leades to life,
            whereon ech man may looke.
            It is not we, but it is he,
            that freely giueth life:
            That none but he, may praiſed be
            without gaineſay or ſtrife.
         
         
            
            TO THE VERTVOVS
AND MY VERY
DEARE FREND THE LADY ELIzabeth
Terwhitte I. F. wiſheth encreaſe of godlines,
and conſtancy in the true religion of Chriſt to
the ende and in the ende.
            
               RIght vvorshipfull, & my very
good Lady, after I had peruſed
this litle treatiſe of Chriſtian
righteouſnes, as it vvas
firſt vvritten in the Frenche
tongue, I tooke great cōfort in it & thought
it to be very neceſſary, to be turned into
Englishe for the benefite of Chriſtes poore
Church. I therefore as occaſiō ſerued at conuenient
times, performed that I purpoſed,
vvherein I haue ſtudied to be as ſimple and
plaine (becauſe of the vnlearned) as poſsibly
the matter & phraſe of that tongue vvould
ſuffer me. I am not ignoraunt vvhat an
hard thing it is to tranſlate vvell, and contrarivviſe,
hovv eaſie a thing it is for euery
carping Momus, or ignoraunt zoilus to

finde fault: but herein I shall as God shall aſiſt
me, arme my ſelfe vvith paciēce to beare
vvhatſoeuer hath bin, is, or shalbe layd vpon
me. This only shall cōfort me, that I vvalke
not before men, but before God: in vvhoſe
preſence I proteſt, that according to the ſimple
knovvledge he hath giuen me, I haue
dealt ſimply and ſincerely. Of all vanities I
eſteeme it the greateſt, to hange vppon the
blaſtes of mens mouthes. They that are that
vvaies caried higheſt, and haue not the teſtimony
of good conſciences, neither ſeeke to
approue themſelues to God, to vvhom they
muſt ſtand or faule, they shall finde no comfort
in it, in the day of death. It litle auaileth
a man to be iuſtified of the vvhole vvorld,
and to be condemned before God. Therefore
God giue vs grace to vvalke as in his preſence,
that vvhatſoeuer vve take in hande,
it may be conſecrated to him, & haue an excellent
bleſsing vpon it. I haue dedicated my
labours herein, to your good Ladyshippe for
ſundry cauſes, thogh I deny not, but my meaning
is to make them common to the church
of God: firſt that they may be a teſtimony to

all poſterity of your forvvardnes, fidelity &
ſinceritie in the religion of Chriſt Ieſus:
Then, of my bounden duety and good vvill
tovvards you. And I moſt humbly beſeeche
you in the eyes and ſight of the vvhole
vvorlde, that you conſtantly and inuiolably
holde and keepe that bleſſed hope of your
beſt inheritance. And as God in mercy hath
dravven you out of the ſincke and mier of
Poperie, and of the falſe vvorshippe of God
(vvherto, as to all other vices vve are moſt
apt by nature) to the true religion of Chriſt,
ſo goe forvvards, and moſt humbly and continually
thanke him for it. Acknovvledge
it the greateſt benefit that euer in mercy he
coulde haue beſtovved vppon you. Bevvare
of the vvorld, that maketh leaſt accompt of
this moſt excellent, and vvaighty thinge.
Study by all meanes to anſvvere this holy &
excellent callinge, that your religion may
shine as vvell in vvorkes as in vvordes, in
an holy conuerſation as in a ſincere profeſſiō.
Knovv aſſuredly that vvhere the truth
of God raigneth, there the kingdome of Sathan
decaieth, the ſtrength of ſinne abateth,

the pleaſures of the flesh are reſtrained, &
Ieſus Chriſt by the ſcepter of his holy vvord
& bleſſed ſpirit, cōtinually vvorketh, to the
daily mortifying of the outvvard man and
quickening the invvard, to the brideling &
maiſtering of the affections of the mind: till
it be renued, reformed & chaunged into his
holy obedience, and ſo by litle and litle be
tranſlated into his kingdome. And till this
be brought to paſſe, you shall neuer feele
vvhat Chriſtes righteouſnes is (vvhich is
our only happines) vvherof this booke ſo notably
& comfortably entreateth. The Lord
Ieſus open your heart, and giue you vnderſtanding
in all his miſteries, that you may ſee
his great glory, till you may comprehende
vvith all Saincts the height, depth, vvidth
and length of his glorious righteouſnes, laying
holde vpon it through aliuely faith, and
ſo be ſealed vp through him (as I doubt not
but you are) to euerlaſting happines, fare you
vvell moſt humbly from my poore houſe this
ſeconde of Nouember. 1577.
            
               Your good Ladyſhips bounden
in the Lord. I. F.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN EXCELLENT
TREATISE, OF CHRISTIAN
RIGHTEOVSNES,
Made by M. I. de l'Eſpine Miniſter
of the worde of God, and newly
put furthe for the inſtruction
and conſolation of the
children of God.
            
               THERE is not any one article
in all our Chriſtian Fayth the
knowledge whereof canne be ſo
helthfull and neceſſarie vnto vs,
as this of Chriſtian righteouſneſſe.Abacuc 2. 4
Nowe foraſmuch as of this righteouſneſſe
dependeth euerlaſting life,Rom 1. 17. and of Faith
dependeth this righteouſneſſe,Rom. 3. 24. and 15. and of Faith
cometh that knowledge which we haue of the
promiſes of our God,2. Cor. 1. 28. and of Ieſus Chriſt, who
is the onely meane, that they are applyed, and
freely accompliſhed towardes vs, without hauinge
any reſpect to any of our workes: It behoueth
for the better vnderſtanding of all theſe
thinges aright, that we laye them furthe in order,
& beginne with the definition of Chriſtian

righteouſneſſe.The definition of the righteouſneſſe of the philoſophers and ſchoolemē. But it muſt be noted that in the
holy Scripture the ſignification and vſe of this
worde (Righteouſneſſe) is farre different from
that which is vſurped in the bookes of the philoſophers
and ſchoolemen: becauſe they take
righteouſneſſe, for a certaine habite and qualitie,
which being encloſed in our minde, enclineth
vs to liue honeſtly, and in ſuch ſorte to order
the courſe of all our actions, that they be
entirelie conformable to reaſon, and to thoſe
rules that are ſette out vnto vs in the Lawe.
A thinge that we can not doe perfectly, ſeeing
that we are loaden and compaſſed about with
ſo greate infirmitie, and for that our nature
beinge ſo diſeaſed and corrupted, it yrcketh
vs, and wholy turneth vs, from the loue, ſtudy
and exerciſe of that which is good: and diſpoſeth
and ſtirreth vs vp to the quite contrary, to
embrace and followe vice, with a meruelous
will and readyneſſe. Adde hereunto, that we
are driuen and ledde in this caſe by many tentations
and aſſaultes, wherewith the fleſh, the
worlde and deuill doe continually aſſaile vs.
Wherfore we muſt conclude, that in the whole
worlde, there can neuer be founde a righteous
man if righteouſneſſe be to be meaſured according
to that definition, which the philoſophers
haue giuen: and that it be eſtabliſhed, in a perfection

of vertue, which we muſt more loue,
eſteeme and honour, then any other good, and
apply our whole ſpirite, and all our vnderſtandinge
to atteine to it, and poſſeſſe it: without
thinking at any time that this is any meane to
make vs to be accompted righteous before
God, in whoſe preſence and iudgement all our
workes ſhal euer be found imperfect and damnable,Iob. 4. 18. & 9. 3. & 25. 4.
if they be examined according to the rigour
of his righteouſnes.
            To vnderſtande then what this Chriſtian
righteouſnes is, and in what it conſiſteth, it is
meete to note, that Righteouſneſſe and iudgement,
are corelatyues, and for the better vnderſtanding
of the one, it muſt be layde and ioyned
with the other.Rom. 3. 4. 5. The which thing maye eaſely
be obſerued in many places of the newe Teſtament,
where righteouſnes is ioyned with iuſtification,
and iuſtification with righteouſnes.
In ſuch ſorte,VVhat righteouſnes is. that comparing theſe places one
with on other, a man ſhall finde that righteouſnes
is no other thinge but the meane whereby
we are iuſtified before the iudgement ſeate of
God.VVhat iuſtificatiō is. And that iuſtification is nothing elſe but
a releaſe of our ſinnes which we obteine there
through the fauour, and in the contemplation
of the merite of Ieſus Chriſt, who hath there
diſcharged vs.
            
               
But here it is to be noted,Many kinds of iudgements. that there are many
kindes of iudgements differing one frō the
other, that is to wit, there is the iudgement of
God: the iudgement of the Law: the iudgemēt
of men, and of our owne conſcience: & we muſt
know whether our owne righteouſnes be ſufficient
to ſatisfie & anſwere to euery one of theſe
iudgementes, and whether the ſame in any of
theſe, can ſtande vs in ſteede to obtaine an acquitement
and deliuerance of the accuſations
that are propounded by our enemies there againſt
vs.
            Concerning Gods iudgement which is the
firſt of the foure,The iudgement of God. we muſt anſwere that it is imposſible
there, that we can defende vs, if we
haue no other thing to bring forth and alleage
but our owne innocencie: foraſmuch as our
thoughtes, our affections, our wordes, our actions,Pſal. 39. 6. 12.
& generally our whole life and nature
being examined, it ſhalbe found that in man is
nothing elſe but vanity,Pſal. 51. 7. & 62. 10. and to be ſhorte the very
matter of death and damnation, for how can
an euill tree bring forth any good frute? & how
can rotten and wormeaten ſeede,Similitudes ſhewing the corruptiō of man, & his vnhabilitie to do good. engender any
thing, but like it ſelfe? In like maner how can
a man frō a poyſned & infected veſſel draw one
drop of good wine? let vs conclude thē, that we
neither do, nor can doe any thinge, that can be

able to ſuſteine, the rigorous examinatiō of the
righteouſnes of God, and that in vs and in our
whole life there is nothinge yt can in this caſe
defende & deliuer vs but his mercy alone. Becauſe
we are as the Prophet ſayeth,Oſee 2. 3. a wildernes
altogether couered with thiſtles, brambles,
and bryers, which are good for nothinge,
but to be burnt,In his boke of confeſſiōs. 2 chap. 10. and a very dunghill of corruption
where there is nothing (as S. Auguſtine
ſaith) but euen the very ſincke and aboundance
of miſerie and filthines.
            The beginning then of our righteouſnes is,The beginning of our righteouſneſſe is to knowe our vnrighteouſnes.
that we accuſe and condempne our ſelues, and
that we confeſſe before God that (which he
knoweth well enough) to witte that we are nothing
but duſt and corruption.
            The prodigall childe being farre from his
fathers houſe,The example of the prodigall childe. neuer thought that he coulde returne
thether or attaine to righteouſneſſe and
vertue, from which he was departed, but by
the knowledge and feeling which he had of his
faults,Luc 15. 18. & the ſure perſwaſion which he had conceaued
to confeſſe them.
            The publican comming to the temple loaden
and couered with vice & ſinne had remembraunce
of his vice and wretchednes,The ſecond example of the publican, Luc 18. 13. 14. which
he with great griefe and deepe gronings confeſſed:
whereupon it came to paſſe that he returned

righteous into his owne houſe.
            After Dauid & holy Peter were falne from
God,3. Example of Dauid and of Peter. through a great vnkindnes & ignorance,
as well from him, as from thoſe graces, which
they had receaued of his large liberality,2. Sa. 12. 13 had
they any other meane to be recōciled vnto him,Luc. 22. 62.
but by ye acknowledgement & cōfeſſion of their
ſinnes? whereupon we muſt conclude, that by
this we muſt approche before God. And that
there is nothinge that doth more allure & knit
vs to him, then a penitent heart which (as S.
Auguſtine ſayth) feeleth and continually complaineth
for his ſinnes and imperfections.
            This humility is not onely the foundation
of our righteouſneſſe (as Iohn Chriſoſtome
ſaith) but alſo of all our religion,The acknowledgement of our miſeries is the fundation of our religion. the which decayeth
as ſoone as we begin to conceaue any opiniō
of our ſelues or of our owne vertues. He
(ſayth S. Auguſtine) will not be any longer
of the body, that refuſeth to be humble, and to
make himſelfe litle with his head: for ordinarily
as the valleyes are more aboundant and
bringe foorth more frute then doe the mountaines,A ſimilitude ſhewing the good that commeth of humility.
by reaſon that being more low, they receaue
more commodiouſly all the fatnes which
falleth and deſcendeth from the hie hilles: euen
ſo it behoueth that we be more low and humble
in our owne eyes,1. Sa. 15. 17 if we will, that God fullfill

vs with his graces: the which may finde no
place in vs, if we preſume any whit of our
vertues. The ſame which Chriſt ſayth to thoſe
Scribes and Phariſeis, when he ſaw them arrogant
and preſumptuous, and puffed vp with
a vaine and falſe opinion, that they had conceaued
of their owne righteouſneſſe: you iuſtifie
your ſelues before men, ſayth he to them: but
God knoweth your heartes within,Luk. 16. 15. before
whom, they are moſt abhominable, that are in
greateſt credit and reputation, in the world.
            Wherfore where there is any queſtion concerning
righteouſnes,Pride is quite contrary to our helth. we muſt diligently take
heede that we be not like thoſe that are ſicke of
the dropſie,A ſimilitude. who by reaſon of the groſſeneſſe of
their bodies, ſeeme to be in good eſtate: notwithſtanding
they be full of nothing but water
and ſuch euill humors, which in the end are the
cauſe of their death.
            That then ye outward appearance which we
may haue of any vertue do not abuſe & deceaue
vs,A ſimilitude ſhewinge that all the perfectiō that mē in any wiſe may haue, is nothinge elſe but imperfection before God. let vs know that all the vertue, whereof we
may be furniſhed, can no more endure before
God, then waxe before the fire. And as it can
not be but that one pinne or needle is enough
to pearce a bladder, and to make all the winde
therein incloſed, incontinently to come foorth:
euen ſo it can not be, but that euen a litle tentatation

is enough to drawe the vizard from hypocrites,
& to diſcouer them to euery one, who
ſhall knowe, after that they ſhalbe ſifted, that
there was nothing but a colour and an imagination
of all the reputation of righteouſnes &
vertue, which they had gotten amongeſt men.
            Lette vs not make then any accompt of all
the righteouſnes which can be in vs, nor let vs
not bring it to ye iudgemēt of our God, to better
our cauſe, or to winne there by lawe any thing
for vs. Foraſmuch as there was neuer any other
cauſe of the ruine of the Iewes, nor any
thinge that ouerthrewe them, and made them
fruſtrate of the hope they had to attaine to the
righteouſneſſe which they pretended,Rom. 10. 3. but the
only preſumptuous opinion they had conceaued
to be able to appeare there, through their
owne righteouſnes.
            Now to the end we faule not headlong into
the like daunger and inconuenience, let vs acknowledge
and feele in our ſelues, that we are
not able to thinke one onely good thought,2. Cor. 3. 5. but
let vs be reſolued in this, that all our ability is
from the alone grace and bounty of our God.
For all our glory (as S. Paul ſayth) is excluded,Rom. 3. 27. & 5. 2.
and we haue not any thinge in our ſelues,
whereof we may boaſt our ſelues.
            For beinge naturally deade in ſinne as

we are,Arguments to proue the corruption & vnrighteouſnes of man, before God. can we haue any good motion or feelinge?
But it is certaine that before our regeneration,
and before we be called through the
grace of God to the knowledge of him: we are
blinde and can not ſee any whitte of the miſteries
and ſecretes of God. Moreouer, we are
deaffe and can not heare his voice:1. Cor. 2. 14. we are ſicke
of the palſey and impotente,Deut. 14. 4. and not able to
walke in his waies:Ezec. 11. 12. 19. and 36. 26. we haue an harte of ſtone.
which bringeth foorth no good affection: and
a mouth full of bitternes and curſſing, and we
are as a graue within, from whence commeth
nothinge but ſtenche and corruption:Rom. 3. 13. to conclude,
we are altogether deade, depriued of all
good, in ſuch ſorte, that we haue not any good
vſe of our reaſon. Let no man flatter him ſelfe
(ſayth S. Auguſtine) foraſmuch as we are nothing
of our ſelues but deuills & Sathans:Auguſtine vpon Iohn. that
is to ſay of our owne nature, we are enemies
of God, of his honour, of his lawe, and of all
vertue: and there is not any other difference
betwixt vs and Deuills, but the onely pittie,
which God hath vnto vs, and the gracious fauour
which he woulde ſhewe vs. And although
God haue accepted of vs, and that being receaued
into his couenaunt, we are conſecrated vnto
him to be his temple: notwithſtanding all
theſe great & incomprehenſible fauours which

he hath ſhewed vs, we ought not vtterly to aboliſh
the remembrance which we ought alwaies
to haue of our horrible corruptiō. The Scripture
to the ende to repreſſe our preſumption, &
to let, that we forgette not what is the corruption
of our nature, putteth vs continually in remembraunce,Ioſue. 40. 6.
that we and all fleſh are nothing
but graſſe, wormes meate, duſt, and filth, as
Dauid ſayth that God knoweth vs,Pſa. 103. 14 & whereof
we are made: and that to be briefe, we are nothinge
but duſt and putrefaction: yea that the
greateſt and goodlieſt of the whole world with
all their commodity & bewty,Pſa. 62. 10 which men worſhip,
are nothinge but vanity: and that if they
were put into the ballaunce to be wayed with
nothing, nothing would be found heauier then
they. Beinge then ſo noted in the Scripture,
yea when we are ſo adorned and enriched with
the great & precious gifts of our God: in what
eſtimation ſhall we haue righteouſnes and vertues
whereof we thinke to haue ſo great plenty?
            We do as marchaunts,A ſimilitude to ſhew the hypocriſie and miſery of man. who alwaies praiſe
and eſteeme their wares & marchaundiſe more
then they are worth: euen ſo do we of our vertues:
but when they are examined and priſed
by thoſe which knowe them, as by the ſpirit of
God and his Prophetes, they are altogether

as olde ragges, torne tyed together & patched:
& as old images new gilded ouer, ye which outwardly
haue ſome gliſtering & ſhew, but within
are nothinge but duſt & durt: or, as counterfaite
money, which is of ill mettal how goodly
a printe ſoeuer it haue.Teſtimonies of the Scriptures, & Fathers to proue the vnrighteouſneſſe of man before God. All our righteouſneſſes
ſaith Eſay are as olde ragges, foule and lothſome
to ſee. S. Paule albeit he walked in the
law, without rebuke, and that he felt himſelfe
not culpable in any thing in his conſcience nor
willingly to haue tranſgreſſed: yet notwithſtandinge
he eſteemeth his righteouſneſſe as
dongue. Daniell praying vnto God, alleageth
not his owne righteouſnes & vertues,Philip. 3. 8. neither
the righteouſneſſe & vertues of his compagnions,Dan. 9. 5.
to the ende to cauſe God to encline, and to
heare his prayers. Now (ſayth he) that we are
before thy face, we can ſet nothing before thee,
nor propound any thing on our part but ſhame
and confuſion.Auguſtine. Curſed (ſayth Auguſtine) be all
our righteouſneſſes, if they be iudged without
the mercy of God.Tertullian. And Tertullian: All the
good that we do (ſayth he) and all the righteouſneſſe
and vertue which is in vs, is nothinge
but ſhame and reproch.
            When they ſpake theſe thinges, it was not
without great reaſon, becauſe there is no righteouſnes
and vertue in vs, which is not defiled

& polluted with great vices. Alſo, there is not
any faith, which is not mingled with an infinite
number of doubtes, errours and fonde imaginatiōs:
nor likewiſe, any godlines which is not
contaminate with innumerable ſcruples and
ſuperſtitions. To conclude: all our wine (as
Eſay ſayth) is mingled with water,Eſay. 1. 22. and all our
corne is full of darnell and durt.
            Now if a man woulde boaſt of his ſtrength
and helth,Theſe ſimilitudes and other following, ſhew the beaſtly pride of them, that thinke to haue in thē
                  ſelues wherewith all to ſtand before God. and yet were ſubiect to a thouſande
diſeaſes: or of his knowledge, and yet were
ignorant of all good learning: or of his ritches,
and yet were indebted and indaungered to the
whole world: woulde not euery one mocke him
as an idiote and a foole? euen ſo we aſwell ſhew
our ignoraunce, and what ſclender vnderſtanding
we haue, when we wil attribute any righteouſnes
to our ſelues, and boaſte our ſelues in
it, be it neuer ſo litle.
            He that is ſtronge (ſayth Ieremie) let him
not boaſte and preſume of his ſtrength,Iere. 9. 23. nor he
that is wiſe of his wiſedom, nor he that is ritch
of his ritches, becauſe that, if we conſider what
we haue on the one ſyde, we muſt marke what
we lacke on the other. And when all ſhalbe
well caſte, it ſhall be founde that the expence
will farre ſurmounte the receipt, and the debtes
are much greater, then the reuenue. Moreouer,

all that is greateſt vnder the Sunne, and that
which men moſt wonder at and worſhip in the
worlde,Eccle. 4. 2. & 1. 1. is nothing elſe (as Solomon ſayeth)
but vanitie. Is there any thing ſo ſtable and
durable, which is not mutable, tranſitory, and
vncertaine? what madnes then is it to make ſo
great a matter and ſo highely to eſteeme of our
ſelues, for thinges of ſo ſmall valewe? we are
oftentimes like to thoſe that dreame and wake
againe,A ſimilitude. who when they are a ſleape thinke to
haue founde ſome great treaſure, and haue a
great ioye in it: but after their wakening, they
ſee that all is vaniſhed like ſmoke, whereupon
they vexe & greiue themſelues. Likewiſe when
we thinke that we are righteous, this is a
dreame, which paſſeth through our ſpirits and
vaniſheth aſſoone as we are awake and are deliuered
from the darkenes of ignorance, wherin
we were a ſleape and buried. S. Paule whileſt
he was ignoraunt, without a true and right
knowledge of ye lawe,An example in Paul before his conuerſion. thought to be righteous,
and feelt not ſinne any whitte raigning in him,
vntill that God by his grace, had illuminated
him, & made his will by the lawe knowen vnto
him, & ſo conſequently the luſtes, & corruptiō yt
was in his nature. The which made him ſoone
enough to forgoe the opiniō which he had conceaued
of his owne righteouſnes and vertues.
            
               
After that we haue well ſwept our chambers,An other ſimilitude.
it ſeemeth vnto vs yt they are very cleane.
And yet notwithſtanding, whē the ſunne commeth,
to enter there by the windowes, we perceaue
ſtreight waies by the beames an infinite
deale of duſt, which ye philoſophers call motes:
euen ſo oftentimes before we be wel inſtructed
in ye law of God, if we be exempted from groſſe
& palpable ſinnes, ſuch as are murthers, whordomes,
theftes, we glorie that we are perfect
and innocent. But when our conſciences come
to be diſcried by the word of God, & that Ieſus
Chriſt who is the light hath entred there by
his ſpirite: then he maketh vs to ſee by his
beames an infinite number of faultes and imperfections,
which are hidden in our heartes,
as are the ſerpentes in their holes.Rom. 7. 7. S. Paule
ſayth that he neuer vnderſtoode, that concupiſcence
was a vice, vntil he had ſeene in the law,
that it was there forbidden. Yea, but hadde he
not learned this in the ſchoole of Gamaliel, before
his conuerſion? I graunt, as concerninge
the outwarde barke and ſuperficially. But he
had not attained yet to the bottome, the which
we can not do, vntill we haue ben in the ſchoole
of Ieſus Chriſt, whoe in the law wil make vs
truely to know both God and our ſelues, euen
as the ſunne ſhining by his brightnes maketh

vs to ſee it ſelfe, and all thinges with it.
            In the night by reaſon of the darkeneſſe
ſpreade vpon the earth,An other ſimilitude. all thinges are hidde
and couered: which cauſeth that we can not diſcerne
and diſcouer the ſpottes which we haue
in our faces: But when the light beginneth to
appeare, and that we take a glaſſe, to beholde
our ſelues therin: then they are diſcouered and
ſhewe themſelues: euen ſo likewiſe during the
time that we are couered with the darkenes of
ignoraunce, the vices that dwell in vs, are hidden
there, and oftentimes we thinke, being
leprous & deformed, that we are bewtifull and
perfect: but our eyes being open, and illuminate
by the ſpirite and grace of our God, and
taking the glaſſe of the law, therein to beholde
the eſtate of our nature and our life: then we
beginne to knowe the great and greuous imperfections
that are in vs: and we attonce looſe
the opinion which we had conceaued before, of
our owen righteouſnes and vertues.
            We are oftentimes like vnto drounkardes
who being ouercharged with wine and meate,An other ſimilitude.
haue no maner of knowledge or feeling of the
caſe wherin they are, nor of any thing elſe, and
yet hauing their face couered, and all to berayed
with durt, they canne not perceaue it
vntill that their wine be drienched, and their

braine deliuered from thoſe fumes and vapours
wherby they were ſo letted, & darkened.
We likewiſe, before we be regenerate, are in
ſuch ſorte beſotted with a loue that we beare to
our ſelues, and with a vaine opinion that we
haue conceaued of our ſelues, that we know not
the filthyneſſe and vilanies wherwith we are
berayed. But when the lighte of the ſpirite and
word of God beginnes to breake forth vnto vs,
we come by litle and litle to breake and ſcatter
thoſe cloudes, which were before our ſenſes,
and recouering the view of our reaſon, we beginne
to awake our ſelues, and diſcouer the pitiefull
and miſerable eſtate wherin we are. And
looke as this knowledge groweth and encreaſeth
in vs, ſo much the more it augmenteth and
encreaſeth the knowledge of our vices and imperfections.The Patriarches, Prophetes and Apoſtles: in whom they ſought their righteouſnes.
As we may ſee by experience in
the fathers, who though they were notable and
excellent perſonages, and marked with all notable
vertues: yet notwithſtanding they made
no accompt of them: but contrarywiſe they confeſſed
that they were the greateſt ſinners in the
worlde as a man maye ſee by thoſe goodly confeſſions
which the ſcripture mentioneth, to
haue bin made of Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Dauid,
Ieremie, Daniell, S. Paule, S. Iohn,
and generally of the whole Church: by which

we woulde iudge them to haue bene the moſt
wicked men, which were vpon the earth, if we
knew not the humilitie, that was in them, and
in what contempt they had them ſelues and
their workes, for the great knowledge they
had of the lawe of God: the which engendred
in them an other thinge, to wit, the knowledge
of the imperfection which was in them and in
their life, when they came to meaſure it, according
to the rule of the lawe, & brought all their
thoughtes, deſires, wordes and actions, to be
tried by the will and ordinaunce of God.
            We ſaye in a common prouerbe, that ſuch a
one as thinketh himſelfe in beſt health, carieth
death in his boſome. Which muſt not onely be
vnderſtood of the bodely helth, but alſo of the
health of the ſoule.A ſimilitude taken of a commō prouerbe. For the diſeaſes of the body
are nothing ſo dangerous, as thoſe of the ſoule:
becauſe that verie many (albeit their hartes
are full of diſtruſtes, doubtinges, errors, falſe
opinions, ingratitudes, enuies, reuengements,
darkenes, ignorance, and other deadely diſeaſes)
neuertheles they thinke them ſelues
in very good health, and that their righteouſnes
is ſufficient to enable them, to aunſwer
and ſatisfie the iudgement of God. As that
prowde Phariſe,Luc 8. 11. who in ſteade of humbling
himſelfe before God & confeſſing this faultes

to him ſetteth forthe and extolleth his owen
workes,Mat. 19. 20 in his prayer: And the Scribe that
bragged, that he had accompliſhed the whole
law:Iere. 2. 23. and the Sinagogue, that boaſted her ſelfe,
of her owen innocency, and in that, that ſhe had
not ſinned. Wherefore God cauſed complainte
to be made againſt her, to conuince her of hipocriſie,
and of the ſinnes, that ſhe had forgotten,
through negligence, and of the loue, that ſhe
ought to haue borne vnto him.
            Although then that God doth not alwayes
diſcouer our faultes wholly vnto vs, he wil not
therefore that we make light of them: but if we
do, he ſtreight wayes calleth vs to a reckning,
and requireth them of vs, and conſtraineth vs
to confeſſe them vnto him, that he may forgiue
vs: to the ende, that we maye haue occaſion
hereby, to acknowledge and ſet forth his great
liberalitie. And this is all that he requireth and
demaundeth of vs for hauing acquited and diſcharged
vs of ſuch a great and notable ſumme,
wherein we were indebted to him. For looke
how much ſoeuer of the glorie of any righteouſneſſe
and vertue we attribute to our ſelues,
ſo muche we diminiſhe of the bountie
and liberalitie of our God, and we prouoke
him to ielouſie, becauſe we beare him not that
loue, nor reuerence, that we owe vnto him,

but doe more loue our owen honour then his.
And euen like as a houſband louing his wife
tenderly,A ſimilitude. (to make his affection knowen vnto
her, beſtowing vpon her many great preſentes
of golde and coſtly iewelles,) is verie heauie if
ſhe diſſemble the gifts which he hath beſtowed
vpon her, and ſaye ſhe hath purchaſed them by
her owen mony: Euen ſo God can in no wiſe be
pleaſed with vs, if we will conceale or els attribute
to our ſelues, ye graces which he hath beſtowed
vpon vs, which he woulde haue to be
teſtimonies, tokens and demonſtrations of the
inuiolable loue and fidelitie that he beareth vnto
vs.
            Moiſes ſaide vnto the people of Iſrael, whileſt
they were yet in the wildernes: When
thou ſhalt come into the lande which God hath
promiſed to thy fathers, and ſhalt haue taken
poſſeſſion thereof, and peaceably enioye the
fruictes and delicate thinges that it ſhall bring
forth vnto thee,Deut. 8. and 9. Take good heede that thou ſay
not, that they ſtrength and righteouſnes hath
gotten all this: but acknowledge that God, by
his onely goodnes and loue which he beareth
vnto thee, hath ſhewed theſe great benefites and
fauours to thee, without hauing any reſpect of
thee, who waſt a rebellious and idolatrous people,
nor to thy workes, which were altogether

vitious and faultie: euen ſo if God hath once
brought vs into his Church, let vs beware that
we ſaye not that we haue merited or gotten the
graces that be there communicated vnto vs
by our owne induſtrie: but let vs continually
confeſſe our pouertie and vnworthynes, and acknowledge
with the Apoſtle, that in that we
are vertuous, we are ſo, by the meane of his
onely goodnes: and then without all compariſon
we ſhalbe richer & happyer, then we ſhould
be, if we woulde be ſo, by our owne meane and
by our own ſtrēgth: much more I ſay by the liberality
of our good God, who is much richer
and more aboundaunt to geue vnto vs, then
our owne ſtrength and force can purchaſe, or
heape vpon vs. And we muſt perſwade our
ſelues that God can doe vs more good in one
moment, then we knowe howe to deſire or to
compaſſe by our trauell or diligence, in tenne
milions of yeares.
            What cauſe then is there,Similitudes ſhewinge that we haue neede to be iuſtified by the onely grace of God. that we ſhoulde
not deſire and labour to be more righteous by
the grace of our God, then by our own vertue?
A man ſhalbe a great deale more healthful that
will be throughly gouerned by the regiment &
counſell of ſome good and expert phiſitions,
then he that wil be lead altogether by his owne
appetite. A beaſt is a greate deale better gouerned

by man, then it can be by it ſelfe. A
feilde, a vine, a tree, are in much better caſe,
being tilled, cutte and pruned by labourers and
houſbandmen, then if they were lefte to them
ſelues. Bodies alſo being alone, and without
any life, are blockes, but hauing the ſoule and
life in them, they are applyed and vſed to an
infinite nomber of goodly and excellēt actions:
Whereby a man maye eaſely perceaue, that
the inferiour natures, to the ende they may be
well gouerned and ruled, haue neede of the gouernement
& guiding of the ſuperiour. Whēce
commeth it then, that in the matter of righteouſnes,
we thinke that our reaſon and will
haue more might, then the grace of our God?
            There are certaine glorious beaſtes, which
bragge that they haue gotten that which they
knowe, by their owne onely diligence, and
without the helpe of any other maiſter and teacher:
and that they are no further bounde, for
the good they know, then to their owne labour
and trauell. And alſo there be ſome others yet
more prowde and arrogant, who thinke them
ſelues with power ſufficiently enabled, to get
all vertues by their owne naturall faculties:
as Pelagius and all his ſecte,Pelagius & his ſect. who canne not
better ſhew their arrogancie and ignoraunce,
then in thus pleaſing them ſelues, in them

ſelues, and hauing in ſuch eſtimation and admiration,
the naturall force and power, which
they falſly attribute to them ſelues. The which
is an euident ſigne, that they neuer knewe
them ſelues nor the ſtrength of their owne
ſhoulders, in vaunting ſo of the weakenes and
pouertie that is in them.
            But for our partes, if we deſier to be cladde
with a righteouſnes, which is able to ſtand before
the face of God, and to appeare with aſſuraunce
in his iudgement, let vs not ſeeke it in
our ſelues, but let vs ſeeke it, and finde it, in the
onely grace and mercie of our God. For (as
S. Auguſtine ſayeth) there is nothing within
vs, that can pleaſe and contente him, but onely
that, which he hath put in vs of his owne
goodneſſe.
            Let vs not then follow theſe prowde ſpirites,
which delight and contente them ſelues
in nothing but in their own workes, & through
a doting imagination accompting and eſteeming
them goodly and perfect, euen as apes
do their younge ones: but contrarywiſe, let all
that is in vs, and all that we do, diſpleaſe vs, and
let vs be the firſt iudges to condemne our ſelues
and our workes, foraſmuch as the meane
to come to righteouſnes, is to be able to approch
with confidence, to the throne and iudgement

ſeate of our God, and continually to ſaye
with the holy Apoſtle:Rom. 7. 14. I knowe that I am
carnall and ſoulde vnder ſinne: by meanes
whereof I can in no wiſe approue that which I
doe. For I doe the euill which diſpleaſeth me,
and can not do the good I loue & deſire to doe,
certainelie, there is not in me, (that is to ſaye
in my fleſh) any good thinge. I ſee and feele
continually in my members a law which fighteth
againſt the lawe of my minde, and leadeth
me captiue to the lawe of ſinne which is in my
members.
            O how this confeſſion ought throughly to
beate downe the pride and arrogancie of thoſe
preſumptuous ones, and ſtop vp the mouthes
of all thoſe that wilbe iuſtified by their owne
workes and vertues! For it commeth from a
veſſell and inſtrument which God by ſpirituall
fauour had choſen from among all the men of ye
world,A notable conſideration vpon that Paule confeſſeth him ſelfe a miſerable ſinner. and who euen in thoſe times of his ignoraunce
liued in ſuch ſorte according to the righteouſnes
of the lawe, that he was blameleſſe
and vnrebukeable towardes men. What a one
then might he be (being regenerated, taken vp
into the third heauen,2 Cor. 12. 1. where he had heard ſecretes,1. Cor. 3. 6.
which it was not lawfull for him to vtter,Galat. 2. 6.
& who had ſo greatly trauelled in the worke
of the Lord to plante and to water his Church,2. Cor. 11. 5. 23.
               
that therein he paſſed and farre out wente all
his compagnions. And to conclude, he gaue
place to none of them, neither in knowledge,
nor in zeale, nor in high, and diuine meditations,
nor in diligence, nor in vertues, nor in
any other thing which was agreable to his vocatiō,
for his good and vprighte walking therin.
If then ſuch a perſon did in ſuch ſorte and ſo
much humble him ſelfe, what ought we to do
after him?
            Iſaye,An other example of the humilitie of Iſaie, the excellēt ſeruaunt of God. whoſe mouth and tongue was cleanſed
by one of the Cherubins, & was ſente from
before the face of God for this purpoſe: who
alſo had exerciſed his miniſterie in the Church
of God the ſpace of three ſkore yeares and
more, and without ceaſing day and night, was
as a good watchman vpon the wall to diſcouer
the comming of the enemies,Iſaie 6. 6. to the ende that
both him ſelfe, and thoſe ouer whome he had
charge might not be ouer taken through negligence:
what ſayth he of him ſelfe? and in what
place and degree doth he put him ſelfe?Iſaie 46. 8. Thou
art (ſayeth he to God) our Creatour and we
are nothing but earth and duſt. All our righteouſnes
is as filthie cloutes, and we are all
faded as a leafe, and our iniquities haue caried
vs as the winde: there is none that calleth vpon
thy name, nor that ſtirreth vp him ſelfe to laye

holde vpon thee: For thou haſt hidde thy face
from vs, and haſt conſumed vs becauſe of our
iniquities. Ought not this confeſſion to make
all the glorie and righteouſnes of theſe proude
hypochrites, to bluſh for ſhame? Certainely
the perfection which thoſe imagine, deſerueth
not to be compared to the imperfection of thoſe
excellent ſeruauntes of God, nor their phantaſticall
riches and abondaunce to their pouerty.
For aſmuch as the baſeſt golde,A ſimilitude againſt the righteouſneſſe of hypochrites though it be
rayed with ſome dirte, is alwayes more precious,
then the brighteſt lead that a man can
finde. Euen ſo the righteouſnes of a Chriſtian
man, though it be defiled through many infirmities
and imperfections, yet notwithſtanding
is more to be eſteemed then all the righteouſneſſe
of hypocrites and infidelles.
            There is nothing better,The fruite of Chriſtian humilitie. then for a man to
humble himſelfe before God. Humilitie was
the cauſe that the Caanityſh who was otherwiſe
a dogge, became a faithfull woman, and
that her faith was preferred, before the faith of
all the people of God. Becauſe there is no better
meane, to lifte vs vp, then to humble our
ſelues: to be wiſe, then to repute our ſelues
fooles: to be ſtrong, then to feele our one debilitie
and weakenes. And this S. Auguſtin confirming,
ſayeth, that all our ſtrength is in humilitie,

and that there is nothing more weake
and fraile then pryde and preſumption.A ſimilitude of the prowde and of the humble. Foraſmuch,
as all prowd perſons ſtaye them ſelues,
vpon their owne ſtrength, that is, ſtaye vpon a
reede and vpō the ice of one nights freſing: and
are like vnto ſmoke that mounteth vp on high,
and ſo in going vp is ſcattered and commeth to
nothing. But the humble man is as a rocke or
a ſquare body, which is alwayes ſteyed on
which ſide ſoeuer it be turned, and there is no
man (as ſayeth that ſame good father) ſo harde
to be healed, as he that thinketh him ſelfe to be
hoale: foraſmuch as he alwayes refuſeth counſell
of the phiſition, and will take no remedies,
nor keepe any good dyet or gouernment of him
ſelfe, which ſhoulde be meete and healthfull for
him. Euen ſo likewiſe there is no man farther
of from the righteouſnes of God, then he that
hath ſome good opinion of him ſelfe. For ſuch
commonly are obſtinate, and can not without
great difficultie, be brought from the perſwaſion,
which they haue conceaued of their owne
righteouſnes.
            There is then no greater preſumption nor
more daungerous in the worlde,Preſumptiō very daungerous. then this. For
who ſoeuer preſumeth ſo of his owne ſtength &
vertue, & that he can of him ſelfe become wiſe,
he maketh himſelfe equal with God. For there

is none but God, which is of him ſelfe, and by
nature wiſe, righteous, bleſſed and perfecte.
Men are not otherwiſe wiſe, then by learning
and inſtruction: nor righteous, but by grace:
nor happie, but by the fruition and participation
of the ſoueraigne good: If then a man wil
depende vpon him ſelfe, and eſtabliſh in him
ſelfe the foundatiōs of felicitie and happynes,
preſuming that through the light & quickenes
of his owne ſpirite, he can obtaine wiſedome,
and by the power of his owne will, righteouſnes
and by the contentation and delight which
he hath of his owne vertues and actions, perfecte
felicitie: certainly this man eſteemeth him
ſelfe to be like vnto God. But thoſe perſones
that haue ſuch an opiniō, and preſume ſo much
of them ſelues, they are founde in the ende to
come to ſhorte of their accompt: becauſe it commeth
to paſſe with them as it did to our fore fathers,
who when they acknowledged not the
honour which God had beſtowed vpō them, but
went about to lifte vp them ſelues in an higher
degree then he had ſette them, they fell attonce
hedlonge, and became like vnto brute beaſtes:
which thing happened to Nebucadnezar,Nebucadnezar puniſhed for his pryde. who
beinge become drunken and beſides himſelfe
through the great victories and proſperities
that he had gotten,Dan. 4. 22. thought to mounte vp to

heauen and to make himſelfe equall with God:
but contrary to his expectation, to beate downe
and breake the idle thoughts and diſcourſes of
his harte (no otherwiſe then happened to them
that builded the tower of Babell) God hauing
attonce diſcharged him of his aucthoritie, dignitie
and mighte, together with the loue,
obedience, feare, and fidelitie of his ſubiectes,
freinds and ſeruaunts, in the end hauing made
him like to wilde beaſtes, with whom he liued,
and did eate, and drinke, as though they had
bene his familiers and compagnions: he was
taught by experience what it was, and the daū
               ger
therof for an earthly man to ſeeke to exalte
himſelfe, and to take vpō him to be haile fellow
with God:Exod. 20. 5. foraſmuch as he is geleous of his
glorie, and can not at any hande abyde that his
glorie ſhoulde be abaſed or diminiſhed, without
being kindled & prouoked to reuenge him ſelfe
vpon all thoſe whom he findeth guiltie of any
ſuch audacitie and raſhenes. He woulde ſhew
vs that we are bounde vnto God for all the
good thinges we haue, and that we owe vnto
him therin faith and homage, and principally
for thoſe ſpirituall giftes of our goodnes and
felicitie: ſo as he wilbe accompted and confeſſed
to be the chiefe cauſe and thauthour of
that we are, afterwardes for this that we are

good, and to conclude for that we are bleſſed:
and when ſo euer we will attribute any of theſe
three thinges vnto our ſelues, or elſe referre
that vnto any other then to him, he can not
abyde it.
            Alexander the Great hearing the rehearſall
of the great victories and Conqueſtes which
Philippe his father had gotten and made,Alexander the Great an image of all ambitious princes.
was greiued, for that his father hauinge ſo
brought into ſubiectiō the whole countrey and
brideled his enemies on euery ſide, already he
tooke from him all hope of doinge any honorable
or glorious thing: As he had borne himſelfe
in hande he woulde doe, it ſo fauling out that
matter and occaſion to employe himſelfe, and
his power failed him not. For this is the propertie
of all valliant and noble Princes, to be
agreiued when they looſe oportunitie to make
themſelues eſteemed and to win honour and
renowen by their proweſſe, and that they are
conſtrained to reſt them ſelues and be idle at
home in their houſe, as cowardes miching and
daſtardes. In ſo much, as there is nothing that
they are more gredie of, then the glorie and
immortalitie of their names. Is it then any
meruaill if God who is altogether perfect, and
in whome a man can not reprehend any thing,
or deſire any thing, ſhoulde in ſuch ſort loue his

glory? ſeeing that ſinnefull men are ſo deſirous
of theirs, if once they thinke to haue any thing
in them that is commendable. But as concerning
vs, we maye not ſuffer our ſelues to be
vainquiſhed or ouermaiſtred of any ſuch paſſion,
which (as S. Auguſtine ſayeth) is the
worſt guide, and moſt dangerous counſailour,
that we can chooſe, to rule and gouerne our
actions by. And it is impoſſible but that we
ſhoulde obaye this paſſion, when we are once
ſubmitted vnto it, and become the ſclaues
thereof.
            Wherefore that we may go ſafely, we muſt
be mainteined in a ſimple humilitie, not lifting
vp our heartes to hie, but in ſuch wiſe taminge
our appetites,A ſimilitude ſhewing the fruit of humility. that we be like to litle children
that come from the nourſe. They that goe the
plaine waye, are not in ſo greate daunger to
fall as they which go vpon the ridge of houſes,
or vppon the toppe of ſome highe mountaine:
Euen ſo they that wilbe modeſt and haue no
opinion of them ſelues, they goe a great deale
more ſafely and ſurely, then they which haue a
bigge hearte, and loftie lookes. For the waye
that leadeth to life is ſtraight. And ſo is the
gate whereby a man muſt enter there. Wherefore
if we will paſſe thereat, we muſt not be ſo
bigge and puffed vppe with an opinion of our

ſelues: but we muſt be leane and ſpare, and we
muſt not eſteeme more of our ſelues then we
are worthe.
            Philo the Iewe writeth that the cauſe why
leauen was forbidden the Iewes,An allegorie of the leauen forbidden to the Iewes. at the feaſt of
the Paſſeouer was, to giue them to vnderſtand
that by this prohibition, they had to keep them
ſelues from the daunger of pryde and preſumption,
into which they doe eaſely ſlide and fall,
which haue any opiniō of them ſelues, puffing
vp themſelues, therby as the dough is with the
leauen. Wherefore it is very requiſite that we
take good heede, in all our workes, to followe
that counſel which our Sauiour Chriſt giueth
touching our almes: to witte, that our left hand
know not what our right hand doeth. He would
teach thereby, that we ought to be ſo vertuous,
that our vertue be knowen to all the worlde, to
the ende to edifie them which ſhall ſee it and
knowe it: but of our ſelues it muſt not be
knowen, for feare that we knowing it, it engender
ſome preſumption in vs, which might
corrupte that foreſaide vertue: like as the leauen
ſowreth the dough wherein it is mingled.
But this ambition, as it is maſked and diſguiſed,
ſo it knoweth very well howe to diſſemble,
and to flatter our appetites: ſo as we
can hardly take heede to our ſelues, yea though

we ſtudie the beſt we can, to be humble: foraſmuch
as it ſtealeth vnawares vppon vs, and
ſhrowdeth it ſelfe ſecretely within our hearte,
within which oftentimes it is founde or euer
we wiſte that it was entred. And this is the reaſon
why S. Auguſtine ſayeth, that all other
ſinnes are to be feared and fled indifferently of
all perſons: but the moſt perfect, and the beſt
exerciſed and experienced in vertue ought
principally to take heede of this rocke.A ſimilitude againſt ambition. For,
as wormes engender ſoner in a ſofte and tender
wodde, then in other that is more harde
and knottie: and likewiſe as mothes do breede
ſoner in fine woll, then in courſe flockes: euen
ſo ambitiō ſoner aſſaulteth an excellēt and rare
man in all kinde of vertue, then an other which
is not ſo vertuous.
            It is therefore verie needefull that we take
good heede yt we be not ſleapy, neither become
ſlothfull, as it happened ſometimes vnto Dauid,Pſal. 30. 7.
as himſelfe confeſſeth, ſaying: when I was
in proſperitie I thought I ſhoulde neuer be
ſhaken: The Lord hauing in ſuch ſorte eſtabliſhed
me & vnderpropped me by his grace, ſo as
I aſſured my ſelfe to be firme as the rocke: but
aſſoone as he had turned away his coūtenaunce
and taken his ſpirite from me, I was founde
on the earth, and I beganne to know and feele

my feeblenes and infirmitie. It is conueniente
therefore that we be vigilant to conſider well
all the meanes, and preuent all thoſe wayes by
which we maye be taken and deceaued.A ſimilitude againſt ambitious hypocrites. There
be ſome which are like to thoſe that tugge at
the oare in a Galley. A man woulde iudge
ſeeing their manner of doinge and howe they
ſtreatch their armes forward, that they would
goe on and ſaile forthe right: when with all
their might they enforce them ſelues to drawe
backewardes: euen ſo being vaine glorious,
they wil neuertheleſſe perſwade, that they haue
nothing in greater deteſtatiō then vaine glorie:
when there is not any thing whereof they are
more deſirous and gredye. Such in times paſt
were the Phariſeis as are yet at this daye the
Prieſts and Monkes of the Papacie, who haue
their heartes ſwolne and puffed vp with ambition:To whome hypocrites may be reſembled.
which they cloke and coulour vnder the
vizarde and outwarde ſhew of humilitie. Theſe
maye be reſembled to Antiſthenes, who on a
time walked in the common place at Athens,
with a cloke all to torne and tottred, to the end
that euery one beholding him ſo apparailed,Antiſthenes noted of hypocriſy by Socrates.
might iudge that he did it through humilitie,
and not for lacke of goods, becauſe he was a
man wel eſteemed and of good reputation. But
Socrates hauing diſcouered by the readynes

and ripenes of his good ſpirite and iudgement
the hypochriſie of this philoſopher, ſayd all a
lowde, that he ſawe his ambition, through the
hoales of his cloke. Diogenes alſo entring on
a time into Plato his chamber, and ſeeing his
bed very finely made (becauſe being of a ciuile,
and gentleman like nature, he was nete, in his
moueables apparell, and geſtures, and to be
ſhort,Plato noted of pride by Diogenes whom likewiſe he reproued for that offence in all his conuerſation) he went and wallowed
him ſelfe like a ſwine vpon it, ſaying that
he trampled downe Platoes pryde: but Plato
aunſwered readely, that this was done with a
greater pride: whereby it maye appeare that
there are many conterfaict humilities, ſeruing
for no other purpoſe but to abuſe the ſimple,
who can not beware of them.
            There be of them others,Humilitie in wordes. who hauing a certaine
verball humilitie in mouthe onely, ſaye
they preſume not any thing of them ſelues, and
that they woulde they were as cleane from other
ſinnes as from that of ambition. And yet
a man maye eaſely know by their fetches, the
great deſire and gredynes that they haue of honours,
ſeeking all the wayes they can, to compaſſe
them, and piteouſly tormentinge them
ſelues, when they ſee they are fruſtrat of them.
Adde hereunto, that they deſire to be flattered,
and are neuer ſo well contente as when they

heare themſelues extolled, and there owne
praiſes ſet out: contrarywiſe neuer ſo diſpleaſed,
as when they ſee men huſhte and ſaye nothing
praiſworthy of them: or any manner of
waye to obſcure them: Wherein they diſcouer
their notable hypochriſie, and ſhew euidently,
that they are lyers, and accuſe and condemne
themſelues: when they confeſſe that they are
teinted with other ſinnes, and yet will be free
from this of ambition.Iames 2. 10. For (as S. Iames
ſayeth:) He that ſinneth in one point of the law,
he is giltie of all. Which thing euery one may
acknowledge in himſelfe, if he will well examine
the bottome, and ſecrets of his owne conſcience,
and conſider by pecemeale all the circumſtaunces
of euery ſinne. For as among the
vertues there is ſuch a chayne as entertaineth
and embraceth each other, (as men that are in
a roūde or that hold one an other by the hande)
euen ſo among vices there is ſuch a conſpiratiō
as lightely they are neuer ſondred one from the
other. Whereupon we muſt think that we can
not be giltie of any one vice but we muſt alſo in
like manner be giltie of all the other.
            Theſe then be not thoſe humilities, (being
counterfait and baſtardlike) that it becommeth
vs to bring to the iudgement of God, to
defende vs: foraſmuch (as Dauid ſayeth) that

the cauſe of all reprobates ſhall there be quite
ouerthrowen, and all their actions condemned,
being ſtrange from God.Gregory the diuine. But the true humilitie
which God requireth, and which is neceſſarie,
for to make vs appeare with confidence
before his face, is a true knowledge which we
ought to haue of our ſelues, and which engendreth
in vs a true feeling of our vices and imperfectious,
and cauſeth vs to bewaile and lamente,
to accuſe and confeſſe them before God:
and maketh vs alwaies aſhamed and confounded
before his maieſtie: in ſuch ſor
                  •
                
               
                  •
               hat when
we appeare before him, we dare no more lifte
vp our eyes to heauen,Luc 18. 14. then that publicane: but
looking downe to the earth we ſaye with him:
Lorde be mercyfull to me poore and wretched
ſinner:Pſal. 54. 4. and with Dauid: waſh me O Lord from
my iniquitie, & cleanſe me from all my ſinnes.
Alſo as he ſayeth elſe where:Pſal. 143. 2 Enter not into
iudgement with thy ſeruaunt: For no man liuing
ſhalbe inſtified in thy preſence: and with
Daniel:Dan. 9. 5. 7. O Lord to thee belongeth righteouſnes,
and to vs ſhame and confuſion: for we haue
ſinned, we haue committed iniquitie, we haue
bene wicked and rebellious, and haue alwayes
bene contrary to thy commaundementes and
iudgementes.
            With ſuch an humilitie and confeſſion, we

maye at all howers preſent our ſelues before
God, and be aſſured that he will not reiecte vs
from his preſence:Pſa. 51. 19. becauſe (as Dauid ſayeth)
he neither deſpiſeth nor reiecteth ſorrowfull
ſoules, hearts that are humbled and caſt down,
and penitent ſpirits.Iſai 66. 2. I ſay ſayeth: vpon whom
ſhall the ſpirite of the Lorde reſt, but vpon the
humble, and vpon him that trembleth at his
worde?S. Auguſtin. S. Auguſtine ſayeth: that men ioyne
them ſelues and ſeeke out ſuch as are their equales,Like will to his like.
and maye match them in greatnes, dignitie
and riches: but contrarywiſe God who
is the ſoueraigne in maieſtie and highnes, he
ioyneth him ſelfe to none, but to thoſe that are
humble and lowly in their owne ſight.
            Let vs conclude then that there is nothing
ſo neceſſary and expediente,The cōcluſiō touching Chriſtiā humilitie. as to humble and
throw downe our ſelues, as hath bene ſaid. We
ſee that reedes and young oſyers,A ſimilitude. which bowe
and yeelde to the wind, abide ſtable for the time
of the tempeſt, where as the greate trees that
ſeeme to be ſo ſtrong and ſo wel rooted, can not
reſiſte the violence and force of a great winde,
ſo as many times they are blowen downe, ſhiuered
and rooted vp by the rootes: euen ſo there
is none loſte, condemned, deſtroyed and ouerthrowen
in the iudgement of God: but he that
will be there compted good, and will defende

him ſelfe there with the vertue & ſtrength of his
own righteouſnes. For this is as a great thunder,Similitudes ſhewinge what the thoughts of the faithful ought to be when they preſent thē
                  ſelues before God.
that neuer putteth forth his might but againſt
thinges of reſiſtaunce: but againſt any
heape of earth, or againſt a wolle packe, or
ſome ſuch other flexible & yeelding ſubſtaunce,
the blow is broken and it ſtreight waies dyeth.
It is a great reproch and ſhame amongeſt men
for a man to breake and become bankeroute for
worldly goods: but before God it is a great glorie
and honour, and we know not how to do any
thing more profitable and honorable for vs,
then (as a man woulde ſaye) to laye the keyes
vnder the dore, and to forſake all, confeſſing
that we haue no meane to paye, & to diſcharge
our ſelues towardes his righteouſnes. We had
neede in this caſe to be like couetous men, who
alwayes thinke that they are poore, how great
ſubſtaunce ſoeuer they haue, becauſe they haue
more regard to that they deſire, thē to that they
haue. Moreouer, they thinke alwayes (as the
Poete ſayeth) that their neighbours vineyeard
& feelde is goodlier & more fruetful then theirs.
We in like maner conſidering both our ſelues,
and the whole eſtate of our life, ſhall finde that
that which is maymed and wantinge in vs, is
more then that which either we haue or canne
haue heere in this worlde. Let vs not thinke

therefore to be rich before God, or that our
neighbors are poorer then we, as the Phariſie
thought and ſaide: but let vs be certaine and reſolued
in this opinion, that before God we haue
not any thing wherof we make ſure accompt:
neither righteouſnes nor wiſedom: nor vertue,
that we may ſet out or alledge before his iudgment.
And touching our neigbours we muſt alwayes
thinke, that we haue ſo litle, that we
maye not dare preferre or compare our ſelues
to any of them.
            Nowe being thus prepared to preſente our
ſelues before God,The ſecond point ſhewing that we muſt finde though not in our ſelues, a perfect righteouſnes that maye ſtand before God: & in what that righteouſnes conſiſteth. to witte, through a right
knowledge of our ſelues, through an inwarde
feeling of our vices and corruptions, and by an
humble confeſſion of our errours and imperfections,
it is meete yet to ſeeke out a righteouſnes,
that we maye bring it out there, and
ſuch a one as is not onely ſufficient ſo ſuſteine
the rigour and ſeueritie of that iudgement: but
alſo to obteine full forgiuenes and iuſtification
of all ſinnes and offences, and of all accuſations
which our aduerſaries can allege there againſt
vs: which we can not finde in our ſelues, nor in
any mortall man as we haue ſhewed and declared
before.Pſal. 14. 1. For all haue gone aſtraye, and are
of thēſelues abominable before God,Rom. 3. 12. there is
not one that doth good no not one.Gene. 9. 21. Noah was

drunke:Numb. 20. 24. Moſes murmured at the waters of
Miribah: Abraham was an Idolatrer: Dauid
a murtherer and adulterer:Ioſua 24. 2. S. Paule a perſecutour
of the Church:2. Sam. 11. 4 S. Peter denied Ieſus
Chriſt:1. Tim. 1. 13 S. Iohn with his brother Iames,Iohn 18. 25 and
the other Apoſtles were ambitious.Mat. 20. 20 To conclude,Luc 22. 24.
there was not any among all the fathers
and Sainctes, that haue bene ſince the foundacion
of the world, to whome it hath not come
to paſſe to committe ſome one notable faulte or
other in their life time, & who not continually
acknowledged his great ſinnes, as occaſiō hath
bene offred vnto him.1. Cor. 1. 29. So as no fleſh hath wherof
to boaſte it ſelfe or to glorie before God,
who hath ſhute all men vnder ſinne and infidelity,Rom. 11. 32.
to the ende, that he may haue mercy on all,
and that euery one may acknowledge and confeſſe,
that his ſaluation in and through all, conſiſteth
in the onely grace and mercie of God.
            We muſt not therefore thinke to finde the
righteouſneſſe that we ſeeke after,Our righteouſnes is in Chriſt Ieſus alone. any where
elſe, then in Ieſus Chriſt, of whome Ieremie
ſayeth: his name is called the eternall, our
Righteouſnes.1. Cor. 1. 30. S. Paule ſayeth, agreably to
the Prophete, that he was made our Righteouſnes,
wiſedome, ſanctification and Redemption.Rom. 5. 19.
And elſe where he ſayeth: that as by one
mans diſobedience, many became ſinners: ſo

by the obedience of an other many ſhal become
righteous. To what tendeth all that which is
ſpoken of him in the ſcripture?Iſai 53. 4. to witte, that he
hath payed our debtes:Coloſſ. 1. 20. that by him we are reconciled
to God his father:2. Cor. 5. 19. that he hath obteyned
for vs remiſſion of our ſinnes: that he is
our reſurrection and our life,Iohn 11. 25 and our interceſſour
to the father,1. Tim. 2. 5. that by his death and ſacrifice,Iſay 53. 5.
he hath pacified the wrath of his father againſt
vs:Apoc. 1. 6. that he hath waſhed vs in his bloud:
and by an infinit nomber of other excellent ſentences
that are ſette out vnto vs, and tende to
no other ende, but to make vs know and to perſwade
vs, that there is no other but he alone
who is our righteouſnes, and the meane of our
ſaluation and of our life.
            It is not then the lawe,Heb. 9. 10. nor any other ceremonies
or ſacrifices of goates, ſheepe, oxen and
lambes,Tit. 3. 5. nor yet any workes and vertues that
can iuſtifie vs before God: but the onely bloude
of Ieſus Chriſt, through which his teſtament
and newe couenaunt which he hath made with
vs, is paſſed, accorded, ſealed and ratified. All
thinges (ſayeth he) are giuen vnto me of God
my father.Mat. 11. 27. If we then will haue all that is neceſſarie
for our happyneſſe, as the fauour of
God, righteouſnes, life, light, the forgiuenes
of our ſinnes, and the holy ſpirit to regenerate

and ſanctifie vs: we muſt addreſſe our ſelues
to Chriſt,Iohn 6. 27. foraſmuch as it is he, whom the father
hath choſen to be Treaſureour and ſtewarde
of all his graces. Moſes by whom the
law was publiſhed and deliuered to the people,
conducted them ſafely through the deſerte: but
he brought them not to the place of their reſt:Ioſu 1. 6.
For that was Ioſue, who was a figure of Ieſus
Chriſt, who made them paſſe ouer Iordaine,
to eſtabliſh them in that poſſeſſion and inheritaunce
which God had promiſed vnto their fathers.
            The lawe therefore maye well leade vs and
teach vs the way that we muſt take and walke
in the middeſt of the darkenes and wildernes
of this world,The effecte of the lawe towarde the faithfull. like as ſome marke by the waye
ſides,Similitudes maye well direct vs, and ſhew vs which
waye to take: but the lawe can not giue vs
ſtrength and courage to goe through, if we be
wery, neither enable vs to come to the place
whither we goe.Heb. 4. 8. Likewiſe the lawe can not
bring vs to that reſt, which God hath promiſed
vnto his elect: nor any other, but our great Ioſue,
that is to ſay, Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, who
onely can doe it, by his righteouſnes. Therefore
S. Auguſtin ſayed very well,S. Auguſtin vppon S. Iohn. it is very neceſſary
that we dayly lifte vp our eyes on high,
to beholde that Serpent hanging deade on the

Croſſe, to the ende we maye be preſerued from
the venome and bytinge of that ſerpent that is
aliue and raigning yet in the worlde. And in
an other place he ſayeth: this is the waye in
which we muſt walke, and the truth vpō which
we muſt reſt, & the path in which we muſt go.
            When then we are once marching towards
him,Chriſt is only the waye the truth & life. we ought not to feare but that going on in
this waye, and continuing therein, we ſhall
come in the ende to the goale and to the felicitie,
whither we bende our ſelues. Foraſmuch
as this is a ſure waye which can not be ſtopped
nor layd with theeues, nor drowned with any
ſhowers or flowdes of waters. Moreouer, it
is plaine and ſtreight and hath neither rockes
nor blockes or any other lettes which maye
make vs ſtomble. It remayneth only then that
when we are in this waye, we keepe our ſelues
there without ſtanding ſtill, or going backewards,
or turning aſide either to the right hand
or the left: becauſe we can no ſoner leaue it, nor
departe in any other manner, but by and by we
goe aſtraye, and are layde open to all kinde of
daungers:Similitudes Euen like as in winter we can no
ſooner be from the fier, but we are a colde, nor
out of light but we enter into darkenes: euen
ſo we can no ſoner be parted frō Ieſus Chriſt,
who is our righteouſnes & our life, but ſtreight

waye we are in ſinne and in death: foraſmuch
as he is the life that quickeneth vs, the Sunne
that giueth vs light, and the fier that warmeth,
comforteth and refreſheth all his members. As
the mone hath no light but that it hath from the
Sunne, and as that light is litle or great, as it
is neare or farre of, in ſuch ſort that if it departe
from it, it remayneth altogether obſcure
and darke: Euen ſo in like manner the Church
hath no light, righteouſnes, life, helth, ſtrength,
and happynes, but that, which it hath pleaſed
her huſband Ieſus Chriſt to giue vnto her, becauſe
of that vnion and fellowſhippe, which he
hath with her. Wherefore if at any time ſhe be
ſeparated from him, and that there be a diuorſe
between her and her huſband, there remayneth
to her nothinge but darkenes, vice and wretchedneſſe.
            Eue in the beginning was created of the
fleſh,Gen. 2. 23. bone,Epheſ. 5. 30 and bloude of her huſband: euen ſo
the Church is regenerated by the participatiō
that ſhe hath with the fleſhe of Ieſus Chriſt,The regeneration of the church.
through the ſacrificing whereof ſhe was redeemed,
waſhed & purged from all filthynes in his
bloude, and through the participation of his
bones was fortified and mainteyned againſt all
tentation. For he who in the beginning was
the aucthour of our life, he is likewiſe now the

aucthour of our good life. And we muſt not
thinke that there are two diuerſe beginninges
of our being and righteouſnes. For he himſelfe
that hath made vs mē, hath alſo made vs Chriſtians:
and as in the beginning he created vs
and made vs of nothing: euen ſo afterwardes,
he regenerated vs, being nothing, but vanitie,
the children of wrath and maledictiō: and when
we were worſſe then nothing he choſe vs and
that before we were conceaued and borne: he
hath called vs when as rebellious ſeruauntes
to maiſters, we fledde from him: when we turned
our backes to him: he iuſtified vs being
ſinners, ſanctified vs being prophane and polluted,
raiſed vs vp being deade: And will alſo
glorifie vs although we be yet altogether couered
with ignominie and corruption: whereupon
a man maye inferre that,S. Cyprian. which S. Cyprian
ſayeth is verie true: that in our ſaluation we
muſt glorie in nothing. For there is not any
thing of ours, and which we ſhoulde not confeſſe
to be wholly from God.
            If we will examine this throughly,The confutation of their errour which ſaye that it is in our owne power to diſpoſe our ſelues to receaue our ſaluation, when God offereth it vnto vs. and conſider
it in euery part, we ſhall confeſſe the truth,
what ſoeuer the ſchoolemen prate & bable, that
of our ſelues we can diſpoſe our ſelues to receaue
our ſaluatiō when ſoeuer God offreth it
vnto vs. It is ſo farre of that it can be true, that

quite contrary we are thē wholly turned away,
and reſiſt againſt it with all our power. Which
thing may plainely appeare by the example of
S. Paule, who was called and ledde by Ieſus
Chriſt, as it were by ſtrong hande to his ſheep
folde, euen then, when he was going to Damaſcus,Actes 9. 5.
being carried with a deadely hatred,
and enflamed with furie to perſecute and vtterly
to roote out (if he coulde) the memorie of
his name. There is nothinge more certaine,
then that S. Auguſtine ſayth that all they that
labour and ſweate vnder the heauie burden of
this fleſh,S. Auguſtin and complaine of this miſerable life,
they haue but one onely conſolation and hope,
that is to ſaye, that Ieſus Chriſt is their Mediatour
& their righteouſnes. By reaſon wherof
whē he made his entraunce into the middeſt
of Ieruſalem, all that wente before and behind
him cryed out with one voice, Hoſanna, &c. that
is to ſaye▪ Saue vs O ſonne of Dauid our Sauiour.
To the end to ſhew that there was neuer
good man neither before nor after his comming
which did hope to be ſaued by any other
meanes, then onely through his righteouſnes
and obedience.S. Auguſtin And therefore S. Auguſtine
ſayeth, that all the Sainctes, ſince Abell vnto
Iohn Baptiſte, and after the Apoſtles, vnto
the ende of the worlde ought not to be praiſed

but in him, and not in them ſelues. In ſo
much that the firſt haue ſayde,Pſal. 34. 3. My ſoule ſhall
reioyce in the Lorde: and thoſe that came after
haue ſayed in like manner:1. Cor. 15. 10. By grace I am that
I am: and all in generall ſaye: That whoſoeuer
will glorie he muſt glorie in God.
            And in verie truth this is he that hath borne
the wooll and the flece,The perfection and righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt. of which was ſponne
this cloth, wherewith we muſt be clad, that we
may be ſhrowded againſt heats, cold, and other
iniuries of heauen. All you (ſayeth the Apoſtle)
which are baptiſed in Chriſt, haue put on
Chriſt.Gal. 3. 27. This is that kinge, who for the adorning
of the Queene his ſpouſe hath made for
her ritch and ſumptuous robes,Pſal. 45. 14 as the Pſalmiſt
ſayeth:Ezec. 16. 9. Which thinge Ezechiell ſheweth
alſo more clearly: I haue waſhed thee with
water, yea I haue waſhed away thy bloud from
thee, in which thou waſt altogether polluted:
I haue anoynted thee with oyle, and clothed
thee alſo with broydred worke, and haue ſette a
crowne of Golde vpon thy heade: and I haue
decked thee with golde and ſiluer, that thou
mighteſt be very bewtifull. All that ſame long
Alegorie, which he vſeth there in the 16. of his
propheſie, is to no other ende, but to extoll the
righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt, with which the
Church is apparailed and adorned: with thoſe

other precious giftes, graces and bleſſinges,
wherewith ſhe is altogether couered and repleniſhed.
And as there is nothing, more vncleane
then ſhe, when ſhe is naked: ſo is there nothing
more bewtifull then ſhe, when ſhe is decked in
the liuerie and collour of her huſband. For then
hath ſhe a ſpeciall grace, that makes her verie
amiable, delightfull, and in paſſing good liking
to God him ſelfe: Moreouer, being ſo clothed
in this robe of innocencie, all that was foule in
her, and which diſfigured her, is in ſuch ſorte
couered and defaced, that there appeareth no
more vncleanes in any part of her, becauſe Ieſus
Chriſt (as S. Auguſtine ſayeth) is as a
ſpounge which wipeth vs & cleanſeth vs from
all our filthynes, which he taketh in exchaunge
for the bewtie, righteouſneſſe, and perfection,
which he communicateth vnto vs: Wherin we
ought to acknowledge and to adore this great
and incomparable loue which he beareth vs,
and which he hath truely and in effect ſhewed
vnto vs, heaping vpon vs at the daye of our
mariage ſo great and precious ioyes: although
he receaue nothing of vs in dowrie, but olde
baggage altogether couered with thicke and
filthie dirte: to witte, euen our imperfections
and iniquities.
            We receaue then, in doing this thinge two

great commodities of his righteouſnes,Chriſt deliuereth vs from death, and giueth vs eternall life. which
ſerue vs for two purpoſes: to witte firſt to draw
vs out from the mier and claye wherein we
were buried: to decke vs with goodly robes
wherewith we are clad to make vs bewtifull:
that is to ſaye, to deliuer vs from the malediction
and curſe, wherinto we were fallen: and
then on the other ſide to bleſſe vs and to bring
vs into fauour with God his father, to drawe
vs backe from pouertie, and to enrich vs: to
raiſe vs vp from death, and to giue vs life: to
drawe vs from hell, and to make vs mounte vp
into heauen. Euen as Ieſus Chriſt on the one
part hath deliuered vs from feare, terrour and
torment of conſcience, ſparring and ſhutting
vp hell gates: ſo on the other he hath ſet vs in
a certaine and vndoubted hope of euerlaſting
life, and of a bleſſed reſte, opening his paradiſe
vnto vs.Apoc. 1. 18. This is that, which is ſayde of him in
the ſcripture: that he keepeth the keyes of death
and of life: the one, to make faſt and ſhut vp the
gate, which was alwayes open to ſwallow vs
vp and deuour vs: and the other, to open vnto
vs the kingdome of heauen, which was alwayes
locked and ſhutte againſt vs. By meane
whereof at his death the vaile that let the entraunce
into the Sanctuary was broken and
clefte into two partes:Mat. 27. 51. to the ende that that way

might be made open for vs, and that euery one
might haue a meane and libertie to come vnto
God, and to preſente them ſelues before him
with confidence. This is the cauſe that Paule
writing to the Hebrewes ſayed:Heb. 9. 10. that by his fleſh
he hath prepared a waye for vs to heauen, to attaine
vnto life. Foraſmuch as he hath in that
fleſh rendred vnto God for vs perfect obediēce:
and by his death hath ſatiſfied his righteouſnes
for our ſinnes, obtaynīg for vs by this meanes,
the forgiuenes of our ſinnes, and through this
remiſſion righteouſnes, and by righteouſnes
the grace and fauour of God, and by Grace,
life: in ſuch ſort as we maye nowe preſente our
ſelues to him in all aſſuraunce:Iſay 33. 14. who before was
as a conſuming fire, to conſume vs and bring
vs to nothing &c: but now by the meanes of Ieſus
Chriſt is a ſhadowe to releiue and refreſhe
vs againe.By Ieſus Chriſt alone we haue acceſſe vnto God the father.
            
            This is the reaſon for which Ieſus Chriſt
was figured by the ladder which Iacob ſawe
when he ſleept, wherevpon the glorie of God
reſted it ſelfe.Gen. 28. 12. Foraſmuch as in the humanitie
of Chriſt dwelled the fulneſſe of the Diuinitie
bodely,Coloſſ. 2. 9. becauſe by it God deſcendeth downe vnto
vs: Euen as Ieſus Chriſt hauing taken our
humanitie,Iſai 7. 8. was called Emmanuel, which is
aſmuch to ſaye as God is with vs, ſo alſo we

through him mounte vp as it were by degrees
to heauen,Mat. 1. 23. where our conuerſation is,Philip. 3. 10. & wherof
at this day we are Citizens & of the houſeholde
of God.Epheſ. 2. 19. Being then very God and very man
of two diuerſe natures, the one diuine and the
other humaine, which are conioyned and vnited
together inſeparablie, without any confuſion
or diuiſion: in that he is God, we muſt goe
vnto him to be in ſaftie, and to liue happely: and
on the other ſide in that he is mā, he is the way
by which we muſt march on to attaine to euerlaſting
life.S. Auguſtin So thē we muſt go to Ieſus Chriſt
that is God, by Ieſus Chriſt that is man, by
the worde that is made fleſh, to the word which
was in the beginning with God, and by the
breade which men eate vnto the breade which
Angells eate.
            And there is no neede that we ſeeke for any
other but him,All our felicitie conſiſteth in Chriſt alone whether it be to reſte our ſelues
in, or to leade and directe vs thither. For being
God, he is the ſoueraigne God, and the ende
whereunto all our appetites and deſires ought
to be directed. And when we are come thither,
there is the place where we muſt reſt and altogether
repoſe our ſelues: foraſmuch as he is
perfect and repleniſhed with all vertue & righteouſnes,
which he communicateth vnto vs, by
means of that communion and fellowſhip that

we haue with him. To conclude then, he is the
waye that muſt leade vs to our felicitie, and the
only meane to make vs attaine thither. When
we are waſhed with his bloude, this is it that
preſerueth vs from that deſtroyer, this is the
cloude that ſhrowdeth vs from being burned
& conſumed with the extreme heat of the wrath
of God, and the libertie whereinto we muſt retire
from the furie of the enemy that purſueth
ſo harde after vs. To be ſhorte, this is the gate
of ſaluation and the hauen where we muſt harborre
and ſaue our ſelues in the time of tempeſte.
            This is the cloke vnder which we maye obtaine
the bleſſing of God,VVe obtain throughe Chriſt the bleſsing of God. as Iacob obtayned
that of his father Iſaake, being diſguiſed with
the apparell of his elder brother Eſau. And as
the high Prieſt neuer appeared before the face
of God,Gen. 27. 19. without his holy embroidred garmēts,
his Ephod,Exod. 28. 2. his robe, and his other prieſtly apparell,
without which he coulde not fynde any
fauour when he appeared in his preſence: Euen
ſo (to follow the truth of this figure) we ought
neuer to preſente our ſelues before God (if
we will be accepted and receaued of him,) but
we muſt be clothed and decked with the righteouſnes
and innocencie of his ſonne: wherwith
if we be once couered, we neede not feare that

we ſhall be reiected and deſpiſed of him, or that
there is any enemy whoſoeuer he be, that hath
any power to hurte vs. For ſuch armour can
defende vs euen from the wrath of God it ſelfe,
againſt which no other thing can reſiſte.
            It is written that Alexander hauing conceaued
a great hatred againſt the cittie of Ieruſalem,Ioſeph lib. 11. de antiqui. Iudaic. cap. 8.
was fully reſolued vtterly to deſtroye it,
becauſe that laying ſeidge to the cittie of Tyr
the inhabitauntes of Ieruſalem had refuſed to
helpe him with victuals and other munition
which he had demaunded of them. Nowe after
that he had taken Tyr, he marched forth with
all his armie againſt Ieruſalem, with full purpoſe
vtterly to deſtroy it. The which thing whē
the highe Prieſt named Iaddus vnderſtood, he
apparailed him ſelfe with the holy garmentes
of the highe Prieſt, and ſo preſented him ſelfe
before Alexāder, who vpon the ſuddaine, when
he ſawe him in this habite, alighted from
his horſe, and bowed his knees before Iaddus,
and reuerenced him, and ſhewed him great honours,
and great loue to the countrey, and gaue
great giftes to the temple. Nowe if an enemy
ſo furious and terrible were ſo ſuddainly appeaſed,
at the onely ſight of this highe Prieſt
ſo apparailed (who was but a figure of Ieſus
Chriſt:) what ſhall it be when Ieſus Chriſt

ſhal appeare in his glorie and all his members
with him, clad and couered with his righteouſnes,
and ſhewing them ſelues to all the worlde,
in ſuch and ſo magnificall and glorious apparaill?
Shall not the deuills and hell bowe their
knees then for feare when they ſhall ſee him in
his maieſtie and in ſuch excellent glorie?
            Let vs conclude then that beinge garniſhed
and couered with the righteouſnes of Ieſus
Chriſt, we can haue no lacke of ſtrength
and might to vanquiſh and ouercome our enemies,
nor of any other thing that may make vs
perfectly happy what ſoeuer.S. Ambroſe. As S. Ambroſe
writeth verie elegantly, in his ſeconde booke
of Virginitie, that Ieſus Chriſt is vnto vs, all
in all things: If we be ſicke, he is our phiſition:
If we haue an Ague, and that we are altered,
he is our fountaine: If we be laden with iniquitie,
he is our righteouſnes: If we be weake and
weryed, he is our ſtrength: If we feare death,
he is our life: If we deſire to mounte vp to heauen,
he is our ladder: If we haue byne darkenes,
he is our light: If we haue houngred, he
is our breade and nouriſhment. Wherupon we
may perceaue and knowe the great riches and
commodities that Ieſus Chriſt bringeth vnto
all them that poſſeſſe him.
            Now hauing ſhewed that there is no other

righteouſnes,The third point ſhewing in whom the iuſtice of God is, and howe a man maye obtaine it. but the righteouſnes of Chriſt,
which can be ſufficient to beare the rigour of
the iudgement of God, and that maye enable
vs to appeare and aunſwere there: it remayneth
now that we declare vpon what matter it
worketh and where it reſteth & dwelleth: how
it maye be obtayned: and in what ſort a man
maye aſſure him ſelfe of it: finally, hauinge
obteyned it, what fruits it bringeth forth in vs.
            Firſt the righteouſnes of Chriſt hath two
principall partes,The righteouſnes of Chriſt hath two partes. to witte Iuſtification, and
Sanctification, that is to ſaye: when it is communicated
vnto vs, although that before we
were the wickedeſt in the worlde, and guiltie of
death before God, and moreouer, that our nature
was altogether corrupted and teynted in
euery parte of it:How we are iuſtified. notwithſtanding all this, we
are holden and reputed for righteous before
God, and are allowed and receaued of him for
his children and heires, when we are prouided
of this righteouſnes, and when we are clothed
with it, he giueth vs his holy ſpirite, to
leade vs and conducte vs (as a ſchoolmaiſter
doth his children) and for to ſanctifie, inſtructe
and ſtrengthen vs in all his wayes. And that
this is true. S. Paule writeth,Rom. 4. 22. not onely that
it was ſayde of Abraham that his faith was
counted to him for righteouſnes: but alſo that

we ſhalbe accompted righteous before God,
as he was, if we beleue in Ieſus Chriſt: Alſo,
God was in Chriſt and reconciled the worlde
to himſelfe,2. Cor. 5. 19. not imputinge their ſinnes vnto
them. And ioyning both theſe partes together
in the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, he ſayed
to them ſpeakinge of their life, that they had
bene altogether led in wickednes, and were diſſolute
in all kinde of miſcheefe: but that they
were now waſhed,1. Cor. 6. 11. iuſtified and ſanctified in the
name of Ieſus Chriſt, and through the ſpirite
of God.
            Now if we will know by what meane this
is done,VVe are iuſtified and ſanctified by the righteouſnes & holynes of Chriſt. we muſt note, that being vnited by
faith in our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and graffed in
him, (as members in their body,) that he is
then become our heade, and we are ioyned to
him as the houſbande to his wife. By meanes
whereof he chargeth him ſelfe with all our
debtes,The firſt reaſon. and appointeth him ſelfe to be the aunſwere
and pledge for vs, to the ende he maye
paye all for vs and throughly acquite vs of all,
that we are indebted and bounde for, offring
him ſelfe to ſatiſfie the righteouſnes of God, by
his owne death, to the which death we were
bounde by reaſon of our ſinnes:Galat. 3. 13 and to deliuer
vs by his Croſſe, from the curſſe, to which we
were likewiſe ſubiect, for hauing diſobeyed

the will of God, and broken his lawe, in a thouſand
and a thouſandes thinges: he hath alſo raſed
out our diſobedience,Rom. 5. 19. by his obediēce, which
being ſo perfect & accompliſhed in all pointes,
he hath ſupplied and made amendes for all our
faultes and imperfections, and for the dutie
wherewith we were bounde to God with all
our might, being his creatures, children and
ſeruaunts. The death then which Ieſus Chriſt
hath ſuffred, the ſacrifice which he hath offred,
the curſſe which he hath borne, & the obedience
that he hath rendred: all this was done in our
name, and for our diſcharge, and is receaued
before the iudgemēt of God, for acquitall in ful
payment and diſcharge of all our debtes, in
ſuch ſort that no more can be demaūded againe
of vs, he hauing through his innocencie fully
ſatiſfied that promiſe which he had made for vs.
Beholde the firſt reaſon, why the righteouſnes
of Ieſus Chriſt is imputed vnto vs and accepted
of God in his iudgement.
            The ſecond reaſon is,2. Reaſon. that being knitte and
vnited together by mariage,Ephe. 5. 30. both we and he are
but one body and one fleſh: and there is a mutuall
communion between vs. And as he participateth
with our afflictions, miſeries, pouerties
and infirmities, ſo when we are perſecuted
by tyrans, he complaineth with vs and lamenteth

our aduerſities and ſorrowes, likewiſe,
when we are houngry, ſicke, diſeaſed, in priſon,
&c. he beareth and endureth all our calamities
with vs. We alſo on the contrary part are partakers
of all his benefites, graces and giftes
which his father hath beſtowed vpon him: and
in generall, of all that he hath done and ſuffred
for our ſaluation and redemption: we are anointed,
as he was, with the oyle of his holy ſpirite:
we are deade and buried with him, and we are
raiſed vp and caried into heauē with him where
we are ſette at the right hande of God his father,Rom. 6. 4.
as he is.Coloſſ. 3. 1. We are inheritours together
with him,Ephe. 2. 22. and we haue part in his glorie, in his
reſt & in all his felicity,Rom. 8. 17. by meane of his righteouſnes,
obedience & innocencie, of all which
through his grace we are made partakers. Alſo,
of his death, ſacrifice and ſatiſfaction. And
to conclude,A ſimilitude. as marchantes which are of one
companie & become parteners, are partakers
alike of all the profittes and damages which
growe of their marchandiſe: euen ſo Ieſus
Chriſt, by reaſon of that ſocietie we haue together
with him, giueth vs a parte, and we
likewiſe giue him, of all that we haue and poſſeſſe.
The difference that is in this, is, that the
gaines & loſſes, that come of the traffique that
is exerciſed amongeſt men is equall and common

amongeſt them all, but here we gather vp
all the fruites that ariſe of the righteouſnes of
Ieſus Chriſt: he on the contrary parte taketh
vpon him, and chargeth himſelfe with all the
damages and loſſes that came of our diſobedience.
            The third reaſon,3. Reaſon. for which the righteouſnes
of Chriſt is imputed vnto vs,Epheſ. 1. 2. is, that being
knitte to him, as the members of a bodie are to
their heade (the which, by meanes of this coniunction
receaue thence one influence which giueth
them life, and diſtributeth to each their
motions & ſenſes according as is fitte for their
nature, and as is requiſite for their actions) we
receaue from him as S. Paule ſayeth, our life,
our nouriſhment, our grouth, our force and
ſtrength: for the enabling and diſpoſing of vs
to doe thoſe good workes that belong vnto our
vocation. And by reaſon of this coniunction
there is ſuch an vnion betwixt him and vs, that
as he communicateth with vs in our afflictiōs:
ſo we likewiſe on the other ſide communicate
with him, in his riches: we are righteous by
his righteouſnes, we are acquited by his ſatiſfaction,
we are quickened to life by his death,
and obaye God through his obedience.A ſimilitude. And
euen as in a naturall body, the power that the
eye hath to ſee, ſerueth more to ye vſe of the other

members then for it ſelfe becauſe that ſeeing
and marking them all it is watchfull rightly to
guide them and to direct euery one of their actions,
not being able in the meane time to ſee
them ſelues, nor to ſerue it ſelfe: euen ſo the
righteouſnes, innocencie & obedience of Chriſt
Ieſus, ſtande vs in more ſted then him, ſeeing
that notwithſtanding he had all theſe thinges,
and it was in his nature, life, and whole conuerſation
abſolut and perfect, yet for all this,
he was condemned and crucified. We on the
contrary part albeit his righteouſnes, innocencie,
and obedience be onely imputed vnto
vs, yet for all that, by meanes of this imputation
we are abſolued, iuſtified and diſcharged
of all our ſinnes, and of all accuſations that all
our enemies can bring againſt vs.
            The other part of the righteouſnes of Ieſus
Chriſt conſiſteth in the ſanctification not
only of vs but alſo of our works.The 2. part of the righteouſnes of Chriſt. For although
that there is not (as Paule ſayth) any fellowſhippe
between righteouſnes and vnrighteouſnes,2. Cor. 6. 14.
between light and darkenes, between the
temple of God and Idolls: yet for all this, whē
Ieſus Chriſt will ioyne vs with him ſelfe, and
will chooſe vs and conſecrate vs, to the ende to
dwell in vs, as in his temple:S. Auguſtin he ſanctifieth vs
firſt by his ſpirit & prepareth the houſe where

he will dwell. And becauſe it is ouer ſtreight to
entertaine ſo great a lorde, he enlargeth it: and
whereas it is olde and ruinous, he repayreth it
and buildeth it newe againe: whereas it is ſtincking
and full of filthe, he ſweepeth and clenſeth
it. And to be briefe, where as it is naked and
vnfurniſhed, he furniſheth and decketh it. And
euen as, when he woulde be borne of the Virgin
Marie, and before he woulde be lodged in
her wombe, he ſent his ſeruauntes before him,
that is to ſaye, his ſpirite, to the ende to take it
vp for him and to ſette his marke there: ſo alſo
when he wilbe conceaued in our hartes, and be
borne of vs, he prepareth and regenerateth vs
before, ſanctifying the place where he will
make his abode.
            Now this ſanctification conſiſteth in fower
pointes.The ſanctification of the faithful conſiſteth in 4. points. The firſt is, that we feele and confeſſe
our ſinnes, and that we accuſe, condemne, and
deteſte our ſelues before God as miſerable and
accurſſed in all pointes.1. Hatred & deteſtation of euil. The ſecond is, that we
haue a ſetled zeale and feruent affection to the
ſtudie and exerciſe of good workes, ſearching
out,2. A loue and endeuor to good. with all diligence, all the meanes & wayes
to applie our ſelues to good: and ſhuming on
the contrary,3. Reſiſtāce againſt tē
                  tations. all the thinges that maye turne
vs awaye from it. The third is, that we fight
couragiouſly againſt all the deſiers and concupiſcences

of our fleſh, and that we be ſtrong and
reſolued againſt all the other tentations of the
deuill and the worlde, whether it be that we are
ſweetly enticed or flattered thereunto, or violently
drawen and enforced. And that we be
not colde and white lyuered in theſe combats,
but hardy, vigilant, and attentiue to eſpie and
to take all occaſions,4. Cōtinuall inuocation for Gods fauour. whereby we maye reſiſte,
and vanquiſh all our enemies. The fourth is,
that as we continually ſinne, ſo we alſo as often
diligently praye vnto God, that it will pleaſe
him of his great mercy to pardon our offences.
And as the people of Iſraell, going through
the deſerts, had to ſight oftentimes againſt the
ſerpents, and when they were ſtonge and ſmitten
by them, for to be preſerued from the venim
and from death, they lifted vp their eyes
toward the braſen ſerpente that Moiſes had ſet
vp amiddeſt their tentes, by ſight whereof they
were healed: we in like maner fighting againſt
our concupiſcences, if it come to paſſe at any
time that they giue vs any blowe, to the ende
that this ſtripe may not be deadely vnto vs, we
muſt lifte vp our eyes towardes Ieſus Chriſt
hanging vpon the Croſſe, and beſeech him that
he woulde forgiue vs all our treſpaſſes.VVhat it is, to applie a mās ſelfe to good workes.
            
            Now when it is ſayd that to ſhewe our ſanctification
by the effecte we muſt applie our

ſelues to good workes, it maye not be vnderſtand
that it is enough to exerciſe our ſelues in
one or in two, leauing the reſt behinde: as many
doe, who doe not take nor vſe the worde of
God, but in that only where it is agreable and
maie be referred (they thinke) to their appetite:
but it is needfull to embrace it wholie, and
not to thinke that we can doe our dutie in any
ſorte whatſoeuer, vnleſſe we enforce our ſelues
to keepe all the commaundementes of God,
without omitting the leaſt point or title therof.
Euen like as to be healthie in our bodyes,A ſimilitude. it is
not enough, not to haue the plague or a pleureſie,
but generally to be free from all diſeaſes:
euen ſo to be holy in our ſoules, we muſt be
cleane from all ſpottes and defylinges: and we
muſt take the whole lawe of God, as an vniuerſall
rule of all our thoughts, affections, wordes
and deedes, to the ende to keepe it from point
to point, and not to omitte any thing which is
there commaunded vs.A ſimilitude. And what would it profite
in a cittie, diligently to watch at one gate
and to keep it ſhutte againſt the enemye, if in
meane while all the reſte ſtood wide open to
him? euen ſo likewiſe it is to no purpoſe to keep
our ſelues from one vice, vnleſſe we make accompt,
and conſcience to abondon our ſelues
from all others: like as amongeſt archers (as

ſayeth Ariſtotle) there is but one onely marke
wherto they muſt direct their arrowes to ſhoot
well, and yet many meanes to miſſe and ſhoote
ſhort: ſo is there but one onelie holynes, whervnto
we muſt aſpire, which is a ſetled deſier,
fully reſolued wholly to obaye God. But there
are many kinds of vices and meanes to diſobey
him, and to withſtand his will. We conclude
then, that to be applied to good workes, it muſt
not be done to halues, but perfectly & without
exception to take care and indeuour to keep all
that God commaundeth.
            But here a queſtion muſt be reſolued,Of the perfection of workes. and
that is: that if to doe our dutie, and to ſatiſfie
the will of God, we muſt be perfect in euery
kinde of vertue. And we can not otherwiſe be
Sainctes and Chriſtians, vnleſſe we haue in
perfection all the points of holynes. The Philoſophers
and ſchoolemen,The opiniō of the philoſophers & ſchoolemen. they ſay that this is
neceſſarie, and that a man can not be ſayd to
be vertuous vnleſſe he haue attained to the fulnes
and perfection of all vertues: But the ſcriptures
& the auncient fathers they ſpeake otherwiſe.Sentēces of the ſcriptures and auncient doctours.
For S. Paule ſayeth, that the minde is
accepted according to that it hath: that is to
ſaye,3. Cor. 8. 12. that we are accepted of God when we employe
that portion and meaſure of power and
ſtrength which he hath giuen vnto vs to the

ende to do well, and he is contented with that,
although we lagge ſomewhat behinde, and in a
great ſorte of thinges come verie ſhorte of that
ende and perfection, which is propounded and
ſet out vnto vs in the lawe. And the ſelfeſame
Apoſtle confeſſeth, that he had nothing, but
that ſame onely will:Rom. 7. 18. To will is preſent with
me (ſayeth he:) but I finde no meane to performe
that which is good. Abraham ſacrificed
his ſonne,Gen. 22. 16. no otherwiſe then in effect, & he had
nothing but the ſame will which was imputed
vnto him, as if he had accompliſhed all that
was commaunded him. So as God him ſelfe
witneſſeth of him, ſaying: Foraſmuch as thou
haſt done this thinge, and to obaye me haſt
not ſpared thine onely ſonne, I will bleſſe thee
and multiplie thy ſeede, as the ſtarres of heauen.
Ieſus Chriſt ſhal ſay vnto his elect, which
ſhall be on his right hande in the daye of iudgement:Mat. 25. 34
Come ye bleſſed of my father: inherite ye
the kingdom prepared for you before the foundacion
of the worlde. Foraſmuch as when I
was houngry ye gaue me meate, &c. This is
certaine that among the elect, there was ſome
who being holden in pouertie, or for lacke of
ability, or by ſome other let, did not that, which
Chriſt ſhall ſaye there they did, which thinges
themſelues cōfeſſe not to haue done in the ſame

place alleaged: And yet for all this, it ſhalbe
ſayde vnto all, not becauſe all haue done thoſe
things, but becauſe they had a will to do them.
Moreouer, if in reſpect of vice, the will onely
be enough to conuince and condemne a man,
and that he is accompted an adulterer before
the iudgement of God, who hath onely looked
on his neighbours wife to luſte after her: and
that he is alſo reputed a manqueller, that hateth
his brother: euen ſo likewiſe in reſpect of
good workes we muſt not doubte but the good
wil, and deſire we haue to performe them is accepted
and approued of God though alwayes
the effectes follow not ſo ſoone and ſo excellent
as we deſire.
            As touching the auncient fathers, they ſaye
the ſelfe ſame thinge,S. Ambroſe. S. Ambroſe vppon S.
Luke, affirmeth that ye righteouſnes of a Chriſtian
man conſiſteth more in the will, then in
the worke, and that it ought rather be meaſured
by the affection then by the effect. But in
the booke which he hath written De fuga mundi,
he ſayeth, it is a harde thing for one to keepe
himſelfe wholly from vanitie, and that it is impoſſible
altogether to depart from it, otherwiſe
then in will and deſire alone.S. Auguſtin S. Auguſtine vpon
the firſt Epiſtle of Iohn ſayeth: that the
whole life of a Chriſtian is no other thing but

an holy deſire and good will: And in his 9.
booke of the Trinitie, he hath a ſaying ſeruing
to this purpoſe worthy to be noted: He (ſayeth
he) that knoweth righteouſnes and loueth it
perfectly, that man is righteous, notwithſtanding
that outwardly he hath not yet ſhewed by
his workes, in any ſort, that good affection of
his harte. To conclude, looke where and how
often ſo euer God hath commended vnto vs the
ſtudie and keeping of his lawe, he doth it alwayes
in theſe tearmes: Thou ſhalt take heede
to do thoſe thinges which I commaunde thee:
To giue vs to vnderſtand that the principall
point that he requiers of vs, is, that we haue a
deſire to pleaſe him, and a ready good will to
do that, which he hath commaunded vs according
to that grace and ſtrength that he hath giuen
vs, which is the thing that he moſt eſteemeth
in vs. As we ſee a father a great deale
more to contente him ſelfe with that his ſonne
doth, be it neuer ſo litle, then of all that his ſeruaunt
can do: becauſe he eſteemeth their works
not according to their greatnes, or the paine
and time that they haue ſpente in doing them:
but according to the will and readynes which
they haue that do them.
            We muſt then conclude, that the holynes of
a Chriſtian man, the deutie & diligence which

maketh him to employe thoſe graces that he
hath receaued of God, to profite in his feare,
and continually to better him ſelfe in the exerciſe
& grougth of good workes, are imperfect
in many reſpectes.Ieronim. And as S. Ierom ſayeth:
the perfection of all the righteouſnes that is in
the fleſh is maymed: & to be perfect it is neceſſarie
that we acknowledge, confeſſe, and feele
with an inward feeling, that we are imperfect.
S. Auguſtine confirmeth the ſame,S. Auguſtin ſaying: that
a righteous mans vertue maye be ſayde to be
perfect with this condicion, that his perfection
conſiſteth in hauing the knowledge of his imperfection,
and in making humble confeſſion
thereof before God. And how ſoeuer there be
great lacke in vs in this point, & that our righteouſneſſes
are as vnperfect beginnings in this
worlde: yet neuertheles, we muſt not thinke
that he will reiect and denie them: For he is
not as other creditours rigourous and not to
be intreated, who will not be contented with
him that is bounde before they be payd and ſatiſfied
the vttermoſt farthing: but he is gentle
and gracious, and is pleaſed with vs, when we
denie not our debtes, and will not excuſe our
ſelues in this, that we are not able to paye: but
without all diſſimulation or conſtrainte, we
frankly and freely confeſſe, ſhewing him the

deſire we haue to ſatiſfie him, which yet we can
not doe (by reaſon of our pouertie) and therefore
humblie beſech him that he will take in
good parte that litle we haue, and offring that
vnto him, which he hath giuen vs of his owne
ſpeciall grace.
            When we thus ſubmitte our ſelues wholly
vnto him, and praye him to vſe ſuch fauour and
gentlenes as ſhall pleaſe him towardes vs, we
likewiſe bearing and ſhewing ſuch a ſinceritie
and vprightnes towardes him in the affaires
we haue to do, there is no doubt but he will in
like manner take in good part that litle which
we preſent vnto him: and that both we and our
workes (how imperfect ſo euer they are) ſhall
be accepted and approued of him, in the fauour
of his ſonne, as if they were perfect, and abſolute
in euery point.A ſimilitude ſhewing that god reiecteth not his childrē though they be imperfect. For a father caſteth not
away his children, becauſe they are ſicke, croke
backt, blinde, or maymed of hande or foote, or
otherwiſe counterfait and imperfect: but handleth
them more tenderly, & dealeth more ſoftly
with them, then with the others, reſpecting
their debility and feeblenes. We caſt not away
wine though it haue lyes or groundes, nor
golde how ſoeuer it be couered with durte. A
houſband man refuſeth not lande, though it be
ouergrowen with brambles and bryers: but

will vſe the greater diligence to ſtocke it and
to plowe it, hoping with his diligence, that it
will bring forth fruite plentifully: God likewiſe
will not refuſe and put vs awaye, becauſe
he ſeeth manye imperfections and infirmities
in vs, naye rather that is an occaſion, that he
will take the greater pittie vpon vs:Pſal. 103. 13. as Dauid
ſayeth: Albeit (ſayeth S. Ambroſe) the light
be oftentimes hidden by a cloude,S. Ambroſe. which is caried
before the ſunne, yet therfore it is not quite
put out. And the ſunne ceaſeth not to be the
ſunne, though his beames be ſtopped, and can
not pierce vnto vs: euen ſo likewiſe howſoeuer
our faith oftentimes be diſfigured, and corrupted
by many errours, doubtings and diſtruſtes:
it is not therfore quite choked,Two notable queſtions. and we leaue not
to be faithfull for theſe imperfections.
            But before I ende this matter, it is meete,
that we yet handle two pointes:1. VVhy God accepteth the imperfecte workes of his childrē. one of which,
is the reaſon, why our holynes is acceptable
vnto God, and the ſeruice which we doe vnto
him, ſeeing both the one and the other are imperfect:
and ſeeing in his lawe he reiecteth all
the ſacrifices,2. VVhy the faithful are not perfectly regenerated in this worlde. which had in them any imperfection
at all. The other point is concerning the
cauſe wherefore he regenerating & ſanctifying
vs by his holy ſpirite, hath yet lefte ſuch an
heape of vices and imperfections in vs, and ſo

much corruption in our nature and life, which
notwithſtanding all the diligence and labour
we can, to correct and mortifie it, yet we can
not come any thing 
                  •
               eare, to be wholy deliuered
and exempte from it.An anſwer to the firſt queſtion. Touching the firſt of
theſe two pointes, there are two reaſons, for
which our vertues and workes are approued
& accepted before God, how imperfect ſo euer
they be. One is, becauſe Ieſus Chriſt hath couered
and taken them vnder the cloke of his
righteouſnes, aſſone as we are vnited and knit
vnto him: ſo as no ſuch ſpotte appeareth in vs
that can offend God. And for that he is our Mediatour
towardes God his father, we ſee God
no otherwiſe then in him and by him: As the
father in like manner will not ſee nor beholde
vs other where then in Ieſus Chriſt, & through
his humanitie as members and partes of his
body. And this is the cauſe that maketh vs to
appeare altogether other then we are:Similitudes For euen
like as loking aſide through any glaſſe, be
it blew or yelow or of any other coulor, all the
thinges we ſee ſeeme to vs to be of the coulor of
the glaſſe, through which we did beholde them:
So God alſo beholding and looking vpon vs in
his ſonne, we ſeeme to him to be of his coulor,
and we haue the appearaunce and brightnes of
his innocency and righteouſnes: which cauſeth

that in ſeeing and touching vs, he thinketh he
ſeeth & toucheth his owne naturall Sonne. As
Iſaack ſpeaking to Iacob his yonger ſonne,
and feeling his necke and handes, thought it
had bene Eſau his eldeſt ſonne. The other reaſon
is, that the grace of Gods ſpirite, being
mingled with our workes, our workes deriue &
fetch from thence their greateſt dignitie, bewtie,A ſimilitude.
eſtimatiō & free ſtrēgth, as when we mingle
water with wine in a cuppe or in a glaſſe, that
which is taken in there is called wine, though
water be mingled with it: and albeit there be
more water then wine (as it maye be) yet that
which is the more principal and moſt precious
part of all, beareth the name: euen ſo the works
which we do by the grace of God, be it that
they haue a great many ſpottes and imperfections,
as they proceed from vs, yet for all that,
they holde alwayes the name and reputation of
him, who is their principall aucthour.
            Concerning the ſecond point,An anſwer to the ſecōd queſtion. which is to
know the reaſon why God doth not wholy regenerat
and ſanctifie vs, from the firſt hower
that he calleth vs to his knowledge: ſeeing that
all his workes are perfect, and that the lawe
requireth of vs, that we ſhoulde be holy as he
is holy: that is to ſay, that we ſhoulde be wholy
and perfectly holy. We muſt marke, in verie

deede, that our regeneration and ſanctification
are workes of God which are perfect and abſolute,
as all that he doth is: But this perfection
is ſucceſſiue or by degrees. As we ſee that it is
in many of his creatures.Similitudes Seede caſt into the
earth doth not by and by ſprout, encreaſe and
come to his perfection: but by ſpace and length
of time, it attaineth to his perfection and ripenes,
in that ſeaſon that God hath appointed.
A tree likewiſe, is not perfect aſſoone as it is
planted. An infante is not ſtreight wayes vpon
the ſuddaine aſſoone as it is conceaued in the
wombe of his mother, become a man but with
time: euen ſo we are not all at the firſt daſh regenerated.
But this regeneration riſeth by degrees,
and being once begonne, then it proceedeth
faire and ſoftly by litle and litle encreaſing
euery daye, till we come to euerlaſting life in
the heauens. And in that God delighteth ſo to
regenerate and entierly to reforme vs, to make
vs altogether newe creatures,Three reaſons why God differreth to regenerate vs perfectly. he doth it for
three great and weighty reaſons. Firſt, becauſe
he would humble vs, foraſmuch as being
naturally enclyned to preſume to much of our
ſelues, we haue great neede that this pride be
keept vnder: and that this miſcheuous inclination
which we haue to ſuch manner of arrogancie
ſhoulde be digged vp and rooted out of our

hartes: which thinge God doeth after that he
hath adopted vs leauing vs ſubiect to many
miſeries and diſeaſes, aſwell of the body as of
the minde, to the ende that by this meane we
ſhoulde be barred from lifting vp our ſelues in
any opinion and admiration of our ſelues, and
that we ſhoulde not ſpeake more biggely and
proudly then we ought: and herein he maketh
of a poiſon, a remedy and preſeruatiue againſt
the poiſon that is in our nature: as we ſee by
experience to be done in the confectiō of triacle.
For euen like as of the fleſh of the viper men
make a ſoueraigne and excellēt remedy againſt
the bytinge of them:Similitudes full of great conſolation. euen ſo God maketh of
thoſe infirmities that remaine in vs after our
regeneration, and which of them ſelues are
deadly and damnable ſinnes before him, an
healthfull remedie to correct and repreſſe the
other vices & diſeaſes, which are a great deale
more pernicious: as is arrogancie and vaine
confidence of our ſelues, contempt and forgetfulnes
of God, and ſuch other like peſtilences
which would kill vs ſuddainly, if they were not
ſpedely preuēted. Which thing our good God
doth, who knowing the daunger wherein we
are, as a good father is more carefull for our
good & ſaluation then we our ſelues. By meane
whereof, he preuenteth and cutteth of the waye

that leadeth to the daunger of death (wherein
otherwiſe we are) by theſe afflictiōs & diſeaſes,
which alwayes putteth vs in minde and ſetteth
this medicine before our eyes, driuing vs to
ſearch after him & to requier aide at his hands.
He dealeth with vs, as a iudge in ſome criminall
proceſſe, who will giue an enlargement,
but yet with condition, or as they ſaye with a
quouſque, that is, till the time that he calleth
it backe, and putteth him in his former eſtate
wherein he was before, if it happen that he fall
into any new fault againe. The iudges do this
to keepe them alwayes in feare and diligence,
to do their dewtie, and to ſtoppe them from taking
to great liberty. God likewiſe doth ſo
with vs, when he will pardon our ſinnes and ſet
vs at libertie, leauing vs notwithſtanding a
great ſorte of infirmities and imperfections,
which maye alwayes ſerue him, to charge vs,
and for matter to call vs to a reckoning, when
we would winde out of that bondage, and boaſt
our ſelues abroade of the goodlynes of our reaſon
and loialtie.
            The ſecond reaſon is,The 2. reaſon. becauſe he woulde
correct our ingratitude, which is a vice as naturall
to vs as preſumption. For there is nothing,
into which we fall ſo eaſely, as into the
forgetfulnes of God and of his benefits, which

we haue receaued of him, eſpecially when we
are at eaſe and in proſperitie, which maketh vs
wanton, and bereueth vs oftentimes of our
ſenſes and vnderſtanding, which is an other of
the moſt pernicious vices that can be and prouoketh
the heauy wrath and iudgement of God
againſt vs. And this is the cauſe, why he leaueth
vs alwayes in ſuch neceſſity to the ende he
maye meete with ſuch an inconuenience and
giue vs occaſion to ſeeke after him.A ſimilitude ſhewing the wiſdom of God in gouerning thoſe that he his. Againe he
doth vs not all the good he will doe, at one
clappe, fearing leaſt that we woulde vtterly abandon
and looſe it. And herein he doth as a father
of an houſholde well aduiſed, who at the
firſt daſh doth not much aduaunce his ſeruaūts:
but doth for them by litle and litle, the better
alwayes to put them in comfort and hope to receaue
aduantage at laſte, to the ende that by
this meane, they maye be holden in ſeruice, and
not departe from his houſe: euen ſo, God during
the time that we are in this world, giueth
vs more hope, then he doth benefites (and yet
it is plaine that the graces that he beſtoweth
vpon vs are infinite) for feare leaſte that if he
ſhoulde make vs great and rich attonce, and
ſhoulde giue vs out of hande all the good that
he keepeth in ſtore for vs, it woulde make vs to
abandon his ſeruice, as we ſee ſometimes it

happened to the Iewes by this occaſion.Iere. 22. 21. As
God reprocheth them by his prophet Ieremy:
I ſpake vnto thee when thou waſt in proſperitie,
but thou ſaydeſt, I will not heare: this
hath bene thy cuſtome and manner from thy
youth, &c.
            The third reaſon,The third reaſon. why God doth not attonce
defende & fortifie vs and that throughout, when
he hath regenerated vs, is, to the end that thoſe
infirmities which yet remaine in vs after our
regeneration, ſhoulde ſerue to exerciſe vs, and
to keepe vs from ſlothfulnes and ſleeping.S. Ambroſe. For
hauing (as S. Ambroſe ſayeth) a robe or garment
which is all to torne and vnſewed, and
which for this cauſe had neede to be amended,
we muſt occupie our ſelues in repairing and amending
the ſame: and muſt auoyde by this
meane ſlothfulneſſe and idleneſſe. Moreouer,
being ſo exerciſed we grow more ſtronge and
able to fight againſt the fleſh and againſt all other
enemies. Which thing was aunſwered
to S. Paule (when he deſired to be deliuered
from that pricke of the fleſh that ſo continually
troubled him) that he ought to contente him
ſelfe with the grace of God which is ſufficient:2. Cor. 12. 9.
the ſtrength whereof ſheweth it ſelfe more in
our infirmities then in our proſperities. Marke
then that our diſeaſes and afflictions ſtand vs

in ſted and greatly profite vs, when we ſuffer
and beare them patiently, and we ought to contente
our ſelues with the onely will of God that
ſendeth them, and likewiſe we muſt waye that
the ende of theſe imperfections, which he hath
yet left in vs after that he hath regenerate vs,
is, to keep vs in obediēce, and to bridle vs, that
we do not ſtumble and goe aſtraye. For euen
like as to be wiſe, it behoueth vs to be fooles
(as S. Paule ſayeth) and to the ende we maye
ſee more cleerly (as Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth) to
be blinde:1. Cor. 3. 18. euen ſo that we maye be perfect we
muſt be imperfect,Iohn 9. 41. and that we haue fowle and
dirtie feete, it is to keepe vs occupied in waſhing
them.
            Hauing now handled theſe two partes of
Chriſts righteouſnes,The 4. point where the righteouſnes of Chriſt is to be founde. it followeth neceſſaryly
to be knowen, what the matter is wherevpō this
righteouſnes worketh, where it reſteth and is
to be founde either in him or in vs. Where as
the Sorbonicall ſophiſters ſay that we can not
be otherwiſe righteous, then by the righteouſnes
that is in vs: we ſaye cleane contrary, to
witte, that ye righteouſnes which we muſt haue
to eſcape the iudgement of God, is not in vs,
but in Ieſus Chriſt.2. Cor. 5. 21. As S. Paule ſayeth, that
he was made ſinne for vs, that we ſhoulde be
made the righteouſnes of God in him. If we

will therefore rightely vnderſtande, how his
righteouſneſſe is attributed vnto vs, we muſt
know in what reſpect our ſinne is attributed
vnto him: foraſmuch as there is the like reaſon
of the one, as there is of the other. But it is verie
certaine that our ſinnes were neuer effectually
in Ieſus Chriſt: who being conceaued
by the holy Ghoſt was alwaies holy, innocent,
cleane, and without ſpotte: but our ſinnes were
onely imputed vnto him,Heb. 7. 26. to the ende that he
ſhoulde beare the puniſhment of them for vs.
In like manner, his righteouſnes is not eſſentially
in vs. For to what degree ſoeuer, of holynes
or vertue we be come vnto in this life, there
is notwithſtāding alwayes in vs a great many
of diſordred and vnruly affections: in our vnderſtanding
a great many of euill thoughtes:
in our mouthes a great many of euill wordes:
in our workes a great many of imperfections
and indirect dealinges: in all our life there is
ſo much corruption and filthynes, that of it ſelfe
it is abhominable and ſtincking in the ſight of
God. Wherevpon a man maye well know, that
ſuch a righteouſneſſe as that is that was in
the ſonne of God, neither dwelleth nor remayneth
eſſentially in vs, but onely by imputation:
to the ende that thereby we maye receaue the

rewarde.Coloſſ. 3. 3. And altogether like (as S. Paule
ſayeth) that our life is hidde in him, and muſt
not be reueiled, till the time that he ſhall appeare
in glorie: euen ſo is our righteouſnes,
the which appeareth not clearely enough, by
reaſon of our imperfections, no more then our
life doth by reaſon of our mortalitie and corruption,
till the daye that God ſhall appeare
in iudgement in the perſon of his ſonne.
            This is the reaſon why this righteouſneſſe
is compared to a robe,The righteouſnes of the faithful compared to a robe. according to that which
is ſayde in the Pſalme: that the prieſtes ſhould
be clothed with righteouſneſſe. For as a robe
is not borne with vs,Pſal. 132. and we haue it not from
our mothers wombe as we haue our ſkinne:
& it is not faſtened to our bodies as the ſkinnes
of beaſtes: euen ſo likewiſe neither is the righteouſnes
wherwith we are couered, as with a
longe robe, to the ende that our imperfections
maye not be perceaued. And this is a great benefite
and mercie that God hath done and beſtowed
vpō vs, in that he hath not aſſigned it to
our ſelues nor put it ouer in our owne handes,
but hath prouided a ſtewarde, to whom he hath
deliuered it in truſt: foraſmuch as we are ſo
ill aduiced, and ſo ill houſbandes, that had we
once the ordring of it our ſelues, the deuill by
his ſleightes and conuayaunces woulde ſone

beguile vs. For if our fore fathers who were
ſo wiſe & indued with ſo many excellent graces,
coulde not keep ſafely that originall righteouſnes
for ſo ſmall a time, (wherewith they were
adorned from the beginning) and were notable
to preſerue them ſelues for ſo litle a while from
the crafty fetches and ſnares of Satan, but that
they loſt it: What maye happen vnto vs, which
are not ſo wiſe as they were, if we ſhoulde haue
the keyes and charge of ſo great and precious
a treaſure, as is the righteouſnes of the Sonne
of God?
            It is a great commoditie and verie good for
a tree,Diuerſe ſimilitudes ſhewing that it is not neceſſary that Chriſt his righteouſnes ſhoulde be eſſentially in vs. that the life and ſappe therof lyeth hidde
in the roote: For this is the meane to defende,
and preſerue it from the ſtormes and froſtes of
the winter: euen ſo is it for our profit, that our
life and our righteouſnes are in Ieſus Chriſt,
who is our foundacion and roote. For being
locked vp in ſo ſure a place, it ſhal be preſerued
and kepte for vs againſt all thoſe that woulde
robbe vs or ſnatche it awaye from vs by treaſon
or violence. We ſee that kinges and great
lordes, they neither medle nor deale with any
money, but they leaue their reuenues in the
handes of their treaſorers and receauours to
diſpoſe of them, contenting them ſelues when
they haue any neede, or other affaires, to be

puruayed and prouided for, of that which is
neceſſary: what nede thē is there that we ſhould
haue our goods in our owne hands, ſeeing that
we ſhall lacke nothing, that is needfull for vs?
We haue the grace of God, we are his children
and conſequently his heires: we are enlightened,
guided, ſtrengthened, and comforted
by his ſpirite: we are citizens of his kingdome,
and ſeruauntes of his houſeholde: to be
ſhorte, we haue all the profites, rentes and commodities
that grow of his righteouſnes: what
would we deſire more? Is it not enough that
we gather the fructe of a tree, and that it alwayes
remayne in his place, and that we carry
it not awaye with vs? In like manner alſo
we muſt contente our ſelues to be partakers of
the fructes of Chriſt his righteouſnes, albeit
it be not eſſentially in vs: but onely by imputation,
and in aſmuch as through his onely mercie
it is beſtowed vpon vs.
            But here a doubt maye be moued,Howe we maye be righteous by the righteouſnes of an other. by the righteouſneſſe of an
other, ſeeing that this is a perſonall qualitie,
which can not be communicated to an other, no
more then health, wiſedome, ſtrength and bewtie.
Now can I be otherwiſe in health, then by
the health that reſteth effectually in my bodie:
how can it be then, that I ſhoulde be righteous,

by the righteouſnes, that dwelleth in an other?
We muſt aunſwere that this is done by imputation:
And as a man maye be acquited of his
creditour,The ſimilitude of the debtour, acquited by an other. by the paymente which ſome ſhall
make of his owne money in the name of the
debtour: euen ſo we maye be righteous, by the
righteouſnes of an other, when he is accepted
in our name, as that is of Ieſus Chriſt, when
we are vnited and knit vnto him. All the members
of the body without the eye,The ſimilitude of the members of the bodie enlightened by the eye. are altogether
blinde of them ſelues, and yet notwithſtanding,
they ceaſe not euery daye to do their duties
rightely. The feete go without ſtombling,
the handes without offending: in ſuch ſort that
ech one of them is led in his worke by the light
of the eye which illuminateth & directeth them:
and as the ſight of the eye is communicated to
all the members of the body, who ſee by it and
in it: euen ſo we in like manner are profited by
the righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt, which is imparted
with vs, as the ſight of the eye with the
members, to the ende that we maye vſe it in
the iudgemente of God, there to be acquited
and iuſtified, and pronounced altogether innocente
and diſcharged from all our faultes and
offences.
            Now let vs come to the other point,The firſt point ſhewing by what meane, we may appropriat to our ſelues the righteouſnes of Chriſt Ieſus. which
is, to know by what meane we maye obtaine

this righteouſneſſe, and appropriate it to our
ſelues. The onely meane is Faith as we maye
know by many places of the ſcripture. For S.
Paule ſayeth that the righteouſnes of God is
by faith. Alſo: that righteouſnes is reueiled in
the Goſpell, and communicated by faith. And
in an other place:Rom. 1. 17. being iuſtified by faith, we
haue peace in our conſcience.Rom. 5. 1. And the Prophet
alſo ſayeth:Abac. 2. 4. That the righteous man ſhall liue
by faith. And Ieſus Chriſt, in the worde wherupon
we altogether reſte,Iohn 3. 5. ſayeth: that who ſoeuer
beleueth in him, ſhall not come into iudgement.
And to them alwayes that were ſicke,
and were healed, he ſayth commonly, that their
faith had ſaued them, to the end to teach vs that
faith is the meane,Faith is the only meane to faſten vs to Chriſt, & obteine his righteouſneſſe. which is neceſſarie to obteine
not only righteouſnes, but alſo the adoption
of children, the vndeſerued fauour, and
bleſſing of our God, and generally all the benefites
of Ieſus Chriſt. And altogether like as
we apprehende coullors by the ſight, & ſoundes
by the eare: euen ſo we apprehende by Faith
Gods promiſes, in which he offreth life vnto vs
and all other his graces.S. Ambroſe. As Ambroſe ſayeth:
Faith is ſuch a vertue and of ſo great ſtrength,
that it obtaineth all that God hath promiſed vs
we beleuing in him.
            But when we ſpeake ſo of Faith, we vnderſtande

not by this name a bare opinion which
we maye haue of the truth or a ſimple perſwaſion
and conſent,VVhat that iuſtifying Faith is. wherby we allow all that is
contayned in the ſcripture: but we vnderſtand
by this Faith a liuely apprehenſion of the truth
of Gods promiſes, and an aſſurance of his
grace and fauour in Ieſus Chriſt. Alſo, a full
confidence that is ſufficient to beare all the tentations,
that can be laid vpon vs, and to beate
downe death, the deuill, and all the gates of
hell, and further to ſet it ſelfe againſt wrath,
in the iudgement and malediction of God, the
which it turneth from vs as a tempeſt & ſtorme
when we are threatened. Now when we earſt
ſayed that the lawe contayneth the promiſes of
God, and in them his vnderſerued fauour and
grace, as the eye doth the colour, and the eare
the ſounde, and the other ſenſes their proper
obiect: we vnderſtande this of the aſſuraunce
and certaintie onely, and not of any carnall feeling.
For the thinges that we beleeue, they
can not be felt with the hande, nor ſeene with
the eye, nor by any reaſon, or other ſenſe of man
be comprehended, and yet neuertheles they are
more certaine, then the thinges that we feele,
becauſe our ſenſes maye be deceaued. As the
eye which wil iudge a peece of wood in the water
to be crooked, although it be verie ſtreight:

But Faith when it is once grounded, & reſteth
it ſelfe vpon the worde of God, it is aſſured of
all that is therein taught, and ſpecially it embraceth
Ieſus Chriſt and draweth from him
euerlaſting life.
            And albeit that oftentimes, conſidering the
eſtate & diſpoſition of thoſe matters, it ſeemeth
to vs that all thinges goe quite backwardes,
contrarie to that which God hath promiſed vnto
vs: yet notwithſtanding, in this caſe we muſt
beleue,Rom. 4. 18. (as S. Paule ſayeth) in hope againſt
hope, and in no wiſe doubt, but his promiſes
ſhalbe accompliſhed. For ſooner ſhall heauen,
earth, and all the worlde periſh, then the leaſt
iote of that which God hath promiſed vs, and
which is proceeded from his mouth, faill to be
fully & wholy accompliſhed in his time. When
our reaſon then, or ſenſe will doubte of that
which God hath ſayd, or vnſaye and murmure
againſt it, or any manner of waye, diſtruſt his
promiſes, we muſt reſiſte and ſette our ſelues
manfully with all our might againſt it, as Abraham
did: and ſtaye our ſelues (as he did)
wholly vpon this, that God alwaye hath both
will, and might to performe what ſoeuer he
hath promiſed.
            And when we come to conſider the corruption
and vice of our nature, the rebellion of our

will againſt the will of God, our infirmities &
imperfections, our diſtruſt alſo that we haue oftentimes
of his loue, and other doubts that we
make of his prouidēce,Howe we muſt behaue our ſelues in tē
                  tations. we muſt not then doubt,
but that our faith is mightely aſſailed, and that
we haue to fight wonderfull ſharpe and daungerous
combats: but that we maye auoyde
them, it is needeful (as in all other tentations)
to keepe our ſelues alwayes to the worde of
God, and to make it a buckler againſt all that
the deuill, our reaſon, and ſenſe can alleage againſt
his will, and thoſe promiſes that he hath
made vnto vs.S. Auguſtin We muſt (as S. Auguſtine
ſayeth) ſhutte our eyes from all that we maye
ſee, and from all conſiderations that may turne
vs awaye or feare vs: and open our eares, only
to heare and meditate vppon that which God
ſayeth. And if on the one ſide conſidering the
things that are preſent, we perceaue our ſelues
a falling, & readie to be caſt headlong into any
diſtruſt, we muſt on ye other ſide for to comfort
our ſelues, behold Ieſus Chriſt, of whome we
are members & ſheep of his paſture, & we muſt
oppoſe his righteouſnes againſt our vices, his
life againſt our death: his obediēce againſt our
rebellion, his fauours & rich grace againſt our
wretchedneſſe and pouertie, his ſatiſfaction againſt
our debtes, his mercie againſt our miſerie,

his ſtrength againſt our weaknes and tē
               tations,
his merite and interceſſion, againſt all
the accuſations & informations which the law,
our conſcience and the deuil himſelfe can bring
forth and alleage againſt vs: alwayes thinking,
that where ſinne aboundeth, there grace
yet more aboundeth, & hath farre more ſtrength
to ſaue vs then ſinne hath to condemne vs.A ſimilitude. We
muſt do, as they that go vp into an high tower,
who looking downewardes & ſeeing the depth
are afraide to fall, and that they maye be the
more ſure they laye holde of the railes: euen ſo
muſt we alwayes leane vpon the righteouſneſſe
and death of Ieſus Chriſt, and ſtrengthen our
ſelues in that, to the ende we maye be preſerued
from falling downe.
            Now hauing ſpoken of the meane whereby
a man maye laye holde of the righteouſnes of
Chriſt,Three queſtions depē
                  ding of the former point. and of the qualitie of Faith that apprehendeth
the ſame: it remayneth yet, that we
ſpeake of three thinges. The firſt, whether
that for the laying holde vpon that righteouſneſſe,
it be neceſſarie that Faith be perfecte.
Then afterwardes, whether it muſt be, that it
muſt be cleane from all vices: and laſtely whether,
it hauing bene once receaued in our harts,
we can looſe it afterwardes, and be depriued
of it.
            
               
As concerning the firſt point,1. To witte, whether faith muſt be perfect for the apprehending of Ieſus Chriſt. to witte, of
the perfection of the lawe, it is impoſſible that
euer we can attaine it: in as much as we are
compaſſed about with a mortall body, which
is ſo groſſe and ſo ſlauiſh, and which fighteth
without ceaſing againſt the ſpirite, when it
woulde lifte vp it ſelfe into any heauenly meditation:
moreouer, hauing ſuch an heape of darkneſſes
and falſe opinions in our ſenſes and vnderſtāding,
it is impoſſible that euer we ſhould
haue any perfect knowledge of God, what diligence,
paine or trauell ſo euer we tooke to get
it: hauing in like maner a harte entangled with
ſo great paſſions and luſtes which driues vs hether
and thether, to all vaine affections, in ſuch
ſort, that by reaſon hereof, we can not loue God
perfectly and ſo conſequently haue any perfect
confidence in him: becauſe confidence followeth
loue, euen like as loue followeth knowledge.
            The knowledge therefore and confidence
that we haue of God being imperfect, which
are the two parts of Faith, it followeth hereof,
that it can not be perfect, & that we haue neede
continually to begge at Gods hande, that he
will augment it in vs, and daye by daye ſtirre
vs vp in the meditation of his promiſes, which
is the true meane to nourriſh, encreaſe, and
augmente Faith. And wherto ſerue exhortations,

prayers, Sacraments, and ſuch other
exerciſes, if our Faith coulde be perfect here?
ſeeing that all theſe are not ordeined & foſtred
in the Church, to any other purpoſe, then to
fortifie, and encreaſe the knowledge, zeale and
affection of the faithfull.
            Now let vs come to the ſecond point.2. Point whether Faith muſt be cleane from all vices. Seeing
that our Faith is neuer perfect in this worlde,
but is alwayes mingled with an infinit nomber
of infirmities which alwayes remayne in
vs, in ſuch ſort as there is none can ſaye his
harte is cleane from all ſinne: and that we haue
neede in reſpect of this, to begge of God in our
prayers, that he will pardon vs our offences,
and making the confeſſion of our Faith, to ſay:
I beleue the remiſſion of ſinnes: Notwithſtanding
all this that, as yet our faith is very weake
& defiled with many imperfectiōs, neuertheles
it ceaſeth not, to laye holde vpon that, that it
ſhall pleaſe God to beſtow vpon it. No otherwiſe
(for examples ſake) thē as a litle child who
with his litle handes,A ſimilitude of the force and ſtrength of Faith. or a poore man with his
rugged, and ſcabbie handes refuſe not to take
breade and other almes, that a man will beſtow
vpon them, aſwell as if they were greater and
whole. Altogether like as diſeaſes that are vniuerſall
through out the whole body,An other ſimilitude. (as is a
burning agewe) though they weaken all the

partes of the ſame and ſpecially the ſtomacke,
more then all the reſte: yet neuertheleſſe hinder
not but that it maye take a medecin, yea rather
the diſeaſe is an occaſiō vnto it to prouoke
it to take it: euen ſo alſo it ought to be ſo farre
of, that the weakenes of our Faith ſhould keep
vs from embracing righteouſnes and the other
benefites of Ieſus Chriſt, that it muſt prepare
and diſpoſe vs to the contrarie:Luc. 5. 35. According to
which Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth to the Phariſees
who thought them ſelues to be righteous, that
he came not for their ſakes, but to call ſinners:
adding the reaſon, to witte that they that are
ſicke haue neede of the phiſition. And euen like
as our diſeaſes and infirmities let not but that
our faith, be it neuer ſo weake, is yet capable
of the graces of God, & of all the righteouſnes
of his ſonne: euen ſo the littlenes of faith maketh
it not leſſe capable to be able to apprehend
and embrace that righteouſneſſe:An other ſimilitude. And like as
altogether the Aple of the eye which is ſo litle,
and yet, for all that can apprehend the light of
the Sunne which is ſpred ouer all the horizon,
yea and the Sunne it ſelfe which is farre greater,
and more ample then all the earth: euen ſo
the eye of faith, albeit that it be verie ſmall, yet
it ceaſeth not to lay holde of the Sunne of righteouſnes,
together with his light, iuſtice and

other giftes, which are as great and as many
in number.
            But now let vs handell the laſte of the forſayde
three pointes,3. VVhether the elect can loſe their faith. that is to ſaye: whether
Faith being once receaued into our hartes, we
can vtterly afterwardes looſe, and forgoe it.
For if hauing once receaued it, we can not be
aſſured to keepe it conſtauntly to the ende, we
ſhall alwayes be in doubt of our ſaluation. But
if we be once perſwaded and reſolued in this
point, that hauing bene inſpired by the ſpirite
of God in our hartes, it will ſtill there abide,
and dwell there for euer: this perſwaſion will
alwayes keep our ſpirites quiet and contented,
and they ſhall alwayes be ioyefull, yea in the
middeſt of all tentations that maye aſſaile vs.
Wherfore it is very neceſſary for vs to marke,
and diligently to imprinte in our mindes, all
the places of the holy ſcripture, in which God
hath aſſured vs of the continuaunce and perſeueraunce
of his grace and fauour towardes vs,
and of keping vs in the faith, and giuing of all
the other giftes that he wil communicate vpon
vs. As in the firſt place, this teſtimonie of S.
Paule woulde be marked,Rom. 8. which ſayeth: that
Faith is ioyned with election, and ſo by conſequence
founded vpon the counſaile and will of
God which is euerlaſting & immutable: Then

afterwards that place of the Romaines where
it is ſayd:Rom. 11. 29 That the giftes and calling of God
are without repentaunce, that is to ſaye, irreuocable,
when he hath once giuē them vnto vs.
Alſo,Mat. 13. 12 that which is ſayd in S. Matthew: That
to him that hath, it ſhall be giuen. If then, we
haue by Gods grace, Faith and the giftes of
the ſpirite, let vs be certaine that they ſhall remaine
ſtill with vs, and looke by the ſelfe ſame
grace that they were freely beſtowed vpon vs,
by the ſame they ſhall be keept and encreaſed.
Alſo there is an other place of the Apoſtle,Rom. 8. 30. that
all they which were predeſtinate to life ſhall
afterwarde be called, iuſtified, and in the ende
glorified: If theſe fower pointes, wherein is
contained the whole ſumme of the ſaluation of
God his children be ſo chained in order one to
the other, by an immutable decree of God: we
muſt cōclude, that as our election is ſure, ſtable
& permanent, ſo alſo are the other effectes that
do neceſſaryly follow it: Alſo that which S.
Iohn ſayeth in his firſt Epiſtle:1. Iohn 5. 18. that he that is
borne of God ſinneth not, and the wicked toucheth
him not, Alſo: that goodly proteſtation
that the Apoſtle maketh for him ſelfe and all
the faithfull,Rom. 8. 38. with ſo great aſſuraunce. I am
(ſayth he) certaine, that there is neither death,
nor life, nor Angells, nor principalities, nor

powers, nor thinges preſent, nor thinges to
come, nor thinges highe, nor thinges lowe, nor
any creature, that ſhalbe able to ſeparate vs frō
the loue of God which is in Ieſus Chriſt our
Lorde.Iohn 14. 23. Alſo, that which Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth
to his diſciples: If any man loue me he will
keepe my worde, and my father will loue him,
and we wil come vnto him and dwell with him.
Whereupon we maye note that he ſayeth not,
We will viſite him, and ſo departe againe, as
many times we ſee freindes doe viſite one an other:
but he ſayeth, we will abide with him:
which is as much to ſaye: We will holde our
ſelues to him, and dwell continually with him,
without euer departing from him.
            By all theſe places, and many more which
might be rehearſed out of the ſcripture, it appeareth
plainly that faith being once giuen vs
of God, it ſhall neuer be quite taken away from
vs, and ſo by conſequence neither the grace of
God, which alwayes followeth it. And although
it ſeeme oftentimes for deade, as it was
in Dauid, when he committed ſo great and
heinous ſinnes one after an other: yet for all
that, there remained alwayes in his harte, a
certaine remnaunte of it, which for a time was
hidde as fire is vnder the Aſhes. And like as
when it is raked vp it ſheweth not his brightenes

nor heate outwardly, vntill it be vnraked
and kindled in a flambe: euen ſo, it oftentimes
falleth out with our faith, which is hidden and
couered with many vices, which ye moſt holyeſt
Sainctes of God them ſelues doe many times
committe (euen as to fall into diſeaſes) the
which continueth, till it pleaſe God to ſtirre vs
vp a new by his ſpirite, and to light vs againe,
euen like as whē a candle is put out. We muſt
iudge then of our faith, as of a tree, which in
wiuter ſeemeth to be deade, becauſe it hath no
fruit nor leaues nor any outward appearaunce
of life: and yet notwithſtanding it ceaſeth not to
liue, & ſheweth that life, that was hidden within,
outwardly, in the ſpringe time, bringing
forth flowers and leaues, and taking againe
his goodly hewe: in ſo much as the ſappe and
ſtrength which keepte it ſelfe encloſed in the
roote during the time of the colde, ſpreadeth it
ſelfe throughout all the brāches, to make them
greene and freſh againe: Euen ſo likewiſe is it
of Faith, which ſeemeth oftentimes to be quite
dead in vs, when it bringeth not forth any ſenſe
or feeling neither of God, nor of his promiſes,
nor of his commaundements or threateninges:
And ſheweth not it ſelfe by any other wonted
effect. Notwithſtanding this, it is aliue in vs,
and the life of it hath his being in Ieſus Chriſt

in whome it is ingraffed & planted. And as the
ſtrength of this roote can neither be froſen nor
deade: euen ſo neither can the Faith of a Chriſtian
which is ſo depelie grounded within be
altogether extinguiſhed and deade being the
roote of all immortalitie, from whence it fetcheth
his life.
            But before we ende this matter,Howe the righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt maye be diſtributed to all the faithfull. it is needefull
to conſider one wonderfull thing, to witte,
how the righteouſnes of Chriſt, which is one
onely, maye be alſo entierly diſtributed to euery
one of his members, without being deuided
and ſundred in any reſpect.
            To aunſwere this point, a man maye ſaye
of it, as certaine Philoſophers haue ſayd of the
ſoule of man,A ſimilitude of the ſoule. which is wholly throughout the
whole body, and in euery parte a like: euen ſo
is the righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt, wholly in
the bodye of the whole church, as the ſoule, to
giue it life and to mainteine it. Then is it altogether,
in euery of the particular members, to
make them ſtrong, whole, ſtowt and of courage
to doe all their offices and duties. The which
thing a man maye vnderſtande by two ſimilitudes,
one is of the voice, which being hearde
of a great many perſons, is in ſuch ſort receaued
of euery one of them,Similitudes of the voice & the face. prouided that they be
attentiue, that the ſame is wholly vnderſtoode,

without beinge deuided or ſundred in any reſpecte.
The other ſimilitude is of the face
which maye be receaued in many glaſſes, and
wholly repreſented to all, without any diuiſion
or ſeparation of the ſame.
            Let vs conclude then that a faithfull man
through faith embraceth the whole righteouſnes
and all the fructes of the ſacrifice of Ieſus
Chriſt: and that, for this cauſe he can not be
condemned or accurſed before Gods iudgemēt,
no more then his head with whome he is in ſeparably
knitte & vnited. When any man is faln
into the water where he is vp euen to the chin,
if he cannot be hurt, as lōg as his head is aboue
the water: although that all the members and
partes of his body be drowned and foundred: ſo
alſo we cannot be ſtiffled or hurt in the deapths
of death,A ſimilitude. ſeeing that Ieſus Chriſt our heade, is
alwayes lift vp aboue thoſe deapths, & for that
vppon the life and health of him dependes the
health and ſaluation of all his members.
            Now it is time to ſhew by what ſignes and
markes we maye know,Howe we maye know whether Ieſus Chriſt dwell in vs or no? whether we poſſeſſe
Ieſus Chriſt, and whether he dwell in vs and
we in him. S. Paule ſayeth to the Romains:
that being iuſtified by Faith, we haue peace in
our ſoules:Rom. 5. 1. which is an vndoubted token that
Chriſt dwelleth in our hartes, that is to ſaye:

when we feele there tranquilitie and reſte, and
that we beginne to be peaceable in our conſciences:
torments, bytinges, anguiſhes, terrors
and diſtruſtes there ceaſing: and when in
the ſted of all theſe, there cōmeth in place, ioye,
pleaſure, conſolation, and as it were a common
feaſt where all reioyce. For then Ieſus Chriſt
liueth in vs and we in him: to witte, when all
our thoughtes, our meditations, our workes
and our delightes, doe carrie vs to him, as to
the marke: And when we ſette him out to our
ſelues, to be our onely glorie, honour, riches,
treaſure, and the grounde of all our hopes: and
that we holde him as our cheife and ſoueraigne
good, that is to ſaye: when we neither knowe,
deſire, or ſeeke after any other but him: and that
we are enlightened, by his light and ſpirite, are
made wiſe through his wiſedome, and ſtronge
through his ſtrength, and riche through his
bleſſinges, and righteous through his innocencie,
and bleſſed through his grace and fauour:
& when we will haue no other maiſter to teach
vs, nor other light to leade vs, nor other ſight
to direct vs, nor other truth to deliuer vs, nor
other life to quicken vs, nor other king to gouerne
and defende vs, nor other mediatour to
reconcile vs, and make vs at one with God, nor
other aduocat to pleade our cauſe in his iudgement,

nor other gate to enter in at to his kingdome,
nor to make vs there reioyce of the perfect
and full felicitie, which he hath reſerued &
keept for his elect. And in generall, when we
neither ſeeke, nor will haue other fountaine to
quenche our thirſt, nor to ſatiſfie our deſires.
See then howe Ieſus Chriſt liueth in vs and
we in him.
            It is verie true that the feeling,The perplexities and doubtes that are in the ſpiritual life of the faithfull. which we
haue of all theſe thinges, is not alwayes a like
and the ſame in vs. For aſmuch as we are not
alwayes a like diſpoſed, at one time as at an other:
and we haue not alwayes a like deſire to
ſee or to heare the worde of God, or to reade it,
or to conferre with our brethern, which are
more aduaunced in the knowledge and zeale of
the ſeruice of God then we are. And likewiſe
the ſpirite of God doth not touch and ſtirre vs
vp alwayes a like. And this is the cauſe that in
our faith, as in all other qualities, there is ſome
time more and ſome time leſſe, and that oftentimes
it is more ſtrong & liuely, and then ſome
times againe more remiſſe and fainte.A ſimilitude. For altogether
like as we ſee that water is more hoat
or colde, according as it is neare or farre of frō
the fire: euen ſo is it with vs, according as we
are more or leſſe exerciſed in the word, and driuen
by Gods ſpirit, we haue more or leſſe zeale

and affection. And altogether like as the diſpoſition
of the bodye followeth the qualitie and
temperature of the aire, elementes and exerciſes,
to which we giue our ſelues: euen ſo according
to the places where we liue, and the
nouriſhment that we there take, is the eſtate of
our ſoules and conſciences. But be it that water
be ſometime hoate and ſometime colde, and
that it chaunge his qualities, ſometimes one
waye, ſometimes an other, yet is it alwayes
water: euen ſo the man that is electe after his
regeneration, is alwayes faithfull, how ſo euer
in that he is the childe of Adam, he be ſometimes
enclined to euill, and that his faith is not
alwayes in one and the ſelfe ſame eſtate, and
that he is not alwayes accompanied with the
like zeale and affection. For oftentimes it commeth
to paſſe that we fele Ieſus Chriſt to ſtirre
and moue him ſelfe in vs, and by and by after,
we haue no manner of feeling at all: but therefore
he ceaſeth not to dwell in vs, no more then
our ſoules do to dwell in our bodies when we
ſleepe, although in ſleeping we neither feele
them, nor any of their operations. A woman
who hath conceaued and beareth in her wombe
a younge childe, feeleth it not alwayes ſtirre,
notwithſtanding when ſhe hath felt it once or
twiſe, ſhe doubteth not but ſhe is with childe:

euen ſo it commeth to paſſe that we haue not a
continuall feeling of Ieſus Chriſt, to aſſure vs
that he dwelleth in vs and we in him: but it ſuffizeth
that we haue him when occaſion ſerueth.
            There are ſome alſo that feele and taſte in
ſome ſort the righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt: but
on ye other ſide they haue a farre greater feeling
of their ſinnes, which oftentimes maketh them
to feare that they are not in God his fauour.
Concerning this point we muſt note, that we
more feele that which is euill, then that which
is good. For as we ſee by experience, we feele
the calamities and miſeries of warre more then
the fruicts and pleaſures of peace, & the griefes
of diſeaſes, more then the quietnes of health, &
the hardenes of pouertie, more then the profites
and commodities of aboundance & riches:
by reaſon whereof we ought not much to meruell,
if we feele the ſtinginges and prickes of
ſinne a great deale more then the conſolations
of the righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt: ſeeing that
ſinne dwelleth in vs & not righteouſnes, which
thing is in cauſe that the one is more ſenſible
then the other: Notwithſtanding for all this
we muſt not thinke, that ſinne is greater and
ſtronger then righteouſnes, or that it can in any
reſpecte be compared vnto it, or can be more
able to condemne and deſtroye vs, then the

righteouſnes of Ieſus Chriſt and the grace of
God is,A ſimilitude. to iuſtifie and ſaue vs. We haue ſome
times in the toppe of a finger, ſome paine or
greife, which we feele a great deale more then
the health that is all ouer the reſte of the bodie,
yea though it be much greater then the
paine of our finger. Wherefore we muſt not
eſteme the greatnes or the ſtrength, whether it
be of righteouſnes or ſinne, according to that
feeling we haue: becauſe the one is alwayes
more ſenſible then the other: and ſpecially for
aſmuch as we embrace righteouſnes onely by
faith which is of thoſe thinges that are not outwarde
and ſenſible.
            There are others alſo that feele nothing elſe
but their ſinnes:A remedie againſt the 
                     •
                  entation of the cōtinual feeling of our ſinne onely. and therefore they liue in continuall
feare and diſtruſte, where out they can
not winde them ſelues, hauing no taſte at all of
the grace and righteouſneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt,
nor of any other meane, whereby it is graunted
vnto vs. Which thing (of a truth) is verie dangerous:
and they which feele them ſelues in
ſuch caſe ought earneſtly to praye vnto God,
that it will pleaſe him to quicken them vp, and
to warme them through his ſpirite. And on
their part it behoueth that they giue thē ſelues
oftentimes to reade and to meditate vpon his
promiſes, and that they frequente the Church,

and heare exhortations, with the greateſt attention
they can, for aſmuch as Faith is engendred
by hearing. And although it come to
paſſe that they doe all theſe thinges without
any great affection,A ſimilitude ſhewing that we muſt not be diſcouraged though we finde not alwayes in our ſelues that good deſire and taſte that we ought to haue, of the worde of God. yet muſt they not therfore
thinke, that they are altogether vnprofitable
vnto them, no more thē a man that taketh bread
and meate when he taketh and eateth it, without
any great appetite. For although that he
haue not ſuch a pleaſure in eating, as if he were
well an houngred: notwithſtāding, that which
he receaueth, ceaſeth not to profite and ſuſteine
him, as we ſee in ſickenes: euen ſo do prayers
and other Chriſtian exerciſes, to which ſuch
colde perſons do giue them ſelues. And how
ſo euer they make them without any greate
zeale, yet for all that they ceaſe not to profite
them. And in euery thinge that commeth to
paſſe, howe ſoeuer it be that they feele their
ſinnes, they declare thereby that they are not
altogether deade, nor vtterly depriued of life,
and that therefore it onely remayneth for them
to ſearch the meanes how to encourage them
ſelues, and to doe euen as a man woulde doe to
fire, when it is out, which when he will kindle
againe, he bloweth it, or to a lampe to which
a man putteth oyle when the lighte is going
out.
            
               
There are other ſome which neither haue
feeling of righteouſnes nor of their ſinnes,A remedie againſt the ſpirituall blockiſhnes or lacke of feeling. and
theſe are altogether blockiſh, not thinking any
whit of their ſafetie, nor regarding to hearken
vnto anything that is ſpoken, taught or ſhewed
to them for their helpe and recouery. Such diſeaſes
are verie daūgerous as are to mans body
Apoplexies,Apoplexia is a diſeaſe engendred of colde humours, that taketh away a mannes ſenſes and feeling. the falling ſicknes, Palſeyes and
ſuch other which are altogether colde, killing
the naturall heate, and choking all the ſenſes.
All that we can doe for theſe, is to praye vnto
God to heale them, as he did the man ſicke of
the Palſeye, and that he will reſtore to them
the vſe of their ſenſes, that they maye feele aſwell
the burden and waite of their ſinnes, as
alſo the conſolation of his grace.
            The laſte point,The laſte pointe is of the effectes of this righteouſnes in vs after regeneration & that cō
                  teineth 4. partes. that we haue to entreate of
is of the effectes, that this righteouſnes bringeth
forth in vs after our regeneration: wherof
there are fower principall partes.
            The firſt is of the mortification of the fleſh:
The ſecond of the confeſſiō of Faith. The third
of prayers: and the laſt, of charitie.
            Mortification of the fleſh conſiſteth in this,
that we ſuffer not ſinne to reigne in vs: but couragiouſly
fight againſt all the concupiſcences
thereof,1. The mortification of the fleſh. obaying the ſpirite of the lawe of God,
and groning continually vnder the burden of

our infirmities, crying to God without ceaſing,
that in this caſe he will make an ende, and
prouide for vs.
            Confeſſion conſiſteth in this,2. The confeſsion of Faith. that we publiſh
the meanes of our ſaluation, and that we
witneſſe it openly and euidently by our workes
and wordes, at all times when occaſion is offred
vnto vs: without being hindred through
the feare of any daunger what ſoeuer.
            As concerning prayers,3. Prayers. it is neceſſarie that
euening and morning, before and after meate,
and in the beginning and ending of all our
workes, we praye vnto God and praiſe him,
begging that in our prayers which he hath cō
               maunded
vs to axe, and promiſed to giue vnto
vs, with full Faith and aſſuraunce to obteine
them: which we muſt grounde vpon his grace
and promiſes, and vpon the merite and interceſſion
of Ieſus Chriſt our alone Mediatour.
            As touching loue,4. Charitie. firſt of all it is required
that we loue God with all our hearte, with all
our ſtrength and with all our vnderſtanding,
and then our neighbour as our ſelfe, the which
loue of our neighbour that it maye be righte it
muſt be referred to that loue of God in ſuch
wiſe that it be the rule and meaſure thereof,
and likewiſe of all other our affections.
            Now in obſeruing of theſe fower poinctes,

we muſt firſt take heede that we be not dull and
ſlothfull to do our indeuour therein. The which
thing that we maye auoide, we muſt ſeeke out
with all diligence euery occaſion to applie our
ſelues thereto, and take heede to auoide thoſe
thinges which maye turne vs awaye from it.
Then afterwardes we muſt beware that in no
wiſe we diſtruſte the grace of God, nor the ſeruice
that we offer vp vnto him, but that we be
certainly perſwaded, that we together with our
workes, ſhalbe acceptable vnto him, through
grace, That hauing this perſwaſiō we may go
faithfully & cheerefully forward in our vocatiō.
            And finally, that we take good heede to our
ſelues,VVe muſt auoide preſumptiō & an opinion of our ſelues. that aboue all thinges we be not preſumpteous.
And to the ende, to keepe vs from
it, it is not enough, that we haue no opinion of
our ſelues nor of our workes: but as it is written
in the Pſalme: we muſt not deſire any
thing that is to highe for vs,Pſal. 131. 1 but be contente
with that porcion and meaſure of grace, that it
hath pleaſed God to beſtow vpon vs, and we
muſt applie our ſelues according to that power
and meane that he hath giuen vs: As S. Peter
ſayeth:1. Pet. 4. 10 Let euery man as he hath receaued the
gifte, miniſter the ſame one to an other as a
good houſband and ſtewarde of the graces and
gifts of God. For if we haue receaued but two

tallentes, and wil make as great traffique with
thē, as he that hath receaued fiue, this is a preſumption
before God, who hath meaſured out
and proportioned his giftes to our capacitie,
and requireth of profites and gaines according
to the quantitie of thoſe graces & giftes which
he hath beſtowed vpon vs.
            We haue ſaide in the beginning that the ſecond
iudgement wherto we muſt anſwere concerning
our righteouſnes,The ſecond iudgement where we muſt aunſwere concerning our righteouſnes. is that of the lawe,
which is no other thing then the ſeate of Gods
righteouſnes, to which it is impoſſible for vs
of our ſelues to ſatiſfie, and we haue neither
workes, thoughtes, wordes, nor affections but
they are to be condemned of God, if proceſſe be
made out there for vs, & we be to be iudged in
this courte:Gal. 3. 10. as S. Paule ſayeth that all they
which are vnder the lawe,2. Cor. 3. 7. are vnder the Curſe:
and in an other place,Pſal. 143. 2 he calleth the law the Miniſter
of Death. And Dauid ſpeaking to God
ſayeth: Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruant:
For no man liuing ſhalbe iuſtified in thy
ſight:Pſal. 130. 3 Alſo in an other place he ſayeth: O Lord
if thou looke vpon our iniquities, who ſhall
ſtande in thy iudgement? For aſmuch as this
iudgement is ſo entier, where all thinges are
examined, in ſuch ſort, from point to point, that
the brighteneſſe and lighte of the moone and
ſtarres, the righteouſnes and innocencie of the

Angells, ſhall hardly eſcape from being reiected
and cenſured,Iob 25. 5. as Iob ſayth. How then ſhall
we be able to aunſwere there,Iob 4. 18. and what meanes
ſhall we alleage for our iuſtification, that we
maye eſcape?Rom. 2. 12. S. Paule ſayth, They that haue
ſinned without the lawe, ſhall periſh without
the lawe. But ſeeing that they ſhall be condemned
by the lawe, who haue tranſgreſſed it: what
ſhall we do then? we can aunſwere and alleage
many thinges for our defence.
            Firſt we can auoide this iudgement and
ridde our ſelues from it demaunding to be ſent
before the throne of Gods mercye:The waye how to be deliuered from the iudgement and malediction of the lawe. foraſmuch
as being free and deliuered, we are not any longer
vnder the lawe, but vnder grace: ſo as
Moiſes is not nowe any more our Iudge but
Ieſus Chriſt: to whom the father hath giuen
aucthoritie and iudgement.Galat. 4. 7. Moreouer mercye
(as S. Iames ſayeth) is aboue righteouſnes:Iohn 5. 22.
which is as an inferiour and lower courte,Iam. 1. 13. from
which we may appeale to that highe and great
courte of God his mercie: wherin Ieſus Chriſt
is ſette downe and keepeth the higheſt place as
chiefe preſidente. And as it is he that is our aduocate,
ſo we are aſſured that he will giue vs
a diſcharge in our fauour. Wherefore if the
lawe, Moiſes and the righteouſnes of God doe
condemne vs, we muſt not therefore be afraide:
foraſmuch as this is ſuch a ſimple ſentence,

as we maye at all times appeale from it. To
conclude, the lawe is as a receauer, which taketh
accompte of our debtes, which is ſo harde
and rigorous that by no intreatie it will remitte
and pardon any thing of that we owe, and
will make vs to pay to the vttermoſt farthing:
But the Lord is he that ſtayeth & cloſeth vp the
counte, to witte Ieſus Chriſt, being (contrary
to the law) good, gracious and liberall, entreating
vs with all gentlenes, neither demaunding
any thing of vs but that which we be able
to paye, and furniſhing vs him ſelfe with that
which we lacke, and acquiting vs of his mere
liberalitie of the ouerplus, ſo that preſently it
maye be ſupplyed in him.
            Furthermore we maye yet alleage in this
iudgement, that the lawe can not make our
proceſſe: but Ieſus Chriſt, and the mercie of
God be our aſſeſſours, who moderate iudgement
in ſuch ſort, that not onely it can not be
hurtefull vnto vs, but very healthfull for vs. As
the iudgement of the woman taken in adulterie,
the figure therof:Iohn 8. 3. An allegorie of our exemption from the iudgemēt of the lawe by Ieſus Chriſt. who being threatened
before Ieſus Chriſt, by the Phariſees, who
maintayned that by the lawe of Moiſes ſhe
ought to be ſtoned to death, was notwithſtanding
all that they coulde alleage, ſente awaye
by Ieſus Chriſt, without her accuſers, or any
others that were in their companie, once interpoſing

to hurte her in any ſorte what ſo euer:
Onely Ieſus Chriſt ſayth vnto her, that henſe
forwarde ſhe muſt take heede that ſhe ſinned no
more: and ſo that condemnation which the miniſters
of the law had pronounced againſt her,
was by Chriſt, turned into a ſimple admonitiō
and inſtruction. A thing that ought well to be
marked,The vſe of the lawe towardes the faithfull. to the ende we maye vnderſtand what
ought now a dayes to be the true vſe of the
lawe towardes the faithfull: which condemneth
them no more to death as it was wont, but teacheth
and enſtructeth them of their deutie, exhorteth
them to that, and reproueth, and procureth,
by all meanes ſo to direct, and bring
them on, as they maye be ſufficiently enabled
to goe to the ſchoole of Ieſus Chriſt.
            The lawe and Ieſus Chriſt in like manner
are as a Phiſicion and ſurgeon,A compariſon & difference of the lawe & the Goſpel. comming to a
ſicke man to heale him. The ſurgeon openeth
the veine, and taketh awaye bloude from him,
not to the ende to make him to dye, but as a remedie,
appointed for the recouerie of his health
and ſauetie. The lawe alſo peirceth our impoſtume,
& ſometimes maketh a great hole in it:
but neither to the ende to kill vs, nor to hurte
vs: but to bring vs into a good order, to the end
we may be the more eaſely healed. Thoſe ſentences
then, that the lawe pronounceth againſt
vs, they are profitable for vs, for aſmuch as

they awaken vs and make vs to looke to our
ſelues and to our affaires, and to be more diligent
to ſearch out the meanes wherby to bring
vs into good order.
            The laſt bulwarke that we can ſet againſt
the iudgement of the lawe,The third meane, or defence againſt the iudgement of the law. is that Ieſus Chriſt
hath fulfilled the ſame for vs, as he him ſelfe
witneſſeth: that he came not to aboliſh the law,
but to fulfil it. Which thing S. Paule alſo confirmeth
ſaying:Mar. 5. 17. that Chriſt is the accompliſhmente
of the lawe in righteouſnes to all beleuers.Rom. 10. 4.
Wherfore we be not, in any wife ſubiect
to death, nor to the curſe, that the lawe hath
pronounced againſt them, that haue tranſgreſſed
it, ſeeing we are the members of Ieſus
Chriſt, and that we haue keept and fulfilled it
in him. And as in Adam we were made ſinners
through diſobedience: euen ſo being incorporated
into Ieſus Chriſt, we are righteous
through his obedience: and ſo conſequently
exempte from the iuriſdiction and power of the
lawe: which can not exerciſe the aucthoritie, it
hath to condemne vs, but againſt them, that
tranſgreſſe, and are rebellious againſt it. Whē
therfore we endeuour our ſelues, to do our deutie,
to mortifie, through his ſpirite the workes
of the fleſh, there is not any condemnation to
vs, nor to all them that are in Ieſus Chriſt,
who are by a liuely Faith vnited to him,Rom. 8. 1. ingraffed

& incorporated into his righteouſnes.
            The third kinde of iudgement whereof we
ſpake in the beginning of our diuiſion is the
iudgement of men:The third iudgement againſt vs, to witte, the iudgement of men and of the remedies of the ſame. which commonly is more
corrupte and vniuſte, by reaſon of their ignoraunce
& falſe opinions, which they conceaue
& frame in their owne vnderſtanding: and likewiſe
becauſe of their paſſiōs and deſires, which
often times driue and carry them hedlong contrarie
to their wil. Wherfore we muſt not trouble
our ſelues much to ſatiſfie that, eſpecially in
matters that appertaine to religion and conſcience.
As in the doctrine of ſaluation, which
we muſt not take from any other, but from the
ſpirite of God, nor ſearch for it any where elſe
but in the lawe and the Goſpell: where all is
taught by the writinges of the Prophetes and
Apoſtles. Wherefore there is no other rule of
our Faith and obedience, but the onely will
of God, that is to ſaye we ought not to beleue
any thing, as concerning our ſaluation,
but that which he hath promiſed in his holy
Goſpell, nor doe any thing for his ſeruice, but
that which he hath commaunded and ordeined
in his lawe. And when ſo euer it be founde, that
men will be ſo raſhe either to adde,Our faith muſt not depend vpon others. or to diminiſh,
or to alter any thing in the worde of God,
there a man maye iudge, and ſurely perſwade
him ſelfe of ſuch, that they are falſe teachers

and prophets: and ſo likewiſe of them that beleue
& ſubmitte them ſelues vnto ſuch by whom
they are abuſed and deceaued. This is the reaſon
why S. Paule ſayeth, that if he woulde
pleaſe men, he ſhoulde not be the ſeruaunt of
Ieſus Chriſt. And in an other place: If an
Angell from heauen ſhoulde teache any other
Goſpell then that Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles
haue publiſhed,Gal. 1. 8. 10 that he woulde accompt
him accurſed. It is therefore needefull to be
taught that in theſe thinges, belonging to the
honour and ſeruice of God, and to the ſaluation
and reſt of our ſoules, we reſte our ſelues altogether
vpon the ſcripture, and thereto bend our
ſelues as to the onely marke, that we neither
haſt to much forwarde, nor lagge to much behinde.
And further that we hange not vpon the
iudgement of men, as whereby we maye either
be iuſtified or condemned.
            Sainct Paule writing to the Corinthians
ſayeth:1. Cor. 4. 3. 4. &c. I paſſe litle to be iudged of you, or of
the iudgement of men, no I iudge not my owne
ſelfe: foraſmuch as I know my ſelfe not to be
culpable in any thinge, yet am I not thereby
iuſtified: but he that iudgeth me is the Lorde.
Therefore iudge not before the time, before
the Lorde come, who will bringe all thinges
to light, manifeſtinge the thinges that are
hidde, and all the counſailes and affections of

the harte: thē ſhal euery one be praiſed of God.
Hereby he would teache vs not much to eſteme
the iudgement of men be it in good or euill, becauſe
they are vaine of their owne nature, and
if they praiſe vs, this ought not to puffe vs vp,
or to encreaſe the opiniō we haue of our ſelues.
Alſo if they diſpraiſe or condemne vs, we ought
not therein to diſcourage our ſelues hauing the
ſpirite of God, his worde and our owne conſcience,
to ſuſteine and iuſtifie vs.
            We are at this day excommunicated of the
Pope, and condemned and reiected from his
preſence and of the moſt parte of men: and principally
of them, who are in greateſt eſtimation
and credit of knowledge and wiſdom, notwithſtanding
concerning the Pope, we ought to
make no reckoning of him nor of all ye ſentēces
that he can pronounce and thunder out againſt
vs. For he is the enemie of Ieſus Chriſt, and
conſequently Antichriſt: and an enemie of the
light, foraſmuch as all his workes are euil: and
of the truth, being the firſt Embaſſadour and
miniſter of lying: and to conclude, an vtter enemie
to the ſaluatiō of men, and of the honour of
God. Alſo he is the ſonne of perdition, to caſt
awaye and to deſtroye all thoſe, which will depende
on his aucthoritie, and wilbe brought to
his opinion touching the eſtate and ſaluation of
their conſcience. Is not this he which beareth

the name of blaſphemie vppon his forhead,Apoc. 13. 1. to
ſhewe that he woulde be the protectour? It is
not therfore to be meruailed at, if he condemne
and holde thoſe for heretiques, which loue the
honour of God, and employ them ſelues to aduaunce
the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt.
            As concerning the great and wiſe men of
this world we ought not alſo to diſcourage our
ſelues, if they ſette them ſelues with all their
ſtrength againſt the truth, wherof they haue no
knowledge as Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth:Mat. 11. 25. that his
father hath hidde from the great and wiſe of
the worlde, the miſteries of the kingdome of
heauen, and hath reueiled them to litle ones.
According to which S. Paule ſayeth:1. Cor. 1. 23. that he
preached Ieſus Chriſt crucified, which was
an offence to the Iewes, and fooliſhneſſe to the
Grecians: alleaging that which is written in
Eſaie:Iaſy 29. 14. I will deſtroye the wiſdome of the wiſe,
and will caſte awaye the vnderſtanding of the
prudente. And adioining that ſame queſtion.
Where is the wiſe? where is the ſcribe? where
is the diſputer of this worlde? Hath not God
made the wiſedome of this worlde fooliſhnes?
Ieremie ſayeth alſo,Iere. 5. 5. ſeeing the people to make
no accompte of his worde: I will get me vnto
the great men, and will ſpeake vnto them. For
they haue knowen the waye of the Lord, which
the people knew not. But theſe alſo haue broken

the yoke, and haue banded them ſelues together
to ſpeake againſt the worde of God, as
the others. All theſe places ſerue to ſhew vnto
vs, that God hath choſen the fooliſh thinges
of the world, to confounde the wiſe. And hereof
it is, that we ſee nowe a dayes that the greateſt
men and they that are of moſt reputation in the
worlde, do moſt obſtinatly reſiſte the truth: and
ſhewe by worde and effectes, that they are moſt
blinde in God his matters, taking darkenes for
light, ſower for ſweete, and ſweete for ſower.
            Now as the greatnes and aucthoritie of men
ought not to aſtoniſh vs, nor any whit to moue
vs, ſo alſo, neither the nomber and multitude
of them.Mat. 7. 13. Foraſmuch as the waye that leadeth
to deſtruction is broade, and is choſen of the
greateſt nomber of perſones who enter there,
and goe on in it becauſe that men are naturally
enclined to embrace errours and lyes, and their
is none, but the elect of God which beleue and
loue the truth: who are a litle nomber (as Ieſus
Chriſt ſayeth) in reſpect of the reprobate.
            We conclude then, that to the ende we be
righteous it is not needful that we ſatiſfie men,
nor conforme our ſelues to their iudgement, in
matters that concerne the honour and ſeruice
of almighty God, & the eſtate of the conſcience:
wherin oftētimes they erre, becauſe they leaue
the worde of God which is the only way wherby

by a man maye well and rightely iudge and define
of theſe two poincts, and betake thē ſelues
to the iudgement and definition of their owne
opiniōs and phantaſeis, which are for the moſt
parte fonde and ridiculous.
            There are two thinges in which we maye
applie our ſelues to mans iudgement,Of the vſe of ciuill & politique thinges. that is to
ſay, to thinges meerly ciuill & politique, and to
thinges indifferent. For it muſt not be that a
faithfull man be partiall in policie, neither that
he violate the publique peace, as lōg as he may
keepe it & mainteine it without offence to God,
or trouble to the quiet of his conſcience. But it
behoueth that he obaye the ordinaunces of the
Magiſtrate, and keep the ſtatutes, lawes & cuſtomes
of the countrey where he dwelleth, carefully
watching that he giue no occaſion of offence,
nor ſuſpicion that he will innouate or alter
any thinge in the eſtate and policie of the
common wealth.
            As concerning thinges indifferent,Of the vſe of thinges indifferent. we muſt
follow the counſaill of S. Auguſtine writing to
Ianuarius:S. Auguſtin that when the thing that is commaunded
of men is not contrarie to Faith, nor
to good cuſtomes, we muſt hold them for indifferent,
& not gaine ſtand in any thing what ſo euer:
to ye end to keep peace wt thoſe with whom
we are conuerſaunt. For which cauſe Vitcor
Biſhop of Rome, was ſharpely reproued by

Ireneus & other auncient fathers: becauſe that
for ye diuerſitie of ceremonies, which they kept
in the celebration of Eaſter, he had ſeparated
his Church from the Communion of the Eaſte
churches. The which thing was attributed vnto
him for great preſumption and arrogancie,
that he would go about, to ſubiect all Churches
to the Cuſtomes and ceremonies which were
obſerued in his: and for hauing renounced the
common confederation, in which he ought to
haue abidden vnited and faſt knitte, and not to
haue broken the chaine of charity, which ought
to haue locked together alike all the members
of the vniuerſall Church.
            The laſt indgement to which we muſt aunſwere,The fourth & laſt iudgment, which is that of the conſcience.
is that of our conſcience, which either
miniſtreth vnto vs great conſolations, or elſe
great torments, according as it is either euill
or well diſpoſed. For we may ſaye that a pure
conſcience, is a paradiſe, which we maye haue
in this worlde:A good cō
                  ſcience is a paradiſe in this worlde. foraſmuch as there is not any
thing which can bring vs greater peace & contentmente,
be it in proſperitie or in aduerſitie.
Euen like as ye bodie when it is in good health,
is ſtrong and able to beare the great ſtormes &
colde of winter,A ſimilitude. and likewiſe the exceſſiue and
vntemperate heat of the ſommer: euen ſo a conſciēce
that is whole, & fully reſolued, can beare
ſtowtely all accidēts, without yeelding or ſhrinking

vnder the burden and waight of any thing
what ſo euer may happen vnto it.An euill conſcience a hell. Cōtrarywiſe
an euill and ſicke conſcience is a verie hell, and
there is nothing in ye world that may more vexe
& tormente vs. And as a good conſcience is as
ſuger to ſweeten and mollifie all our affections:
euen ſo ye other is as ſharpe vinegre, which ſowreth
& troubleth all our ioyes and conſolations:
And moreouer as the one is ſufficient to reſiſt
all tentations: euen ſo ye other is ſofte, cowardly
& vanquiſhed aſſone as it is aſſailed. It is neceſſarie
therefore that as we are curious in looking
to the health of our bodies, obſeruing for
that purpoſe, the diete and gouernment that is
deliuered & appointed by the phiſition vnto vs,
& cōtrarywiſe abſtaining from all thoſe meats,
& exceſſe which may offende & alter our health:
euen ſo that we haue the ſame deſire and care to
preſerue that health of our ſoules, marking diligently
all the rules and ordinaunces of good
life, which God the moſt highe and ſoueraigne
phiſition hath appointed vs, and taking heede
on the other ſide, to auoide and ſhun that, which
he hath prohibited and forbidden vs.
            Let vs conſider a litle, what great pleaſure
and ioye a man may haue, who returning home
after a long iornie into his owne houſe, findeth
there his wife, who commeth to take him about
the necke, and embraceth him, kiſſing and making

much of him: doth not this make him by
and by to forgette all his trauell which he hath
endured in his iorney? as contrarywiſe, if he
ſhould find his wife after his returne brawling,
riotous, frowarde, & who in ſted of comforting
him, would all maner of wayes vexe & torment
him, woulde not this encreaſe and double his
paines and torments which he hath ſuffred by
the way? Euen ſuch is ye eſtate of the conſciēce.
Although that our enemies commit a thouſand
outrages, violencies & villanies againſt vs: If
we returning from our ſelues, and entring into
our own conſcience, find there one with a chereful
& merrie countenaunce, which doth comfort
and contente vs, it maketh vs in a momente to
forgette all our enemies. But on the other ſide,
if it be naught, it weryeth vs in ſuch ſort, yt we
ſhal not find any houſe worſe then our owne, nor
any place where we maye worſe quiet our ſelues,Iſai 28. 20.
then with our ſelues. Iſaie ſayth: yt an euill
couſcience is as a ſtreighte bed,A fine ſimilitude. in which a man
can not ſtretch him ſelfe, nor turne him ſelfe at
pleaſure. It is an hard thing for a man there to
ſleepe well and to reſt quietly: Likewiſe a man
which hath a feſtred cōſcience, he can not finde
any place or condicion to contente him, & which
is not altogether to ſtreighte for him. This is
the cauſe that Dauid ſo often prayeth to God
that he wil ſet his impriſoned harte at large,Pſal. 4. 2. yt
               
is to ſay, that he wil ſhew him this fauour, that
he may alwayes haue a ſoūd & vpright cōſciēce.
            Now to ye end we may haue ſuch a cōſciēce,The way to haue a good conſcience.
it behoueth that it be will foūded: & that it may
be well founded, it is requiſite that ye only word
of God be the foundation therof: ſo as we make
no conſcience, but to do thoſe thinges that God
hath forbidden & to leaue vndone thoſe thinges
that he hath cōmaunded. For aſmuch as he that
wil ſtretch out his cōſcience beyond this, knoweth
not how to ſaue him ſelfe, but that ranging
beyond the boūdes of Gods word, he muſt haue
infinit ſcruples, which ſhall vexe him cōtinually.
And to be ſhort, there is nothing in ye worlde
more pernitious, nor more to be feared, then to
cōfound ye conſciēce about ſuch imaginatiōs, or
about the cōmaundements & traditions of men.
            But here muſt be noted that the conſciēce &
the peace of conſcience are thinges diuerſe,A differēce betwixt the conſcience and the peace of cō
                  ſcience. and
that they haue diuerſe foundacions. For the cō
               ſciēce
(as hath bin already declared) is ruled by
the law, that is to ſay, by the cōmaundements, &
forbiddings of God. But ye peace of conſcience,
hath for his foundacion ye Goſpell,Ieſus Chriſt onely hath ſatisfied the iudgement of our conſcience. ye promiſes,
the grace of Ieſus Chriſt & his righteouſnes.
And as there is no other meane to anſwere to ye
iudgement of God, but ye righteouſnes & innocēcy
of Ieſus Chriſt: euē ſo is it he alone which
can ſtand vs in ſted to ſatiſfie ye iudgemēt of our

cōſciēces. For if we looke vnto our workes we
haue our conſciences ſtreighte way vexed & diſquieted
with feare & diſtruſt of not hauing done
our deutie, in not obaying God, nor keeping of
his cōmaundements, as we were bound: which
was the cauſe y• S. Paul ſayed,1. Cor. 4. 4. that he felt him
ſelfe not culpable of any thing, but yet for this,
he thoughte him ſelfe not iuſtified: to giue vs to
vnderſtand: that there is nothing yt can pacifie
our cōſcience, but ye only righteouſnes of Ieſus
Chriſt, & not our own, which is alwaies imperfect
& defiled with many filthes of our cōcupiſcēce,
& by reaſon hereof cannot contēt our hart,
nor make vs to take any pleaſure in many of
thoſe thinges we haue done or left vndone: but
the bloud, woundes & death, and the ſide of Ieſus
Chriſt opened (as S. Bernard ſayth) is
that, which pacifieth the conſcience, when as it
would thus tormēt & perſecute vs: Beholde the
freedom & refuge we haue, where we may retire
to ſauetie. To conclude then and here to
make an ende of this treatiſe, the righteouſnes
of Ieſus Chriſt, is the only meane, wherby we
are iuſtified before the iudgemēt of God, of the
lawe, of men, and of the conſcience.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   