
      
         
            
            
            GREAT BRITTAINES SVNNES-SET, BEWAILED WITH A SHOWER OF TEARES.
            
            
               BY WILLIAM BASSE.
            
               AT OXFORD, Printed by Ioseph Barnes. 1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO HIS HONOVRABLE MASTER Sr
                RICHARD WENMAN Knight.
            
         
         
            
            
               A Soule ore-laden with a greater Summe
               Of ponderous sorrow then she can sustaine,
               (Like a distressed sayle that labours home)
               Some obiect seekes, wh
                     •
                  eto she may complaine.
               Not that (poore soule) hir obiect can draw from
               Hir groaning breast th' occasion of hir paine:
               But over charg'd with Teares shee (widow-like) bestowes
               Vpon hir best friends eares, some children of her woes.
            
            
               
               Not (like as when some triviall discontents
               First taught my raw and lucklesse youth to rue)
               Doe I to Flockes now vtter my laments,
               Not choose a tree, or streame, to mourne vnto:
               My waightier sorrow now (Deare Sir) present
               These her afflicted features to your view.
               Whose free and noble mind (were not this griefe your owne
               Would to my plaints be kind, if I complain'd alone.
            
            
               
               But such true arguments of inward woe
               In your sad face, I lately haue beheld,
               As if your teares (like floods that overflowe
               Their liquid shores) alone, would haue excell'd
               This generall Deluge of our eies, that so
               Sea-like our earth-like cheekes hath over-swell'd:
               As if your heart would send forth greatest lamentation,
               Or striue to comprehend our vniversall passion.
            
            
               
               And as th' occasion (Sir) may iustly moue
               To maid-like sorrow the most man-like heart:
               So may your griefe (to your beholders) proue
               The iustice of His grace, and your desart.
               For teares and sighs are th' issues of true loue:
               Our present woes our former ioies imparte.
               He loues the living best, who for the dead mournes most:
               He merits not the rest, who not laments the lost.
            
            
               
               To you I therefore weepe: To you alone
               I shew the image of your teares in mine;
               That mine (by shewing your teares) may be show'n
               To be like yours, so faithfull so divine▪
               
               Such, as more make the publique woe their owne,
               Then their woe publique▪ such as not confine
               These 
                     〈◊〉
                   to rimes▪
                   not yet forms frō examples borrow▪
               
               Where losse is in
                     〈…〉
                  , there boundlesse is the sorrow.
            
            
               
               O let v
                     •
                   
                  (Muse) this heavynesse (that no
               Iust heart, vncleft, at one time can sustaine)
               By fittes, and preparations vndergoe:
               Let's feare, let's hope▪ tremble; and hope againe.
               O▪ let vs this dysastrous truth ne're know;
               But rather deafe and stupefied remaine:
               For happier much it were, the hearing sence to loose,
               Then loose all sence to heare such an vnhappy newes.
            
            
               
               Like to a changeling (in his sleepes) become
               Rob'd of his sexe, by some prodigious cause;
               I am turn'd woman: watrish feares benube
               My Heate: my Masculine existence thawes
               To teares, wherein I could againe entombe
               His tombe, or penetrate hir marble iawes:
               But, O, why should I twice entombe him! O what folly
               Were it to pierce (with sighes) a monument so holy!
            
            
               
               Here then run forth thou River of my woes.
               In cease lesse currents of complaining verse:
               Here weepe (young Muse) while older pens compose
               More solemne Rites vnto his sacred Hearse.
               And, as when happy earth did here, enclose
               His heav'nly minde, his Fame then Heav'n did pierce:
               Now He in Heav'n doth rest▪
                   now let his Fame catch fill;
               So, both him then posses'd▪ so both possesse him still.
            
            
               
               Or, like a Nymph distracted or vndone
               With blubber'd face, hands wrong, neglected haire,
               Run through moist Valleys, through wide deserts run
               Let speech-lesse Eccho eccho thy dispaire.
               Declare th' vntimely Set of Brittaines Sun
               To sorrowing Shepheards: To sad Nymphes declare
               That such a night of woes, his Occident doth follow
               That Day in darknes clothes, and mourner makes Apollo.
               
            
            
               
               But of his partes thinke not t'expresse the least
               Whom Nature did the best in all things forme.
               First, borne a Prince (next to his FATHER) best;
               Then, Fram'd a Man, to be, as he was borne:
               Beauty his youth beyond all others blest,
               Vertues did him beyond his youth adorne.
               What Muse, what voice, what pen, cā give thee all thy duties
               O Prince of Princes, me: youth, wisdō, deeds, & beauties.
            
            
               
               
                  Fates, that so soone beheld his Fame enrould,
               Put to his golden thred their envious sheeres:
               
                  Death fear'd his magnanimitie to behold,
               And (in his sleepe) basely reveng'd hir feares.
               
                  Time, looking on his wisdom, thought him old,
               And laid his rash Sythe to his Primest yeares.
               
                  Stars that (in loue) did long t'embrace so faire a myrrhour
               Wink'd at Fates envious wrong, Death's treason & Times errour.
            
            
               
               
                  O Fates, O Time, O Death, (But you must all
               Act the dread will of your Immortall GVIDE)
               
                  O Fates, How much more life did you appaule,
               When you his liuely texture did divide?
               
                  O Time, when by thy sythe this Flow'r did fall.
               How many thousands did'st thou wound beside?
               
                  O Death, how many deathes, is of that life compacted,
               That from all living breathes, his only death extracted.
            
            
               
               How many braue Deedes ha's the wounded wombe
               Of Hope, mis-carryed now, before their time?
               How many high designes haue seene their doome
               Before their birth, Or perish'd in their Prime?
               How many beauties drown'd are in his tombe?
               How many glories, with him, heavn's do clime?
               How many sad cheekes mourne, Him laid in Earth to see
               As they to earth would runne, his Sepulcher to be.
            
            
               
               Like a high Pyramis, in all his towers
               Finish'd this morning, and laid prostrate soone;
               Like as if Nighte's blacke and incestuous howers
               Should force Apollo's beauty before Noone:
               Like as some strange change in the heav'nly powers
               Should in hir Full quench the refulgent Moone:
               
               So HE his daies, his light, and his life (here) expir'd
               New built most (Sū-like) bright Ful Mā, & most admir'd
            
            
               
               But HEAV'NS, Disposers of all Life and Death,
               
               That our pied pride, and wretched liues mislike,
               Tooke HIM that's gone (from vs) to better breath
               Vs that remaine, with (death from him) to strike.
               His flower-like youth here, there more flourisheth,
               His graces then, are now more Angel-like.
               Those glories that in Him, so shone, now shine much more
               Our glories now are dim, that shin'd in him before.
            
            
               
               And thou faire Ile, whose three-fold beauties face
               Enchants the Three-fork'd Scepter of thy Lover,
               
               That with thine owne eies drown'st thy lap, the place
               That his enamour'd armes and streames would cover:
               Make true and two-fold vse of griefe, That grace
               May with affliction now, it selfe discouer.
               These teares thou dost begin, to shed for HENRYES sake.
               Continue for thy sinne, which made Heau'n Henry take.
            
            
               
               That thy iust Iames, who hither to hath sway'd
               Thy Scepter Many-fold, and ample Frame,
               Many more ages, yet, may liue obay'd
               T'enlarge thy glories, and to yeeld the same
               Divine examples vnto CHARLES that made
               HENRY so noble, and so great in Fame.
               For who but such a King, as He, can such another
               In place of Henry bring? who match him but a BROTHER.
            
            
               
               And neighbour Lands to whome our moanes we lent
               May to our greater losse now lend vs theirs.
               
                  Florence his old Duke mourn'd but we lament
               A greater then a Duke in flowring yeares.
               
                  Spaine for a Queene hir eies sad moisture spent:
               We for a Prince (and for a Man) shed teares. 
               But France whose cheek's still wet, nearest our griefe hath smarted;
               For she from Henry Great; wee from Great Henry parted.
            
            
               
               And thus, As I haue seene an even, showre,
               (When Phoebus to Ioues other splendent heyres
               Bequeath'd the Day) downe from Olympus powre.
               When Earth in teares of Trees, and Trees in teares
               Of Mountaines wade. Like some neglected flowre
               (Whose sorrow is scarce visible with theirs)
               Downe to my silent brest my hidden face I bow:
               My Phoebus in his Rest, hath hid his heav'nly brow.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            A MORNING AFTER MOVRNING.
            
               LEt me no longer Presse your gentle eies,
               Be'ing of themselues franke of religious teares.
               But stanch these streames with so lace from the Skies;
               Whence Hymen deck'd in Saffron robes appeares.
               Let Henry now rest in our memories,
               And let the Rest, rest in our eies and eares.
               Now He hath had his Rites, Let Those haue their adorning
               By whose bright beames our Night of mourning ha's a morning.
            
            
               
               And now (my Muse) vnmasque thee: And see how
               A second Sonne in Henries place doth shine.
               See Fiue great Feastes all meete in one Day, now.
               Our MAKER keepes his Sabaoth most divine.
               
                  Isis and Rhene are ioyn'd in sacred vow;
               And faire Eliza's Fredericke's Valentine.
               
               The Court in ioy artires hir splendent brow:
               The Country shroues; And all in mirth combine.
               Fiue-times he hallowed. The Day, wherein, GOD rests,
               Saints triumph, Princes wed: & Court & Coūtry feaste's.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   