
      
         
            
            
               
AN HERBAL FOR THE BIBLE. CONTAINING A PLAINE AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION of ſuch Similitudes, Parables, and Metaphors, both in the olde Teſtament and the Newe, as are borrowed and taken from Herbs, Plants, Trees, Fruits and Simples, by obſeruation of their Vertues, qualities, natures, properties, operations, and effects: And BY THE HOLIE PROPHETS, SACRED WRITERS, Chriſt himſelfe, and his bleſſed Apoſtles vſually alledged, and into their heauenly Oracles, for the better beautifieng and plainer opening of the ſame, profitably inſerted.
            Drawen into Engliſh by THOMAS NEWTON.
            Imprinted at London by Edmund Bollifant. 1587
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERIE GOOD LORD, ROBERT EARLE of ESSEX and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford and Bourgchier, LORD Ferrers of Chartley, Bourgchier and Louaine, &c. Your most humble, THOMAS NEWTON wiſheth increaſe of all ſpirituall gifts, long life and happie daies, with all felicitie in flouriſhing honour.
            
               IF I WERE to yeeld a reaſon for my boldneſſe, in preſuming to preſent by way of dedication, this my poore trauaile vnto your Honor: beſide other of ſufficient force to moue me thervnto, I might (and that truly) ſay, that the liuely ſparks, and tried proofe of your L. Heroicall ſpirite, farre and neere with generall voice ſounded out and emblazoned 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               our thankefull welwillers, your vndaunted cou
               
                  •…
                and valour abroad, your ſurpaſſing affabilitie

and courtly curteſie at home; and (which most is of all) your feruent zeale according to knowledge toward the glorious Goſpell of Christ, were cauſes mouing, or rather vehemently thrusting me on, by this meanes and in this ſort, dutifully to attempt your Honorable patience. Of ſuch force is true Nobilitie, accompanied with hir proper adiuncts, and inuested with hir peculiar titles, that ſhe draweth all men into the loue and admiration of hir. So that all men to their incredible comfort do ioyfully note and euidently behold the liuely image and expreſſe paterne of that Mirror of Nobilitie, your late most magnificent father, brightly ſhining in you his ſonne: being like ynough (through Gods good fauor, mercifully finiſhing that, which he hath alreadie graciouſly and richly begun in you) if not in ech point to ſurmount, (which is ſcarcely poſſible) yet at least to match (which is most Honorable) his martiall ſeruices, valorous proweſſe, woorthie attempts, venturous exploits, inuincible courage, renoumed bountie, and most noble generoſitie.
            The troupe therefore of Vertues, deliuered vnto your Honor (as it were by hand) from your ſo noble a Parent, and togither with the hereditarie ſucceſſion of his lands, left, and (by nature) lineally deſcended vnto you, was the Loadestone, that mightily drew me, being a rude lumpe of vnwrought Yron, to admire your excellent graces: and by ſuch meanes as I am able, to testifie this my zealous loialtie toward ſo Honorable a Gentleman, ſo rare a Peere, ſo ſure a Botreaux vnto his Countrie, & ſo pretious a Paragon of perfect Nobilitie. Not doubting, but your

good Lordſhip will diſpence with my preſumption, 
                  •…
               d accept in good part this ſmall token of my faith
               
                  ••
               ll hart and loyall minde: which being moſt willing 
                  •…
               d readie, would not ſtay to performe (euen to the 
                  •…
               termost) that which I ought, if I could do that, 
                  •
               hich (alas) I cannot.
            The worke (my Lord) in my ſimple opinion, for the choiſe of the Argument, raritie of the matter, and profit of the circumstance deſerueth to be aduiſedly read, attentiuely conſidered, effectually ruminated, and perfectly digested. I am the bolder thus much to ſpeake in the behalfe of it, euen for Lemnius his ſake, the chiefe Author thereof: whom eſpecially I haue followed; although for reſpects, not alwaies (as a Votarie) preciſely tyed my ſelfe vnto his ſentence, nor euerie where word for word religiouſly expreſſed his diſcourſe. But haue (vpon occaſion) in ſome places, added vnto him for the more perſpicuitie: in ſome, taken away, to auoid 
                  ••
               diouſnes and prolixitie: in many, by conference with other Authors, at large explaned that, which I thought was too compendiouſly couched, and ouer mystically inuolued in termes of obſcuritie: but no where (perdie) otherwiſe haue I dealt, than I knowe to be vſually tolerable, and by good preſidents a
               
                  •…
               g the learned, authentically warrantable.
            
               
                  •…
               e frankly confeſſe, and willingly profeſſe my 
                  •…
                haue beene ſingularly delighted in reading 
                  〈◊〉
                of this mans learned bookes: and haue partly testified my good liking thereof, tenne yeeres ago, by publiſhing in print a profitable Worke of his, vnder the title of The Touchſtone of Complexions;
               
which I then tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſh, in my natiue Countrie of Cheſſhyre, and dedicated vnto the Right Honorable, my ſingular good Lord, the Baron of Cobham.
            Receiue now therefore (Right Honorable) into your protection and patrociny, theſe my poore labors▪ and if they ſeeme woorthie, ſhrowd them from the criticall doome of waiwarde Wranglers and ſurly Areopagites, that without looking into my intent, will perhaps be buſie ynough to condemne mine attempt. Which humble ſute, as I doubt not but to obtaine at your Honors hands: ſo, enioying the ſame, I ſhall thinke my paines ſufficiently recompenced; my ſelfe to enterpriſe ſome other thing to your L. liking, encouraged: and to be ech way as ſurely garded, as Vlyſſes euer thought himſelf vnder the ſhield of noble Aiax.
            
               From my poore houſe at Little Ilford in Eſſex, 
                  the 26. of May. 1587.
                
               Your L. at commandement, THOMAS NEWTON.
            
         
      
      
         
            MONARCHES, KINGS, PRINCES, PROPHETS, AND SACRED Writers haue been ſingularly delighted, and profoundly ſeene in the skill of Plants and Herbs: as by the ſundry Metaphors, Similitudes and Parables, by them in their Works, Propheſies, and Writings vſed, it doth manifestly appeere.
         
            The firſt Chapter.
            
               THat noble Kings and renowmed princes in the old time (euen otherwiſe moſt buſily encombred with garboyles of wars) haue beene ſtudiouſly addicted and ſingularly delighted in the ſerch and knowledge of the nature of Plants and Herbs: both ancient hiſtories doe ſufficiently witneſſe, and the books of the ſacred Bible do largely teſtifie. For, the ſearch and skil of theſe things, carrieng with it ſuch pleaſant ſtore of delectable varietie: and furniſhed no leſſe with

profit than pleaſure, ſeemed nothing at all derogatorie from the maieſtie of Kings, nor any whit vnſitting the honorable eſtate of Princes, ſomewhiles to ſolace and recreate themſelues with theſe kinds of ſtudies: namely & ſpecially when and ſo often as they could (as it were) breath from their other moſt vrgent affaires, and haue either time or leiſure to intermitte their other weightie and ſerious proceedings. And by this kind of ſtudie (whereby not onely Kings and princes, great Herbariſts, & Students of Phyſicke. their minds, but their bodies alſo were ſingularly ſolaced) their fame and memories became as glorious and renowmed, and their honorable magnificence as highlie dignified, as by anie other their woorthie acts, noble conqueſts, or triumphant victories whatſoeuer.
            Heerby Mythridates the noble king of Pontus (hauing vnder him 19. kingdoms) through excellent skill in herbs, and for that his moſt ſingular inuention of the ſoueraigne Triacle Mythridate, found out and deuiſed by a mightie king. and cordiall preſeruatiue againſt poiſon, and all other contagious and infectiue diſeaſes, hath woon vnto himſelfe an immortall name among all poſterities. Lyſimachus, Eupator, Gentius 
               Seuerall herbs knowen by the names of theſe princes, for that they firſt found out the vertues thereof. the king of Illyria, Artemiſia Queene of Caria and wife to Mauſolus, with manie others, are famouſly renowmed, not ſo much for their noble exploits in martiall affaires, as for their exquiſite skill and profounde knowledge of Plants and Herbs.
            
               Marcus Curius a noble warrior and right

valiant Generall among the Romans, after he had vanquiſhed Pyrrhus the puiſſant king of the Epyrotes, ſo greatly delighted in this knowledge of Herbs, that he withdrew himſelfe frō all worldlie cares, and quietly betooke himſelfe to end the remainder of his daies in the delectable practiſe thereof, in the Countrie. The ſame courſe did Lucius Cincinnatus, and Marcus Valerius Coruinus (two noble perſonages) likewiſe take.
            
               Solomon alſo the mightieſt and richeſt king Solomon a moſt excellent Herbariſt. that euer was (who beſide his infinite treaſures and ineſtimable wealth, had giuen vnto him by almightie God ſuch ripe wiſedome and exact knowledge of things, that no king in the world was comparable vnto him) among other his rare and admirable vertues, is ſet downe in holie Scriptures to be ſurpaſſingly skilled in the vertues, qualities, and operations of Herbs: and that he was able to reaſon, diſcourſe, & diſpute not onely of Beaſts, Foules, creeping things, & Fiſhes, but of trees 1. Kin. 4, 33. alſo and Plants, from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hyſope that ſpringeth out of the wal: that is, from the higheſt & talleſt tree, to the ſmalleſt Wiſd. 7, 17. ſhrub and loweſt herbe.
            Beſides Solomon, there be ſundrie other holie men and bleſſed Prophets among the Hebrewes, that doe manie times inſert into their propheſies, and vſually borrow compariſons, Herbs haue ſundrie effect, and operations. taken from the names & effects of Herbes. For ſome plants ſeruing to one purpoſe, and ſome

to another, ſome being good for nouriſhment, ſome for medicine, and ſome for both: ſome being hurtful and dangerous to nature, ſome wholſome, cordiall, and ſoueraigne: the Prophets of God were thereupon mooued to take and fetch from them manie right apt Similitudes and proper compariſons, to adorne their Sermons, & garniſh their matters withall, to make the ſame by ſuch familiar meanes the eaſier to be conceiued, and the readier to be beleeued.
            And although in each other kinde of learning, humane diſcipline & philoſophie, there be manie ſingular ornaments and peculiar garniſhments, effectually to delight the mind, and to drawe it by example and imitation to vertue and honeſtie: yet for the true and perfect atchieuing, and fuller bringing to paſſe of theſe things, there be none of greater, nor yet of like force and efficacie, to thoſe that are vſed by the holie Prophets in their diuine Writings and Propheſies; ſo that to him that is any whit reaſonably ſeene either in the works of Nature, or in heauenlie contemplations, it may eaſily appeere, how that their writings and propheſies are not barren, rude, ignorant, and vnartificiall: but profitable, fruitfull, learned, and eloquent. For, the holie ſcripture being giuen by inſpiration from God, fully and ſufficiently inſtructeth the mind, and furniſheth the conſcience and ſoule with moſt ſweete foode and wholeſome nouriſhment. Which

thing, the kinglie prophet Dauid right wel declareth, where he vſeth a very fit ſimilitude borowed from freſh Paſtures, greene Medowes, pleaſant Brooks, and wholſom Waters, wherwith cattle be delicately fed, and expediently nouriſhed. The Lord (ſaith he) is my ſhepheard, I 
               Pſal. 23. 1. 
               ſhall want nothing: he maketh me to rest in greene pasture, and leadeth me by the ſtill waters. So likewiſe in another Pſalme, where he reioiceth in the Lord, and highlie praiſeth his holie name for bleſſing him with ſtore of heauenlie riches, yea and of earthlie benefits alſo, as Cattell and fruitful ſoile, he ſaith: The lines are fallen vnto me 
               Pſal. 16, 6. 
               in pleaſant places. For in the old time, men vſed to meaſure their land with long ropes, & therby to ſhare out their Acres & bounds, according to eueriemans right and title: as now we do with perches or poles.
            Now, for that there be of theſe kindes of ſpeeches infinite places both in the olde and new Teſtament, diligently noted and founde out as wel by the ordinary practiſe and courſe of life, as alſo by obſeruation of the nature, effect, and vertue of Things: I haue at this time thought good to beſtowe ſome labour in this Booke to ſet downe the ſame vnto the view & conſideration of the ſtudious Reader: wherby he may ſee what a rich treaſure of knowledge and wiſedome there is laid vp in the ſacred Scriptures; which affoordeth vnto the induſtrious Chriſtian, ſtore ynough of matter both pleaſurable and profitable, delightfull

and wholeſome. Neither is it poſſible for a man to reape anie the like benefit of plentiful knowledge and copious learning, nor to taſte ſuch foiſon of ſoueraigne foode both for ſoule and conſcience, out of anie Works written by Philoſophers, Orators, or Poets, as hee may out of the moſt plentifull ſtorehouſe, and aye laſting fountaine of Diuinitie, and out of thoſe bookes which were endited by the holie Ghoſt, and written by heauenly inſpiration. So that whoſoeuer ſhal aduiſedly conſider, and attentiuely diſcuſſe the deepe myſteries and profound knowledge laid vp in the Scriptures, and therewithall alſo what ſurpaſſing wiſedome harboured in their mindes, which left behind them ſuch diuine inſtructions and wholſome documents, cannot chooſe but moſt plainly perceiue, by how manie degrees, diuine learning and ſacred ſtudies do incomparably ſurmount all profane skill, and humane knowledge: and how far things heauenly and eternall do excell things earthlie and tranſitorie.
            That the holie Prophets were not onely moſt exactly ſeene in the peereleſſe skill of Diuinitie, but moſt exquiſitly alſo furniſhed with the entire knowledge of all thigns naturall: and not ignorant in anie kinde of learning or diſcipline; may hencefoorth bee ſufficiently prooued, and manifeſtly gathered, for that in their writings they vſe ſo manie Similitudes, & make ſo many Compariſons of things fetched

out of the verie ſecrets and bowels of Nature; as namely, from beaſts, fouls, worms, creeping and ſwimming creatures, Herbes, Trees, the Elements, fire, water, earth, aire, riuers, brooks, wels, ceſternes, ſeas, ſtars, pearls, ſtones, lightening, thunder, raine, dew, heate, drowth, cold, winds, blaſts, haile, ſnowe, froſt, ice, corne, ſeede, ſalt, leauen, nets, ſnares: and likewiſe from the humours in a mans bodie, Blood, milke, generatiue ſeede, menſtrue, woman in trauell, child-birth, droſſe, yron, golde, ſiluer, and innumerable other things, wherewith they learnedly beautifie their matter, and (as it were) brauely garniſh and deck out their termes, words, and ſentences with tropes and figuratiue Phraſes, Metaphors, Tranſlations, Parables, Compariſons, Collations, Examples, Schemes, and other ornaments of ſpeech, giuing therby vnto their matter a certaine kind of liuelie geſture, and ſo conſequently attiring it with light, perſpicuitie, eaſineſſe, eſtimation, and dignitie: ſtirring vp thereby mens drowſie minds, and awaking ſlothfull, negligent, careleſſe, ſluggiſh, and retchleſſe people to the conſideration and acknowledgement of the truth, and to the following and imbracing of godlines.
            Heereby as they doe withdraw and deterre the wicked from their wicked waies, by laieng downe before them, Similitudes tending to ſuch purpoſe: ſo doe they no leſſe ſtirre them vp to vertue, to true happines, to perfect felicitie,

to ſound aſſurance, to the feare of God, and truſt in his mercie. Finally, they each waie ſeeke to win them to the knowledge of God, and of themſelues; and leaue no waie vnattempted to allure and bring them to the truth and perfect bleſſednes.
            And as touching the godlie, which feare the Lord, and frame their liues accordingly, they ceaſe not to incourage, confirme, ſtrengthen, and eſtabliſh them in their vertuous doings, by earneſt exhortation to perſiſt in their well begun exerciſe. They doe (as the Apoſtle S. Paul alſo willeth) admoniſh ſuch as walke inordinately, and liue out of courſe, being vntractable 2. Theſ. 3, verſ. 11. and vnruly, to remember their dutie, and to acknowledge their fault; they gently 1. Theſ. 5, verſ. 11. reprooue them, and mildly ſeeke to recouer them: they comfort the weake, and cheere vp the moornfull, they ſtrengthen and raiſe vp the feeble and broken harted, they reuiue the Iſai. 61, 1. ſorrowfull and heauie ſpirited, they raiſe vp them that are throwen downe: they vſe lenitie, mildneſſe and compaſſion towards al men in generall: they are ſlow to anger, ſlow to reuenge and violence: they heale the broken Luk. 4, 18. and bruiſed conſciences, they preach deliuerance to the captiues, ſight to the blinde, libertie to the impriſoned, comfort to the afflicted, ioy to the diſtreſſed, health to the ſicke, recouerie to the diſeaſed; and to the miſerable, releaſement from the thraldome and tyrannie of the Diuell: all theſe they notably

and elegantly ſet foorth in their writings by moſt apt Parables, forcible Compariſons, and effectuous Similitudes.
            Seeing therefore each one of the Prophets (among whom, many were kings, and deſcended of roiall blood) haue diſcourſed of theſe things, and inſerted the ſame into their writings: ſeeing likewiſe our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt and his Apoſtles haue practiſed the ſame, and ſhewed foorth the like kinde of doctrine: I thought my labour ſhould be well beſtowed, if brieſly and by the waie, I ſhould in this treatiſe ſhew what ſtore of excellent learning, pro
               
                  •
               ound wiſedome, hidden knowledge, and ex
               
                  •
               ct skill of nature; what zeale likewiſe of ad
               
                  •
               ancing true religion, and of baniſhing al ido
               
                  ••
               trie and ſuperſtition there reſted in thoſe men that by diuine inſpiration haue left and deliuered vnto vs ſuch woorthie and wholeſome matters, and ſuch ſurpaſſing knowledge, by drawing into their bookes (for the greater ornament and ſetting out of their ſpeech) the 
                  •
               hole ſtore and furniture of Nature.
         
         
            
            The ſecond Chapter.
            
               Of the qualitie, propertie and nature of Mandrake, which Rahel, by intreatie and compoſition got of hir ſister Leah.
               
            
            
               IN the infinite number of freſh, green and flouriſhing herbes, which almightie God the creator and maker of all thinges hath made and appointed to grow out of the earth for the vſe of man: the herbe Mandrake is not of leaſt account, not laſt to be reckoned. Of the which, (bicauſe there is ſpeciall mention thereof made in the holy Bible, and for that alſo it was accounted of, as daintie, delicate, and much deſired to be eaten) we wil therfore begin this our preſent diſcourſe, and argument thereat.
            There be of this Herbe two kinds: the one hauing leaues much like vnto Lettice, ſauing Mandrake. that they be narrower and ſmaller, and of adarke or dim greene colour. The Apple wherof groweth out at the centre or middle of the ſtalke, vpon the ſmal ſlender ſtems, in the bignes of a Filberd, and ſome as big as a Walnut, or Cheſtnut. And this kind is called the female Mandrake.
            
            But the male Mandrake hath more goodly,

faire and large leaues, of a whitiſh or milkie 
                  •
               reene colour: whoſe Apples growing out at 
                  •
               he middle of the ſtem among the broade and spread leaues, are in forme round and orbicular, and of colour, yellow, much like to the yolke of a hens egge, of a ſtrong ſent and ſauour, prouoking ſleepe; but yet pleaſant and delightſome: the roote is blackiſh, clouen into two diuiſions or clifts, like legs, folding and wrapped one about another, about the which, there grow many fine threeds or ſmall haires. Wherevpon certaine coſening Makeſhiftes, Much paltrie and coſening knauerie vſed about Mandrakes. deceitfull Pedlars, & hypocriticall lurdeins in times paſt, and yet ſtill in ſome places, deuiſe out of the roote of this herbe, and Brionie, to make certaine ſhapes and proportions like to the feature and phiſnamie of a man, reſem
               
                  •
               ling ſometime a man & ſometime a woman; being neither afraid nor aſhamed to perſuade and beare the ſimple ignorant people in hand that they grow naturally out of the earth in ſuch forme, proportion and making. Some of this lewd rabble of ſhifting mates, & ſhameles deceiuers, impudently and boldly auouch and conſtantly affirme, that this is a creature, hauing life, and engendered vnder the earth of the ſeed of ſome dead perſon, that hath beene conuicted and put to death for ſome felonie or murther, and that they had the ſame in ſuch dampiſh and funerall places where the ſaide conuicted perſons were buried: by which perſwaſion they pitifully abuſe the credulitie of

ſeely people, & get from them by colour therof no ſmall ſums of money. And ſome haue beene made to beleeue, that the apples and roote of this herbe hath had great vertue to procure antaſie (which they call loue) and as it were to enchant, and (perforce) to cauſe the partie to whom it ſhould be giuen to doate in amorous conceites, and to be foaded in a fooles paradiſe, as it is termed.
            
               Rahel (as the ſcripture mentioneth) was verie deſirous of this Apple, & made importunate ſute to obtaine it. For when as Ruben went out into the fieldes in the daies of wheat Gen. 30, 
                     •
                  4. harueſt, he founde Mandrakes and brought them to his mother Leah: which when Rahel perceiued, being one that enuied hir ſiſter for Rahe
                     ••
                   sute to Leah for Mandrake. hir fruitfulnes in bearing children, ſhe deſired and entreated hir ſaid ſiſter to giue hir of the ſame Mandrakes. Leah being offended with hir ſiſters importunitie, denied hir requeſt, and refuſed to beſtow the Apples vpon hir. At length the matter betweene them was compoſed and agreed vpon, vnder this condition, that Leah the night next following ſhoulde ſleepe with Iacob, who was husband to them both, and ſlept with them by turnes: and that Rahel ſhould haue and enioy the Mandrakes, which ſhe is thought to haue gotten from hir ſiſter, to the intent thereby the ſooner to conceiue, by eating the ſame apple, and ſleeping with the patriarch Iacob hir husband. For, ſhe greatly ſpighting hir ſiſters fruitefull wombe,

and no leſſe deſiring to baniſh and put awaie from hir ſelfe the rebuke of barrainnes and ſterilitie: bitterlie expoſtulated with hir huſbande, for that ſhe could beare no children, whereas hir ſiſter was the mother of manie. But Iacob wiſelie and grauely correcting hir error, and ſomewhat mooued with diſpleaſure againſt hir, told hir, that he was not therefore to be blamed; for that fruitfulnes and beareing of children was the gift of God, and diſpoſed at his diuine will and pleaſure.
            Now, whether Mandrake haue any ſuch vertue to make women fruitfull, and to helpe conception, therein lieth the queſtion and doubt. For, ſeeing that it hath a ſoporiferous nature and ſleepie qualitie, and is withall alſo verie colde, it is thought to be vtterlie vnprofitable, vnfit and ſtrengthleſſe to worke anie ſuch effect. For anſwere wherevnto, this I ſay, that as I confeſſe it to be vnauaileable and vnable to worke ſuch effect, or to bring anie ſuch thing to paſſe in cold and moyſt countries, or in a cold and moyſt wombe: ſo again in hot, parched and aduſt places it ſtandeth with good reaſon that it may well effect ſuch a conſequence. So that I am of opinion, that in Aphrike, Spaine, Iurie, Mauritanie, Barbarie, Aegypt and ſuch like countries, where the women be of an hot conſtitution, and haue aduſt, 
                  •
               rie, vnkindely, faint and leane wombes, this kinde of Apple may ſafely and verie conueniently be eaten. For by the eating thereof, the

bodie may expediently be brought (as I thinke) to a temperatenes: in that, the ſame (after carnall knowledge) being brought a ſleepe, the wombe is the better enabled to retaine the ſeede, not ſuffering it to euaporate as in an hot & dry matrix it vſually commeth to paſſe. Which thing I haue (by experience) in many founde to be true: who for the great and exceſſiue diſtemperance of their wombs, haue continued barraine and childleſſe, albeit their husbands haue beene as likely men to haue begotten children as any. Yea this ſame diſtemperance hath many times bred contagion in the generatiue partes of manie men, through the ſalſuginous, and frequent vnnaturall humour thereof. To women of ſuch conſtitution, (who for the moſt part are immoderatelie thereby giuen to vntamed luſt) theſe Mandrake apples may without any danger, yea to great purpoſe and auaile be ſafelie giuen: as alſo Pompions, Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons, Purſelane, Lettice, Nightſhade, with ſuch like cooling Simples, whereby that exceſſiue heate, and immoderate diſtemperance of the matrix and wombe may be qualified, and conueniently rectified.
            I know right wel that in theſe our Northren parts of the world there are ſundry kindes of Plantes and Herbes, which being naturallie harmefull and pernitious, can not chooſe but empaire and damnifie health, if their dangerous qualitie and offenſiue effect be not inhibited

and met withall. This is the reaſon, why we qualifie all thoſe Herbes that are naturally colde, with pepper, ginger, & graines of Paradiſe: by the which, their malice is reſtrained, & their harmfull qualitie conquered. So, Muſhromes & ſuch other excrements of the earth, to the Italians and people beyond the Alpes are nouriſhable and harmeleſſe, whereas to vs inhabiting this countrey, they are both dangerous and venemous, vnleſſe their pernicious qualitie by ſome hot condiments be mitigated and maſtered. Moreouer in hot regions, parched and burned with the full force of the Sunne, all thinges attaine the ſooner and the better to their ripenes: whereby it commeth to paſſe, that theſe kindes of delicacies, which (as ſtirrers and prouokers of wanton luſt) are ſo highly eſteemed, and ſo inordinately deſired of theſe laſciuious riotours and incontinent ſpend-thriftes, to increaſe and irrite their beaſtly luſt, do little or nothing preiudice the health of their bodies.
            But that the Hebrewes in the olde time tooke great delight and made ſingular account of Mandrake for the fragrant ſmell, and ſingular comfortable ſent thereof, may well appeere by that marriage ſong or Canticle of Solomon. Which maketh me to thinke that it was greatly eſteemed, much deſired, often Cant. 7, 13. handled, and carried about in Iurie, for that it hath in it a verie delicate and pleaſant ſmell, inducing and prouoking ſleepe, which vnto

wearie and weake perſons is both comfortable and recreatiue.
            And now to ſpeake ſomewhat by experience in my ſelfe, what I haue found and tried by this Mandrake, I will heer by the way ſhew you, what happened vnto me through the ſame. It ſo fell out, that in the ſommer ſeaſon (for at this time of the yeere the Mandrakes be ripe) I chaunced once or twice negligentlie and rechleſſely to lay vp on a ſhelfe in my ſtudie ſome of theſe goodly and beautifull apples. But behold what thereof enſued. Certes I became ſo ſleepie and drowſie, that I coulde not, but with verie much adoe, keepe my ſelfe waking. Striuing thus (all that I coulde) to ſhake off this drowſines, and finding no reaſon to lead me how it ſhould ſo come to paſſe, at length by caſting mine eie about ech corner, I eſpied the Mandrakes, which I had afore there laid: which after that I had taken away and remooued into another roume, I preſentlie recouered my former alacritie, and put to flight my ſluggiſh drowſines.
            But from this ſweete ſmelling and moſt fragrant apple, (whereby the carrier thereof becommeth gratious and the better liked with his beloued) the bridegroome taketh occaſion Cant. 7, 11. to walke foorth into the field. For, when as in the ſpring & ſommer ſeaſons all things do
                  ••
                burgen and flouriſh, and that the Mandrak
                     ••
                  
                and other pleaſant plants do gallantlie and odoriferouſlie ſmell, he calleth his ſponſe o
                  •
               
               
bride out of hir chamber, to the intent ſhe may for a while leaue the citie, and pleaſantly repoſe hir ſelfe in the gardens of pleaſure in the ſuburbs, refreſhing hir ſelfe with the manifold varietie of moſt beautifull herbs, and delightſome trees, as namely, ſpikenard, violet, lillies, pomegranate, Mandrakes, and the floriſhing vine. For, as all the trees, herbs and plants growing out of the earth, doe in the ſpring time of the yeere, ſpecially flouriſh and bloſſome, and exceedingly both for the gallant hue of the bloomes, and alſo for fragrancie of ſmell delight the beholder: ſo namely and aboue the reſt, the Vine ſendeth foorth a moſt excellent and ſurpaſſing ſent.
            It flowreth about the beginning of Iune, and hauing many weake and ſlender branches from whence groweth ſundrie newe knottie ſhootes, bringing foorth at euerie knot or ioint, broade iagged leaues diuided into fiue cuts or parts, it yeeldeth foorth a moſt pleaſant ſmell, wherewith the hart and braine of man is maruellouſly recreated, ſo that it is no ſmall ſolace and delight for a man during the time of the flowring therof, to dine, ſup, or otherwiſe to paſſe away the time in ſome conuenient arbor or gallerie vnder this moſt gallant and braue tree.
            It is alſo ſaide that the odour and ſmell of 
                  ••
               e leaues & flowres of this tree be ſo ſoue
               
                  •
               aigne, that no venemous beaſts wil approch

neere thereunto; inſomuch that Serpents, Snakes, Adders, Toades, and ſuch like, cannot abide to come neere where it is. During the ſeaſon and time therfore of the flow ring of this tree, it is right wholeſome vnder the ſhade therof to walke, ſit, conferre, talke, and coole our ſelues, ſith the ſame may without danger of noiſome and venemous creatures be ſafely performed. The Bridegroom Chriſt therefore (for ſo is he termed by Iohn the Baptiſt, being ſingularly affected toward his Spouſe the Church, which is the Congregation of faithfull beleeuers) delighteth in nothing more, than in the aduancement of the honor, dignitie, comelineſſe and beautie of his Bride: neither contrariwiſe, doth the Bride in any thing ſo much delite as in requitall of kindnes, and recompence of curteſies toward hir husband and Spouſe: ſo that betweene them twaine, there is no apt, proper, and reſembling Similitude to bee conueniently gathered either out of the Heauens, Stars, Planets, Mountaines, Hils, Woods, Groues, Fields, Herbes, Flowers, Trees, Wine or Vine, out of which any ſweet, pleaſant, delectable, or wholeſome ſmell, ſauour, or ſent proceedeth; but that the ſame be moſt pithily, and according to the honorable dignitie of either partie moſt fitly applied, and vpon occaſion moſt orderly and learnedly alledged.
            Thus is the Bridegroome there aptly

compared to ſweete Spikenard, to a bundle of Mirrhe, to a bunch or cluſter of pleaſant Grapes. The ſame Bridegroome alſo compareth his beloued (for hir excellent whitenes and ſweete ſmell) to a Lillie: inſomuch that if hir handmaids or thoſe of hir traine ſhould be compared vnto hir, they ſhould ſeeme to be but thornes and mungrels, without honor, beautie, eſtimation or dignitie. Theſe and ſuch like Metaphors are moſt plentifully to be read and ſeene, not in this Song or Canticle onely, but in all the reſt of the ſacred Scripture alſo; ſo that there is offered vnto each diligent Reader and induſtrious Student matter ynough, wherwith to delight himſelfe, and to recreate his minde, at leaſt way, if he attentiuely bende himſelfe in feruent deſire, entire care, and aduiſed cogitation to conſider heerein the excellencie of Nature, and the incomprehenſible maieſtie of the Maker and Creator.
            There are founde (I ſay) in this Song or Canticle, very elegant ſimilitudes taken from ſuch things as are knowen to be cordial and ſoueraigne remedies againſt the debilitie of the vital ſpirits, Sounding extaſies or Traunces: as namely, ſweete, ſmelling and redolent wine, delightfull and comfortable Noſegaies of fragrant Herbs and pleaſant Flowers. So likewiſe the Bride being now readie to faint and languiſh, and (as it were) at the point to quaile and ſhrinke downe through immoderate

loue toward hir husbande and Spouſe, commandeth hir handmaids to bring ſome comfortable Reſtoratiues, & to apply ſweet ſented odours to hir noſe: Staie me (ſaith ſhe) with flowers, and comfort me with apples, least I 
               Cant. 2, 5. 
               faint, for I am loue ſicke. So alſo doe we vſe, when anie fall into a ſounding or traunce, to giue vnto them Cinamome, Cloues, Vineger, Citrons, Lymons, Myrtle, Narde, and other ſoote Simples to ſmell vnto, which by the Scriptures, and ordinarie experience are knowen to be for that purpoſe good, cordiall and ſoueraigne.
         
         
            The third Chapter.
            
               Of Manna: and first of that which rained downe from Heauen: and next of that, which is vſuall in Phyſicke.
            
            
               WHereas the children of Iſrael in the wildernes were fed with Manna: it may not be thought Exo. 16, 14. Num 11, 8. Deut. 8, 16. Pſal. 78, 24. to proceede from anie naturall cauſe, but euen from the diuine power, and miraculous handie worke of almightie GOD, who yet (notwithſtanding) vſed the miniſterie of nature in the doing thereof: as he likewiſe did in the Quailes which he ſent among them

into the Campe: and as he alſo did, when as the Rock being ſmitten, yeelded foorth water abundantly for the refreſhing of the drie and thirſtie people: or as when by the caſting in of a peece of wood the bitter waters became Exo. 15, 25. Num. 20, 8. Exo. 14, 21. ſweete: or as finally, when by a moſt ſtrong Eaſt winde the red Sea was dried vp, and gaue free paſſage vnto the Hebrewes (all the Aegyptians purſuing them, being vtterly ſwallowed vp and drowned.)
            The like reaſon is to bee giuen of the Meale and of the Oile which was ſtill increaſed 1. Kin. 17 16 2. Ring. 4, 6. without waſting, at the praier of Elijah, and of Eliſha: of the Rauen that brought bread and fleſh to Elijah: of the Angell that broght vnto him a cake baked on the coles, and a pot of water; in the ſtrength whereof he iournied fortie daies and fortie nights Cap. 19, 6. without any other foode, vntill he came to Horeb, the Mount of God, where he found a caue, in the which he ſafely hid himſelfe from the tyrannie of wicked Iezebel, who cruelly perſecuted and hunted all the Prophets of the Lord to death.
            Theſe and ſuch like admirable, woonderfull and miraculous workes, could the Lord euen with a worde or a becke without the helpe of any thing, haue brought to paſſe: but yet his diuine will and pleaſure was, to vſe naturall thinges, (whereof he is both the worker and gouernour) as the meanes or inſtrument whereby to atchieue and worke

the ſame ſtrange effects, to the reliefe of his children, and comfort to their diſtreſſed mindes.
            The like haue we to obſerue and note alſo in Hezekiah being ſick, and by the doome of Iſaie. 38, 21. 2. Kin. 20, 7. God himſelfe appointed to die, whoſe boyle was cured by a lumpe of drie figs (which in operation are maturatiue) laide plaiſterwiſe to the ſame. Out of the which, wee are to learne this moſt profitable leſſon, that albeit God bee able to heale without any medicines, yet his pleaſure is, that in the time of ſicknes, we ſhoulde not contemne Phyſicke, as the meanes whereby our recouerie is wrought, but to vſe the ſame in the feare of God, for the reſtoring of our health and prolongation of our life.
            The like meanes did Chriſt himſelfe alſo vſe, in reſtoring ſight vnto a poore blinde Iohn. 9, 6. man, when as hee ſpat on the grounde and made claie of the ſpettle, with the which he annointed his eies, with further commandement to him to go and waſh himſelfe in the poole of Siloam. In like ſort alſo, cured he a dumbe man, & reſtored vnto him his ſpeech, Mark. 7, 32. by putting his fingers into his eares, and touching his toong with ſpettle.
            Theſe kindes of miracles did the Lorde worke, ſome while with onelie touching, and Mat. 20. 34. Mar. 10, 52. Luk. 18, 42. ſome while with onely a word, requiring nothing elſe at their hands that were cured, but onelie firme and ſtedfaſt faith and vndoubted

confidence to obtaine their requeſtes, as namelie in poore blinde Bartimaeus, faithfully crieng vnto Chriſt, (notwithſtanding the churliſh rebukes and checkes that he ſuſtained for ſo doing, at the hands of ſome of the companie) appeereth.
            But albeit Almightie God for his great mercie ſake, and for the ineſtimable loue wherewith he moſt bountifully loued mankind, did many and ſundry waies ſignifie his infinite goodnes toward them: yet moſt ſingularly and notably did he teſtifie and make apparant his woonderfull power and heauenly might, in working moſt ſtrange, moſt ſupernaturall and inimitable miracles. Among the which being innumerable, the raining and ſending downe of Manna ſo copiouſlie and aboundantly from heauen, to ſuffice ſuch an huge and populous multitude, is namely and ſpeciallie to be remembred.
            For, when as the people (being a confuſed multitude) to the number of ſixe hundreth thouſand perſons, repiningly murmured againſt God, and Moſes his ſeruant, for bringing them out of Aegypt, into that waſte Num. 11, verſ. 31. Exo. 16, 13. Pſal. 78, 24. Wildernes, to be (as they ſeditiouſlie muttered) there ſterued and famiſhed: God in the euening of the ſame daie ſent into their Campe an incredible multitude of Quailes: and in the morning the Dewe lay rounde about the Hoſte vpon the grounde, and when

the Dew that was fallen, was aſcended, the
                  ••
                appeered vpon the face of the Wildernes, a ſmall round thing, thinne as the hoare froſt vpon the earth, in the likenes of Coriand
                     ••
                  
                ſeede, of the colour of Bdellium, and in reliſh or taſte like vnto Wafers made with Honie. When the children of Iſraell being thereat greatly a
                  ••
               onied, or (as ſome expounde it) contemptuouſlie regarding it, did with admiration or irriſion beholde it; they ſaide one to another, Manhu, What is this? For they wist not what it was.
            
            The Manna which is vſed in Phyſicke. being hot, temperate and moyſt is not altogither vnlike vnto this which we haue nowe mentioned. For there is gathered in hot Countries and warme Regions an Aerie and Dewie Honie, diſtilling and dropping from the Ayre in the night time about the Canicular daies in Sommer, and falling vpon Trees, Braunches, Herbs, Boughes, Flowers and Stones in ſmall drops or graines, which being rolled and chafed a little while with the toong, melteth and diſſolueth as it were Sugar, and with a moſt delicate ſweetenes ſingularlie delighteth the palate and mouth. It is right ſouereigne and beneficial to lenifie the roughnes of the Iawes, and aſperitie of the Throate. It notably quencheth heate, purgeth blood, looſeth and mollifieth the bellie, as the Caſſia fistula doth, but ſomewhat more gently and mildely: and therfore

may ſafely and without any feare or danger be miniſtred to tender Folkes, Yoonglings, Aged perſons, Women with childe, or that lie in childebed, taking the quantitie of an ounce in weight at once, hauing alwaies regarde and reſpect (as meete it is) to the nature and conſtitution of ech particular perſons bodie.
            And it is termed by the name of Manna, or Melaereum, bicauſe being drawn vp from the earth by the heate of the Sunne in the daie time; it falleth downe againe in the coole night ſeaſon, and lighteth vpon Trees, Plantes, &c. in ſuch proportion, ſhape, taſte, ſweetenes and reliſh almoſt, as the other Manna was, which the Bible deſcribeth, and which the Iſraelites did eate many yeeres; inſomuch that with the long vſe therof, they fell to loathing of it, and diſdainefully to deſpiſe the great bountiful gift of their Lord and God.
            I my ſelfe haue ſometimes founde this Manna at ſuch times as I haue purpoſely walked out of the Vniuerſitie to ſeeke for Herbs in mornings afore dailight, ſpecially at the later ende of the Spring, when the Ayre hath beene milde and the weather calme.
            But there is ſolde by ſome of theſe couetous and vnconſcionable Apothecaries in ſteede of this true right Manna or Ayrie Honie, another counterfeited and ſophiſticated Manna, made of Sene and Sugar. But by the

melting thereof in the mouth, the patcherie and ſleight may ſoone be eſpied.
            There be ſome that gather about Bee hyues, and other places where Bees do mellifie, certaine excrements of yellowiſh colour and ſweete reliſh like to Honie, beleeuing and making others to beleeue that the ſame is the right Manna, diſtilling out of the Ayre, whereas in verie deede, it is nothing elſe, than a certaine excrementall lyquor, iuyce, iellie, ſlime or ſpittle, comming from Waſps, Dorres, Drones and Gnats. For, theſe kinds of vnprofitable Bees do lie in waite to lurch the labours, and to ſucke the Honie made and gathered by the painefull toyling Bees, which ſo ſoone as the ſame poore Bees eſpie, they ioyne their forces togither, ſet vpon thoſe theeuiſh Drones and filching vermine, and neuer leaue till they haue baniſhed or deſtroied and ſlaine them: And this is by the moſt excellent Poet Virgil notably auouched and ſet out, where he ſaith:
            
               They faſhion, trym and brauely decke Georg. lib. 4.
               
               Their Combes for Honie ſweete:
               And neately frame their waxie web
               As for their worke is meete.
               With carefull care ſome hatch and breed
               Mo yoong ones for increaſe:
               While others, Honie of the best
               To gather neuer ceaſe:
               Wherewith their ſtatelie Cels they fill
               With ſtore of Nectar fine:
               
                  
Shewing themſelues a dapper Crew
               To brew this iuyce diuine,
               Ech one is ſet vnto his taske,
               Ech one his worke doth know:
               Some range abroad: ſome ſtay at home
               And labour do bestow,
               By couching into order neate
               What others home do bring:
               Or elſe in Warlike guiſe they driue
               The Drones from Hyue with ſting.
            
         
         
            The fourth Chapter.
            
               Of wilde Letuce.
               
            
            
               ALmightie God euerie way ſeeking the benefite and furtherance of Exod. 12. Numb. 9. man in godlines, and in moſt ample ſorte powring out his vnſpeakable bountie vpon him, requireth at his hands againe in lieu thereof none other recompence, but that he ſhoulde loue and honor him, and in moſt aſſured truſt and vndouted beleefe leane vnto his moſt gratious promiſes. He ſundry waies admoniſheth him, and in many ſortes putteth him in remembrance of his dutie, and ſtirreth him vp from his ſlothfull, negligent and careleſſe ſecurity, to an acknowledgement of the benefites

which he hath receiued, leaſt otherwiſe he ſhoulde vngratefully forget them: For this cauſe and purpoſe the Lorde GOD inſtituted diuerſe rites, and ſundrie ſolemne ceremonies, not onely in the olde Law wherein all thinges concerning Chriſt and his kingdome were typicallie ſhadowed, but alſo in the Goſpell, wherein all the promiſes of God were reallie, perfectly, plainely and effectuallie exhibited, fullie finiſhed, and ſubſtantially manifeſted, as Chriſt at the time of his giuing vp of the Ghoſt witneſſed. Ioh. 19. 30.
            
            Thus doth he teſtifie and aſſure men of the infallible performance of his promiſes, and of his heauenly attonement and reconciliation Why Sacraments were ordained. with them, by certaine Signes, Tokens, Seales, or Sacramentes, viſible to the eie, and apparantly ſubiect to outwarde ſenſes.
            For Baptiſme being the Seale of the righteouſnes Baptiſme. Rom. 4, 11. Gen. 17, 12. Exo. 14, 22. of Faith, and the firſt entrance and receiuing into the Church, was figured by Circumciſion and by paſſing through the red Sea: inſomuch that we be thereby conſecrated vnto God, and engraffed into him, by faith, with ful deliuerance from the guilt of our ſins.
            And in place or ſteede of the eating of the Paſchall Lambe, we haue now the holy Communion Supper of the Lord. Luk. 22, 19. 1. Co. 11, 24 of the bodie and blood of Chriſt: which he hath left vnto vs and commanded

to be ſolemnlie frequented and celebrated of al true Chriſtians, for a perpetual remembrance of his death and paſſion, and for a continuall memorie of that his moſt ineſtimable benefite of redeeming vs freely without any deſert or merite in vs, from the tyrannie of the Deuill, and from the power of death, hauing all our ſins and iniquities entierly forgiuen, and cleerely pardoned, in and through our mercifull Mediator, Aduocate and Attonement maker Ieſus Chriſt. For the Law was giuen by Moſes, but grace and 
               Iohn. 1, 17. 
               truth came by Ieſus Chriſt. This myſterie liuely and truly exhibited in Chriſt, was long afore prefigured and ſhadowed by the willing obedience of Abraham, in the ſacrificing of Gen. 22, 6. his ſonne Iſaac: and in the ordinance and inſtitution of a male Lambe without blemiſh, which Moſes by the preſcript commandement of God, ſolemnely appointed to be eaten with ſower Herbes, or wilde Letuce, for Exod. 12, 5. the better retaining in freſh memorie: the miſerable ſlauerie and thraldome wherein they afore liued vnder Pharao in Aegypt: from which moſt ſlauiſh yoke and intollerable bondage, they were mercifully deliuered.
            The Paſſeouer therefore was inſtituted, to Paſſeouer. Paſchall Lambe. reuiue, retaine, and renew the memorie of that day, wherein the Iſraelites by ſtriking their door poſts with the blood of the Lamb were preſerued from the danger of the Angel, that was ſent to deſtroie and kill all the

firſt borne in Aegypt: and wherby they ſafely paſſed through the red Sea: which day was thervpon termed Paſſeouer, being a word aptly and fitly importing moſt wholeſome inſtruction and comfortable direction, vnto vs liuing in the troubleſome wilderneſſe of this miſerable world; to admoniſh vs of our paſſage toward our heauenly Countrie, and bleſſed dwelling of immortalitie.
            This Lambe was commanded to be eaten with ſower Herbs, or wilde Letuce: for that, in this our wretched life, all things are bitter, troubleſome, greeuous, and full of calamitie, hauing in it a great deale more Aloe than Honie, that is, much greater ſtore of miſerie and miſchiefe, than of ioy and tranquillitie.
            Some hold opinion, that vnder the name of Letuce, there be alſo comprehended the Herbs Succorie and Endiue, bearing a white blewiſh flower and iagged: which being kept couered and buried in ſand or grauell, is vſed in winter time for ſalads at the beginning of meales. The vſing and handling of it in this ſort, cauſeth it to forgo and looſe his bitterneſſe, and withall to become excellentlye white, much like to the inner leaues of the great white Cabage or Colewort. And theſe Herbs be verie good and profitable againſt the obſtructions of the Liuer, for that, they haue in reſpect of their bitterneſſe, an abſterſiue vertue and cleanſing force, opening the

pores and paſſages, and enlarge all oppilations. They be alſo very good to cure the tertian Ague, and the Iaundice. They qualifie alſo and mitigate all the diſtemperance both of the Gall and Liuer, wherewith (as by their tawnie complexions it appeereth) the Iewes are ſpecially incombred. Theſe Herbes or Plantes hath Virgil learnedlye remembred and ſet out, where he termeth Endiue to be Georg. lib. 1. naturally bitter. And in another place, he ſaith:
            
               I could deſcribe (if leiſure ſeru'de) Georg. lib. 4.
               
               The Garden how to dreſſe:
               And how ech Herbe to plant and ſowe,
               All this I could expreſſe:
               The Roſebanks that renowmed be
               Of Paeſtum fertile ſoile,
               Which twiſe a yeere yeeld foorth their crop,
               With helpe of ſlender toile.
               Endiue likewiſe and Cichorie
               That growes in watriſh ground
               In Meades and Ditches; Smallage greene
               And Parſelie might I ſound.
               And how the gallant Cucumber
               Delightfully doth ſmell
               And ſtretch it ſelfe along the graſſe:
               Of all theſe could I tell, &c.
            
            Columella likewiſe greatly commendeth 
               Lib. 10. them, and wiſheth them to be carefully planted and nouriſhed in Gardens, as a neceſſarie helpe at a pinch for any preſent occaſion: for that, the husbandly benefit and houſhold

ſtay thereby growing, may ſerue in ſteede of a thriftie Larder, as Tullie in his Booke of Old-age termeth it.
            
               Let Gardens ſtored be with Herbes that bring
               Good taste to meates, and ſtirre vp appetite;
               As Cheruill, Endiue, Letuce, and ſuch thing
               As orderly the ſtomacke may irrite.
            
            Like vnto theſe in vertue, nature, effect and operation, are the herbs Chondrilla (which we may call Gumme Succorie) the ſoft milke Thiſtle, Dent de Lion, or Rostrum Porcinum, Hawkeweede called Hieracium; all which haue in them a milke white iuice and yellowiſh flower, very pleaſant and daintie food for Hares and Conies. For by eating thereof, theſe ſmall Creatures preſerue themſelues from embolning and dropſie-like ſwelling, by reaſon that the bitterneſſe of theſe Herbes, drieth vp their moiſture and ſuperfluous humor. Wherefore ſuch of them as be not too greatly bitter, are in the beginning of the Spring, when their leaues be tender, good to be vſed in ſalads.
            But that the wilde Letuce (which is termed by the name of Endiue) was vſed at the eating of the Paſchall Lambe onely as a condiment or ſauce, I cannot eaſily be perſuaded: bicauſe (by reaſon of the notable nipping bitternes thereof, which biteth the toong) it is not fit to be eaten, neither can it ſerue for foode, nouriſhment or meate, ſauing onely when it firſt ſpringeth vp, and

is verie yoong, that is, ere it be armed on his backe ſide with ſharpe prickles. For the common Endiue which is the verie right Wilde Letuce, in bitternes paſſeth all other plants and herbs whatſoeuer that conteine in them white iuyce, ſap or liquor. And therfore Phyſitions vſe to miniſter Endiue in medicine, while it is yoong and tender, and not when it is full growen, prickly, and olde. But the other kinds thereof, namely Succory and Seriola, I am fully perſwaded may be vſed as a ſauce or ſeaſoning, to reliſh Lambe being either roaſt or ſodden: and thereof (aſwell the leaues as the roots) haue our Country folkes learned to make right holeſome and toothſome Salades. The roote thereof is well neer a cubite and a halfe in length, which many do vſe to ſlit into ſmall partes, like to the red Parſenep or Carot, and ſo to eate it with Oyle, Vineger and Pepper, as they do Cucumbers, Sampiere, Charlocke or Raponſe, with many ſuch like, as the time and ſeaſon of the yeere doth conueniently yeelde and affoord.
         
         
            
            The fift Chapter.
            
               
                  Of the Olyue and wilde Olyue Trees, and of Olyues and Oile.
            
            
               AS the Palm tree (which will not be kept downe with any waight) is the Reuel. 7, 9. Badge, Enſigne and token of victory: ſo is the Olyue tree a betokener and ſingnfier of peace: for proofe wherof, the Doue may ſerue, which Noah ſent out of the Arke, who after the floode was abated and the waters ſlaked, came againe, bringing in hir mouth an Olyue leafe, as an apparant figure of Gods wrath mitigated. Gen. 8, 11.
            
            The leaues of this Tree be long and narrowe, much like to the leaues of a Willow, Wythie or Pryuet, greene at the top, but whitiſh and of an hoarie colour rowarde the neather end, like the white Popler: the flowers be ſmall, and many, of colour browne, pleaſantly and delightfullie ſmelling. It beareth berries in maruellous great number, in forme like to an Egge: which when they draw towarde ripenes, are endued with an Oile & fatiuice. Out of whom there is preſſed and drawen an Oyle, that is of excellent vertue to ſtrengthen the ioynts, comfort the members, and alſo to mitigate and aſſwage

any dolours of the bodie. It ſuppleth the Lyms, and maketh them nymble, actiue and liuely, ſpecially being outwardly applied, rather than inwardly receiued. There with the body being annointed not only looketh the neater and ſmoother, but alſo becommeth a great deale the ſtronger, readier, and fitter to any exerciſe or labor.
            This (no doubt) did Dauid well knowe, where he expreſſelie mentioneth the ſame, and breaketh out into moſt earneſt, hartie and vehement praiſe, and thankeſgiuing to God for the ſame, and other benefites. It is 
               Pſa. 104, 15 
               the Lord (ſaith he) that cauſeth graſſe to grow for the cattel, and herbe for the vſe of man, that he may bring foorth bread out of the earth, and Wyne that maketh glad the hart of man, and Oyle to make the face to ſhine, and Bread to ſtrengthen mans hart.
            
            To the ſame purpoſe tendeth alſo that ſaieng of Plinie, affirming that, there be two Liquors, most holeſome to mans bodie, to wit, inwardly, Wyne, and outwardly, Oyle.
            
            That pitifull Samaritane alſo (by whom is Luk. 10, 34. ment Chriſt) powred Oyle and Wine into the woundes of the man that fell among Theeues, being two moſt excellent things in ſuch caſes to be miniſtred: Wine, to ſcowre, cleanſe and mundifie the wound: and Oyle to ſupple, lenifie, and aſſwage the paine, and to heale the diſtreſſed patient. Heereby is ment and ſignified, that Chriſt (contrarie to the guiſe of the careleſſe Prieſts and negligent

Leuites) healeth with his heauenly doctrine, afflicted conſciences and wounded Soules, bindeth vp the ſoares of the amazed minde, recureth and ſkinneth the agonies of the troubled conſcience, and that in ſuch ſort, that no appeerance or ſhew thereof is left to be ſeene, that is to ſay, ſo entirely and wholie, that none of all the miſdeedes which he hath afore committed, ſhall be to him imputed, or once laide to his charge.
            This Oile being inwardly taken, doth mollifie and looſe the bellie, aſſwageth all paine, ſwelling and inflammation, ſlicketh and ſmootheth al roughnes and aſperities, daunteth and encountreth poiſon; it maketh the belly ſoluble and ſlipperie; it prouoketh vomit, whereby all noiſome, hurtful and pernicious things may be the better expelled; it hindereth and letteth through the ſlipperie nature and gliding facultie that is in it, that poiſoned drinks and venemous potions ſhal not pearce or enter into the veines, to the endangering of the bodie with death: yea, it hath this qualitie, propertie and commoditie alſo further, that being taken afore hand, it withſtandeth dronkennes, and will keepe a man that he ſhall not haſtilie or quickly be ouertaken and cupſhot.
            Vnaduiſedly and beſide the rules of art do ſome deale, that apply and laie to ſuch members as are broken, wrentched, out of ioynt, bruſed, ſhronken, battered and harmed

by ſome fall, this Oyle or Butter. But the Verdiuyce, or Oyle that is made of the Oliue afore it be full ripe, hath an aſtringent power, and is very good to binde, vnite, knit and conſolidate the ſundred and diſſolued parts of the bodie. But yet, at the firſt, and in the beginning while the wound is green, (if the age of the partie will beare it) it ſhall not be amiſſe to annoint or inſtill into the place ſome Butter or Oyle, (a veine being firſt opened) to aſſwage the paine, and diſſolue the clottered and congealed bloud engendered in the ſame.
            For which purpoſe, my vſe and order is to miniſter vnto the partie, a potion made with the powder of Madder and Nutmigs: and afterward to apply vnto them ſome ſuch things as are by nature conſolidatiue, to wit, A potion conſolidatiue. Milfoyle or Yarrow, red roſes before they be full blowen, Myrtle Berries, all the kinds of Symphitum or Comfrey, Sperma Coeti, right Mumia, Rhabarbe, and Nu
                  •
               mig; & to boile al theſe togither in red wine, which is by nature ſtipticke and aſtringent.
            The berries are called in euery Countrie almoſt by the name of Oliues: which being Oliues. gathered afore they be ripe, and while they be yet but newly greene, are vſually kept in pickle or brine, and are excellent good to prouoke appetite, and procure to a man a ſtomacke to his meate; and they be good alſo, to withſtand droonkenneſſe, as like wiſe

bitter Almonds be.
            From the fruit and flowers of this Tree or Plant, diuine Writers deriue and fetch ſundrie Similitudes both apt and elegant. So in the booke of Iob, where ſpeedie deſtruction is denounced to the wicked and blaſphemous, it is thus ſaid: Before his day ſhall God 
               Iob. 15, 33. 
               destroy him, and his branch ſhall not be greene: be ſhall be cast out, as the Vine doth hir ſower grape, and as the Oliue doth hir flower. That is to ſaie, he ſhall bee taken away before his day by quicke and ſudden death, and ſhal not arriue to ripe age.
            And the Similitude is taken from ſuch Trees and freſh Herbs, as in the Spring tide growe vp gallantly, and appeere moſt beautifull, and yet their bloomes through blaſting, doe either come to nothing, or elſe are ſhaken downe with the ſturdie ſtormes of nipping windes and tempeſtuous weather. For, God doth not long ſuffer the wicked to enioy their proſperitie, or to haue in all things their wiſhed will and deſired ſucceſſe, but euen in the middeſt of their ſlaunting pride, and when as for age they might haue liued a great while longer, hee cutteth off their daies, and bringeth vpon them a ſudden and ſpeedie deſtruction.
            Thus do we reade, how God haſtened his iudgements, & brought the floud vpon the world, for that they would not be warned, nor repent and amende their wicked liues, Gen. 6.
               
but daily grew from woorſe to woorſe. And God threatening ſudden deſtruction, and denouncing dreadfull woes vnto the Prieſts and Ringleaders of Ephraim, for their careleſſe contempt of Religion, whereunto thorough their pride and droonkenneſſe they were fallen, thundereth out his greeuous ire and heauie indignation againſt them for the ſame by his Prophet, where he ſaith: Woe to 
               Iſai. 28, 1. 
               the Crowne of Pride, the Droonkards of Ephraim: for his glorious beautie ſhall be a fading flower, and as the haſtie fruit afore Sommer and ripening time. Whereby his meaning is, that they with all their pompe, ſtatelineſſe and arrogancy, ſhal be brought lowe, and thrōwne downe, as Sommer fruit and ſoone ripe figs, that are by and by with greedineſſe pulled and eaten, and cannot be kept till winter.
            A much like argument doth the ſame Prophet alſo in another place (as an Ambaſſador or meſſenger ſent from God) denounce againſt the Aegyptians: Afore the Haruest when the flowre is finiſhed, and the fruite is riping in the flower, ſhall the branches (of Aegypt) be cut downe, and the boughes thereof taken away. Wherby hee ſignifieth that the Aegyptians ſhall be ſerued, euen as ſoone ripe fruites, and firſt grapes or berries, which are ripe before their time, and are readie to be eaten afore the ſeaſon that other fruites are. For ſuch kinde of fruites do quickly rot, and will not long be kept, ſo that thereby his plaine meening

is, that their felicitie and glorie ſhal not be of any continuance.
            By the Olyue Tree alſo and other Trees beſides, the good ſucceſſe and plentifull aboundance of all things towarde the godlie, togither with the increaſe and continuance of the ſame, is ſignified, which the Prophet Dauid plainely witneſſeth, in his comparing of a godlie and vertuous man fearing God, to a Tree planted by the water ſide, that is fruitfull 
               Pſal. 1, 3. 
               and bringeth foorth his fruit in due ſeaſon.
            
            
               Ieremiah amplifieth and diſcourſeth the ſame Argument more at large, where he pronounceth all calamitie and miſerie to the froward and ſtiffenecked people, that forſaking the Lord God, ſought helpe, refuge and ſuccour in man, and things of vanitie. Curſed (ſaith he) be the man that trusteth in man, and 
               Ierem. 17, 5 
               maketh fleſh his arme, and withdraweth his hart from the Lord: for he ſhall be like the Heath in the Wildernes, and ſhall not ſee when any good commeth, but ſhall inhabite the parched places, in a ſalt hungrie and fruitleſſe ſoyle. But bleſſed be the man that trusteth in the Lord, and putteth all his trust and confidence in him. For he ſhall be as a Tree that is planted by the ryuer, and ſhall not feele when the heate commeth, but hir leafe ſhall be greene, and ſhall not care for the time of drought, neither ſhall ceaſe from yeelding fruite. By theſe and ſuch like Metaphors is the ſtedfaſt truſt that ought to be wholie put in God, commended and ſet foorth: ſignifieng that our hart,

minde, hope and cogitations, ought not to depend on any other, not to be directed to any other, than to him alone, from whom all goodneſſe floweth, and who is moſt bountifull, willing and ready to giue all manner of good things vnto men (truly calling vppon him) in moſt large and ample foiſon.
            Heerupon it was that Dauid relying vpon God, and ſtaieng himſelfe vnder his gouernance and protection, rather than vpon any vaine, tranſitorie, and momentanie things of the world, contrarie to the guiſe, cuſtome, and maner of the wicked, ſaith thus: I ſhal be 
               Pſal. 52, 8. 
               like a greene Oliue tree in the houſe of God: for I trust in the mercies of God for euer. Again, where he deſcribeth and ſetteth out the bleſſednes and plentie that ſhal light vpon the man that is not idle, but feareth the Lord and walketh in his commandements: and the fruitfulnes that ſhall be giuen to his wife, he ſaith: Bleſſed 
               Pſal. 128. 
               is the man that feareth the Lord and walketh in his waies, he ſhall eate the labours of his hands, & all things ſhal go wel with him: His wife ſhal be as the fruitfull Vine on the ſides of his houſe: His children as the Oliue branches round about his table. Lo, thus ſhal the man be bleſſed that feareth the Lord. Likewiſe in the propheſie of Ieremiah, God calleth the people: that he taketh ſingular delight in, A greene Oliue tree, a faire and 
               Ier. 11, 16. 
               of goodlie fruit, which is, as though he ſhould ſay, the name of it is vnto him pleaſant, gracious and amiable.
            
               
With the ſame agreeth alſo the Prophet Hoſea, who with the ſame Spirite and out of the ſame fountaine wrate his Propheſies. The beautie of Iſrael (ſaith he) ſhall be as the Oliue 
               Hoſea. 14, 7 
               tree, and his ſmell as Lebanon. Whereby he ſignifieth, that all they which aſſuredly and vndoubtedly cleaue vnto God, and obediently walke in his precepts, ſhal ſtand highly in his fauor and grace, and be vnto him both pleaſant and acceptable. For, as a ſweet ſmel and fragrant odor reuiueth the ſpirits, and refreſheth the ſenſes: ſo doth the ſmell of a man that imbraceth the wholeſome doctrine of God, and dutifully conformeth himſelfe to his diuine will, delight, recreate, refreſh, and pleaſe him.
            And that choſen veſſell S. Paule, ſhewing how gracious and fauourable they ſtand before God, which ſincerely aduance his glorious Goſpell, and faithfully inſtruct others in the ſame, ſaith that We are vnto God the ſweete 
               2. Cor. 2, 15. 
               ſauour of Christ in euery place.
            
            And the Patriarke Iſaac: The ſmell of my 
               Gen. 27, 27. 
               Sonne is as the ſmell of a pleaſant field, which the Lord hath bleſſed.
            
            Finally, in the Canticle or Song of Solemon, the Bride being the Church ſpeaking of Chriſt hir Spouſe, ſaith: Bicauſe of the ſauour 
               Cant. 1, 2. 
               of thine ointments, we will run after thee, &c. that is to ſay, we will endeuour and ſtudie the beſt that we can or are able euery one of vs in his calling, that we may be fed and refreſhed

with his wholſome doctrine, which cheereth the feeble, and recreateth the wearie, none otherwiſe than a ſweet and pleaſant ſmel delighteth the ſenſes of thoſe that ſwoune, or fall downe for debilitie and weakeneſſe of their vitall ſpirits.
         
         
            The ſixt Chapter.
            
               Of the prickly Buſh or thornie Shrub, called Rhamnus: and of ſome, Christs Thorne.
            
            
               THis thorne Rhamnus is a kinde of Shrub or Buſh, that is on euerie ſide beſet and encompaſſed with many ſharp prickles & ſhort ſtubbed thorns: out of the which there groweth (cluſterwiſe) by ſmall and ſlender ſtems, the fruit or berries, in great number and quantitie, of an yellowiſh colour, & round forme, as big as a Mirtle or Iuniper, and of taſte moſt ſharpe, ſower, tart, and eigre. If a man be not warie and heedfull in the handeling wherof, he may quickly wound his hand with the ſharpe prickles that grow therupon. The berries which are ſobbie and watriſh, being bitten with the teeth, taſted with the toong, or cruſhed and bruiſed with the fingers, 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
tanne and die the ſame with a yellowiſh or ſaffron colour.
            Of this Thorne there be three kindes: among the which this kinde that we not ſpeake of, groweth in great abundance in the grauelly ſoile and buſhie grounds of Zeland. In which countrie all along by the ſandie ſoile of the Sea coaſt, there are growing many and ſundry ſorts of theſe and ſuch like ſhrubs, ſhootes, and thornie prickled buſhes, as namely this Rhamnus, Bremble brier, Sea Purcelaine, Furze or Gorſe, Holme or Huluer, Teaſels, Cardthiſtles, Seaholly, Camock, Reſtharrowe and petie Whin, beſide many others.
            
               Bellonius a learned man (who for the increaſe of his knowledge trauelled through the land of Iurie and Syria) holdeth opinion that the thornie Crowne, wherewith the Iewes crowned our Sauiour Chriſt, was of this Rhamnus: whereunto he is perſuaded, for that in thoſe Countries there is none other ſort of thorne growing.
            From this thornie Buſh or prickly ſhrub, doth the princely Prophet Dauid take a moſt excellent and fit Similitude, againſt the hawtie pride, preſumptuous tyrannie, factions mutinie, and intollerable crueltie of bloodie Caitifs and treacherous wretches, that maliciouſly lie in wait to ſurprize the innocent, and ſupplant the godlie: whoſe wicked practiſes and vndermining drifts, ſhall (notwithſtanding)

be fruſtrated and defeated: and all their ſpitefull imaginations adnihilated. As raw fleſh (ſaith he) beforc your pots feele the fire of 
               Pſal. 58, 9. 
               Thornes, ſo let them be ſnatched vp. That is, they ſhall miſſe of their purpoſe, and quaile in their conceiued miſchiefe: their deuiſes ſhall be daſhed ere they be throughly hatched, euen as yoong thornes, which ſhall be plucked vp and weeded out afore they euer come to full ripeneſſe, or to haue any hard prickly nature: bicauſe the Lord (as it were with a tempeſt) will deſtroy them, and carrie them away (as with a whirlewind) in his wrath, & bring downe their high lookes and miſchieuous platforms. By which words, he ſignifieth and meaneth, that although they practiſe neuer ſo many ſleights, policies, deuiſes, deceits, frauds, quarrels, maſſacres, murders, ſpoiles and deſolations, yet ſhall they come ſhort of their deſire, and not be able to bring to paſſe their conceiued miſchiefes, but ſhall be nipped (as it were) in the bud, before they can attaine to any ripeneſſe or ſtrength to worke their malice.
            Vnder which words there be couertly alſo included this further meaning; that ſuch wicked perſons practiſing tyrannie and oppreſſion towards the ſeely inferiour people, ſhall be violently taken out of this life, euen as fleſh is taken out of the pot or caldron, being halfe raw, or before it beynough ſodden, or meete to be eaten: hauing ſcarcely felt

the heat of the fire that is made of thornie, prickly, and crackling Rhamnus.
            
            For, Fagots and Bauens of Furze, Thorns, Rhamnus, Iuniper, Brembles, Bryers and Buſhes, are woont not only to ſcratch, prick and wound the hands of ſuch as deale with them and handle them; but alſo being laide on the fire, they terrifie and make afraide thoſe that ſit thereat, with their crackling flame and ſparkling noiſe, in ſo much that they caſt out vpon thoſe that be neere, dangerous ſparkes and hot burning brands.
            This therefore muſt be vnderſtoode to be the ſenſe and meaning of theſe words of the Prophet: That although Tyrants, Oppreſſors, Sycophants, and Bloodſuckers do rage and raue, ſtampe and ſtare, fret and fume, and euery way ſeeke occaſions to ouercrow and ſupplant the innocent, yet ſhall they miſſe of their purpoſe, and nothing ſhall ſucceed according to their deſire, but that by their ſodaine and vnlooked for death, the godly and innocent ſhall be deliuered out of their iawes and danger.
         
         
            
            The ſeuenth Chapter.
            
               Of the wilde Gourd, commonly called Colloquintida.
               
            
            
               COlloquintida is vſed in Phyſicke to purge Phlegme and Choler, as wel yellow as black: which humours it expelleth mightily and forcibly, but not without detriment & danger to the powers and faculties of the bodie: ſo ſtrongly ſometimes opening the veines, that it cauſeth blood to 
                  •
               ome foorth. To qualifie therefore his dangerous nature and imperious operation, it 
                  •
               hall be verie expedient to put to it Maſticke 
                  •
               nd ſuch other things, as are good to ſtreng
               
                  •
               hen and comfort the ſtomacke.
            The fruit of it when it is ripe, is round and 
                  •
               leake or whitiſh, of the bignes of a Ball, or 
                  •
               f an Orenge or Cytron. If the vpper part of 
                  ••
               e rinde or barke being yellowiſh, be pared 
                  •…
               ay with a knife, the inſide is full of iuyce, 
                  ••
               d of a moſt bitter taſte. As appeereth in 
                  ••
               e hyſtorie of the Booke of Kings.
            For, whereas Eliſha his ſeruant went out 2. Kin. 4, 39. to the fieldes to gather Potherbes, and a
               
                  •
               ong others gathering this Colloquintida, and

ſhredding it into the Pot, not knowing what it was, powred out the potage for the men to eate, they had no ſooner taſted thereof, but they preſently cried out and ſaid, Death is in the Pot: bicauſe the bitternes therof was ſo extreeme, that they thought they had beene poiſoned. Eliſha being not vnskilfull in the Secretes of Nature, foorthwith bethought himſelfe, how this bitternes might be met withall and qualified. And therwithall he caſt Meale into the Pot, whereby the potage became good and ſauerie, and might Meale. be ſafely eaten, without danger or harme.
            There is reaſon Phyſical to be yeelded for this matter. For Mault meale, namely, o
                  •
                Barlie mault, hath that vertue, nature, and operation, that it taketh away all vnnatural reliſh and bitter taſte. And by common experience we finde it true, that brackiſh and bitter water being mingled with Barlie mault, becommeth ſweet, delicate and ſauorie: And ſo likewiſe doth the Beane meale▪ in ſo much that within the ſpace of two houres, it will become of good reliſh and potable, and may ſafely without danger b
                  •
                receiued into the bodie.
         
         
            
            The eight Chapter.
            
               Of the Willow.
               
            
            
               THe Willow is called Salix, & hath his name, à ſaliendo, for that it quicklie groweth vp, and ſoon becommeth a Tree. Heerewith do they in ſome countrey trim vp their parlours and dining roomes in Sommer, and ſticke freſh greene leaues thereof about their beds for coolenes. From this doth God by his Prophet Iſaiah take a moſt excellent ſimilitude, wherin he promiſeth to the godly that put their truſt in him, plentie and aboundance of all things, and proſperous ſucceſſe in all their affaires: and that he will bountifully giue vnto them, not onely external and corporall benefits, but ſpirituall and eternall bleſſings alſo; and that he will refreſh their drie ſoules, with the moſt plentifull foode of 
                  •
               is holy ſpirite; and moyſten their thirſtie 
                  •
               onſciences, with the perpetuall fountaine 
                  •
               nd laſting Spring of his bleſſed Diuinitie. Wherby the mournful & drie ſouls are moſt 
                  •
               omfortably cheered, and animated to bring 
                  •
               oorth plentifull fruits of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                charitie, 
                  •
               oth toward God and th
                  •…
               or. 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Iſai. 44, 2.
               
               not (ſaith he) O Iacob my ſeruant whom I 
                     〈◊〉
                   choſen. For I will poure water vpon the thirſtie, and floudes vpon the dry ground: I will poure my ſpirits vpon thy ſeede; and my bleſſing vpon thy buds: And they ſhall grow as among the graſſe, and as the Willowes by the riuers of water.
            
            For, as Trees planted and ſet by the waters ſide, ſeeme faire and pleaſant, adorned with ſtore and varietie of freſh and greene leaues: ſo likewiſe doth the minde of man (being garniſhed with godly knowledge, and moyſtened with the water of Gods diuine ſpirite) flouriſh and ſhine with the bright beames of vertue, and ſpread abroade his boughes, both of faith toward God, and alſo yeeld forth the fruit of Chriſtian works toward his neighbor.
            The Iewes being caried away captiue into Babylon, and ſeeing themſelues deſtitute, forſaken Pſal. 137. and comfortleſſe, hanged their Harpes (wheron they were wont to chaunt Hymnes and play ſongs of thankeſgiuing vnto Go
                  •
                for his benefits) vpon the Willow trees: making greeuous moane for that their ſo miſerab
                  •…
                and lamentable caſe, wherewith they wer
                  •
                ſo deepely and pittifully diſtreſſed, that the
                  •
                coulde haue no maner of ioye; ſo much 
                  〈◊〉
                once to ſhew foorth any token of mirth, 
                  〈◊〉
                to handle their muſicall inſtruments. A
                  •…
                very fitly are they deſcribed by the Pſalmi
                  •…
                to haue hanged their inſtruments on the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  s, for that, this tree is barraine and 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
seth his bloſſoms, before his ſeede be ripe.
            Beſide this, it is bitter, and nothing ſo de
               
                  •
               ectable or pleaſant to the eie, as is the Plane tree, the Palme, the Cedar, the Cypreſſe, the Terebinth or Turpentine tree. And therfore the compariſon betweene Baniſhment and this Tree is very fit, and agreeable, and therfore did they hang their Harpes theron. For 
                  •
               s the Willow is bitter, and not greatly to the eie delightſome, ſo was their baniſhment & tranſmigration into Chaldea, to the Iewes, bitter, dolefull, heauie, comfortleſſe and lamentable: and the rather for their often cal
               
                  •
               ing to remembrance the hill Sion, the Citie 
                  
                     •
                  eruſalem, and the moſt ſtately and ſumptu
               
                  •
               us Temple, in the which they were woont 
                  •
               o ſing Pſalmes, and Diuine Ditties in the 
                  •
               raiſe and honor of God. Yea, they were ſo 
                  •
               eepely ſtricken with ſorrowe in their harts, 
                  •
               o ſee the true worſhip and ſincere religion 
                  •
               f God, contemned, deſpiſed, prophaned, 
                  •
               laſphemed and troden vnder foot: to con
               
                  ••
               der how their Prophets were baniſhed and 
                  •
               aried away: to behold the pitifull plight of 
                  •
               heir Citie, which was ruinated, deſtroied, 
                  •
               nd made euen with the grounde, that no
               
                  •
               hing coulde make them merie; nothing 
                  •
               ould mitigate their conceiued griefe; ney
               
                  ••
               er coulde they by any all
                  •
               rements or en
               
                  ••
               eaties, be drawne and perſwaded, to ſing 
                  ••
               eir holie and ſacred S
                  •…
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               dicated and directe
                  •…
               
               
praiſe of God, among ſuch blaſphemous, wicked and prophane perſons, that did none other thing than ſcornefully diſdaine, and malapertlie deride the Lorde God and his true religion.
            Theſe corroſiues of minde ſo galled the
                  •
                at the hart, and ſo greeued their zealous conſciences, that all melodie among them 
                  〈◊〉
                forgotten, and in lieu thereof all griefe an
                  •
                
               Ierem. Lament. 4, 19. ſorrow entirely poſſeſſed them. For Muſi
                  •…
                in the time of mourning, is (according to t
                  ••
                old ſaieng) vnmeet, vndecent and out of
                  •…
                
               Eccl. 2, 1. ſon: and therefore it was very fitly by the
                  •
                anſwered againe, How ſhall we ſing a Song 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Pſal. 137, 4. 
               the Lord, in a ſtrange lande, among a number 
                  〈◊〉
                Atheiſtes and godleſſe people, that are nothing mooued with compaſſion ouer 
                  〈◊〉
                calamities, nor touched with any remorſe 
                  〈◊〉
                our miſeries, but do rather inſult vpon 
                  〈◊〉
                and ſcoffe, taunt, deride, and mocke the wo
                  •…
                ſhip and honor which we haue beene acc
                  •…
               
               ſtomed to yeelde to the immortall Go
                  •…
                Therefore their requeſt and ſute to vs, to delight them with our Harpes or Inſtrumen
                  •…
                is booteleſſe and in vaine, ſeeing th
                  •
                deſpightfullie contemne, and ſcoffing
                  •…
                deſpiſe, both vs, and the God of the H
                  •…
                brewes.
         
         
            
            The ninth Chapter.
            
               Of the Herbe Saliunca.
               
            
            
               
                  SAliunca is thought of Ruellius. Plinius. ſome to be the ſame that is otherwiſe called Nardus Coltica. It is a ſmall, ſhrubbie, ſhort and turfie plant, neuer growing to be ſo high as our common Lauender. For it neuer 
                  •
               iſeth it ſelfe much aboue the grounde. Which Virgil well noted, where by certaine 
                  •…
               mpariſons drawne from ſundry plants, he 
                  •…
               oke occaſion to commend one for his ex
               
                  •
               ellencie in piping, and therby to ſet foorth 
                  •…
               s ſuperioritie ouer his aduerſarie, with 
                  ••
               eſe words in effect:
            
               So much as winding willow yeeldes Eclog. 5.
               
               In goodnes to pale Olyue tree:
               And Saliunca low in fieldes
               To ruddie Roſe yeelds in degree:
               So far (me thinkes) in Arte and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               A
                     •
                  yntas comes behinde thee 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
                  •
               f this Saliunca is vſed to be made 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                ſmell vnto, for the reſtoring and 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •…
               g of the powers & faculties of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               , 
                  •…
               d to drine away, fulſome, 
                  •…
                
               
                  •…
               gious ſauors. For it 
                  •…
               
               
ſweetenes and odor, inſomuch that being laide among Naperie, and Garments, it bo
                  •…
                cauſeth them to ſmell excellently, and with
                  •…
                alſo preſerueth the ſame from Mothes a
                  •…
                Vermine. In lieu and place heereof many d
                  •…
                vſe for the ſame intent and purpoſe, Sp
                  •…
                and Lauender, (whoſe flower is moſt commonly blewe, and ſpyke-eared at the top 
                  〈◊〉
                the ſtalke) which yeeldeth foorth ſuch 
                  〈◊〉
                ſtrong ſent and vehement ſmell, that it ma
                  •…
                times cauſeth headach and induceth vn
                  •…
               
               tines.
            We haue knowne ſome Huckſters, T
                  •…
               
               uerners and Vinteners, that haue been prooued to haue diſtilled this Lauender wat
                  ••
                and to mingle it with their Wine, to the 
                  〈◊〉
                to make it ſhew the brauer and perfecter, a
                  ••
                the quicklier to ouerturne, and inebriate th
                  •
                drinkers. By which legierdemayne and deceitefull tricke, their Gueſtes the next d
                  •…
                haue beene greeuouſly troubled with th
                  •
                headach, which could not otherwiſe by a
                  ••
                remedies be holpen or eaſed, than by re
                  •…
               
               uing ſome ſleepie potion, or by drinki
                  ••
                colde Water, or Whaye, and that in gr
                  •…
                quantitie.
            But out of this ſmall and ſlender Pla
                  •…
                doth God (who bountifully both promiſe
                  •
                and largely performeth gracious bene
                  •…
                vnto his children) take ſimilitudes and 
                  〈◊〉
                compariſons: as namely where he ſaith: 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Iſaie. 55, 12. 
               mountaines and hils ſhall breake foorth before

into ioy, and all the trees of the field ſhall clap their hands. That is, they ſhall all be glad for your welfare, and reioice at your felicitie: ech of them ſhal yeeld honor vnto you, & ſolemnly extoll your praiſes: bicauſe you being now deliuered out of miſerable thraldome, by the free mercies of God, and aduanced to ſuch honorable dignitie through his onely goodnes, and withall (after your hard and heauie exile) enriched with ſuch and ſo great bounties, There ſhall grow vnto you in ſteede of low Saliunca or ſmal thornes, the tall and high Firre trees, and for Nettles there ſhall grow the Myrrhe tree. Of which words, the meaning is, that all things ſhall proſper and increaſe with them, and haue good ſucceſſe, ſo that for ſmall, abiect, and ſeely poore Herbes (yea thoſe that be hurtfull) there ſhal grow goodly, faire, and fruitfull trees.
            Theſe great bleſſings are not to be referred, onely to temporall and externall things, but alſo to the inward gifts of the ſoule and ornaments of the minde: ſo that for fiercenes, violence, crueltie, hawtines, pride, arrogancie, and loftines, (which (as S. Paule witneſſeth) are the vndoubted workes of the Gal. 5, 20. fleſh) there ſhall be found gentiones, meekenes, curteſie, mildnes, lenitie, humanitie, peace, placabilitie, long ſufferance, temperance, and ſuch like, which the Apoſtle there reckoneth among the fr
                  •…
                of that Spi
                  •…
               . So that now there ſhall be a 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •…
               d 
                  •…
               
               tion,

ſeeing that in ſteede of wrong, iniquitie and wickednes, there ſhall be ſeene Iuſtice, equitie, and righteous dealing: in ſteede of incontinencie, luſt, chambering, wantonnes and prodigalitie, there ſhall be chaſtitie, moderation, frugalitie and modeſtie: in ſteede of ſloth and ſleepie drowſines, ſhall be liuely luſtines, courage, cheerefulnes, magnanimity, contempt of baſe matters, & condigne account of vertues. So that the order of things ſhall be quite altered, and in ſteed of corrupt affections, or rather vnruly perturbations, which carrie the mind from the right rule of Reaſon, and from the ſincere Lawe of God and Nature, there ſhall be peace and tranquillitie of conſcience, ſurely anchored 
                  〈◊〉
                an vndoubted truſt and infallible aſſurance of Gods mercies and promiſes.
         
         
            The tenth Chapter.
            
               Of the Herbe Borith, of Phyſicions called Struthion, of the Mauritanians, Arabians, and Apothecaries, Condiſi: in forme, qualitie, operation, effect and vertue, very like (if not the ſame) that 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Saponaria, which we call Sopewort, or Fullers weede, is, bicauſe the iuice thereof will mundifie and ſcowre like Sope.
            
            THe people of the Iewes a little afore t
                  •…
                deſtruction of their Citie, being d
                  •…
               
               ned

in ſinnes, and deſperately frozen in the dregs of their manie and filthie abhominations, ſo that they might ſeeme to be euen at the higheſt degree of forlorne wickednes; it pleaſed God for the plainer diſcouerie therof, to detect their ſhamefull enormities, and to giue ſentence vpon their graceleſſe diſobedience, by vſing a very apt, fit and elegant Similitude, whereby he noteth their greeuous and lamentable ſtubbornnes, that with no maner of wholeſome remedie and ſoueraigne aduertiſements, coulde be reclaimed from their diſloialtie to dutifull behauiour.
            For when as they had ſhrunke away and ſtarted aſide from the true and ſincere worſhip of God, vnto ſpirituall fornication and groſſe Idolatrie, ſeeking helpe and repoſing their truſt in others beſide God; when as they laide ſnares to intrap the innocent, and that not ſecretly and couertly, but euen openly & profeſſedly in euery common place and corner, deſpiſing lawe, contemning iuſtice, and reiecting all good, godlie, and ciuill order; and in the lawleſſe doing thereof, made no conſcience, but either thought they might lawfully without controlment doe what they liſt, and liue as they would: or if they thought themſelues to haue done any thing amiſſe, yet perſuaded themſelues; that their ouerſight
                  •
                and off
                  •…
                
               
                  •…
               be eaſily expiated, qualified, 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               ;

ed away by a kind of ſtrange worſhip and friuolous manner of religion, diſpleaſant and deteſtable to Almightie God: Therefore the Lord ſeeing them thus lewdly to contemne his precepts, ſo diſobediently to tranſgreſſe his lawes, ſo vainely to fode themſelues in their helpleſſe hope, and to nuzzle their fooliſh and fantaſticall minds in deuiſe of ſuch deceiueable meanes, whereby they thought to make themſelues pure and cleane, and thereby to haue all things cockſure on their ſides, as they fondly perſuaded themſelues. God therefore (I ſay) bicauſe he would not ſee his honor ſo defaced, his glorie ſo profaned, nor his maieſty and magnificence ſo deſpiſed, reprooueth them for the ſame, and ſharpely expoſtulateth with them, for that they had forſaken him, and fled to others: that they had gone away from him being the fountaine of liuing waters, and digged to themſelues broken ceſterns, and pits that can hold no water.
            And he doth ſo effectually deale in this his expoſtulation, that he toucheth and reprooueth euery one of them by name: I had planted thee (ſaith he) a noble Vine, whoſe plants were 
               Ier. 2, 21. 
               all naturall; how then art thou turned into the plants of a ſtrange, vnkindlie and bastard Vi
                     •…
                  
                And bicauſe he would ſhew that this their reuolt, defection and apoſtacie could not eaſilie be done away, he addeth further ſaieng, Though thou waſh thee with Nitre, and multipl
                     ••
                  
                
               Verſ. 22.
               
               vpon thy ſelfe the herb Borith, or vſe much ſope: yet ſhalt thou be ſtained, filthie and ſpotted before me in thine iniquitie. As if he ſhould thus ſaie: Although in outwarde ſhew and at the firſt ſight thou ſeemeſt (through this thy ſuperſtitious worſhip of thine owne deuiſing, and whereby thou diſhonoreſt the glory of God, with thy hypocriticall and viſured Religion) to haue ſatisfied for thine offences, and to haue waſhed away thy ſins and tranſgreſſions: yet neuer perſwade thy ſelfe that God is appeaſed and pleaſed with any ſuch maner of dealing, neither think that thou ſhalt euer by this meanes recouer that cleere and cleane eſtate that thou imagineſt. No, no, thou muſt take another courſe, and practiſe another way, if thou deſire to appeere faire and beautifull in the ſight of God, and to be reconciled and at one with the Lorde thy Creator.
            Thou muſt vtterly defie, deteſt, renounce and forſake all filthie Idolatrie, all falſe Religion and counterfait worſhip, all faith and hope in any other ſauing onely in the true & liuing God: thou muſt leade a godlie and Chriſtian life, thou muſt embrace and follow the rules of honeſt and vertuous conuerſation, thou muſt extirpe and weede out of the garden of thy conſcience all 
                  〈◊〉
                de opinions and wickednes: thou muſt firmely 
                  •…
                thy faith, and aſſuredly 
                  •…
                vpon God, and 
                  •…
               
               
lie vnto him and ſtay aſſuredly vpon his diuine prouidence. For, to depend vpon any other helper, and to looke for ſafegard, protection or ſaluation at the handes of any other, or by any other meane or maner of counterfeit & ſuperſtitious worſhip, neither required nor commanded by God, is not onely vaine, fooliſh, booteleſſe and helpleſſe, but alſo damnable, iniurious, and derogatorie to the maieſtie of God.
            This herbe Borith or Struthion, which we heere cal Sopewort or fullers weed, doth naturally (indeed) whiten and ſcowre wollen clothes, and that excellently: ſo doth Sope ſupple and ſmooth the skin; and taketh away the ſpots, freckles or morphew in the face and bodie; but no worldly thing can be found, that hath ſuch abſterſiue facultie, to wipe away and mundifie the ſpots and filth of the Soule.
            He that refuſeth to acknowledge his diſcaſe, and wilfully contemneth the holeſome direction and ſound counſell of the faithfull and learned Phiſition, is incurable and in a deſperate caſe: & to ſuch an one, Hippocrates for biddeth to appy any medicine. Yea another Cap. 3. maner of teacher than Hippocrates, euen the heauenly Phyſition Chriſt our Sauior & Redeemer, chargeth vs to depart from them Mat. 10, 14. Luk. 10, 11. and to leaue them to their owne folly, when as no labor, care, induſtrie, paines and diligence beſtowed vpon them for their amendment

and recouerie, will take place and be harkened vnto.
            But God by his Prophet Malachie promiſeth, Mal. 3, 1. Luk. 7. 27. Mark. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 40, 3. that he will ſende his meſſenger or ambaſſador to prepare his waie: by which prophecie was ment Iohn Baptist, as Chriſt himſelfe in the Goſpell expoundeth it: and that ſpeedily thereupon the Lord and gouernor himſelfe ſhould come, that is to ſaie Chriſt, who at his cōming ſhuld renue many things, and beſtow much labor among them, to amende their liues, correct their ſins, & direct their maners, which haue the charge of the Lords flock, to teach and inſtruct them with good and holeſome doctrine. For, he is like a purging fire, and like Fullers ſ
                     •
                  pe. And he ſhall ſit 
               Mala. 3, 2. 
               downe to trie and fine the ſiluer: hee ſhall trie and fine the ſonnes of Leui, and purifie them as gold and ſ
                     ••
                  uer: That is to ſay, he ſhal make them pure, cleane, neate, fine and trim, without any ruſt or droſſe of vices hanging vpon them, euen as metals are ſcoured and burniſhed in a furnace or Goldſmithes forge.
            It pleaſed him therfore firſt to poliſh and beautifie the Miniſterie, from all filth and droſſines, leaſt they that ſhould deale in the ſacred myſteries of the Lord, and expounde his worde to others, ſhoulde be found themſelues enblemiſhed with crimes, and 
                  •…
               
               med with wickednes. And this doth 
                  •…
                Similitude (as we ſee) 
                  •…
                things, being 
                  •…
               
               
ſes, apply the ſame to the minde. For this Herbe Struthion, Sopewoorte or Fullers weede, is a moſt excellent ſcowrer of ſpots and filth out of clothes, and of an incredible and notable effecte, for the whiting of Wooles or Wollen. Yea it is ſo woonderfully abſterſiue, that it draweth Phlegme and other corrupt baggage out of the head, ſcoureth and clenſeth the breaſt, of all groſſe ſuperfluities, and ſo forciblie procureth neeſing, that it bringeth foorth a childe though it be dead.
         
         
            The 11. Chapter.
            
               Of Scarlet, Crimſen, Purple.
            
            
               THere is a Plant or ſmal Shrub, hauing ſlender boughes and ſharpe prickly leaues, whereon there groweth that, which we terme & call Graine, yeelding a moſt gallant and orient red, moſt delectable to behold, and right amiable to the eie. Heerewith they vſe to die and engraine wool, cloth, ſilke, and other ſtuffe, into a moſt braue, gallant, beautiful and rich rednes. Of this Graine is Scarlet denominated, Coccius. and heerewith is it died: and of this is mention made many times and often in the

Scriptures, as alſo of Purple, which were woont to be the peculiar colours for the Robes and Palles of Emperors, Kings, Potentates and Princes.
            So in that excellent Song or Canticle of Solomon, the ruddie lips of the Spouſe are compared to a thred of Scarlet, or Roſe coloured Cant. 4, 3. Ribband.
            
               Ioſua being by God appointed to be the captaine and conductor of the Iſraelites, after the death of Moſes, is ſaide to haue worne a Scarlet Cloake.
            And Chriſt as though he had vſurpinglie Mat. 27, 28. affected a kingdome, was in mockage and deriſion ſtripped, and cloathed with a Scarlet Robe.
            In the Reuelation alſo of Saint Iohn, the Whoore is deſcribed and ſet out, Sitting vpon 
               Reue. 17, 3. 
               a ſcarlet coloured beast: which Whoore was apparelled in Purple and Scarlet, and gilded with golde, and pretious ſtones, and pearles, hauing a cup of gold in his hand, full of abhominations and filthineſſe of hir fornication. And in hir forehead was a name written, A Misterie, Great Babylon, the Mother of Whoore domes and abhominations of the earth: All which is a type and figure of the Citie of Rome, as Ierom expoundeth it. By which titles, tearmes and Epithites, he noteth hir hawtie arrogancie, ſnuffing pride, and cruell nature, embrued with the bloode of Innocents.
            The rich Glutton men
                  •…
                
               Luk. 16, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
pell, beſide his ſumptuous fare and delicious bankets, was clothed in purple and fine linnen, hauing (notwithſtanding) no remorſe, pitie or compaſſion on the poore and needy members of Chriſt.
            From the princely and orient colour of this moſt delicate and goodlie iuice, in the Prophet Iſaiah there is taken an occaſion of a very fit Similitude and Compariſon, in the perſon of God, againſt thoſe that gape after blood, and ſeeke by violence to oppreſſe the innocent. In which Sermon, the Lord louingly ſtirreth them vp to repentance, and ſeeketh to drawe them to an acknowledgement of their wickednes. Which if he perſuade them vnto, and that they will willingly and obediently be reduced & brought againe into the right way, he aſſureth them of forgiueneſſe, and that he will vtterly forget their ſinnes and tranſgreſſions, how manie and how greeuous ſoeuer they be.
            For thus doth he there reaſon with them, & thus doth he begin his Oration & ſpeech vnto them: Waſh ye, make you cleane: take away 
               Iſai. 1, 16. 
               the euill of your works from before mine eies: ceaſe to doe euill, learne to doe well, ſeeke iudgement, relieue the oppreſſed iudge the fatherleſſe, and defend the widowe. If your ſinnes were as Crimſin, they ſ
                     •…
                   be made white as ſnowe; and though they were 
                     〈◊〉
                   as ſcarlet, they ſhall be as wooll. Wherby his meaning is, that though their ſinnes were he
                  •
               
               nous and bloody with the murder and death

of the Innocent, yet were they pardonable, and might by earneſt and hartie repentance, firme faith, and aſſured truſt in the mercies of God, be eaſily waſhed away, ſo that withall there were ioined therewith a ful purpoſe of amendement and newneſſe of life.
            But that Robes and Garments of Scarlet, Purple, Silke and Veluet, were vſed and worn in the old time by the ancient Hebrewes, as well for the honor, ornament, and dignitie of their bodies, as alſo ſometime for riotous brauerie, proud pompe, and wilfull oſtentation, the Scripture in ſundrie places ſufficiently witneſſeth. As namely in Ieremiah, where there is an hard doome and dreadfull commination againſt Iſrael, for that, hauing forſaken the Lord their God, from whom a
               
                  •
               one floweth all goodnes, and on whom a
               
                  •
               one dependeth their whole and entire ſaluation, they vowed and bowed themſelues 
                  •
               o Idols, and went a whooring after ſtrange Gods, painting and pranking themſelues 
                  •
               ike adulterous harlots, with ſtrange and fo
               
                  •
               aine attire, thereby to feed the eies of their 
                  •
               aramours, & to draw them the ſooner into their loue & liking: When as (ſaith the Lord) Ierem. 4. 30 
               all places & corners ſhal be ful of ſlaughter and de
                  
                     •
                  lation; when as the ſtrong men being diſcomfited 
                     ••
                  all flie for feare into thickets, and climbe vp into 
                     •
                  igh rocks: And when thou ſhalt be destroied and 
                     •
                  asted, what wilt thou doe? Though thou 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  y ſelfe with Scarlet, though 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
with ornaments of golde, though thou paintest thy face with colours, yet ſhalt thou trim thy ſelfe in vaine: for thy louers will abhor thee and ſeeks thy life: they will not awhit be mooued to compaſſion with thy gay and braue apparell, but greedily ſeeke thy ſpoile and confuſion.
            
               Ezechiel alſo charging Samaria and Ieruſalem, with whooredome and adulterie, by the which, he meaneth Idolatrie and Apoſtaſie, denounceth againſt them in the perſon of God, plagues & puniſhments no leſſe dreadfull and intollerable. For, as the breach of wedlocke, and defiling of the marriage bed by filthie adulterie, is a moſt wicked and deteſtable ſinne: ſo likewiſe is Idolatrie a moſt ſhamefull and execrable thing: when as the honor and glorie due to the liuing God, is profaned and giuen to another.
            Wherefore the wrath of the Lord is the more fiercely kindled againſt them, for that, not onely in Groues and Valleies, they ſacrificed to their Idols, and ſet vp vnto them, Altars, Images, and Temples with great pomp
                  •…
                and foizon of Calues, after the maner of t
                  •…
                Heathen: but alſo by calling and ſending f
                  •…
                others to beare them companie, they defile
                  •…
                his Sanctuarie, profaned his Sabboths, and polluted his holie Temple, conſecrated and dedicated to his name. And to the inte
                  •…
                that all things might ſeeme vnto the beholders more gorgious, magnificent and holie
                  •…
                
               Thou haſt for their ſakes (ſaith he) waſhed thy ſe
                     •…
                  
                
               Eze. 
                     •
                  3, 40.
               
               and painted thine 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  s, and decked thee with ornaments: And ſatest vpon a costly bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou haſt ſet mine Incenſe and mine Oile, and a great multitude with thee reioicing. As if he ſhould ſay: The honor and worſhip which is due and ought to bee giuen vnto me, is beſtowed vpon Idols and Diuels, and that in ſolemne ſort and order, while a confuſed rabble and diſſolute multitude of brainleſſe Genti
                  •…
                and wicked Heathen, do ioine with thee in the ſame, and run headlong into ſemblable madnes.
         
         
            The 12. Chapter.
            
               Of the Furze or Brier called Paliurus, which is prickly and ſharpe, and vnto which, bloodie, cruell, deceitfull, and hurtfull perſons be in the Scriptures compared.
            
            
               THe Prophets in many places vehemētly inueighing againſt the ſinnes of the people, and earneſtly beating downe the rage, fierceneſſe, and crueltie of ſuch as do trouble, annoie, diſquiet, damnifie, hurt, deuoure, oppreſſe and diſturbe the ſtate of their ſeely weake 
                  •…
               rethren, doe reſemble, liken, and compare 
                  •
               hem ſomtimes to Wolues, Lions, Panthers, Leopards, Adders, Snakes, and other harme
               
                  •
               ull Creatures: ſomtimes to Foxes, W
                  •…
               
               
and other ſuch ſubtill and craftie beaſts: and ſometimes to Prickles, Thorns, Briers or other ſharpe pointed plants.
            Thus did Michah the prophet bewaile the want and contempt of Religion, the ouerthrow and decay of godlines, the ſubuerſion of iuſtice, the prophanation of Diuine worſhip, and finally the lamentable reuolt of all men in generall from vertue, honeſty and integritie. So that there was nothing elſe practized among men but fraude, craft, ſubtiltie, deceit, quarrels, vnderminings, catching at aduantage, lieng in waite, wrangling, colluſion, diſſembling, and al maner of miſchiuous drifts and hatefull dealings. He doth therefore in this ſort amplifie their greeuous enormities, and thus doth he aggrauate their faults by laieng them in heapes before them; vſing for the 
                  •
               ame, a Similitude taken from Thornes and Prickles: Goodmen (ſaith he) are periſhed from the earth, and there is none righteous 
               Mich. 7, 2. 
               among men: they all lie in waite for blood; euerie man hunteth his brother with a net, and the euill of their hands they call good; that is, they flatter themſelues in their miſdeeds and errours: the Prince asketh, and the Iudge iudgeth for a reward, that is, he yeeldeth in al reſpects to ſuch things as he knoweth, will pleaſe the Prince, he feedeth his humour, and obeieth his requeſts; without any regarde at all either of Lawe, Reaſon, or Conſcience; he ſuffereth him to ouerrule all matters after his owne

will, to oppreſſe the poore people, and wring from them what he liſteth, or to practiſe tyrannie ouer them according to his owne lawleſſe luſt and imperious ſenſualitie. The best of them is as a Prickle or Brier, and the most righteous of them, is ſharper than a Thorne hedge.
            
            And therfore where ſuch kinde of perſons beare rule and be placed in office, his meaning is, that there the ſtate of things is ſuch by meanes of whiſpering Talecariers, and ſecret priers into euery mans life, maners & trade, that no man can ſafelie truſt an other, nor reueale his ſecrets and open his counſell, no not to his familiar friende and knowne acquaintance.
            For where ſuch diſorder reigneth, that mens caſes and eſtates be ſo narrowly ſifted, and their deeds and words ſo vndermininglie ſearched, the harts of many doe quayle, their courages be daunted, their mindes be diſmaied, and they brought euen to their wits ende; inſomuch that they not onely forſake and miſtruſt their friendes, but manie times bewray & betray them: which things Chriſt himſelfe foretolde ſhoulde come to Mat. 10, 35. Mark. 13, 9. paſſe.
            Therefore in this ſo dangerous, doubtful, and wauering truſt and faithfulnes, the Prophet further warneth vs what to do, ſaieng: Trust ye not a friend, neither put ye confidence in a counſellour. Keepe the doores of thy mouth from hir

that lieth in thy boſome: that is, diſcloſe not thy minde, no not to thine owne wife. For the Sonne reuileth the Father, the Daughter riſeth vp against hir Mother: the Daughter in law againſt hir Mother in law: and a mans enimies are the men of his owne houſe.
            
            In this ſo lamentable a garboyle and diſordered ſtate of the common wealth, he teacheth euery man, which way to worke, and whereunto hee may beſt and ſafeſt betake himſelfe; ſaieng: Therefore will I looke vnto the Lord, I will waite for God my Sauiour. My God will heare me. Heere he hauing his full hope and aſſured confidence grounded vppon God, reſteth vndoubtedly perſwaded, that God will deliuer and preſerue him againſt al the violent, proude and cruel rage of all wicked oppreſſours.
            For whereas God is gentle, milde and exorable, they on the other ſide be raging, fierce, cruell, ſpightfull, churliſh, vncurteous and (like thornes, brembles, and briers) armed with ſharp prickles, and poynant ends, whereby they hurt, wounde, and damnifie thoſe that be innocent, harmeleſſe, helpleſſe, and comfortleſſe.
            We ſee therefore how heere from Prickly plants the Prophet borroweth a Similitude, whereby aptly to expreſſe, and exactly to ſet downe the nature, propertie and condition of wilfull and wicked men. For the Furze, Bryer, Bremble, Eglentine, Berberie buſh,

(if we onely reſpect their flowers and berries, are to the eie right pleaſant and delightſome, and in caſes of Phyſicke and medieine, haue their profitable and neceſſarie vſes) but in handling they are dangerous, and like ynough to gaſh, ſplit, and wound the hand of a man that raſhly and vnaduiſedly toucheth them.
            And in like ſort, there be ſome ſlie perſons, craftie ſhifters, ſubtill mates, & double dealing diſſemblers, who at the firſt bluſh do outwardly in ſhew pretend much friendſhip, and ſpeake ſmoothly, but if they may once vpon any light occaſion, eſpie occaſion and oportunitie to vtter foorth their inward ſpight, or where to worke their diueliſh and cankred malice, they will be found (I warrant you) readie ynough both to prick, ſting, and wound to the vttermoſt.
            Now this Paliurus being (as hath afore been ſaid) a kinde of ſharpe prickly Furze or Brier, is deſcribed by Theophrastus, Virgil, Plinie, Dioſcorides, Columella and others, with general conſent to be ſharpe, thornie, and dangerous to the handler: howbeit they do not all agree about the deſcription of his forme and faſhion.
            Not much vnlike, is it to that which we commonly call Berberies, termed in Greeke Oxyacantha, where with ſome (for the gallant beautie and ſeemely ſhewe) vſe to decke and adorne their doores, and to keepe the ſlips

and boughes thereof in Pots, for the longer keeping thereof in their flouriſhing hue and greenenes.
            When the flowring and blowing time is paſt, it bringeth foorth berries being at the firſt greene, and in faſhion ſomewhat long, which when they be ripe, become red of colour, and haue within, a harde ſtone, enuironed and encompaſſed with a ſmall ſlender and thin skin or rind. The inyce thereof being fattie and vnctuous, is vſed in Phyſicke as a right ſoueraigne remedie againſt the Stone and Grauell.
         
         
            The thirteenth Chapter.
            
               Of Gith, called in Greeke Melanthion, and with vs commonly Nigella: and of certaine other ſorts of Plants and Graine beſide.
            
            
               I 
               Saiah the Prophet was (as afore hath beene ſhewed) moſt excellently ſeeme in the Secrets of Nature, and moſt skilfull in the qualities and operations of Plants. Which may eaſily be prooued by the manifolde Similitudes which he taketh (for the garniſhing of his Themes and Argumentes) from

Herbes, Plants, Flowers, and Seedes, inſerting the ſame into his diuine Sermons. As namely Gith or Nigella, Cumine, Wheat, Barley, Iſaie. 28, 25. Millet, and Fitches; all which be things well knowne, affoording both fodder for Cattell, and nouriſhment for men.
            This Gith, (called commonly Nigella) is growing in the Gardens of many Herbariſtes, Gith or Nigella. a cubite high or ſometimes more, accordingly as the ground is in ranknes, whoſe leaues be much like to Fenell or Fumiterrie, all too cut and iagged, the flowers of a light blew: which being once paſt, there commeth vp on the top ſmall knops or heades as in Popie, with little ſharpe hornes vppon them, longwiſe, wherein be certaine ſmall cels, chambers or huskes containing the ſeede, which is ſomewhat blacke, much like vnto Onion or Leeke ſeede: in taſte ſharpe, and of a ſtrong, pleaſant and fragrant ſauor, which in ſome places, they vſe to mixe with their Paſte or Dough, before it be put into the Ouen, to make it haue the better reliſh and delicater taſte.
            But ſpecially Phyſicions vſe the Seede heereof as right commodious to helpe Catarrhes, Murres, and Poſes; to kill and driue away wormes, being either droonken with wine or water, or elſe laid to the nauell of the bellie: to take away the toothach; to bring downe womens naturall diſeaſes; to prouoke vrine, to take away lentils, freckles, ſpots,

and other blemiſhes deforming the skin and outward parts of the bodie.
            Cumine is good to ſcatter and breake the Cumine. windineſſe of the Stomacke, Bellie and Matrix: and to alay and helpe the griping torments, and the gnawings and frettings of the Entrailes: It is alſo excellent good to slake and diſſolue the blaſting and ſwelling of the Cods and Genitories, being laid thervnto. For which purpoſe, my order and cuſtome is, to mingle vnto it ſome Nigella, Bayberries, and Millet meale.
            Barlie is a graine generally well knowen, Barlie. and the vſes thereof both to man and beaſt, right neceſſarie and profitable. In time of dearth and ſcarcitie of Wheate and Rie, the poore people grind the ſame to make bread. This Barlie being hulled and cleanſed from the rinde, and then beaten, broken, and ſodden, maketh the noble drinke called Ptiſ
                     ••
                  a; which is moſt ſoueraigne to quench hot burning Choler in vehement Feuers, and to helpe the corruption and oppilation of the Lungs, and hoarſeneſſe in the vocall Arterie, with ſhortnes of wind: ſpecially if thoſe parts be exaſperated or exulcerated with ſuperfluitie of ſalt Phlegme or yellow Choler, putting into it a quantitie of the flowers of Violets or Bugloſſe.
            Heerewith alſo (being made into Mault) is made that moſt noble, neceſſarie, and delicate licour, called Beere, of ſuch colour as

the Brewer is diſpoſed to giue vnto it, as namely, yellow, Saffronlike, reddiſh, browne, or ſuch like, ſpecially when the yeſt or barme (which they vſe alſo to make their bread withall) is ſetled downe to the bottome. For then commeth it to his kindly colour, and is (to looke vpon) very gallant and pleaſant, much like to Malueſey or Baſtarde, and reliſheth not altogither vnlike to Wine; and being immoderately taken, cauſeth droonkennes as well, and as ſoone as Wine doth.
            Wheate, the nobleſt graine and of chiefeſt Wheate. account to make bread withall, is of ſundrie ſorts, as manchet, cheate, cribble, biſcoct, houſhold, and brannie, with other ſorts needeleſſe to be rehearſed.
            Mill or Millet is of ſundrie ſorts, as Aſian, Mill. Indian, Spaniſh and Turkiſh, which beareth a red browniſh or yellowiſh graine: wherwith ſome poore people haue learned to make bread and broth.
            Fitches be a kind of Pulſe, and are good Fitches. prouender for Horſes and Cattel, as Lentils, Peaſe and Beanes be.
            Thus much haue I thought not amiſſe heere by the way to note; to the intent, the mind and purpoſe of the Prophet might exactly and plainly be found out: whoſe onely drift is in this place to ſhew, that God doth nothing raſhly, vnaduiſedly, diſorderly, confuſedly, by chance or at randon, but in all his actions dealeth moſt wiſely, orderly, aduiſedly,

deliberately, and both by law and reaſon: one while ſending puniſhments and plagues, to repreſſe mens inordinate luſts and outragious behauiours; and another while curing their wounds, healing their ſores, ſuppling their grieues, comforting their diſtreſſed minds, and relieuing their afflicted Conſciences. Which thing he ſomewhile haſteneth to put in execution and practiſe; ſomewhile lingereth ere hee take the matter in hand; and ſomewhile ſhewing foorth his mightie power both waies vpon the ſudden, euen as it ſeemeth good in his eies, and as he ſeeth it expedient, when occaſion ſerueth.
            Wherefore the Prophet admoniſheth all thoſe, that thinke otherwiſe than reuerently and dutifully of the iudgements of God, ſpeedily to reforme their opinions, carefully to circumciſe their affections, awfully to regard his holie word, religiouſly to thinke of his ſacred Maieſtie and diuine Prouidence, highly to extoll his name, reuerently to ſpeake, and dutifully to thinke of him: and neither to murmur, repine, mutter, or accuſe him in his dealings, when as they ſee the wicked to flaunt and flouriſh in all proſperitie, and to enioy abundance of all things to their harts deſire: whereas in the meane while the godlie be throwen into miſeries, afflicted with cares, pinched with paines, oppreſſed with wrongs, and ech way laid open

to calamities, vexations, and troubles of the world. For the Lord by his heauenly wiſedome and vnſearchable counſell, doth gouerne and rule the world, and al things therin, iuſtly, wiſely, and rightly.
            For the better beautifieng, and garniſhing of his matter in this behalfe, the Prophet vſeth a very fit Similitude, borowed from the induſtrious toile of husbandmen, and from the manner, order, and trade of plowing, ſowing, and thraſhing. For, the huſbandmau at certaine ſeaſons of the yeere, fallowing and turning vp his land, caſteth his ſeede into the furrowes thereof in due proportion and meaſure, according to the nature of the ſoile, & qualitie of the ground; ſowing in one place Wheate or Barlie, and in another Gith, Lupines, Spelt, Millet, or ſome ſuch kinde of Pulſe. Neither doth he raſhly and harebrainedly ſhuffle all maner of ſeedes togither, and ſo deſperately and fondly caſt the ſame on the ground, but aduiſedly and diſcreetely pondereth with himſelfe, what place and ſoile is fitteſt for each ſeuerall graine.
            The ſowing time being paſt, he thinketh not himſelf diſcharged of care, neither giues he himſelfe to eaſe and idlenes, but longinglie, hopeth for his Harueſt, and many a time wiſheth for the time wherein he may reape his laboured crop: and in the meane while (ere the corne be ripe) he weedeth it, and ſetteth

his ſeruants to worke, to plucke vp the Darnel, Thiſtels, and other noiſom baggage, that would otherwiſe choke the Corne.
            After he hath inned and brought it into his Barnes, he ſitteth not ſtill, neither giueth he himſelfe to eaſe, but as one worke endeth, ſo beginneth he an other, and the ende of one labour is the entrance into an other.
            For then goeth he about to thraſh, fanne, and winnow it, and that ſo carefully, that he will not confuſedly iumble and mingle one ſeed with an other, but make cleane the ſame in order, and euery kinde by it ſelfe, as to the nature thereof appertaineth. As namelie, in one ſort dealeth hee with ſmall and ſlender ſeedes, in an other ſort with them that bee great and big: and in an other, with Wheat, Barley, Rie, Otes, Amilcorne, Lupines, Beanes, Fitches, Lentils, Cumin, Gith, &c.
            As a painefull and carefull Husbandman therefore looketh diligently to all points of his buſines, and beſtoweth his induſtry and labour in ech reſpect, as the time and ſeaſon affoordeth, and as the nature and qualitie of ech Graine requireth, in hope thereby to receiue a good encreaſe and plentifull crop: Euen ſo God trieth ech way, to drawe and bring all men, of all ſorts, and condition in this Theatre of the world, to acknowledgement of their duties, & deſire of their ſaluation. And as an Husbandman after he hath

plowed vp his land, and ſowed it, doth afterwarde harrow it, and breake the harde clods thereof: as he (I ſay) ſoweth, reapeth, thraſheth, fanneth and ſearceth the chaffe from the Corne as he cutteth, pruneth and loppeth his trees, and keepeth them vnder, leaſt they ſhoulde growe rugged, or ſpread their boughes to far out of courſe and order: and finallie as he graffeth, planteth, and teacheth his yoong Siences to be naturalized in another ſtocke than their own: So likewiſe doth God deale with men in this world, puniſhing and afflicting ſome with loſſes, hinderances, and other tokens of his hidden iudgement, for the better trial of their patience and conſtancie: Some (though euill and wicked perſons) he tollerateth, ſpareth, and (as it were) winketh at, in hope of their conuerſion and amendment.
            Neither may any man be ſo hardie as once to mutter or murmure for the ſame againſt him, ſith by his prouidence he wiſely diſpenſeth and gouerneth all things, and beſt knoweth why and for what reaſon he doth this or that. Wherefore if any aduerſitie ſurprize vs, if any trouble aſſaile vs, if ſicknes attach vs, if calamities, plagues, or other encumbrances of this life infeſt and follow vs, let vs be perſwaded that all theſe things are ſent to vs from God, as meanes to worke in vs repentance of our former wickednes, whereby we may flee to him for ſuccor, comfort, and

releefe; in whom onely conſiſteth and dependeth our whole hope, entire affiance, and perfect ſaluation.
            On the other ſide, if all thinges go well with vs, and according to our harts deſire, if wealth encreaſe, if riches abound, if lands, liuing, and reuenewes, honors, dignities, offices, goods and cattels be multiplied and heaped vpon vs; if health, ſtrength, courage, luſtines and ſoundnes of bodie be giuen vnto vs; let vs meekely and humbly acknowledge, from whom all theſe do flow; and let vs be vndoubtedly perſwaded, that all things aſwell in time of proſperitie, as of aduerſitie, come vnto vs by his diuine ordinance, decree, direction and appointment.
            And this doth he not onely moſt notablie declare and ſignifie; where he putteth Cyrus the king of Perſia in remembrance of his duty, by acknowledging how that by the power and might of God, and for the Iewes ſake his choſen people, all things went luckilie and proſperouſlie forward with him, and nations were ſubdued & brought in ſubiection vnder him: but alſo thereby he teſtified vnto all men in generall, that God is Almightie and able to bring al things to paſſe, whenſoeuer and which way ſoeuer he pleaſeth: which might and power as in other places he ſetteth out right diuinely, ſo ſpecially & namely in the Prophet Iſaiah, he moſt liuely and pithilie ſetteth the ſame downe,

where he ſaith thus: I am the Lord, and there is 
               Iſai. 45, 5. 
               none other: there is no God beſides me: I forme the light, and create darknes: I make peace, and create euill: I the Lord do all theſe things. Whereby he meaneth, that proſperous ſucceſſe is his heauenly gift: and that loſſes, hinderances, aduerſities, ſpoile, peſtilence, hunger, war, and ſuch like, be ſent of him as puniſhments and reuengements of our wicked life and heinous tranſgreſſions. For hee it is, that ſo ſtrengtheneth ſuch as faithfully depende on him, and vnfainedly leane vnto his protection, that they liue a good, a quiet, & a peaceable life. Contrarily, ſuch as wallow in the filthie puddle and ſwiniſh mire of lewd behauiour and careleſſe dealings, ſhall taſte of the whip of his ire, and bee plagued with greeuous puniſhments, according to their euill demerits.
            The Lord appointed the office and function of an husbandman vnto Ieremiah alſo, Ierem. 1, 9. whoſe mouth he touched with his hand, ſaieng: Behold, I haue put my words in thy mouth: Behold, this day haue I ſet thee ouer the nations, and ouer the kingdoms, to plucke vp and to roote out, and to destroy and throwe downe, to builde and to plant. Whereby he meaneth, that he being fortified and armed with the power of his word, ſhould haue ſtrength to pull vp Sinne by the rootes, to weede out errors, to grub out of the minds and conſciences of men, their outragious, diſſolute, and enormious

affections: and in ſteede thereof, to plant in them the ſeede of godlineſſe, to inſtill into their harts the wholſome doctrine of faith, and entirely to inflame them with an vnfained loue toward the true and liuing God.
            The like Argument doth our Sauiour Chriſt handle, where he taketh a Similitude from the vine and his Branches, ſaieng: I am 
               Ioh. 15, 1. 
               the true Vine, and my father is an Huſbandman. Euerie Branch that beareth not fruit in me, that is, that ſheweth not foorth his faith by the works of loue, he taketh away, and cutteth downe as vnprofitable ſpray, fit for nothing, but for the fire: but euerie Branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth, (lopping and ſhredding away all vicious, corrupt, and naughtie affections) that it may bring foorth more fruit.
            
            Not vnlike vnto this, is that excellent Similitude which the Apoſtle vſeth, concerning the graffing in of the wilde Oliue tree into the true and right Oliue, and of the breaking off, of the boughes and branches from the naturall Oliue. Whereby he meaneth Rom. 11, 17 none other thing, but that ſome were fallen from their happie eſtate, of glorious ſaluation; and that others were choſen and receiued into the number of the faithful, not for any deſert of theirs at al, but onely by the meere fauor, ſingular mercie, and free grace of God. Which benefit, vnleſſe they thankfully acknowledge, dutifully remember, and conſtantly perſiſt in faith, he pronounceth

that they ſhall be cut off againe, and for their ingratitude reiected from the fellowſhip of God: and that thoſe ſhall be againe receiued and regraffed in, if they abide not in vnbeleefe; but by hartie repentance call vnto God for mercie, loath and deteſt their former ſinnes and wicked life, ſeeke health, imbrace truth, and faithfully beleeue in God, whom afore they had forſaken.
            By this meanes, the Lord partly beateth downe the inſolent pride, and hawtie arrogancie of vaine-glorious perſons, leaſt any man ſhould either be puffed vp with a vaine perſuaſion of his holines, or flattering himſelfe in his owne peeuiſh conceit, ſhould loftily contemne or diſdainfully inſult vpon the miſeries and calamities of others. And partly heereby he cheriſheth and nouriſheth an hope in them, that being now alienated and eſtranged frō God, ſhall be graffed in againe, and eftſoones receiued into the felowſhip and companie of the faithfull.
         
         
            The 14. Chapter.
            
               Of the Lentiske or Masticke tree, called in Greek Schinos: and of the Prime tree, called Ilex.
               
            
            WHAT time as the vertuous and chaſte woman Suſanna, was publikelie charged, and iudicially arraigned

vpon ſurmiſe of incontinencie and adulterous life, through the cankered ſuggeſtion and falſe accuſation of two craftie old Lechours, that burned in luſt towardes hir: Daniel (being then but a yoong childe, and raiſed vp of the Lord to examine and ſifte out the bloodie treacherie intended againſt hir) by his wiſe and heauenly policie, ſearched out the bottome of the matter, boulted out the truth, diſcuſſed the cauſe, and finally deliuered the innocent Ladie, both from the preſent danger of death, and alſo from all maner ſuſpition of crime and filthines. For when as ſhe was led foorth Dan. 13. to be put to death, being faultleſſe and guiltleſſe, committing and referring both hir ſelf and hir cauſe vnto God, Daniell by the motion of the Spirite of the Lorde, lifted vp his voice, and cried aloud, proteſting himſelfe to be cleere and free from the bloode of that chaſte woman, who was there and then moſt wrongfully without deſert adiudged to die, willing them to enquire further of the matter, and more narrowly to ſearch out the circumſtances of ſuch an horrible practiſe.
            Whereupon the Elders and Counſailours being a new aſſembled, and the matter being againe before the whole audience of the people with aduiſed deliberation, brought into queſtion, Daniel cauſed the two Accuſers to be put aſide, and kept a ſunder the one from the other. Which done, hee firſt

called foorth the one, and demaunded of him, vnder what Tree he ſawe them companieng togither? Vnder a Lentiske tree: (quoth he.) At the hearing whereof Daniel ſharpelie reproouing him for his ſhameleſſe lie, and falſe teſtimonie, and thundring againſt him the heauie wrath and ſeuere iudgement of God, deſeruedly due vnto him for the ſame, put him aſide. Then calling the other foorth, and likewiſe asking him, vnder what tree, he tooke them companieng togither? Vnder a Prime tree, (ſaid he.) Therefore were they both according to their wicked deſerts, put to death, and ſerued with the ſame ſauce, that they had prepared for others, according to Deu. 19, 19. Prou. 19, 5. Dan. 13, 62. the Lawe of Moſes, for that they were conuicted to haue borne falſe witnes, & to haue wrongfully accuſed another.
            But now ſomwhat by the way to deſcribe the nature of this Lentiske tree: it is a tree of a reaſonable bignes and meane ſiſe, broade in compaſſe, and leaued like an Aſhe, bearing many ſmall red berries, couched cloſe togither in round cluſters, which when they be full ripe, are of a blackiſh colour. This Tree yeeldeth foorth a kinde of Roſen or Gummie iuice, (like as the Terebinthin Tree doth) which is called Maſticke, which groweth not togither as other Roſens doe; but remaine a ſunder in diuers ſmall graines, or partes like kernels, or little white roundels. And this Maſticke is verie ſoueraigne to dry

vp rheumes and catarrhes, and to ſtop all common laskes and bloodie flixes, and all other fluxes of blood whatſoeuer. A perfume made therewith, or chawing the ſame in the mouth, ſaſteneth the teeth that be looſe, and maketh a ſweete breath.
            Of this Tree there be made in Italie fine Toothpickers, like as they doe in the Lowe Countries, of Iuniper and Baies, verie good to clenſe, whiten and mundifie the teeth withall. Inſomuch that it is growen into a common byworde or prouerbe, when we wil note any perſons that be too curious and preciſe in trimming themſelues, or beſtowe too much diligence in poliſhing and dreſſing their teeth, to ſay that he chaweth Lentiske. We in theſe Countries make Toothpickers, ſometimes of the Bittours claw being ſet either in golde, ſiluer or iuorie, ſometimes of the bones of the fiſh Paſtinaca or Galeus. But the beſt of all be made of this Lentiske, bicauſe they do not only no hurt to the gums, but alſo do rather by meanes of their aſtringent nature, binde and comfort both them and the iawes. And that theſe were in vſe in the olde time, the Poet Martiall well witneſſeth where he ſaith:
            
               Best Toothpickes are of Lentiske made, Martial in Apophoretis.
               
               Or if that wood be ſcant,
               A Quill will ſerue the turne full well
               And may ſupplie the want.
            
            But the other crafty and ſlie mate, that went

about to blanch his villanie, and plaiſter his falſhood, by the which he ſought the diſparagement and death of the innocent Ladie, with ſhamleſſe mouth ſaucily auouched, that he ſawe hir commit the acte vnder a Prime Tree.
            
            This Tree is reckoned among ſuch as bear Maſte, whoſe leaues bee at all times of the yeere, greene, without falling or withering: whereon there alſo groweth a kinde of Miſſelto, which Phiſicions doe vſe, as an excellent remedie againſt the Epilepſie or falling ſicknes, and ſuch other diſeaſes engendred of exceſſiue and abounding humors.
            There is one kinde of this Prime or Ilex, that beareth the fine Graine, which Diers vſe to engraine the Cloth or ſilke into a moſt orient and gallant red colour. And there is another kinde of Graine not much vnlike vnto this, which is found in the Huluer tree, whoſe leaues are on each ſide prickly and ſharpe, but all the other parts therof ſmooth and plaine, which in Brabant groweth in hedges and high waies, and ſeldome reacheth to any high ſtature. Yet haue I ſeene of them neere to Zirickzea, that haue beene as big as a Prime tree, which being diligently looked vnto, and often pruned and trimmed by the owners, haue growen to be very high and tall. About the beginning of Autumne it beareth berries round like a Peaſe, and of an excellent red colour, ſuch as doth our Kneeholme,

Butchers broome, or prickly B
                  •…
               , and alſo the Ewe tree, which is leafed like the Larch, Pitch tree, or Firre. The ſhadowe of this Tree in England is not deadly, nor the berries lethall and dangerous to the Inhabitants of that Iſland, as not many yeeres ago I ſawe and found by experience at my being in London. In Hiſpaine they are perſuaded that theſe berries are indued with a venemous qualitie, and that it is ſo hurtfull for mans bodie, that ſuch as do but onely ſleepe vnder the ſhadowe thereof, either die, or at leaſt become dangerouſly ſick therby, ſpecially in the time that it bloometh. The nature therof being ſo venemous, and againſt mans nature, they dare not inwardly receiue the ſame. And yet hath it by ſome of that Countrie beene prooued, that their hens wil feede thereon without danger, and become therwith very fat.
         
         
            The 15. Chapter.
            
               Of the Hyacinth, which of ſome is called Crowtoes, and of ſome, our Ladies flower: and of Hyacinthine, blew, azured and violet coloured garments.
            
            IN ſundrie places of the ſacred Bible we reade of headbandes, laces, ribands, fillets, garlandes, hems, purfles, fringes,

welts, gardes, plaits, pals, robes, clokes, garments, and couerings of blew or violet colour, the better thereby to ſet foorth the honor Iere. 10, 9. and ſtate of the perſon that wore it, and the more to delight the eies of the beholders, as alſo in this our age we ſee by experience the ſame to be had in great eſtimation. So were the garments and Robes of the high prieſt among the Iewes, appointed to be of ſuch colour as ſhould outwardly ſhewe a maieſtie and royaltie to the people, namely, of gold, blewe ſilke (or Hyacinth) purple, Exod. 28, 5. skarlet, fine linen and embroderie: whereby the ſeely ignorant and ſimple people were in the olde time, kept in order and obedience, and the readier and feruenter toward Religion.
            But now in the bright ſhining light of the glorious Goſpell, we muſt rather reſpect the inwarde and ſpirituall ornamentes, than any outwarde, gariſh and pompious attyre, and muſt rayſe vp our mindes to thinges that be of more behoofe and importance for our inſtruction and comfort. For the outward brauerie and pompous magnificence of rich & ſumptuous attire, doth many times nuzzle ſuperſtition in the conſciences of the ſimpler ſort, and dazell the eies of their mindes, with an admiration of thoſe things which God either would haue to be lightlie eſteemed, or at leaſt way, to be emploied to moderate vſes. And of this ſort be theſe pals

and copes wrought with gold, pearles, and precious ſtones, clokes, garments, and couerings, of blew azure, purple, skarlet, and other coſtly colours, artificially and curiouſlie bedected and garniſhed.
            The name of this colour, is taken partlie from the gallant gem and beautifull ſtone Hyacinth or Iacinct, a pretious ſtone. called Iacinct, hauing a moſt radiant tincture of violet colour: and partly from an amiable and delightſome flower of the ſame name, of a perfect Azure or purple colour, Hvacinth an Herbe. ſuch as is in the precious ſtone called an Amethiſt, or in common Bugloſſe and ſundry other Herbs, whoſe flowers being of bright purple colour, be maruellous pleaſant and delightfull to the eies of the beholders.
            And God doth many times and in many places in his worde ſharpely reprooue the ſtately arrogance, and pompous prid of ſuch vaine perſons, as by the brauerie of their apparell, and ſumptuous araie, aduance themſelues in bragging ſort and ridiculous oſtentation, malapertly and ſcornefully contemning others of inferiour calling. And ſometimes heerehence he taketh apt Metaphors and fit Similitudes, applieng the ſame to the inward gifts, and ornaments of the minde. For by ſuch examples doth the Lord ſtir vp and admoniſh ſuch, as be lulled and rocked in the cradle of Security and ſlouthful retchleſſeneſſe, to looke about them and to remember their dutie, which they owe vnto

God: to conſider what honor and worſhip they are bound to yeeld vnto him, and how (caſting aſide, deteſting, abhorring and renouncing all ſuperſtition and Idolatrie) they ought entirely to embrace his pure, ſincere, and ſound religion.
            Which thing both in other places, but namely by his Prophet Ezechiel, he plainelie Ezec. 16. ſetteth downe and manifeſtly diſplaieth. For, firſt he putteth them in remembrance, what great and ineſtimable benefits he had beſtowed vpon them, how bountiful and liberal he had ſhewed himſelfe towards them: what grace and goodnes both ſpirituall and temporall he had extended vpon them: what holeſome lawes and profitable precepts he had deliuered vnto them, and how fatherlie he had inſtructed them with the ſoueraigne skil of his moſt bleſſed and ſincere Religion.
            Afterwards he expoſtulateth with them for their reuolt and ſliding back, he vpbraideth them with their ingratitude & vnthankfulnes, for that they had abuſed all theſe his heauenly bleſſings, and conuerted the ſame to Idolatrous purpoſes, ſtrange worſhips and prophane ſuperſtitions: inſomuch that their minde, reaſon, vnderſtanding and wit, was not now emploied (as it ought to haue bin) in magnifieng his holie name, and ſetting forth his glorious maieſtie, nor in the maintenance and obſeruance of his ſacred and pure Religion, but in ſetting vp and eſtablishing

Idolatrous, ſuperſtitious, counterfaite and hypocriticall deuiſes, forged out of their owne idle braines.
            Thus therefore doth he ratingly and chidingly direct his ſpeech vnto Ieruſalem, ſaieng: When as thou wast naked, poore, needie, helpleſſe, 
               The 16. Chapter of Ezechiel paraphraſtically expoū
                  ded. 
               comfortleſſe, and cast out into the open fielde, ſo ſoone as thou wast borne, without ſwadling clouts, polluted in thine owne blood, and ſprawling in thy naturall filthines: not hauing thy nauell cut, nor waſhed in water: I came and paſſed by thee, and eſpieng thee wallowing and tumbling in thy blood, I exceedingly multiplied thee, as the bud of the fielde: inſomuch that by little and little in proceſſe of time thou greweſt pretie and big, able to be decked and fit to be womanlie araide, as by thy well faſhioned breaſts, and long growen haire may appeere. And although thou waſt in this age, yet waſt thou naked and bare, and lay open (contrary to the natural ſhamefaſtnes of womanhoode) to the gazing view of all paſſengers. Yet when I paſſed by thee and looked vpon thee, perceiuing thee to be of ſuch ripe age, and mariageable yeeres, fit to be wooed and ſought vnto by ſuters and wooers, I ſpred my skirtes ouer thee and couered thy filthines, and I ſhrowded from the fight of men, thoſe things that might not with any modeſtie & ſhamefaſtnes be ſeene. Yea I ſware vnto thee, and by a new couenant betrothed thee vnto my ſelfe, and made thee mine. Wherevpon hauing receiued thee as my

mate and lawfull Spouſe, I waſhed thee from thy filthines, ſo that no blemiſh diſgraced thee: Yea I annointed thee with oyle, and clothed thee with embrodered worke: I ſhod thee with Hyacinth: I decked thee with bracelets vpon thine hands and a chaine on thy necke, and a beautifull crowne vpon thine head, &c. Nowe thou being thus pranked vp in brauerie, and thus richlie decked, haſt plaied the harlot, and haſt powred out thy fornications on euery one that paſſed by: and all thoſe rich ornaments (which in right and equity belonged to me) thou haſt lewdly conuerted to prophane and wicked vſes.
            In all which proceſſe of words his meaning is none other than this: namely to ſhew, that as an adulterous woman by proſtitution of hir bodie becommeth impudent and infamous, ſo was Ieruſalem defiled with Idolatrie: in that ſhe beſtowed that honor, worſhip, and ſeruice vpon Diuels and Idols, which in right was onely due vnto God, on whom alone dependeth the whole hope, health, and ſaluation of all men. For then is the Maieſtie of the moſt high God moſt contumeliouſly diſhonored, when the honor, (which is due vnto none but to him) is taken from him, and giuen to another: wherein he is iniuriouſly robbed, and we thereby (forſaking his ſincere worſhip) are carried headlong into miſerable perdition, and manifeſt danger of our owne Soules health.
         
         
            
            The 16. Chapter.
            
               Of Sedge and Ruſhes.
            
            
               SEdge, (called of ſome Segge, or Sheregraſſe) Sedge. groweth in fenny Sugs and watrie groundes, triangled in form, and ſharpe edged of each ſide: with the which, many in this Countrie do vſe in Sommer time to ſtrawe their Parlours, and Churches, as well for coolenes, as for pleaſant ſmell.
            The Ruſh is a round ſmooth ſhoote without Ruſh. knots or ioints, hauing within it a white ſubſtance or pith, which being drawn forth, ſheweth like long, white, ſoft, gentle and round thred, and ſerueth for many purpoſes. Heerewith be made manie pretie imagined deuiſes for Bride-ales, and other ſolemnities, as little baskets, hampers, paniers, pitchers, diſhes, combs, bruſhes, ſtooles, chaires, purſes with ſtrings, girdles, and manie ſuch other pretie, curious and artificiall conceits, which at ſuch times many do take the paines to make and hang vp in the houſes, as tokens of good will to the new married Bride: and after the ſolemnitie ended, to beſtow abroad for Bride-gifts or Preſents.
            
               
And bicauſe the ſtemme or ſhanke of this Ruſh is ſmooth and vnknottie, it hath miniſtred occaſion to the learned, thereof to deuiſe a Prouerbe, namely, To ſeeke a knot in a Ruſh. Which is very aptly and fitly applied to thoſe which are ſcrupulous in caſes, where no neede is; or that make doubt of a thing, that of it ſelfe is moſt plaine.
            Of the greater ſort of theſe Ruſhes, our people doe vſe to make Mats, horſe-collers, wilchins, frailes, and little maunds.
            In Zeland where the ground is grauelly and ſandie, there groweth ſtore of Bulruſhes, which be not of any great height, but bee ſharpe pointed as an Awle, and ſerue to keep and defend their corne grounds from being ouercouered with ſand and duſt, which the force of the winde, tide, and weather vſually bloweth and caſteth vp.
            Of the ſlender and ſtreight forme of this Bulruſh, ſuch yoong ſimpring Damoſels as pranke vp themſelues, and deſire to be ſlender bodied, are termed by Terence, to be Bulruſhlike. As among vs manie daintie yoong huſwiues that would faine be fine and ſlender, girde themſelues ſtrait, and vſe to licke Salt: fearing (forſooth) leaſt if they ſhould be corpulent or fat, they ſhould be accounted great Roils or championlike Fuſtiluggeſſes. Chaerea therefore bearing great affection to his Darling, whoſe face was beautiful, whoſe In Eunuch
                     •
                  . Act. 2. ſcen. 3 complexion and colour was true and naturall,

not painted, nor with ſlib berſauces procured; whoſe bodie was ſound, wholeſome, and full of good blood, and being alſo in the very prime of flouriſhing age, commenteth hir aboue others, which being nothing ſo handſome and faire, do deuiſe to amend nature by Art and Diet.
            And as heere with vs there groweth abundance of Ruſhes, Reedes, Typh, Cats taile, & Water torch: ſo in the bogs of Aegypt, neere the riuer Nilus, there groweth a kinde of big Ruſh, called Papyrus, whereof in the old time they made Paper, as they doe now in Europe of linnen cloutes, chopped ſmall and ſtieped in water: which, for that it ſerueth to the ſame vſe, purpoſe, and commoditie that the Paper in the olde time did, retaineth ſtill the ſame name.
            This Paper ruſh is eight or ten cubits high, as the Reede is in Spaine, iointed and triangled, and as thicke and big as a man can well gripe in his fiſt. When they be drie, they are good to make ſine ſmooth walking ſtaues, of a darke browne colour like the vtter rinde of a Cheſtnut: which aged Gentlemen delight much to haue, for ſtaie of their weake and feeble bodies.
            The pith of this Ruſh yeeldeth foorth a kinde of ſweetiſh and toothſome licour, like as doth the white roote of our Reede.
            Of this big Paper Ruſh they vſed in the old time to make boates, punts, lighters, and

other engins of carriage, being pitched 
                  ••
               ſt togither, as not onely Plinie, but the holie Lib. 13. c. 11. Prophet of God Iſaiah alſo teſtifieth: who Iſai. 18, 1. threateneth the land which is beyond the riuers of Aethiopia (that is, the borderers vpon Nilus) bicauſe they ſent Ambaſſadours by the Sea in veſſels of Reedes or Ruſhes, to make league and ioine togither in confederacie with other nations, for the ouerthrow and conqueſt of the Iſraelites.
            But to go on with our purpoſed Argument: In the Bible, there be taken from theſe aboue named ſhutes and Ruſhes, ſundry proper Similitudes and fit Metaphores. As when the holie man Iob diſcourſed with the Nobles and Gentlemen that came for curteſie to viſite him, and to bewaile with him, his ſore and greeuous calamity, where there Iob. 8. were among them, many notable points to and fro canuaſſed, argued and diſputed, of the frailtie and miſerie of mans life, of the prouidence and great goodnes of God towards man, of afflictions, troubles, griefes, and vexations, which are common aſwell to the good as to the bad; of proſperitie and worldly welfare, which the bad and wicked as well as the good and godly do enioy; one of the companie named Bildad the Shuhite, brought certaine ſtrong and waightie argumentes, grounded vppon naturall reaſons, whereby he went about to prooue that wicked, godleſſe, infamous perſons, ſlanderers,

and Hypocrites which diſſemble with God, and thinke to pleaſe him with their counterfait mawmetrie, cannot long continue: and that although for a time they ſeem to floriſh, yet by Gods iuſt iudgement, they quicklie wither away and are brought to nothing, euen as Ruſhes, Sedge, graſſe or greene herbes being not moiſtened with water. For the wicked when they are aſſailed with dangers, afflictions and calamities a little afore their death, are greeuouſly troubled in their inward conſciences, for that they are not vpholden with an aſſured truſt and comfort in the mercies of God, whereby they are lamentably tumbled headlong into plain diſtruſt and deſperation.
            Not vnlike vnto this, is the Prophecie of Iſaiah againſt the Aegyptians, whom he pronounceth ſhoulde be greeuouſly diſtreſſed and brought to extreeme penurie: and that all ſuch trades, wherein their chiefe commodities conſiſted, ſhoulde faile and be taken from them, as namely their traffike, fiſhing, & other handy crafts, which brought vnto them large gaine and profit. The waters 
               Iſai. 19, 5. (ſaith he) of the Sea ſhall faile, and the riuers ſhall be dried vp and wasted: and the riuers ſhall go far away, and the riuers of defence ſhall be emptied and dried vp: the reedes and the ruſhes ſhall wither, and all the greene graſſe about the riuer banke ſhall periſh. In which words he foretelleth of a maruelous great barrennes, ſcarcitie, dearth and

ſterilitie that ſhould light among them, that they ſhoulde haue among them no ſtore of fiſhermen, no traffique nor entercourſe of merchandiſe, nor any reſort of chapmen and buiers.
            God likeneth the proſperous ſucceſſe of the godlie, with their vertuous proceeding and going forward in the race of grace and goodnes, ſometimes vnto freſh ſpringing waters, and pleaſant running riuers: ſometimes to greene herbes and flouriſhing flowers: and ſometimes to gallant medowes and delightfull Arbors.
            And the Prophet Iſaiah promiſeth fruitefulnes and fertilitie to the barren, vnfruitful and drie fields: ſaieng, that they ſhoulde be watred with moſt holeſome & liuely ſpringing waters, & be adorned with ſtore of moſt faire flowers, and beautifull Herbes. Wherby he meaneth, that the drie and hungrie ſoules of the people, ſhoulde be moyſtened with the fruitfull worde of God, and plentifullie bedewed with his holeſome doctrine and heauenly ſpirit. His words be theſe: The 
               Iſai. 35, 1. 
               deſert and the wildernes ſhall reioice, and the waſte grounde ſhall be glad, and flouriſh as the Lillie. The drie ground ſhall be as a poole, and the thirstie (as ſprings of water in the habitation of dragons, where they lay) ſhall be a place for reedes and ruſhes. As if he ſhould haue ſaide: in ſteede of vglie vices and monſtruous enormities, there ſhall appeere vertue and godlines: and there ſhall

be ſowed and planted in mens harts, the ſeedes of Loue and charitie both towardes God and man: there ſhall be ſetled in their mindes and conſciences an vndoubted hope and aſſured truſt of their ſaluation. So that they which afore were as barren, yeelding foorth no fruite, ſhall nowe, being watered and moiſtened with the liuely fountaine of Gods worde, and inuinciblie ſtrengthened with the ſtrong ſtaffe of firme faith, begin to fructifie, like a well manured field, that yeeldeth foorth aboundant ſtore of ranke corne and gallant Herbes.
         
         
            The 17. Chapter.
            
               
                  Of Woormewood.
            
            
               THere be three ſorts of Wormwood. The firſt is called Wormwoode Romane or Ponticum, which is planted in Gardens, and hath ſomewhat a pleaſaunt ſmell. The ſeconde is Sea Wormewoode, growing in Salt water creeks and Sea ſhores. The third is our common Woormewood, being exceeding bitter in taſte, and is a moſt ſoueraigne and preſent remedie againſt woorms. But being remooued into Gardens, it maruellouſly altereth

both in nature, taſte, ſauor, ſmel, yea & in the colour of his leaues alſo. For, of grayiſh aſhe colour, it becommeth greene, yeelding ſmell neither loathſome nor altogither vnpleaſant.
            From this moſt bitter herbe, the ſacred writers doe in many places fetch ſundrie Similitudes, which they moſt fitlie applie againſt the wicked.
            So when as God by his Prophet Ieremiah threateneth and denounceth dolefull, heauy and bitter calamities to the ſtubborne, diſobedient, and wicked people: Beholde (ſaith hee) I will feede this people with Woormewood, 
               Ierem. 9, 15 
               and will giue them the water of gall to drinke: and I will ſcatter them among the heathen, whom neither they, nor their fathers haue knowen, and I will ſende a ſworde after them, till I haue conſumed them.
            
            Againe, ſpeaking to the lieng and diſſembling Prophets which abuſe the worde of God, and corrupt it with their adle gloſes: Behold (ſaith he) I will feede them with Woormewood, 
               Iere. 23, 15. 
               and make them drinke the water of Gall: for from the Prophets of Ieruſalem is wickednes gone foorth into all the land.
            
            The Prophet Amos alſo ſharpely inueighing againſt falſe Prophets, that delighted more to flatter the Princes and people, with plauſible and pleaſing tearmes, than to prophecie the ſincere word of truth: and which defiled the right worſhip and ſound religion

of God, with their vaine, phantaſticall, ſuperſtitious, and peeuiſh expoſitions, keeping the heads and rulers in ignorance, & blinde folding them in errors, to whom it cheefely belonged to ſeeke equitie, and adminiſter iuſtice, ſaith that, they turned iudgement into Woormewood, and left off righteouſnes in the earth: 
               Amos. 5, 7. and 6, 12. that is, they digreſſe and turne away from equitie, neither do they faithfully execute the office and dutie of vpright Iudges: which is a moſt bitter and heauie caſe to a poore diſtreſſed innocent man, deſiring in his rightfull cauſe to bee deliuered from wrong and oppreſſion.
            In many places doth Iſaiah ſharpelie reprooue Iſai. 5, 20. and pronounce greeuous woes vnto ſuch Iudges, as call euill good, and good euill: which put darknes for light, and light for darknes: and which put bitter for ſweet, and ſweet for ſower.
            
            And in another place he alſo denounceth ſeuere ſentence againſt thoſe that take rewardes to oppreſſe the innocent, and to defeate the right of the widow and fatherleſſe; whoſe cauſe they ought to defend, and ſpeedilie to ſee them reſtored to their lawfull right. Thus therefore doth he thunder againſt ſuch wicked Lawmakers: Wo vnto them 
               Iſai. 10, 1. Ezec. 22, 7. Hoſe. 10, 4. 
               that decree wicked decrees, and write greeuous things, to keepe backe the poore from iudgement, and to take away the iudgement of the poore of my people, that widowes may be their pray, and that they may ſpoile the fatherleſſe.
            
            
               
No leſſe terribly doth the Lord by his Prophet Ieremie reprooue ſuch vnconſcionable Creatures, ſaieng: There are found among 
               Iere. 5, 26. 
               my people, wicked perſons, that lay wait as he that ſetteth ſnares: they haue made a pit to catch men. As a cage is full of birds, ſo are their houſes full of deceit: thereby are they become great and waxen rich: they execute no iudgement, no, not the iudgement of the fatherleſſe, &c. Generally, whereſoeuer there is any mention in the Scriptures, made of Wormwood, it ſignifieth greeuous calamitie and bitter torment of mind.
            So, in that lamentable deſtruction of Ieruſalem, the Prophet Ieremiah in the perſon of his Countrie men and fellow citizens, complaineth, that He was incompaſſed with gall, filled 
               Lam. 3, 5. and 15. 
               with bitterneſſe, and made droonken with Woormewood. Whereby is meant, that the miſerie, griefe, deſolation and anguiſh was ſo great, that nothing coulde be more added therevnto.
            Like vnto this is that complaint of Dauid, being dangerouſly circumuented, and maliciouſly purſued by his enimies, where hee powreth out his praiers and requeſts vnto God, ſaieng: O God thou hast cast vs out, thou 
               Pſal. 60, 1. 
               hast ſcattered vs, thou hast beene angrie, turne againe vnto vs. Thou hast made the Land to tremble, and hast made it to gape: thou hast ſhewed thy people heauie things: thou hast made vs to drinke the Wine of compunction and giddines. As though he ſhould ſay; Thou haſt ſet ſuch ſights before

our eies, whereby we are nothing at 
                  〈◊〉
                cheered, but rather diſcomforted & thro
                  ••
                into ſorrow and heauines, into griefe, pe
                  •
               
               ſiuenes and horror of death, euen as they that haue droonke ſome deadlie poiſon, whereby their vitall parts be incurably infected, benummed, and ſtupefied.
            The verie ſame Metaphor is vſed by the Prophets Iſaiah, Ieremiah, and Ezechiel, deſcribing Iſaie. 51, 17. Iere. 23, 15. Ezec. 25, 4. the cup of the Lords wrath, whereof as wel the Kings and Princes, as the ſubiects & Commons haue droonken; and wherby they were carried into ſuch outrage, madnes, and aſtoniſhment, that they were euen brought to their wits end, and knew not what to do, nor which way to turne themſelues.
            In no better caſe ſhall he be, that keepeth companie with whoores and harlots; and ſuffereth himſelfe to be inſnared and intrapped with their flatteries, allurements, prouocations and ſuttleties.
            Which thing Solomon wel knew, & therfore diligently aduiſeth and earneſtly warneth a yong man (whoſe age for want of experience is ſlipperie and vnskilful) to diſacquaint and eſtrange himſelfe from the companie of wicked women, and not to ſuffer himſelfe at any hand to be inchanted with their flattering lures and gloſing entiſements. For the lips of 
               Prou. 5, 3. and 7, 5. 
               an harlot (ſaith he) drop as an honie combe, that is, hir words be fawning and ſweete, and hir mouth and throte, finer and ſmoother than

oile: but the end of hir is bitter as Woormewood, and ſharpe as a two edged ſword. For, all that ſhe doth is ſuttle, fraudulent, and diſſembled: and the whole drift of hir cunning ſhifts is onelie to rob, ſpoile, and vndoe thee.
            Finally, vnder the name of Gal and Woormwood is generally vnderſtood heauie, noiſom, hurtfull, bitter, cruell, and lamentable dealings, as beſide the aboue rehearſed examples, is ſignified alſo in the Reuelation. Where it is read, how that the Angell blowing the Trumpet, there fell a great Starre from heauen, burning like a Torch (whereby is meant the wrath of God enkindled againſt the wicked) and the 
               Reu. 8, 10. 
               name of the Starre was called Woormewood; and it fell into the third part of the riuers, and into the fountaines of waters: wherefore the third part of the waters became Woormwood: and many men died of the waters, bicauſe they were made bitter.
            
            Now, as the coniunctions and aſpects of Planets, and conſtellations, doe ſomtime betoken and portend ſlaughter, death, decaie, harme, and danger both to men, beaſts, corne, graine and fruits: ſo was this Starre thus falling, harmfull vnto mankinde, ſignifieng the wrath and vengeance of God, to hang flamingly ouer the heads of all thoſe that be wicked and impenitent.
         
         
            
            The 18. Chapter.
            
               Of Thistles, Thornes, Buſhes, Briers, Brembles and Burres: how in the Scriptures they be commonly applied, and what they ſignifie.
            
            
               THyſtles, Briers, Brembles, and weeds, which grow out of the groūd of themſelues, without planting or Huſbanding, yeelde in a manner no kinde of commodity for the vſe of man, but rather detriment and annoyance both to man by their prickles, and to graine by their ill companie and neighborhood.
            Therefore when as God inioined penance, miſerie, and toile to Adam for his tranſgreſſion, he ſaide, Curſed is the earth for 
               Gen. 3, 17. 
               thy ſake: in ſorrow ſhalt thou eate of it all the daies of thy life: in the ſweate of thy face ſhalt thou eate thy breade. Thornes and thistles ſhall it bring foorth to thee, and thou ſhalt eate the herbe of the field.
            
            Likewiſe the Lord being wroth with the Iſraelites for their extreeme ingratitude towards him, greeuouſly threateneth them vnder the name of a Vineyard: for that, after ſuch a deale of carefull Husbandrie beſtowed

on it, in ſteed of ſauerie grapes, it brought foorth wilde grapes. Now therefore (ſaith he) I 
               Iſai. 5, 5. 
               will tell you what I will do to my Vineyarde: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it ſhall be eaten vp: I will breake the wall thereof, and it ſhal be troden downe: and I will lay it waste: it ſhall not be cut, nor digged, but Briers and Thornes ſhall growe vp in it.
            
            By which figuratiue ſpeech he ſheweth Hoſ. 10, 1. and 8. that he hath beſtowed all the labor and diligence that poſſiblie coulde be, for the behoofe and benefite of the Iſraelites, and for the training and inſtructing of them in the way of godlines with ſound, holeſome, and heauenly doctrine; and that he omitted nothing, which was expedient and needfull for their direction. But all in vaine: for all trauell, labor, induſtry and diligence employed about them, was loſt and to no purpoſe.
            Wherefore he vpbraied them with wilfull contempt of their owne aduancement, and for the careleſſe regarde which they had of their owne ſaluation. And now he therefore heere proteſteth that he maketh none other account of them, than of perſons deſperate and forlorne: and that for their ſtubborne Rom. 1, 24. refuſall of mercie and grace offered vnto them, they ſhoulde runne headlong into all ſhame and wickednes, into vile luſtes and filthie affections, into diſſolute life and lewde maners: inſomuch that their minds being thus wofully peſtered and poſſeſſed with

beaſtly vices, and no whit garniſhed with vertues and goodnes, ſhoulde lie like a rugged, vntilled and vnmanured fielde, which bringeth foorth nothing but weedes and hurtfull herbes.
            Againe, in another place he threatneth to plague them with barrennes, dearth, ſcarcitie, want of Corne and yeerely increaſe of Iſai. 7, 23. 24, 25. fruits; inſomuch that the land ſhould remain as vnder a curſe, bringing forth nothing but Briers and Thornes. So that in what place ſoeuer there were a thouſande Vines, woorth a thouſandpeeces of ſiluer, they ſhould be turned into Briers and Thornes; and all the grounde in the lande ſhould not be able to beare ſufficient corne and competent foode, to releeue the Iſaie. 32, 13. hungrie neceſſitie of the ſterueling Inhabitants.
            And afterwards in the 34. Chapter he denounceth far more dreadfull and horrible plagues againſt the Idumaeans, that is to ſay, the enimies of God and his Church: The riuers thereof ſhall be turned into Pitch, and the ground thereof into Brimstone, and the lande therof 
               Iſai. 34, 9. 
               ſhall be burning Pitch, which ſhall not be quenched night nor day: the ſmoke thereof ſhall goe vp euermore: it ſhall be deſolate from generation to generation: none ſhall paſſe through it for euer: But the Pellicane and the Hedgehog ſhall poſſeſſe it, and the great Owle and the Rauen ſhall dwell in it; being Fowles and creatures that loue not the companie or ſight of man. The Nobles

thereof ſhall call to the kingdome, and there ſhall be 
                     •
                  one, and all the Princes therof ſhall be as nothing: that is, there ſhall be no forme of a common wealth, no ſtate, no order, no policie, no honor nor dignitie of a Prince: no maieſty of a kingdome, no gouernment, no Counſellers, no Peeres; but a diſordered confuſion and minglemangle of the nobility and communaltie togither, and a meere ouerthrowe of all law and equitie.
            Moreouer to aggrauate this their miſerable plight and wofull condition, the palaces of their kings and princes ſhall be throwne downe and made euen with the ground, and all their ſumptuous buildings and gorgeous houſes vtterly ruinated, and being abandoned of any inhabitant, ſhall be nothing elſe than caues and dennes for wilde beaſts and rauenous birdes.
            For thus doth the Prophet both in this and alſo in other places, heape vp the miſerable deſolation of the Countrie: There ſhall growe in the places thereof thornes and nettles, and thistles in the ſtrong Holds thereof, as commonly we ſee in ruinous palaces, and caſtels thrown downe and deſpoiled by the rage of warre. And it ſhall be an habitation for Dragons, and a court for Ostriches: there ſhall walke wicked ſpirits and Goblins, the Satyres and Shrichowles: there ſhall the Hag lodge, and there ſhall the Owle make hir nest, and lay, and hatch: there alſo ſhall the Vultures and Kites be gathered togither, euerie one

with hir Make. By this beadroll and reh
                  •…
                he ſetteth downe before the eies an horrible kinde of deſolation, and a dreadfull pu
                  •…
               
               ture of extreme waſte: the very ſight or he
                  •
                ring whereof driueth a ſhiuering horror into any mans minde, and pearceth it deepely with a quaking and trembling dread, to conſider how that in a late moſt flourishing Realme and renowmed Countrie, there ſhould be ſuch an alteration, and ſuch a ſtate of al things turned vpſide downe: that there ſhould be no more reſort of Merchants and Traffikers, no concourſe of people, no bartering, no marting, no buieng and ſelling, no chopping and changing, but onely a ſight of vglie monſters, prodigious creatures, and rauenous wilde beaſts, the very ſight whereof would affright the ſtouteſt man that liueth.
            Into theſe deformed monſters and vglie creatures, do Diuels and wicked Spirits manie times transforme themſelues: and aſſuming their ſhapes doe with many deluſions and apparitions terrifie and affright fearfull and weake people, ſpecially thoſe, that are not ſufficiently ſtrengthened, furniſhed, and armed with the knowledge of God, and the power of his word.
            Such monſterous obiects and ſtrange apparitions, do ſuch perſons in their imagination and conceit thinke themſelues to ſee, which be Melancholike, Frentike, Lunatike,

Doting, Droonken, Agewy, or thoſe that are inwardly tormented in their conſcience with remorſe of their horrible ſinnes and bloodie offences. For, ſuch perſons haue their minds greeuouſly diſquieted, with ſundrie abſurde viſions, and fantaſticall apparitions, by reaſon of the diſtemperance of their braine, and ſtuffing of their ſpirit animall with abundance of groſſe humors and thicke vapors: whereby (the head being out of courſe) reaſon, iudgement, and memorie is likewiſe out of frame, and peſtered with ſundrie idle and vaine imaginations of ſuch things as they meete withall, or thinke vpon.
         
         
            The 19. Chapter.
            
               Of the Fig tree, and of the Fig.
            
            
               THe Fig tree beareth two ſorts of fruit: the one, which groweth till it be ful ripe, and then being taken from the tree, is dried and put into Frailes: the other, bee the primitiue and greene Figs, which either arriue not at all to ripenes; or at leaſt way bee very late ripe. For when as other trees doe burgen and bloome, the Fig tree ſhewing foorth no bloſſoms or flowers at all, bringeth foorth the greene Fig.
            From this tree and his fruit, be taken in

the Scriptures manie, and the ſame 
                  〈◊〉
                proper Similitudes and excellent examples.
            When Chriſt foretolde to the Iewes the greeuous calamities, and lamentable deſtruction of Ieruſalem, he ſtirred vp them, and vs all to watchfulnes, and heedful vigilancie by many examples, leaſt that day of the Lorde ſhall come vpon them vnawares: and the Similitude which he vſeth, is of the Fig tree when it bloometh. For as when the boughes of 
               Mat. 24, 32. Mat. 13, 28. 
               this Tree be tender, and that it beginneth to bring foorth leaues, it is a certaine token that Sommer is neere. So, treaſons, peſtilence, wars, famine, earthquakes, &c. are the prefaces or prologs to ſorrowes, and ſhew that the day of Iudgement is neere, euen at the doores.
            Figs are ſoueraigne good to ripe an Apoſtumation, to aſſwage and lenifie an harde ſore, as the noble Prophet Iſaiah doth witnes, and in his heauenly Propheſies hath accordingly ſet down. For we read that he cauſed 2. Kin. 20, 7. Iſaie. 38, 21. to be made a plaiſter of drie Figs, and laid it on the boyle or impoſtume of Hezachiah, whereby he was recouered to health and had his life lengthened fifteene yeeres.
            The Prophet Nahum aduouching all humane helps to be vaine, weake and helpleſſe, and all Fortreſſes, Holdes, Caſtels, Towers, Skonſes, Munitions, Rampiers, & Bulwarks Nahu. 3, 12 to be vnable to ſtande againſt God, compareth them to ripe Figs, which if they be neuer ſo little ſhaken, fal downe. Thus therfore

doth he inſult vpon the Affyrians, All thy ſtrong cities ſhall be like Fig trees, with their first ripe Figs, for if they be ſhaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater. Whereby he meaneth, that all their ſtrength, power & force ſhal be confounded and brought to nothing, by the mightie hand of God.
            The Lord alſo by his Prophet Hoſea, taking from this, and ſuch other moſt ſweete and pleaſant fruits, an apt Similitude, doth expoſtulate and reaſon with the Iſraelites, bicauſe they had forſaken ſo gratious and louing a God, and betaken themſelues to groſſe, horrible and palpable Idolatrie. For thus doth he ſet out and expreſſe his great fauour and loue towards them: I found Iſrael 
               Hoſ. 9, 10. 
               like Grapes in the wildernes, and as the first ripe in the Fig tree. Of which words the meaning is: that he was no otherwiſe affected toward Iſrael, nor delighted any leſſe in them, than a wearie and thirſtie wayfaring man, reioiceth when he findeth a ſauorie, and moiſt Grape in ſome waſte wildernes and barren place vnlooked for: or ſome ripe Fig to coole his thirſt, and refreſh his wearied ſpirits.
            This ſo great loue of God towards them notwithſtanding, whereby he ſhewed himſelfe to be delighted no leſſe in them, than is a wearie and thirſtie traueller with ſome delectable fruit, they did not mutually require with loue againe, but ran a gadding to Baal-Peor: that is to ſay, the Idol of Priapus, and

there defiled themſelues with moſt ſhamefull Idolatrie and heatheniſh worſhip.
            Infinite bee the Similitudes that are ech where in the Prophets, taken aſwel from this Fig tree, as alſo from his leaues, and from his fruite: whereby they ſomtimes ſignifie plentie, foyſon, abundance of things, and proſperous ſucceſſe of the godlie in their affaires and dealings: ſomtimes againe, they therby meane barrennes, dearth, ſcarcitie, and deſtruction of the wicked.
            Thus did Chriſt curſe the Fig tree, that had nothing on it but leaues: whereby he noted Mat. 21, 19. Mat. 11, 13. his miſlike of all outward ſhew and hypocriticall oſtentation of Religion, being not accompanied with good works which are the fruits of a ſound faith.
            The Prophet Micah vſing a Metaphor taken from rough, and vnmanured grounde, and from Trees whoſe fruites are gathered, (as in the ende of Autumne it commeth to paſſe) bewaileth the ſtate of the world in his daies, and complaineth that he liued in ſuch an age, wherin all good and godly men were vaniſhed and gone. Wo is me, for that I am as 
               Micah. 7, 1. 
               one that goeth a gleaning in Haruest, and as one that gathereth after the Grapes of the Vintage: there is no cluster to eate: my ſoule deſired the firſt rype figs. The good man is periſhed out of the earth, and there is none righteous among men. Whereby he meaneth, that iuſtice is baniſhed, godlines exiled, religion contemned, true worſhip of

God troden vnder foote and vtterly ſuppreſſed: that wickednes flowed, iniquitie abounded, and all thinges generally were full of blood, oppreſſion and crueltie.
            Many other ſuch like textes be there in ſundry bookes of the holie Scriptures, which might heere be alledged for further proofe Iſai. 34, 4. Ierem. 5, 7. Ioel. 1, 12. Iere. 8, 13. Amos. 4, 9. and confirmation of this matter, but I think it not conuenient to trouble and peſter the Reader with the recitall of all, ſith theſe fewe afore alledged may ſuffice.
         
         
            The 20. Chapter.
            
               Of the Palme or Date tree, and the fruite thereof: and what in the Scriptures is ment thereby.
            
            
               THe Palme or Date tree hath a great tall and ſtreight Truncke or ſtem, and many long ſtreight and narrowe leaues or twigges like Reeds or Gladen. The fruit is pleaſant in taſt, and is alſo right medicinable, and reſtoratiue. For it cheriſheth and comforteth the radicall humor, and conueniently nouriſheth thoſe bodies that bee drie and exhauſted.
            The nature of this tree is to reſiſt and ſtriue againſt any burden or waight laide

vpon it: wherefore it was woont to be vſed as an enſigne of victorie to ſuch as were valiant conquerours, and puiſſant warriours, for their inuincible courage and vndaunted animoſitie.
            So, the true Seruants & Martyrs of Chriſt, which conſtantly perſeuered to the ende, in their Chriſtian profeſſion, maugre the malice, ſpight, crueltie & perſecution of blooddie Tyrants, are read to be araide in long white Robes, and to carrie Palmes in their hands, in token 
               Reue. 7, 9. 
               of puritie and victorie.
            
            Likewiſe they that loue righteouſnes, and embrace equitie, boldly oppoſing themſelues againſt the enimies of God, are reſembled vnto the Palme, and other faire and goodly trees. For ſo doth Dauid, ſaieng: The 
               Pſal. 92, 12. 
               righteous ſhall flouriſh like a Palme tree, and ſhall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.
            
            For whereas the wicked ſhall wither away like graſſe, the iuſt & godlie ſhal proſper and continue ſtil like a Palme, and bring foorth profitable and pleaſant fruit. And ſhall triumph as the Cedar, which being an high, ſoote, and odoriferous tree, free from al rottennes, and that will neuer putrifie and corrupt, yeeldeth alſo withal a moſt gallant and delectable ſhadow.
            And this is it, that the holy man Iob ment, where, vpon confidence of his vpright conſcience, and true dealing, hee boldly pronounceth of himſelfe, ſaieng: I ſhall die in my 
               Iob. 29, 18.
               
               nest, and I ſhall multiplie my daies as the Palme. Whereby his meaning was, that hee aſſured himſelfe of long life and flouriſhing daies, with much ioy and tranquillitie.
            In that excellent Song of Solomon, the haires and locks of the Bridegroome are reſembled to the buſhie top of the Palm tree: which Cant. 5, 11. Similitude and reſemblance is taken from the yoong tender bundles of twigs and leaues that grow out of the top of this tree: or from the cluſter or huske wherein the fruit is lapped, which is called Phaenico
                     •
                  alanus, hauing a blacke, browne, or aburne colour. So that thereby is meant, that his haire was glittering, ſhining, faſt and not ſhedding, as are the leaues of the Palme tree which neuer fall.
            But when God ſeeth the people to run headlong into perdition, to continue in wilfull obſtinacie and blindnes, and not willing any way to harken vnto good counſell and ſounde aduertiſements; neither by any puniſhments, plagues or afflictions to be reclaimed and conuerted from their errors, but that ſtill they will wallow in the mire of their owne wicked imaginations; not acknowledging the ſame plagues to proceed, and to be ſent from God, but referring and aſcribing the ſame to blinde fortune, and ordinarie courſe of nature; then doth he ſeuerely thunder out other greater, and bitter puniſhments againſt them: inſomuch that beſide

the Palmer woorme, Graſſehopper, Cankerwoorme and Caterpiller which conſume and deuoure Corne, graine and fruit; he threateneth by his Prophet Ioel, that all their Vineyards ſhould be waſted, and all their goodlie fruitful Trees ſhould be ſupplanted and rooted vp, whereby there ſhould follow extreme penurie of victuals and foode; and that nothing ſhould be left to alay the extremitie of hunger.
            For theſe be the words, which he there 
                  •
               
               ſeth in deſcribing this dreadfull dearth, and woonderfull ſcarcitie, the rather thereby to ſtir vp their drow ſie heads and careles minds, ſeing ſuch a grieuous calamitie hanging ouer them. Awake ye Droonkards, weepe and howle all 
               Ioel. 1. 5. 
               ye bibbers of Wine, bicauſe of the new Wine: f
                     •…
                   ſhall be pulled from your mouthes. For a nation is come vpon my land, mightie and without number: his teeth are as the teeth of a Lion, and he hath the iewes of a great Lion. He hath destroied my Vine, and pilled off the barke of my Fig tree, (for Trees die, when the barke or rinde is plucked off from them) The Vine is dried vp, and the Fig tree is decaied, the Pomegranate tree, and the Palme tree, and the Apple tree, euen all the trees of the field are withered.
            
         
         
            
            The 21. Chapter.
            
               Of Hebenus, and certaine other pretious Simples and ſtrange Drugs, mentioned in the Scriptures of God.
            
            
               WHAT a noble Mart towne Tyrus in the old time was, being the paragon and flower of al Aſia, and what renowmed traffike was there kept by Merchants of al countries with their wares and commodities; beſide other famous Hiſtoriographers, the holie Prophet Ezechiel amply teſtifieth.
            Who particularly reckoneth vp the ſeuerall ſorts of ſundrie merchandizes, brought thither by Merchants of diuers Realmes, Countries and Prouinces; for that the ſituation thereof was ſo commodious, and the reſort thither ſo incredible, before it was conquered and deſtroied by Alexander the King of Macedonie, which conqueſt and deſtruction the Prophet in his 27. chapter foreſheweth. Ezec. 27. Wherein among many other wares and merchandries, he mentioneth Iuorie, Roſen, Myrrhe, Caſſia, Balme, Corall, Pearle, Spices, Gems and Pretious ſtones.
            
               
               Hebenus is of colour very blacke, and withall Heben. ſo maſſie and ponderous, that although it be ſliced & parted into very thinne plates or peeces, and put into water, yet ſinketh it downe to the bottome.
            Of this there be two ſorts, the one, which commeth out of India, the other out of Aethiopia: and of this latter ſort I haue ſeene 
                  〈◊〉
                crooked Pipe or Cornet made, that hath beene aboue two foote long, as blacke and as ſmooth as Iet, and as hard as a ſtone: and which in the handling, could not be well diſcerned whether it might be termed Wood, Stone or hard Horne.
            Of the kinde of this Hebenus, is another ſtrange and forraine Wood, commonly called Guiacum: the powder wherof being filed of, and boiled in water till three parts be conſumed, is moſt ſoueraigne to cure the Pocks, and the lothſome infection, gotten by lewd, filthie and lecherous life.
            I haue vſed the powder heerof being ſteeped and put into the water of Fenell, as an excellent remedie and approoued medicine to cure the dimneſſe of ſight, and the web in the eie.
            To cauſe one to ſweate, my order is to giue the decoction heereof with Fumitorie, Marigold leaues, Balme and Figs: the which alſo I haue prooued to be excellent good, to driue out the Meaſles and ſmall Pockes in yoong children.
            
               
Iuorie is of an aſtringent nature: and Iuorie. therefore Combes made thereof do both comfort the head, and keepe the haire from falling and ſhedding.
            And bicauſe it is of an exceeding and ſurpaſſing whitenes, ſpecially when the teeth are firſt taken out of the Elephants iawes, therefore doth the Bryde in dignifieng and ſetting out the beautie of hir Spouſe his bodie, attribute and aſcribe vnto him a bellie 
               Cant. 5, 14. 
               like white Iuorie, coueredwith Saphyres. And the necke of the Bride is reſembled to an Iuorie Tower, bicauſe it is firme, ſtrong, ſtedfaſt, vpright, and not ſtowping.
            
               Ieremiah compareth the Nazarites (who were conſecrated to God) vnto Iuorie, which when it is very olde and long kept, waxeth ruddie. For thus doth he bemone and bewaile them, being ſo deformed and disfigured, that they could not be knowne for the ſame they were afore: Hir Nazarites were purer 
               Lam. 4, 7. 
               than the ſnow, and whiter than the mylke: they were more ruddie in bodie than the olde Iuorie: they were fairer than the poliſhed Saphyre: But now is their viſage blacker than a cole. By which words it is eaſie to gheſſe, into what miſerie they were throwen, and what calamitie they ſuſtained.
            
               Myrrhe is a ſweete gum, diſtilling and Myrthe. ſweating out of a tree like Terebinthine, whoſe vertue and propertie is to preſerue the bodie from rotting and putrifaction.
            
               
               Stact is a roſennie liquor, the flower of Stact. the Myrrhe or the fatnes that firſt deſtilleth out of it, the which is commonly called Styrax liquida, and of Phyſitions Styrax calamita.
            
            
               Frankincenſe is a kinde of ſoote perfume, Frankincenſe. & is of great vertue to nouriſh and engender fleſh in the bodies of men or women.
            Gum Ammoniack deſtilling from a tree on Ammoniake. the ſande, (wherevpon it is tearmed by ſome Gutta) is a kinde of ſweete ſmelling gumme, brought out of Aphrica, which hath great vertue to mollifie, warme and draw; it looſeth the belly, helpeth the ſplene, and bringeth foorth the dead child.
            
               Beniamen being a congealed iuyce and odoriferous gum, ſenteth moſt delicately, and is of excellent effect to ſmell vnto in the time of the Plague or other like contagious infection: like as is alſo Ziuet, Ambregrice, Musk, Caſſia and Cloues, which doe comfort the hart, and ſouereignlie recouer and ſtrengthen the ſpirits of thoſe that through faintnes of nature, fall into extaſies, traunces, and cardiacke paſſions.
            
               Aloe is a iuyce or congealed liquor of a Aloe, or Sea A
                     •
                  greene. certaine plant of the ſame name, which is of a perfect greene colour. The ſlips thereof being brought to vs out of Spaine, be commonly hanged vp in houſes, and will continue two yeeres in their naturall beautie and gallant greenenes, without being watered. The iuyce heereof is excellent good to withſtand

putrefaction, to clenſe and mundifie al corruption, to kill the woormes in the belly, to cleere the ſight, and to preſerue the body from all infection of dangerous and contagious diſeaſes.
            The ſweete and pretious wood alſo, commonly Lignum Aloes. Agalochum. called Lignum Aloes, and of ſome Agalochum, is in nature, qualitie and forme not vnlike to the ſweete Thorne Aſpalatus, was both wel knowen and much vſed among the old Hebrewes, for the great vertue which it hath to make one to haue a ſweete breath; like as doth Lignum Rhodium.
            
            All theſe afore recited, togither alſo with the moſt noble and renowmed Balme, are vſed in the Scriptures of God, to ſignifie the high honor and excellencie of vertue, and the moſt ſweete and comfortable perfumes of heauenly loue and doctrine, wherewith the mind of man is moſt gratiouſly inſpired and diuinely indued.
            So Dauid in his Pſalmes, vnder the name of Solomon, ſetteth out the noble honor, maieſtie and magnificence of Chriſt where as he ſaith, that his garments ſmelled of Myrrhe, 
               Pſal. 45, 8. 
               Aloe and Caſſia, out of the Iuorie palaces. Meaning, that there ſhoulde proceede and iſſue from him a moſt ſweete, pleaſant, delectable, fragrant, and odoriferous ſmell, wherewith all people farre and neere ſhould be recreated and refreſhed.
            A much like phraſe is that which we read

in the Canticles of Solomon, where the Spouſe moſt affectionately delighting in the conference of hir Welbeloued, vttereth theſe and Cant. 5, 13. many the like termes, His lips do drop the pure and principall Myrrhe. Signifieng thereby, that his words and ſpeeches were fraught full of grace and truth, preſeruing the godly from euill, and ſtriking the godleſſe to the hart, with bitternes for their impenitencie: the Metaphor being taken from Myrthe, the which although it be moſt ſoote and fragrant, yet is it (withall) moſt tart and bitter.
         
         
            The 22. Chapter.
            
               Of the Terebinth, out of which runneth a Gumme called Turpentine.
            
            THe Terebinth or Turpentine tree groweth in Syria and Palestina, and is a goodlie pleaſant tree to beholde. It hath leaues almoſt like the Baie, and flowers not much vnlike to the Oliue tree, of a reddiſh colour. His berries be in the beginning greene, but afterwards red, and when they be ripe, blacke, yeelding a pleaſant ſauour.
            Out of this tree there runneth in the Sommer time a moſt gallant Gumme and ſoueraigne Roſen, called Turpentine, maruellous ſoote and pleaſant in ſmell, and ſo cleere, that a man may ſee through, vnto the

bottome of the Pot wherein it is kept.
            It is with effect vſed in emplaiſters to cure and heale woundes, and to aſſwage the anguiſh and paine of ſores and greefes. Inwardly it clenſeth the breaſt, lungs, and kidneyes; it ripeth phlegmes, expelleth groſſe humors, openeth the obſtructiōs of the liuer & milt; it notably prouoketh vrine, driueth out the grauell, and mundifieth the paſſages for the better, freer, and eaſier conueiance out of the ſame.
            From this tree and many others there are taken many moſt notable compariſons and proper Similitudes. As firſt, the Prophet Isaiah, who after their great miſerie and diſtreſſe, recomforteth the Iſraelites, and putteth them (ſo many as were left) in aſſured hope of proſperous eſtate. That which is left in 
               Iſai. 6, 13. 
               the midst of the lande ſhall be multiplied, and there ſhall be in it yet a tenth: and it ſhall returne, and ſhall be as the Terebinth tree, and as the Oke which haue a ſubstance in them when they cast their leaues: Euen ſo the holie ſeede ſhall be the ſtay and ſubstance thereof.
            
            Whereby he meaneth, that it ſhoulde ſo happen to them as it doth to trees, which in the nipping Winter, being froſt bitten and without leaues, or blaſted with lightening and perilouſly wind ſhaken, ſeeme as though they were vtterly dead, and in outward ſhew, appeere to bee as it were without any liuely ſap or vitall iuyce: whereas (notwithſtanding)

there is left in them ſome portion of ſtrength and naturall moiſtnes, that reuiueth them againe the next Spring, and maketh them eftſoones gallantly to bloome and flouriſh.
            He therefore denounceth vnto the Iſraelites a lamentable ſpoile, and pittifull maſſacre, ſo that ſcarcely the tenth perſon ſhall eſcape: yet not ſo, as that a generall and vniuerſall deſolation ſhould come vppon them, to make ful hauocke and ſweepſtake among them: but that ſome remnants ſhoulde bee left, which ſeemed as perſons appointed to the ſlaughter, and to be as dead men, without all hope of recouerie. Theſe (ſaith hee) ſhall be made aliue againe, and by the ſeede of the word of God reſtored vnto their former eſtate and dignitie; like as the Linden and Terebinth, and other braue and beautifull trees; which, in the cold winter ſeeming to be withered and dead, doe in the Springe bud againe, and afreſh ſpread their boughes and leaues moſt gallantly.
            But Chriſt being the Wiſedome of God his Father, reſembleth himſelfe vnto the Terebinth, & many other faire and goodly trees, ſhewing by the way, how deſirous euery one of vs ought to be to embrace his doctrine, and to learne his precepts. And thus doth Wiſedome in the commendation of hir ſelfe, ſet foorth hir vertues and properties, therby to draw vnto hir all thoſe that haue any care

of their ſoules health and ſaluation. I am come 
               Eccle. 24, 5. 
               out of the mouth of the most high, first borne before all creatures. I cauſed the light that faileth not, to 
               Verſ. 15. 
               ariſe in the Heauen: I am ſet vp on high like a Cedar in Libanus, and as a Cypreſſe tree vppon mount Sion. I am exalted as a Palme tree in Cades, and as a Roſe plant in Iericho: as a faire Olyue tree in a pleaſant fielde: and am aduanced as a Plane tree by the water. I haue giuen a ſmell in the ſtreets as Cinnamome and Balme: I haue giuen a ſweete odour as it were Mhyrre of the best, as Storax, Galbanum, Onyx and ſweete perfume of Incenſe. As the Terebinth haue I ſtretched out my branches: and my branches are the branches of honour and grace.
            
            In theſe and others of the like ſort, is Chriſt, the Wiſedome of God the Father, moſt highly commended, and honourably ſet foorth, to the ende that all men ſhoulde with readier minds and willinger harts flee vnto him for refuge; and from him, as from a moſt aboundant and plentifull Fountaine, draw out the pure water of life; and not to ſeeke broken Ceſterns and vile pits that can hold no water, as the Lord by his Prophet Iere. 2, 13. 
               Ieremiah witneſſeth.
            Touching the nature and properties of the Cedar and Cypreſſe tree it were ſuperfluous heere to ſpeake much, ſithence the vertues, qualities and effects of them be copiouſly ſet out and largely deſcribed by Dioſcorides, Plinie, and many others. Let this onely

for this place ſuffice, that in the Scriptures of God there be many Similitudes taken from the roots, ſtems, boughes, leaues, flowers, and ſeede: from their ſhape, forme, proportion, ſtature, beautie, odour, ſmel, fragrancy, durablenes and eternitie: from the pleaſant ſhadow that they yeeld and affoorde to the wearied traueller: from their moſt delectable fruites, which for the vſe of man they beare and bring foorth. By the which is ſignified (for the moſt part) the excellency and prerogatiue of vertue, the honorable dignity and bleſſed eſtate of the godly, the blameleſſe integritie of the inward minde, and the honeſt manners of thoſe that ſeeke ech way to benefite and do good to all, and to hurt, damnifie, preiudice, or hinder none.
            Sometime they ſignifie the ſtately inſolencie, arrogant pride, and hautie ſwelling of wicked perſons. For trees that bee of great height, doe many times oppreſſe and hinder the growth and encreaſe of low ſhrubs, growing vnder them, euen as we ſee, the great, rich and mightie men of the world do keepe vnder awe and ſubiection the poore and needie.
            Againe, as Tempeſts when they ariſe, and lightening (when it pleaſeth God to ſend either the one or the other) quicklie and with a tryce hurleth downe and ouerturneth mountains and the higheſt trees, according to that ſaieng of the Pſalmiſt: The voice of the 
               Pſal. 29, 5.
               
               Lord breaketh the Cedar trees, &c: euen ſo doth he bring downe with a breakenecke fall the proude, hauty, arrogant, and inſolent, which ſet themſelues againſt God, and ſeeke the ſpoyle of thoſe that be quiet and godly.
            To the ſame effect alſo is that ſaieng of the Prophet Iſaiah: The day of the Lord of hostes, is 
               Iſai. 2, 12. 
               vpon all the proude and hautie, and vpon all that is exalted, and he ſhall be brought low. And vpon all high and ſtout Cedar trees of Libanus, that are high and exalted, and vpon all the Okes of Baſan. Whereby he declareth that God is able eaſily to bring downe and ouerthrowe all Fortreſſes, Bulwarkes, and Caſtles, be they neuer ſo ſtrong: and all the wealth, riches, and power of the ſtately and loftie minded: and that nothing is any way able to withſtande his force and might when it pleaſeth him to ſtrike.
            To the ſame purpoſe and effect doth Zacharie likewiſe aduiſe the people, not raſhly and vainly to put their truſt in any walled townes or helpe of man, bicauſe no ſtrength (ſeeme it neuer ſo impregnable and inuincible) can protect or deliuer out of the hand of the Lord. Theſe wofull words therefore vſeth he vnto Iſrael, denouncing vnto them (as an Herault at Armes ſent from God, to ſommon them) grieuous deſtruction and lamentable deſolation. Open (ſaith he) thy doores, O 
               Zach. 11, 1. 
               Lebanon, and the fire ſhall deuoure thy Cedars: Howle ye Fir trees (by the which, he meaneth

the inferiour Magiſtrates) bicauſe the Cedar is fallen, that is, bicauſe thy chiefe Rulers and ſoueraigne Gouernors be deſtroied. Howle O ye Okes of Baſan: that is, yee ſtiffe-necked, froward and intractable perſons, bicauſe the mightie defenced forest is cut downe.
            
            The like diſmall day doth he there likewiſe threaten to the Shepheards, which being puffed vp with pride in themſelues, little cared for the welfare of the poore flock, but raigned as Lords ouer them, practiſing rigor, tyrannie, crueltie, and auſteritie as Lions vpon them. Which miſerable abuſe Ezechiel in his time doth alſo greatly bewaile. Ezec. 34, 3.
            
         
         
            The 23. Chapter.
            
               Of Heath, Tamariske, Ling, and Broome.
            
            
               HEath or Tamariske is a little ſmall Tree or Plant of lowe growth (as Virgil well noted) bearing a rugged or rough leafe, not much vnlike to Sauine, and a flower of a browne purple color, & withall ſomwhat moſſie or woollie: Bees delight very much therein. The grounde where it commonly groweth is drie, hungrie, barren,

waſte, and vnfruitfull.
            From theſe doe the Prophets in manie places alledge ſundrie Similitudes, whenſoeuer they denounce and notifie vnto men, what heauie haps, afflictions and calamities ſhall befall them. As namely Ieremiah: Curſed 
               Iere. 17, 5. 
               be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh fleſh his arme, and withdraweth his hart from the Lord. In which words he pronounceth that man accurſed whoſoeuer he be, that repoſeth his confidence and truſt in any bodily, earthly and fraile thing whatſoeuer it be: or that in his diſtreſſe and danger ſeeketh helpe and ſuccour at the hands of any, ſauing of God alone. For he that ſo doth, ſhall be like the Heath, which receiueth no benefite by the temperate and milde diſpoſition of the aire, but cumberouſly occupieth the ſoile, and for a ſmall time continueth, growing no where elſe, but in barren, hungrie, drie, ſalt, parched, rugged and vnfertile grounds.
            But bleſſed and happie is the man that putteth 
               Pſal. 1, 3. 
               his trust in the Lord: for he ſhall be like a tree that is planted by the water ſide; which being continually watered, ſpreadeth out hir rootes and boughes, and ſhal not feele when the heate commeth, but hir leafe ſhall be ſtill greene, and ſhall not care for the yeere of drought, neither ſhall ceaſe from yeelding fruit.
            
            Againe, where God threateneth ruine, deſtruction, ſpoile and deſolation to hang ouer the heads of the Moabites, who (lineally deſcending from the Iewes, namely from

               Lot the brother of Abraham) were ſtill (notwithſtanding) their profeſſed enimies; hee biddeth them to Flee and ſaue their liues, and to 
               Iere. 48, 6. 
               be like the Heath in the wildernes. Whereby he aduiſeth them, with ſpeede to withdrawe themſelues out of their Holds, and by haſtie flight to prouide for the ſafetie of their liues: bicauſe their Cities ſhoulde ſhortly bee deſtroied, ranſacked and deſolated, and their people and citizens ſpoiled, and depriued of all honor, dignitie and eſtimation; ſo that they ſhould no more be accounted of or regarded, than the baſe Ling and baggage Heath in the wildernes.
         
         
            The 24. Chapter.
            
               Of Roſen in generall.
            
            
               ROſen is all that Oylie fatneſſe and gummie ſubſtance, which with the heate of the Sun runneth out of the Pyne tree, Pitch tree, Firre, Larch, Lentiske, and Terebinth. With vs alſo heere in theſe Countries there iſſueth and ſweateth out of the Cherie tree and Damſon tree, a roſen or gum of the colour of honie, which is verie good againſt the grauel and ſtone. The white

Popler alſo yeeldeth a certaine gummy iuice or liquor like Ambre, out at the clifts of the rinde. But of all others, the Terebinth roſen (which wee call Turpentine) is the chiefeſt: next wherevnto is the roſen of the Lentiske, which we tearme Maſticke. After it in goodnes is the Pine; the Firre, and the Pitch Roſen next. The worſt and laſt be thoſe that run out of the wild Pine, and out of the roote of Scammonie, which are tearmed Stroblina and Colophonia.
            
            And there be of Roſen (as there is likewiſe of pitch) two differences or ſorts; the one liquide and currant; the other drie and cleere. The vertue & effect both of the one & of the other, is to aſſwage paine, to lenifie greefes, to binde and cloſe vp woundes, ſpecially the Turpentine that runneth out of the Terebinth; whoſe operations and effects the prophet Ieremiah metaphorically applieth to the inwarde woundes of the minde, which with the ſoueraigne emplaiſter and liniment of the word of God be recured and healed.
            Thus therefore doth he expoſtulate with the Iſraelites: Is there no Roſen (or Balme) in 
               Ierem. 8. 
               Gilead? Is there no Phyſition there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recouered? As though he ſhoulde ſaie: There is a ſoueraigne ſalue to be had, and a preſent remedie is readily prepared, able to heale the wounded minde, and bruſed conſcience: but the daughter of my people careleſſe of hir

recouerie, and forgetfull of hir ſaluation and health, refuſeth to apply the ſame remedies vnto hir filthy, ſtinking & mattery wounds: ſhe paſſeth not a whit for the wholſome Cataplaſmes and ſuppling ſalues of the worde of God: ſhe diſcouereth not hir botches, boiles and impoſtumes to the expert and skilfull Phyſition, to wit, God: ſhe craueth no aduiſe nor helpe at his hands: who is able and willing, out of his infinite ſtore to affoord preſent remedies for the healing of all afflicted and diſeaſed conſciences, and to miniſter vnto the ſame the Wine and Oyle of his conſolation and mercy; as appeereth in the parable which Chriſt himſelfe vſed of the Samaritane (by whom he himſelfe was figured) and of the wayfairing man, that fell Luk. 10, 30. among theeues and was wounded.
            Whereby is ment the ſtate of mankinde, through Sathans malice, deſpoiled of his robes of innocencie and integritie, and left full fraught and miſerably peſtered with all ſinne and wickednes, like (euen) to ſterue and be throwne headlong into the gulph of deſperation.
            But God when for our ſinnes he woundeth vs, that is, when he ſendeth vnto vs famine, dearth, penurie, ſcarcitie, calamitie, wars, troubles, ſicknes, and ſuch like, his will and pleaſure is, that for redreſſe thereof we ſhoulde come to him, and of him alone craue our deliuerance.
            
               
Touching which point, we reade a moſt comfortable and ſweete diſcourſe in the Prophet Ieremiah, wherein the Lord our God complaineth him ſelfe of our to too wilfull diſobedience; and vttereth ſpeeches of great greefe, for that mankinde ſeeketh aide and helpe elſe where than at him, and that they polluting & defiling themſelues with groſſe idolatrie, ſuperſtition, vaine worſhip and ridiculous tromperies, do moſt vnkindly forſake ſo liberall and ſo bountifull a Lorde, to ſerue in miſerable thraldome and ſlauerie, a cruell, craftie and bloody Tyrant.
            Not without cauſe therefore doth he thus reaſon the matter with his people: Am I 
               Iere. 2, 31. 
               become as a wildernes vnto Iſraell, or a lande that hath no light? Wherefore then ſaith my people, we are Lords, we will come no more vnto thee?
            
            Which Similitude is taken from a barren ſoile, and fruitleſſe ground that beareth no corne, graine nor fruite for mans vſe and ſuſtentation. Whereas on the other ſide, the Lorde God, the Creator and maker of all things, is moſt farre from all ſuch ſterilitie: yea with him is all plentie and aboundance that can poſſibly be conceiued, readie at all times to be had and enioyed, if we coulde thankefully receiue them, and hartily ſue for them. So that all they be vtterly and ech way inexcuſable, that ſhrinke and ſtart from ſuch a bountiful Lord, ſith there can no lawfull or reaſonable cauſe of ſuch peeuiſh reuolt

be by any colour alledged, why they ſhould ſo do. And therfore (as it were) greatly mooued with the trecherous indignitie of ſuch a foul diſparagement, he laieth open the hainouſnes of their crime, by another example, ſaieng: Can a maide forget hir ornaments, or a Bride hir attyre? Yet my people haue forgotten me, daies without number.
            
            But in theſe heauenly offers of ſoueraigne remedies, and cordiall medicines to afflicted mindes, the Lord (with all) inſulteth & ſharply taunteth the people of Aegypt, bicauſe they applied and laid to their woundes ſuch medicines and emplaiſters, as were no maner of way, auaileable or profitable, but rather encreaſed, than mitigated their greefe and maladie. And therefore he ſheweth them, where and whence they ſhoulde ſeeke for helpe, and to whom to ſue for their recure: Go vp (ſaith he) vnto Gilead, and take Roſen (or Balme) O Virgin, the daughter of Aegypt: but 
               Iere. 46, 11. 
               in vaine ſhalt thou go to Surgerie, for thou ſhalt haue no health.
            
            Now, Gilead was one of the ſixe franchiſed Townes, appointed to be as Cities of refuge Gilead, a Sanctuarie or place of refuge. Num. 35. Deut. 19. Ioſh. 20. for ſuch as had vnawares without any pretenſed malice killed any man: and that Citie was aſſigned to the Leuites and Prieſts, whoſe office and function was about the Law and miniſterie of the word of God. For as ſaith the Prophet Malachie: The Priestes lips ſhall keepe knowledge, and they ſhall ſeeke the 
               Mala. 2, 7.
               
               Law at his mouth, for he is the meſſenger of the Lord of Hostes: that is, he is the Ambaſſador of God, and is inioyned by his office to teach, and expounde the Law and worde of the Lord.
            The Prophet therefore directing his ſpeeches to the afflicted, ſheweth him that all helpe muſt come from God, and that for his direction in the way of godlines, he ought to reſort vnto his godly miniſters. Otherwiſe, if he elſe where hoped for helpe and aſſiſtance, the remedies ſhould prooue not onely helpeleſſe and booteleſſe, but alſo damnable and dangerous, if any mite of ſaluation be repoſed in any other than onely in the euerliuing God.
            
               Ieremiah prophecieng the deſtruction of Babylon, which was as a filthie ſinke of all wickednes, warneth all men to take heede and to withdrawe themſelues from hir: and Ierem. 50. for that ſhe had refuſed all holeſome admonitions, and turned the deafe care vnto all ghoſtly counſels and ſpirituall aduertiſements, he warneth all men to abandon hir companie, and vtterly to reiect and forſake hir, as ſorlorne, deſperate and incurable.
            Whereby the Prophet ſheweth, that the Preachers and miniſters of the word of God vſed and applied all poſſible remedies for the curing of their diſeaſes, and healing of their ruſtie and feſtered woundes; and that they left no way vnattempted to purge their

harts and minds from errours: but all was in vaine.
            He thought it good therefore to leaue them to their owne blindneſſe, and to referre them to the heauie iudgement of God; who would ſhortly ſtirre vp and ſende among them a lamentable ſlaughter and greeuous plague, by raiſing againſt them moſt fierce, cruell and bloody enimies.
            The like calamitie did Chriſt foreſhew and denounce ſhould come to paſſe vpon the obſtinate Iewes, who deſpiſing and refuſing ſo Matt. 23, 38 manie and great benefites, cruelly raged againſt the Prophets, againſt Chriſt himſelfe, and againſt his Apoſtles and followers.
         
         
            The 25. Chapter.
            
               Of the Vine, with all the parts and appurtenances thereof, as branches, leaues, twigs, boughes, ſtalks, claſpers, taglets, capreoles: Grape, cluster, kernell, &c.
            
            
               AS ſundrie Parables, Similitudes and Reſemblances of things well knowen vnto vs, be often vſed in the ſacred Bible, for eſtabliſhing of the truth, and for proofe and confirmation

of ſuch matters as otherwiſe woulde ſeeme doubtfull and obſcure: ſo is there none that more notably ſetteth out, garniſheth, beautifieth, adorneth and illuſtrateth either the Propheſies, or the Sermons and diſcourſes of the holie Writers, than thoſe that are taken from the Vine, and the appurtenances thereunto.
            And firſt, that notable propheſy of Iacob the Patriark cōcerning the Meſſiah, who deſcending of the ſeede and race of Iudah, reſtored health, reconciled mankind, & brought him into the fauor and loue of God againe: The 
               Gen. 49, 10. 
               ſcepter ſhall not depart from Iudah, nor a Lawgiuer from betweene his feete, vntill Shiloh come; that is, the kingdome ſhall not be altered, nor tranſlated into any other ſtocke, till Ieſus Christ the Meſſiah, and author of all proſperitie and ſauing health doe come. And the people ſhall be gathered vnto him: that is, the Gentils ſhal be conuerted and be brought to receiue his doctrine, to imbrace his religion, to repoſe their truſt, confidence and beleefe in him, and to imitate his life, maners, behauiour and example. He ſhall binde his Aſſe-foale vnto the Vine, and his Aſſes colt vnto the beſt Vine. He ſhall waſh his garment in Wine, and his cloke in the blood of Grapes. Whereby is ſignified the myſterie of his croſſe and paſſion, by the vertue whereof we be purged, and by the efficacie of his glorious reſurrection, out of the tyrannous clowtches of Diuell and death,

brought into freedome and libertie.
            A much like ſaieng hath Iſaiah, and tending to the ſame ſenſe: In that day ſhall the 
               Iſaie. 11, 10 
               Gentils inquire after the roote of Ieſſe, which ſhal be ſet vp for a token vnto the people, and the nations ſhall ſeeke vnto it and his rest ſhall be glorious. He alludeth in theſe words to a Standard, Banner, Marke or token, that may be diſcerned and ſeene a great way off, ſuch as be our Beacons or Pires; which in the day time, Mariners and Sea-faring men (for direction of their courſe) doe ſtedfaſtly behold and looke vnto; as in the night, they do vnto the north ſtarre or pole Arctike.
            And for that, the Vine is a pleaſant, amiable, and delectable tree, yeelding to the owners and beholders (by reaſon of his gallant branches, braue leaues, claſping tendrels, and cluſtering grapes) as well profit and benefit, as pleaſure and recreation, therefore is a wife, that is fruitfull in bearing of children compared and reſembled thereunto, as in the Pſalmes: Thy wife ſhall be as the fruitfull 
               Pſal. 128, 3. 
               Uine on the ſides of thine houſe.
            
            
               Wiſedome alſo commending hir ſelfe, ſaith: As a Vine haue I brought foorth fruit of a ſweete 
               Eccl. 24, 19. 
               ſauour: that is, I deliuer vnto all men ſweete doctrine and comfortable inſtruction, wherby they may be refreſhed as with a pleaſant, toothſom and moiſt Grape. For who ſo giueth eare vnto hir directions and counſels, ſhall be ſure to haue proſperous ſucceſſe in

               
                  •
               ll his affaires, and to receiue daily increaſe 
                  •
               nd furtherance in vertue and godlines.
            This proſperous felicitie, the Lord, by certaine excellent and pithie Metaphors promiſeth by his Prophet Hoſea, vnto Iſrael, and to ſo many as ſeeke to be at one with God, ſaieng: I will heale their rebellion; whereby he meaneth, that he will freely and graciouſly pardon their offences. I will loue them freely. 
               Hoſe. 14, 4. 
               For mine anger is turned away from them. I will be as the dew vnto Iſrael: he ſhall grow as the Lillie; and his roote ſhall breake out as the trees of Lebanon. His branches ſhall ſpread, and his beautie ſhall be as the Oliue tree, and his ſmell as Lebanon. They that dwell vnder his ſhadow, ſhall returne, and growe vp as the corne, and flouriſh as the Vine.
            
            In which words he couertly meaneth foyſon, plentie, aboundance and proſperitie in all thinges; and that the ſtate of their common wealth ſhoulde be flouriſhing and renowmed, not wanting any thing, appertaining to the inwarde beautifieng and ornanament of the minde.
            Whereas to them that bee vnmindefull of Gods benefits, and ſwiniſhly wallow ſtill in their puddle of pleaſures, wantonneſſe and ſenſualitie, all thinges ſhall happen and come to paſſe cleane contrarie, as the Prophet Iſaiah witneſſeth: namely, that their Vines ſhal be rooted vp, that there ſhall be no Iſai. 24, 7. Vintage, and that Wine ſhall faile to them that vſually ſolace themſelues with ſongs

and muſicall inſtruments, at their bankets and feaſtes, and to ſuch as are all vppon the hoigh in their iolitie and huffing moode. Finally, that ſuch ſhall be the miſerie, deſolation, waſte, and maſſacre among them, that the people (which be the honor, beauty, and ſtrength of their Cities) ſhould be deſtroied, and ſo brought (in a maner) to nothing, that few or none of them ſhall be left aliue. For he flatly telleth them, that euen ſuch ſhall their caſe be, as is of Oliues when they bee ſhaken off from the Oliue tree, and as the Grapes when the Vintage is ended. For as the fruits in the gathering of theſe and ſuch like trees, be not ſo generally all gathered, but that ſome remain and be left on the tree: ſo of the great and wofull calamitie which they ſhoulde ſuffer, ſome ſmall number ſhoulde remaine vndeſtroied.
            The like Argument doth the Lord handle and proſecute by his Prophet Ieremiah, pronouncing vpon the wicked not onely ruine and deſolation, but alſo penurie, dearth and famine, inſomuch that there ſhoulde be no Grapes on the Vine, nor fig on the fig tree; and that and 48, 33. Iere. 8, 13. the leaues ſhould be ſo plucked vp, that nothing might bee hoped or looked for to grow thereon. Whereby he ſignifieth, that the famine ſhould be moſt extreeme and remedileſſe, and that the ſoules likewiſe ſhould be miſerably hungerſterued; and finally that euery mothers ſonne of them ſhould be

gleaned away and gathered, euen as figs and Grapes, ſo that few or none ſhould eſcape or be left behinde.
            And as ripe Grapes doe reliſh ſauourely, and with their pleaſant and tooth ſome iuyce do ſingularly refreſh the palate, & delite the throate: Euen ſo ſounde doctrine, holeſome admonition, and gratious ſpeeches do cheer the ſpirites, and comfort the mindes of men.
            
               Moſes likewiſe compareth peſtilent and noiſome doctrine, and the companie, acquaintance, familiaritie, conuerſation, conference, life, maners and dealings of wicked perſons, vnto venemous & poyſoned grapes, which with their peſtiferous and dangerous iuyce do infect the mindes (that are otherwiſe well trained and diſpoſed) and carrie them cleane away from the true worſhip and religion of God: Their Vine (ſaith he) is of the 
               Deu. 32, 32. 
               Vine of Sodom, and of the fieldes of Gomorrha: their Grapes are grapes of Gall: their clusters bee bitter. Their Wine is the poyſon of Dragons, and the cruell gall of Aſpes. That is, their ſpeech is ſo peſtilent and venemous, that it euen preſently infecteth, and foorthwith ſlaieth.
            To the ſame purpoſe is alſo that ſaieng, ſharpe reprehenſion, and nipping ſubſannation of Hoſea, againſt thoſe that followe ſuperſtition, and ſeeke after ſtrange gods, euen as drunkards that wholy giue themſelues to bibbing and ſwilling. They haue reſpect (ſaith Hoſe. 3, 1.
               
he) and ſet their loue on ſtrange Gods, and delite in the Wine bottles. Wherein he compareth their ſottiſh madnes (which carried them to idolatrie, vnto the maner and ſtate of drunkards, that haue none other pleaſure, delite or ioy but in quaffing and tipling, and thinke their cheefe ſolace to conſiſt in the companie of Rynſepitchers and Toſſepots.
            But foraſmuch as we are now entred into this diſcourſe of the Vine, this is by the way to be noted, that the Prophets of God, vnder the name of the Uine, Grapes and other Iſa. 17, 6. 10 Plants, doe ſignifie and meane ſomewhile abundance and fertilitie: ſomewhile dearth and ſcarcitie: ſomewhile fewneſſe and deſtruction of the people: and ſomewhile the great ſtore and multitude; which of few, doe growe vnto a very populous increaſe and number.
            So in the Prophet Ieremiah we read how the Lord by an elegant Metaphor pronounceth that the Idum
                     •
                  ans ſhould be ſo entirely ſpoiled, that nothing at al of thē ſhuld be left: inſomuch as their very enimies ſhould be ſomwhat more fauourable vnto them, than hee would be. For (ſaith he) If the Grape gatherers 
               Iere. 49, 9. 
               ſhould come vpon thee, would they not leaue ſo
                     ••
                   Grapes? If theeues ſhould come vpon thee by night, would they not destroy and rob till they had ynough? That is, they would not altogither haue ſpoiled thee, nor vtterly ranſacked all thy goods, but would haue left ſomewhat behind them.

               But I (ſaith the Lord) haue left Eſau bare, and diſcouered his ſecrets, that he ſhall not be able to hide himſelfe, or any thing that he hath.
            And as all pride, arrogancie and hawtines comming of aboundance and proſperitie, (wherwith thankleſſe Caitifs, droonken with wealth, do grow ſtately and inſolent) is vnto Almightie God, odious and deteſtable: ſo doth he in ſundrie places ſharpely reprooue and vehemently beate downe the ſame: pronouncing and giuing ſeuere ſentence againſt all ſuch as are ſtained therewith: that albeit they ſeeme for a while to flouriſh, and ſtand ſcotfree, yet ſhall they be cut downe, as corne which the Mowers with full handfuls mowe and reape: ſo that euen thoſe few which ſhall be left of many, ſhall alſo be gleaned and gathered vp, as the eares are gleaned in the end of harueſt. And yet ſome he promiſeth to leaue, bringing another Similitude; euen as Grapes are left on the Vines, and Oliue berries on the Oliue tree.
            For as in Vintage time the Grape-gathering cannot be ſo cleane, but that ſome be left behind; nor the ſhaking off of Oliues ſo preciſely done, but that ſome berries remaine, either among the leaues, or in the top of the tree: euen ſo in the dolefull maſſacre and lamentable deſtruction of the people, there ſhould not bee made ſuch a generall ſweepeſtake, but that ſome ſhould be left and reſerued vnder hope of mercie. In that 
               Iſai. 17, 4.
               
               day (ſaith he) ſhall it come to paſſe, that the glorie of Iacob ſhall be impoueriſhed, and the fatneſſe of his fleſh ſhall be made leane: And it ſhall be, as when the haruest man gathereth the corne, and reapeth the eares with his arme. Yet ſhall not the gleaning be ſo, but that ſome gathering of eares ſhall be left, and ſome Grapes and Oliues remaine: as of two or three berries in the top of the vpmost boughes; and of fower or fiue in the high fruitfull branches. Whereby his meaning is, that the rich Cobs and head Rulers (ſwelling with pride and arrogancie) ſhould be throwen downe and ruinated: but of the poore Communaltie and ſeelie inferiour people, there ſhould a remnant be left, as in the Vintage ſeaſon it is ſeene to come to paſſe, that ſome cluſters and berries be left, wherwith the poore people are ſomewhat refreſhed and releeued.
         
         
            The 26. Chapter.
            
               Of Hyſope.
            
            HYſope is a Garden herbe of excellent ſmell and pleaſant taſte, and therfore good to be vſed in broths; for that, being boiled with meats, it maketh the ſame not onely wholeſome, but the better alſo in reliſh and ſauour.
            It clenſeth the breaſt and lungs, and purgeth the head very orderly from flegme, and

tough clammie humors: and therefore is of ſingular effect to helpe the Pleuriſie, Stitch, or any other griefe and paine in the ſide.
            Wherupon it pleaſed the Lord to appoint this herbe to be vſed in ſolmne ſacrifices, either when as Lepers were to be clenſed; or any other enormous offence to be expiated, Leuit. 14, 4. Numb. 19, 6. 18. by dipping a bundle of Hyſope in the blood of a Sparrow, or of a red Cow.
            
            Dauid alſo acknowledging his greeuous ſinnes of adulterie and murther, beſeecheth God to forgiue him, and to purge him with Hyſope, that hauing the foule ſpots of his Pſal. 51, 7. ſoule clenſed, he may haue quiet of conſcience, and be renued in ſpirit. Wherin he had reſpect vnto the rites, and ſacrifices of the olde Teſtament, by the which it was ordeined, that whoſoeuer was purified according to the Law of Moſes, with blood ſprinckled Exo. 24, 6. on him with Hyſope and a ſcarlet lace, were clenſed.
            All which thinges were ſhadowes and figures of Chriſt, by whoſe blood all our ſins are clenſed, and waſhed away through faith Heb. 9. 14. for euer.
            But whereas we reade of Hyſope in the Bookes of the Kings, where Solomon is ſaide 1. King. 4. to be ſo skilfull and wiſe, that he was able to diſpute of the nature of ech plant and herbe, from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, euen vnto the Hyſope that ſpringeth out of the wall: my opinion is, that the ſame is not

there ment of our common Hyſope, which is not any ſmall and ſlender herbe, but ſometime of a foote or more in heigth, bearing a ſpiked purple or dark blewiſh flower. I think therfore that therby is ment the herb called Maydenhaire, whoſe leaues are hackt, or ſnipt rounde about, and which groweth by wals and ſtony ſhadowie places: And bicauſe in leaues it is like to Rue, it is ſometime called Ruta muraria, that is, Stone Rue or Wall Rue.
            Like alſo vnto this, is that which wee call Trichomanes, which groweth alwaies in moiſt & ſhadowie places, being cōmonly of a ſpan long; and hath the ſtalkes of his leaues ſmall, ſtreight, and leane, beſet on either ſide with many little pretie leaues, ſtanding in comely order one againſt another, and continueth alwaies greene.
            His effects and faculties are the ſame in operation that Maydenhaire hath: and is of great vertue to helpe olde coughes, ſhortnes of winde, and obſtructions of the lungs, and breaſt. And theſe are ſometimes called by other names, as Polytrichon, and Callitrichon, bicauſe of the effect which they worke in faſtening the haire, and making it to growe blacke, thicke, and curled.
            Therefore, this being ſuch a ſmall lowe Herbe, ſcarcely a ſpan high, and alſo growing in wals, I am perſuaded that it is in that place to be vnderſtood, for Hyſope. For the

drift and meaning of the wordes in that ſentence is none other, but that hee had perfect skil and exact knowledge of all manner of thinges, euen from the talleſt and higheſt Cedar, to the loweſt and leaſt herbe that groweth out of the wall.
         
         
            The 27. Chapter.
            
               Of the Reede, with the ſeuerall ſorts and differences thereof: of Flaxe, Stubble, Chaffe, Chips, Parings, and other trifling thinges of ſleight and ſlender acount.
            
            
               OF Reede there be ſundry ſortes and kindes. Whereof one hath a long, ſmooth, naked ſtalke, without knots or ioyntes, called in latin Typha palustris, and with vs Reede Mace, Cattes taile, or Water Torch. Such a Reede was that which was in Matt. 27, 29 Reede mace or Cats taile deriſion deliuered into Chriſts right hande, in ſteede of a Scepter royall, for that he called himſelfe a king. For in the top thereof it hath the forme of a Scepter imperiall, two handfuls high or there abouts, rounde in compaſſe, and as bigge as a mans thumbe,

thicke, ſoft and ſmooth as though it were wooll or flockes, which in the handling hath a fine, ſoft, and thrummie nap like Veluet, and when it waxeth ripe, is diſſolued and turned into a Downe or Cotton, eaſily carried away with the winde.
            Another kinde of Reede there is growing by the banks of ſtanding waters, and on the ſhores of riuers, which hath a long, round and hollowe ſtalke or ſtrawe, full of knottie ioints, and at the top large tuftes or downy eares, growing ſcatteringly and looſely, not cloſely compact togither, which doe alſo change into a cotton or moſſie ſubſtaunce, and are alſo lightly caried away with the winde. And this kinde, is our common Poole Poole Reed. Reede, Spier or Cane reede. The roote wherof being beaten ſmall and laide to the place, ripeneth an Impoſtume, & draweth thornes or ſplinters out of the fleſh.
            And for that the Reede is tottering, ſhaking and yeelding euery way with the leaſt winde that bloweth, therefore all ſuch weathercocklike Temporizers as in their words and deeds be wauering, vnconſtant, ſlippery, changeable, fickle, fainte harted and dare not ſtoutely perſiſt in their conceiued opinion, but (as turne coates) ſay and vnſay, doe and vndoe, are fitly reſembled and very aptly compared vnto a Reede, that ſhaketh with euery blaſt.
            And for that the bleſſed man Iohn the Baptist
               
was moſt far from this vicious diſpoſition, our Sauiour Chriſt (in praiſe of his conſtancie, and for that his doctrine & teſtimonie of the Meſſiah were ſound and agreeable to the touchſtone of the truth) gaue an honorable Eulogie of him, plainly and effectually telling the people, that he was nothing at all like to a Reede ſhaken with the winde, that Mat. 11, 7. Luk. 7, 24. he was of a wauering & inconſtant mind, to ſpeake one thing ſtanding, and another ſitting, or that vpon euery light occaſion was readie to recant and ſhrinke from that opinion and iudgement which afore he liked and allowed: but that he was a ſtaied, ſtable, firme, conſtant, and true man, without ſuſpi. tion of lightnes and mutabilitie, and that therefore in equitie and right euery one was to ſpeake and thinke honorably and woorthily of ſuch an excellent Herault and heauenly preacher; and not to eſteeme of him according to the fonde conceite and fooliſh opinion of the ignorant multitude, but according to truth and as the matter indeede rightly required.
            But to go forward with the reſt: wee haue a common tearme and vſual prouerbe, taken from the nature and condition of the Reede, when we would ſpecifie and deſcribe a man that putteth his truſt & confidence in a thing, which not only not helpeth him, but rather damnifieth and greatly hurteth him, to ſay that he leaneth vnto a ſtaffe of Reede.
            
               
The ſame metaphore (as Iſaiah witneſſeth) did Rabſhakeh vſe at the ſiege of Ieruſalem, Iſai 36, 6. when as he thought thereby to daunt and quaile the godly minde and inuincible courage of good king Hezekiah, and to make 2. King. 18, 21. him (for feare) to ſurrender and yeelde vp both himſelfe, his people and the citie.
            The Lorde alſo by his Prophet Ezec
                     •…
                  
                vſing the ſame Similitude, inſulteth vpon the king of Aegypt and threateneth vnto him vtter deſtruction. For when as he tooke vpon him to protect and defende the Iſraelites, which ſhrowded themſelues vnder his power and countenance, he himſelfe became but a ſtaffe of Reede, which brake into ſhiuers; and in ſplitting both wounded himſelfe, and pitifully Ezec. 29. 6. galled them alſo; renting their ſhoulders, and wringing their loines. Wherby was ment, that all their power and forces were abated and decaied, and all their ſtrength of war vtterly fruſtrated and diſcomfited.
            So alſo doth God (as witneſſeth the Pſalmiſt) ſcatter and defeat the practiſes of the proude and inſolent Spearmen, that ietted Pſal. 67, 30. armed with Iauelines like long and great Reedes. The like plague and calamitie did God inflict vpon the ſtocke and race of Ieroboam, and ſmot Iſrael for their Idolatrie, like as a 
               1. King. 14, 15. 
               Reed is ſhaken in the water: & weeded them out of their good and fruitfull land, which he had giuen to their progenitours. Meaning thereby that they were brought to nothing, and deſpoiled of

all their honor and dignitie.
            Now as God by Similitudes of Reedes, doth many whiles caſt downe and confound all thoſe, that vainely truſt in things tranſitory, brittle, and momentanie: ſo on the other ſide them that be weake, penſiue, faintharted, ſorrowfull and moorning, he doth Iſaie. 42, 13. Luk. 4, 18. raiſe vp and recomfort: and with ſpirituall inſtruction doth cheriſh, furniſh and refreſh the ſicke ſoule & bruſed conſcience. Heerunto is to be referred that notable prophecie of Iſaiah concerning the mildenes and lenity of Chriſt, and of his heauenly comfort to all groning and afflicted conſciences: Behold my 
               Iſai. 42, 1. 
               ſeruant on whom I haue leaned: mine elect, in whom my ſoule delighteth: I haue put my ſpirite vpon him: he ſhall bring foorth iudgement to the Gentils. He ſhal not cry nor lift vp his voice; neither ſhall his voice be heard in the ſtreetes. A bruiſed Reede ſhal he not breake, and the ſmoking Flax ſhal he not quench, but ſhall bring foorth iudgement in truth: he ſhall not faile nor be diſcouraged, and the Gentiles ſhall waite for his lawes.
            
            By theſe two Metaphors of a bruiſed Reede and ſmoking flaxe, he declareth the ſurpaſſing Iſai. 61, 1. clemencie, and vnſpeakable mildnes of the Lord God towarde weake harts, troubled conſciences, moorning ſpirits, and afflicted mindes: how gently hee bindeth vp their wounds, and how kindly he healeth their diſeaſes; not bitterly rating and violently forcing them, not churliſhly threatening,

and fiercely affrighting them; nor yet with cruell ſpeeches and rough dealing diſcouraging them, as many troubleſome, crabbed natured people vſe to doe, which deale with their poore brethren more hardly and cruelly than Chriſtian mildnes can warrant, thundering againſt them for their fraile tranſgreſſions the ineuitable iudgements of God, without any hope of repentance.
            Likewiſe, will he not quench ſmoking flaxe. Which Similitude is taken from a Lampe, or from the week or match of a Candle, Link or Torch, which either wanting oile and tallow, or hauing thereof not ſufficient, yeeldeth foorth at ſome time but a darke, blind, ſnuffie and vnperfect light.
            By this Compariſon therefore is meant a weake, ſlender and wauering faith, which yet (notwithſtanding) is not quite quenched and extinct, albeit at ſome time it be verie neere thereunto. This ſmal pittance of faith, Chriſt and thoſe that be his miniſters neuer quite quench and put out, but ſo long as any ſparke of godlineſſe appeereth, doe cheriſh, nouriſh, ſtirre vp, and with the bellowes of the holie Ghoſt blowe and kindle; that all dimneſſe being expelled, the light of faith and pietie may cleerely ſhine out, and glitteringly appeere both to the glorie of God, and alſo to the benefit of his neghbor.
            For ſo doth God temper and qualifie his ſacred lore and heauenlie doctrine (being

the foode and nouriſhment of our ſoules) that neither can any through too much ſeueritie iuſtly ſhrinke from his profeſſion; or eſtrange himſelfe from his Church and congregation: neither yet through ouermuch Ienitie and mildnes (as it were with dandling and wanton cockering) be corrupted and nuzzeled in ſecuritie and licentious ſupinitie.
            The godleſſe and wicked are kept in awe and obedience with dread and ſeueritie of iuſtice; but the weaklings are beſt wonne by gentlenes and lenitie. After this ſort in the Goſpell (offering grace, mercie and ſaluation vnto euerie one) there be ſweete and ſower intermingled togither, for therin are heanenly conſolations ioined with menacing threats; and ſharpe reprehenſions qualified with comfortable aduertiſements.
            By Smoke, vapor and miſts; by Hay, ſtraw, chaffe, ſtubble, embers, duſt, parings, ſhauings, offall, riffraffe, and other refuſe, droſſe or caſtaway baggage, are meant and ſignified in the Bible, both men and things that belewd, light, vaine, of no account and reckoning, of no eſtimation or commoditie, of no price or value, but are as trifling paltrie, ſlight trumperie, and ſuch baſe trinkettrie and traſh, as yeeldeth more harme than benefit, more loſſe than gaine.
            From theſe are taken many and ſundrie notable Similitudes by ſacred and holy Writers,

to garniſh, beautifie and adorne their ſentences withall. As when God by his Prophet pronounceth that the wicked ſhall bee ſcattered as Chaffe, and driuen away as Dust, 
               Pſal. 1, 5. Iſai. 17, 13. Iob. 21, 17. and other baggage ſtuffe with the wind. And likewiſe in the booke of Iob: The candle of the wicked ſhall be put out; that is, their honor, dignitie, glorie, ſtate, worſhip and magnificence ſhall be dimmed and brought downe; and they ſhall be as ſtubble before the winde, and as chaffe that the ſtorme carrieth away, that is, they ſhall be ſuddenly deſtroied and brought to vtter confuſion. In like maner the Prophet Iſaiah pronounceth deſolation to the Moabites, and all the enimies of the Church of God, ſaieng, that they ſhall be threſhed euen as 
               Iſai. 25, 10. and 5. 24. 
               ſtraw is threſhed; and as quickly conſumed, as drie ſtubble with a vehement fire.
            No leſſe dreadfull plagues and lamentable deſolation threatneth he to ſuch as haue hardened themſelues in ſinne, and by an vſuall and domeſticall practiſe of ordinarie tranſgreſſiō haue entred into familiar league and naturall acquaintance with wickednes. If the blacke Moore can change his skin, or the Leopard his ſpots, then may ye alſo do good, that are accustomed to doe euill. Therefore will I ſcatter 
               Iere. 13, 23. 
               you as ſtubble that is taken away with the Southwinde.
            
            The like calamitie doth the Lord threaten to fal vpon them that commit Idolatrie, and repoſe their truſt in Idols: Ye ſhall be (ſaith Isai. 1, 29.
               
he) as an Oke, whoſe leafe fadeth; and as a Garden 
                     •
                  hat hath no water: and your ſtrength, that is, your falſe God, in whom ye truſted, ſhall be as Towe, and the maker of it as a ſparke: and they ſhall both burne togither, and none ſhall quench them: that is to ſay, all the glittering pompe and painted ſhew of fained worſhip and counterfeite religion, ſhall periſh and come to naught, euen as Flaxe and Towe when fire is put vnto them.
            But to the reſt. The Prophet Amos ſharpely inueigheth againſt couetous Cornemongers, who hauing their Graners and Cornelofts full fraught and thwackd with Graine, ſwallowed vp the poore and needie, being readie to ſterue for want of foode, making the 
               Amos. 8, 4. 
               Epha ſmall and the ſhekle great, that is, the meaſure ſcantie, and the price high, and falſifie the waightes by deceit, driuing the poore people for verie neede, to be glad to take at their hands, not onely ſcantie meaſure; but alſo in ſteede of cleane Wheate, doe retaile and ſell vnto them, chaffe, duſt, refuſe, ofcorne, huskes, pods, and baggage woorſe than bran: whereby they catch the poore within their danger, and make them to become indebted vnto them, that they dare not go elſe where to buy any, although they might of others buy better cheape. Theſe Caterpillers and Cormorants of the common wealth, are they, that ſell the poore for 
               Isai. 3, 15. 
               ſiluer, and the needie for ſhooes, braieng the Lordes

people in a morter, and grinding the faces of the poore (as it were) againſt a grindſtone.
            He that diligently conſidereth the drift of this Prophet Amos, and ſearcheth the depth of his meaning in this his ſharpe reproofe and ſatyricall inuectiue againſt theſe couetous Chuffes, and market raiſers, which for their owne priuate lucre, vncharitably enhaunce the price of Graine and Victuall, to the pitifull ſpoyle of the poore and needie of the land, may plainely ſee the greedie Cobs and hunger ſnouted Slouches of theſe our daies liuely in their colours deſcribed; and may (as in a table) beholde the puniſhments that God hath in ſtore for ſuch mercileſſe Caitifes, as deuoure the poore, and withdraw from the needie, neceſſarie foode, and releefe expedient for their ſuſtentation. But leauing theſe, let vs againe retire to the Metaphores and Similitudes, that are taken from this kinde of trifling ſtuffe and vnprofitable baggage, to ſet foorth other thinges that are ſound, true, and profitable in deede.
            God by his Prophet Ieremie compareth his word and doctrine (which is mighty and potentiall in operation; and moſt effectuall in comforting and feeding hungring conſciences) vnto Wheate. For as Wheate giueth ſound, good, and ſubſtantiall nouriſhment vnto the bodie, ſo doth the true word of God, mightilie and wholeſomely nouriſh the ſoule. And as for the adle deuiſes, trifling

inuentions, doting doctrines, deceitfull traditions, and ſuperſtitious religions, coyned by mans fooliſh, phantaſticall, and phanaticall braine, he fitly reſembleth vnto dreames and chaffe. What (ſaith he) is the Chaffe to the 
               Iere. 23, 28. 
               Wheate? that is, what hath vanitie to do with veritie? what agreement is there betweene truth and falſhood: what concorde is there betweene groſſe darknes of ſuperſtitious ignorance, and the cleere bright ſhining light of the glorious Goſpell?
            The ſame Metaphor of Chaffe, doth Iohn Baptist the forerunner of Chriſt vſe, in his ſharpe reprehenſion and nipping exhortation to the Phariſies and Sadduces, which impugned the truth, and reſiſted the benefite of their offered ſaluation: telling them that the Meſſiah was come, who hauing his fanne in 
               Mat. 3, 12. 
               his hand, would make cleane his floore and gather his Wheate into his garner, but woulde burne vp the Chaffe with vnquenchable fire. Whereby he ſheweth that the godly after the race of this life run, ſhoulde be receiued into euerlaſting Tabernacles, and the wicked committed vnto euerburning fire.
            Now, as Iohn for his part did ſeuerely admoniſh the people of their dutie, and roundly exhort them to repentance and amendement, by alledging Similitudes and parables of an Axe put to the roote of the Tree, and of ſeuering and diſſorting the Wheate from the Chaffe: ſo likewiſe Chriſt (to whom all

hypocriſie, counterfaite religion, and faired ſanctitie is loathſome and odious) by alledging a Similitude of a beame and of a Matt. 7, 3. mote, ſharpely reprooueth thoſe buſie priers into other mens liues, which are verie quicke ſighted to eſpie faults, and to too curious in noting euen the leaſt ouerſightes of others, whereas in the meane while, in their owne groſſe ſins they are contented to be as blinde as Betels, flattering themſelues in their looſe dealings, and ſo extenuating their owne miſ-vſages, as though they were nothing.
            To the end therefore that this and ſuch like enormities and wilfull affections, as namely, ſelfeloue, ouerweening of our ſelues, inſolencie, pride, hawtines, arrogancie, ſtatelineſſe, diſdaine, contempt of our neighbor, hatred, wrath, deſire of reuenge, and ſuch other vices might be extirped, weeded, and grubbed out of mens minds, the holie Prophets of God, & ſacred Writers indued with the ſpirit of wiſdome from aboue, vſed theſe meanes to reduce the dull harts of men to modeſtie, and to the knowledge of themſelues, and how briefe, ſhort, brittle, vaine and tranſitorie this life is; how manie waies ſubiect to incurable dangers and caſualties, and within what narrow and ſtraite limites it is bounded. So that the life of man is by them in ſundry places reſembled to manie thinges of ſmall account, and leſſe continuance,

namely to a Dreame, to a ſmoke, to a Pſa. 103, 14 Iob. 7, 67. and 8, 9. and 13, 25. and 14, 2. Iſai. 40, 6. Hoſ. 13, 3. Iac. 4, 13. vapour, to a puffe of winde, to a ſhadow, to a bubble of water, to hay, to graſſe, to an herb, to a flower, to a leafe, to a tale, to vanitie, to a weauers ſhuttle, to a winde, to dried ſtubble, to a poſt, to nothing.
            By theſe Metaphores the ſpirite of God teacheth, that all the glory, beauty, magnificence, ſtrength and wiſedome of man is nothing elſe then vaine, brittle, tranſitorie and ruinous, vnleſſe it be ſuſtained, vpholden and vnderſhored by the heauenly power of the ſure and eternall work of God.
            Theſe might al be aboundantly confirmed by textes and teſtimonies of the Scriptures; which for breuitie ſake, and leaſt the volume ſhould grow too big, we do heere omit. The ſtudious and diligent Reader, deſiring to Iſai. 40, 6. Iac. 1, 10. 1. Pe. 1, 24. Eccl. 14, 18. know the ſame more at large, may be ſufficiently therein ſatiſfied by theſe fewe places quoted in the margent.
         
         
            The 28. Chapter.
            
               Of the Cucumber, and certaine others.
            
            THe Cucumber is ſo generally well knowen, that to vſe any deſcription thereof, were but needleſſe and ſuperfluous. It and other herbes alſo were much

vſed and well knowne among the olde H
                     •
                  
                  brewes and Egyptians, as in the hiſtorie of the Bible we plainely read.
            For Moſes the ſeruant of God was importunately vrged, and greeuouſly diſquieted by the murmuring Iſraelites and diſordered multitude, luſting after fleſh, and ſaieng: Who 
               Num. 11, 4. 
               ſhall giue vs fleſh to eate? We remember the fiſh that we did eate in Aegypt: the Cucumbers, the pepons, the leekes, the onions and the garlicke. Theſe fruites are not onely vſually eaten by people of low degree and baſe calling, but of noblemen and wealthy perſonages alſo, partly as meate and condiments to feed on, partly as ſalades with oyle, vineger and pepper, to ſharpen the ſtomacke and prouoke appetite.
            They vſed in the old time in their vineyardes and Cucumber gardens, to erect and builde little cotages and lodges for their watchfolkes and keepers that looked to the ſame, for feare of filchers and ſtealers: which lodges and cotages, ſo ſoone as the grapes & Cucumbers were gathered, were abandoned of the watchmen and keepers, and no more frequented. Frō this forſaking and leauing of theſe lodges and cotages, the Prophet Iſaiah taketh a Similitude, and applieth the ſame againſt Ieruſalem, the which hee pronounceth ſhould be ſo ruinated and laid waſte, that no relicke thereof ſhould be left; and that it ſhould become euen as an empty

and tenantleſſe cotage or lodge, in aforſaken vineyard and abandoned Cucumber garden: The daughter of Sion (ſaith he) ſhall remaine 
               Iſai. 1, 8. 
               like a cotage in a vineyard, and like a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, and ſhall be like a beſieged citie.
            
            
               Baruch alſo deriding the images & ſhrines of the Idols, whereunto blockiſh people bowed themſelues and offered ſacrifice, in moſt plaine tearmes, and in a long diſcourſe ſaith, that ſuch Mawmetry can doe no more hurt, nor bring any more feare than a deſolate cotage in a Cucumber garden. For (ſaith Baruc. 6, 69 he) as a Scarcrow in a garden of Cucumbers keepeth nothing, ſo are their gods of wood, of ſiluer and of gold: and they are like vnto a white thorne in an Orchard, that euery birde ſitteth vpon. He alludeth vnto the image of Priapus, which the Paynims vſed to ſet in their gardens to driue and ſcarre away night theeues. Which thing Horace alſo in certaine verſes, (iumping in ſenſe with the afore recited words of Baruch) doth approoue and teſtifie, deriding the to too fooliſh ſuperſtition of the doltiſh and ignoraunt people, his wordes in effect are theſe.
            
               Erewhile a lumpiſh log was I Horat.
               
               Seruing no vſe at all,
               Till Carpenter in doubtfull dumpe
               Gan home his wits to call:
               And to bethinke him, whether he
               A bench of me ſhould make,
               
                  
Or elſe Priapus image braue:
               At length yet did he take
               The courſe, a God of me to make:
               A iollie God ſince then
               I am (forſooth) and gardens keepe
               To fray both birds and men, &c.
            
         
         
            The 29. Chapter.
            
               Of the Iuniper.
               
            
            
               AS the Gourd ſerued for a pleaſaunt arbor or booth to ſhadow Ionah 
               Ionah. 4, 6. from the ſcorching heat of the hot Sunne: ſo was the Iuniper a comfortable ſhadowe to Elijah, being wearie 1. Kin. 19, 4. and faint with trauell.
            For when as the Prophet fled for the ſafe gard of his life from the furie of Iezabel, and had long trauelled in a deſart and hot region, for very faintnes in the end he ſat downe vnder a Iuniper tree. For this tree being thicke leaued and branched, is very commodious to ſit vnder in hot ſeaſons, to keepe awaie the parching beames of the broiling Sunne. And therefore in his heauines and agonie of minde, being alſo extremely ouerwearied with tedious iourneying, the ſhadow

heerof was ſome comfort to him, when as with griefe and hunger he was ech way ſo grieuouſly aſſaulted, encumbred and beſet, that he wiſhed for preſent death to end his miſerable plight and diſtreſſed condition.
            But after he had ſlept awhile vnder it, behold an Angell appeered vnto him, willing him to ariſe and eate. Wherupon he ſaw ready baked for him a Cake, baked on the coles, & a pot of water at his head: wherewith he refreſhing himſelfe, came in the ſtrength thereof vnto mount Horeb: and there in a caue lodged ſafe from the ambuſhments and treacherous deuiſes, wrought and intended againſt the Prophets of God, by the cōmandement of that wicked bloodie woman.
            The leſſon heerby taught vnto euerie one is this: that God in this life diuers and ſundrie waies, trieth his children: to whet their zeale, and to make proofe of their faith and conſtancie. But yet that in the end he neuer forſaketh nor leaueth them deſtitute, neither ſuffereth them to bee tempted aboue their ſtrength, nor to be oppreſſed and ouerwhelmed with the waight of the calamities, by his prouidence and permiſſion laid vpon them.
            
               Iob being throwne downe from ſo high a ſtep of wealth and felicitie, into the loweſt and extremeſt degree of miſerie that could be, bewaileth and complaineth, how lewdly he was mocked, flowted and derided by raſcall

pezants and abiect villaines, which were the very ſcumme and offſcowring of men, and ſuch ſterueling Rakehels, as for very miſerie and pouerty were glad to range abroad in the fields and wildernes, to gather nettles about the buſhes, and the berries and rootes of Iuniper, and other Plants to ſtanch their Iob. 30, 4. hunger: as now adaies with vs there be ſome ſuch loitring Vagabonds, ſturdie Landleapers, and ſmelfeaſt Lubbers, which refuſing honeſt lobour, doe (like drones) liue of the ſweate of other mens browes; liſtening and harkening after doles & belly-cheere, where they may vnderſtand of any. Which failing, they are glad manie times to lie vnder hedges, and to feede their greedie and hungrie maw with the roots of Sea Hollies, Eringes, Thiſtles, wilde Carrots, Hawes, berries and ſuch like.
         
         
            The 30. Chapter.
            
               Of the wilde Vine.
               
            
            
               THe wild Vine bringeth foorth a bitter and vnpleaſant Grape, attaining neuer to any ripenes. This fruit bicauſe it is harſh, vntoothſom and eiger, God by his Prophet Iſaiah reſembleth Iſai 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
vnto the froward, crooked, peruerſe and peeuiſh maners of wilfull men.
            For whenas he had moſt diligently beſtowed his labour in the rectifieng and manuring of the crabbed diſpoſitions of the vngratefull Iewes, and had left no waie vnattempted for the reclaiming and reducing of them vnto the acknowledgement of their duties, he found by proofe in the end that al his labour, diligence, induſtrie, trauell and paine (that way taken and ſuſtained) was fruſtrate and loſt. For albeit he ech way carefully pruned, and ſtudiouſly husbanded his Vineyard (in hope to receiue ſauourie and toothſome Grapes) yet brought it foorth nothing, but wild, ſower, tart, bitter, and vnripe Grapes.
            After ſo long manuring and paines ſuſtained among them, he looked for iudgement, equitie, integritie, truth, honeſt behauiour, and thankfulnes toward ſo diligent and induſtrious a Vinetrimmer: but alas, all things prooued cleane contrarie: for they brought foorth the rotten fruit of iniquitie, vnrighteouſnes, contempt of vertue, enuie, hatred, wrath, indignation and ingratitude toward ſo bountifull and liberall an owner, that tooke ſuch inceſſant paines in the poliſhing and beautifieng of their harts and conſciences.
            The ſame ſpeech elſewhere vſeth he, and applieth it to the wicked which forget and

forſake God: flatly telling them, that their dealings ſhall be in vaine, that their conceiued drifts ſhall ſort to no happie end: that all their labour beſtowed and imploied in dreſſing and trimming their Vineyards, was to no purpoſe or effect. In the day of thy planting ſhall the wilde Vine growe; thou ſhalt plant a 
               Iſai. 7, 11. 
               faire plant, and thy ſeede ſhall flouriſh in the morning, but the crop ſhall be gone in the day of inheritance: As though he ſhould ſay: albeit thou plant and ſet the beſt vineſlips that are to be gotten, and neuer ſo carefully commit them to the ground, whereby thou verily thinkeſt to receaue great profite and aduantage at the time of vintage and ripenes: yet ſhalt thou miſſe of thy hope: for thou ſhalt haue nothing but wilde grapes.
            It ſhall likewiſe ſo fall out with the corne and graine: which ſprouting vp gaily, and putting thee in hope to grow to ripenes, and to yeeld thee commoditie at Harueſt, ſhall quayle and come to nothing. For, the day wherein thou thinkeſt to reape, ſhall forreiners and ſtrangers ſodainely inuade and ſpoile it; ſo that thou ſhalt carie none of all that thou ſo carefully and painfully ſowedſt, into thy barnes. Heereof afore hath beene ſomewhat more at large ſpoken.
         
         
            
            The 31. Chapter.
            
               Of Minte, Rue, Anyſe and Cumine, which Chriſt alledgeth against the Phariſees, for their extreeme couetouſnes and diſſembling hypocriſie.
            
            
               THeſe herbes are generally knowne, and in common vſe with all manner of perſons of ech degree, and ech where to be had. Now bicauſe Herbe ſellers ſeemed to picke vppe ſome peece of a liuing, & to make ſome gain by retailing and ſelling of their herbes, the greedy Phariſees ſpared not to exact tithes Mat. 23, 23. Luk. 11, 42. of them for the ſame, and thereby couetouſly to catch vnto themſelues ſome pittance of priuate lucre.
            And bicauſe the hypocriticall ſhew of fained and counterfaite religion, and the ſcraping couetouſnes of the Scribes and Phariſees was odious vnto Chriſt, he ſharply and ſeuerely reprooueth them for being ſo preciſe in things tending to their owne gayne and priuate profite (were they neuer ſo little and ſmal of account) omitting (in the meane while) other greater and waightier matters,

which were as they mayne pillers of Religion, and wherein conſiſted the cheefe ſubſtance of godlines and pietie.
            For they were ſo ſtreight laced and ſuperſtitious in exacting their tithes, and looked ſo narrowly to ech ſmall point, that by anie colour might helpe to ſtuffe their purſe, that they ſtrictly demaunded tithes euen of common pot herbes, of Mynt, Anyſe and ſuch like, letting paſſe the waightie points of the Law, and looking through their fingers, at iudgement, mercy, compaſſion and fidelitie; which vertues were able to admoniſh and put them in remembrance, that they ſhould not iniuriouſly deale with any man; that they ſhould helpe, ſuccour, and releeue the needie; that they ſhould not by periury circumuent, vndermine or ouerreach any, but deale truly, faithfully and conſcionably with all men.
            Seeing therfore they let theſe things eſcape them, which are the cheefe effects of Religion, they ſhew themſelues to ſeek nothing els but onely how to enrich and dignifie themſelues; being in matters of great importance, blinde and careleſſe, and in caſes of ſmall waight, to too quicke ſighted and circumſpect.
         
         
            
            The 32. Chapter.
            
               Of the nature and propertie of Muſtarde ſeede, whereunto Faith and the worde of God are compared.
            
            
               HOW precious, holeſome, and comfortable the doctrin of the glorious Goſpell is vnto all men in generall, faithfully beleeuing the ſame; & how neceſſary and expedient for the inſtruction of ech Chriſtian conſcience in the knowledge of God and vndoubted faith in his promiſes, as there is no man ſo ignoraunt that knoweth not; ſo doth Chriſt by many and ſundry parables taken from vſuall and common things, ech where to be found and had, exhort and ſtirre vp all men of what degree or calling ſoeuer they be, to the loue & ſtudie thereof.
            He compareth the kingdome of heauen, Mat. 13, 24. 31. 33▪ 45. 47. that is, the doctrine of the Goſpell, (which nouriſheth, foſtereth, cheriſheth and feedeth faith) vnto Seede, vnto pearles, vnto leauen, vnto a draw net, and to a graine of Muſtard ſeede: which being but a ſmall and the leaſt

of all ſeedes, yet with his ſharpe and aduſt property biteth the toong, helpeth digeſtion, warmeth the ſtomacke, prouoketh appetite, and bringeth a pleaſant reliſh vnto the palate. And all nations vſe it as a profitable ſauce and expedient condiment vnto their meats, being grinded and braied, and mingled with vineger or veriuice.
            Now, as a Graine of Mustard ſeede, being Luk. 13, 19. and 17, 6. Mark. 4, 31. the leaſt of all ſeedes, and ſowen in the earth, when it groweth vp, ariſeth to a great height, and beareth great branches, ſo that the fouls of heauen may build vnder the ſhadow of it: euen ſo the word of God, and faith being not idle but working; although in outward ſhew it ſeeme ſmall and ſlender, yet doth it by little and little ſpread it ſelfe, and like a faire fruitfull branched tree receiue daily ſtrength and increaſe.
            Againe, as an Emplaiſter or Cataplaſme made of the bruiſed ſeede of Muſtarde, is knowen to haue ſingular vertue and effect, being applied to them that haue their members benummed, and that are fallen into the Letharge or drowſie euill; or that be troubled with the ſwimming and giddineſſe in their head; or that haue the Apoplexie, palſie, falling ſicknes; and to be ſhort, for al cold griefes and diſeaſes; bicauſe it warmeth, and bringeth heate, motion and ſenſe againe into the affected parts, and is alſo good to help leprous, ſcuruie, ſcabbie and vicerous perſons:

ſo likewiſe faith being vpholden, ſhored vp, and ſurely anchored vnto the word of God, reuiueth, erecteth, cheereth vp, and reſtoreth the dull ſpirits and appalled conſcience of man, making it readie and prompt to execute, atchieue, and exerciſe the offices and functions of godlines.
            Therefore the biting and ſharpnes of Muſtard, togither with his hot and fierie taſte, which is manie times ſeene to make the eater thereof to rub his noſe, and wring out teares; and which alſo by prouoking of neezing, doth excellently purge the head from tough phlegme, and rheumatike ſubſtance, is very aptly compared and reſembled to the word of God: which doth pearce the conſcience, ſhake the mind, enkindle and inflame the hart, excite and ſtirre vp drowſie, faint and dul minds to inſue vertue, and performe the duties of pietie; and doth manie times force and fetch out teares of earneſt and hartie repentance.
            Againe, Chriſt ſeeking to draw the harts and affections of men from carefull ſeeking after the vaine traſh, and tranſitorie pelfe of this wretched world, (which moſt men with anxietie and griefe of mind ſo greedily hunt after) willeth vs to conſider and behold the Lillies, not thoſe that by art and labour are Mat. 6, 28. planted and ſowne in gardens, but thoſe that of their owne accord without the helpe of man, grow in the open field.
            
               
By whoſe example, he ſtirreth vs vp to an aſſured truſt to be repoſed in God, being ſo liberall and ſo bountifull a father, who feeding the birds of the aire, will not (doubtleſſe) ſee vs to lacke any thing that good is, concerning our foode and ſuſtenance: and ſith he ſo gallantly decketh the Lillies of the field (which be ſo gorgiouſly and ſo richly clothed, that euen Solomon in all his roialtie was not apparelled like one of them) he will not faile, but aſſuredly prouide for ſuch neceſſaries of apparell and clothing, as ſhall be meete and expedient for vs.
            Chriſt his meaning and drift heerin therfore is, that we ſhould ſeeke the kingdome of heauen, meditate in the doctrine of the Goſpel, and delight in the contemplation of heauenly things: which if we doe, his promiſe is, that we ſhall not want any of thoſe things which be needfull and neceſſarie for vs in this our fraile and tranſitorie life; but that he of his moſt free & bountifull liberalitie will ſufficiently prouide the ſame for vs.
         
         
            The 33. Chapter.
            
               Of Iuie.
            
            THe Iuie, which gaue ſhadow vnto Ionah againſt the feruent heat of the Sunne, (albeit ſome tranſlate it (and that aptly Ionah. 4, 6.
               
ynough) to be a Gourd) is named Hedera, 
                     〈◊〉
                   haerendo: for that it claſpeth and catcheth holde of wals, trees, hedges, or any other thing that it meeteth withall. Whereupon Perſius the Poet hath in effect theſe words:
            
               
                  Perſius in Proaeio.Mount Helicon and pale Pyrene Well
               I leaue, as due to thoſe that doe excell 
               In Muſes Art and skilfull Poetrie:
               Wearing on head the ſpreading braue Iuie.
            
            For among the old Painims, this Tree was dedicated vnto Bacchus, who is the Preſident of Poets, as the Oliue tree was to Minerua: and for this cauſe were Poets woont to be crowned with this, as conquerors were with Baie: as appeereth in Virgil:
            
            
               
                  Eclog. 7.Ye Shepheards, ſee with Iuie that ye crowne 
               Your Poet yoong, in ſigne of high renowne.
            
            And in another place, where he extolleth Augustus Caeſar the Monarke of the world, he praieth, that among the Emperors royall triumphes, his verſes might haue ſome place; and that the Iuie (wherewith Poets are dignified) might be ſuffered to ſhuffle in among the Baies, which were peculiarly conſecrated to victorious Emperors: his words be:
            
               
                  Eclog. 8.At thee (O Prince) my Muſe began, 
               At thee, an end the ſame ſhall take:
               Receiue in glee, the rithmes I ſcan,
               At thy behest, and for thy ſake:
               And mongst thy Baies of Conqueſt, daigne
               To ſuffer Iuie poore to raigne.
            
            For the ſuperſtitious Gentiles vſing euery

third yeere with great ſolemnity to celebrate the feaſt of Bacchus, made themſelues garlands and coronets of Iuie to weare on their heads. So do we reade in the Bookes of the Machabees, that Antiochus compelled the 2. Macc. 6, 1 Iewes, to renounce their auncient rites, and lawes of their fathers, giuen vnto them by God, and like perſons diſtraught of their wits to range vp and downe, keeping reuell rex, and vſing all diſſolute behauiour as the reſidue did that kept the feaſt of Bacchus, wearing in proceſſion Iuie garlands: & that whoſoeuer refuſed ſo to do, was puniſhed by death.
            Now the cauſe wherefore this tree (which Iuie why dedicated to Bacchus. is alwaies greene and neuer looſeth his leaues) was dedicated vnto Bacchus, grew (as I thinke) heerupon; for that it might
                  •…
                withſtandeth drunkennes, and purgeth the braine of ſlimy tough phlegme and colde humors, engendred by drunkennes and ſurfet. The leaues alſo & boughes heer of being arborwiſe platted, or laid to the head, refreſh the ſame (as by the ſhadow which ſo comforted Ionah appeered) and driueth away the headach growing by labor and wearines.
            A ſtrange effect and nature is auouched by Cato, to be in the Iuie. For if wine be put De re rust. into a pot or diſh made of this wood, it will quickly appeere whether the ſame be mingled and alaied with water or no: for the wine will ſtraightwaies run out. The naturall

diſcorde and antipathie betweene theſe twaine, is ſo great, that the one cannot abide to be mingled with the other, nor to come neere togither.
            But whether the tree which ſhrowded and ſhaded Ionah from the heat of the Sunne, (which anone after was worme-eaten and withered, to his no ſmall greefe and diſcomfort) were an Iuy or no, ſundry Interpreters, and namely Augustine do doubt: ſeeing the Gourd is fitter for ſuch a purpoſe, which the Hebrew word ſeemeth alſo to ſignifie. For the Gourd is full of braunches, and beareth great broad leaues, and by the helpe of tendrels, or capreols quickly claſpeth, catcheth hold, and climbeth vp to a great height, and maketh a pleaſant Arbor to ſit vnder, and to defende a man from the heat of the pearching Sunne.
            Further more it is of a cooling nature, and therefore in hot ſeaſons very fit to ſhade and ſhroud the bodie. Being receiued inwardly into the body, being diſtempered with heat, it ſemblably aſſwageth and temperately cooleth it: as alſo do ſalades made of Cucumbers, Melons, Pepons, Citruls, Letuce, Orach, and Purſelaine, which are vſed to be eaten at the beginnings of meales: and ſome of them alſo to be ſmelled vnto, to refreſh the weake ſpirits.
         
         
            
            The 34. Chapter.
            
               Of the Mulberie tree, and his fruite.
            
            
               THe Mulbery tree hath a great & large body, a rugged rinde, his wood inwardly of a boxie or yellowiſh colour, his leaues large and ſnipt about the edges like a ſawe, in bignes not much vnlike to the fig tree: his fruit is faſhioned longwiſe, much after the proportion of an egge, and conſiſteth of many berries growing togither: being at the beginning of a white colour, after red: and at the laſt when they be ripe, blackiſh. He bloometh laſt of all other trees: neither bringeth he foorth any flowers and leaues, vnleſſe the ſpring be calme and temperate, as though it were vnwilling to abide any iniury of nipping froſt, or ſharp winterly weather: againe, it bringeth foorth the firſt of all others, a ripe and nouriſhable fruite.
            The Mulberie being ripe, tanneth and dieth a mans fingers with a bloodie colour. When it is vnripe, (that is, being white before it grow to be red) it ſcowreth out ſpots, and filth from the skin, as well as water.
            The fruite of this tree is of right holeſome 
                  •…
                cooling and refrigerating, namely

in the Sommer ſeaſon: and is beſt afore or at beginning of meales. For being eaten after dinner or ſupper, it putrifieth, and engendreth corrupt diſeaſes, like as Cherries, Plums, Damſons, Cornell berries, Beaches, yoong grapes, and ſuch like do. All theſe taken after meate, do coole, and refrigerate, quench thirſt, and conueniently qualifie the heat of the liuer. Neither am I greatly ſqueymiſh or ſcrupulous to allow and admit the ſame to be eaten after meates, ſo that onely the iuyce of the fruites be ſucked and ſwallowed. For being ſo taken, they keepe down and repreſſe fumes in them that haue drunken wine ſomewhat largely.
            The ſame effect alſo haue other moyſt and ſucculent fruits, as pomegranates, orenges, lymons, and Pomecitrons, which being taken after meats, haue vertue, meruellouſly to preſerue a man from being ouertaken with wine, or eaſily ouercome with drunkennes. And therefore the ſaieng of the Poet Horace touching this matter, may ſeem neither diſagreeing to naturall reaſon, nor yet hurtfull to bodilie health:
            
               At end of meales who Mulberries doth eate,
               Shall healthfull be in parching ſommers heat.
            
            Of Mulberies and likewiſe of brier berries there is made an excellent confection or medicine, called Dia
                     •
                  oron, which hath ſingular vertue to ſtaie the Vuula, and to helpe the ſwellings of the toong, and the 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
or kernels of the iawes or throate.
            Theſe ſoueraigne helpes and comfortable cordials, which God the author of nature beſtoweth vpon man, are ſometimes taken from him, as a puniſhent for his ſin and vickednes, when as either he forgetteth to acknowledge and to be thankefull for this his diuine bountie, or otherwiſe lew dly abuſeth his good gifts and benefits: as Dauid in many places of his Pſalmes witneſſeth: namely where he reckoneth vp theſe among other delicacies and ſtaies of this life, ſaieng: that the Lorde gaue their fruites vnto the Caterpillers, 
               Pſal. 78. 47. 
               and their labors vnto the Graſhopper: That he deſtroied their vines with hailſtones, & their Mulberie trees with the frost. For it is often ſeen, that through vnſeaſonable weather, the flouriſhing vines, Mulberies, corne, olyues and other fruites be ſo ſharpely nipped, blaſted, and froſt bitten, that no profite or commoditie at all commeth of them.
            But 
                  •
               ith we are now grown to diſcourſe of the Mulbery, it ſhall not be amiſſe (as it were by the way) to ſhew an hiſtory therof, written in the Books of the Maccabees. For, when as Antiochus king of Syria warred with a deadly hatred againſt the Iewes, and gaue the onſet vpon them with all manner of weapon and munition that could be deuiſed: among other furniture and martiall habilimentes, he brought into the battell 32. elephantes, carieng ſtrong towers of woode on their

backes, wherein were put armed ſould
                  •…
                
               1. Macc. 6, 30. 34. 37. and warlike fellowes, wel appointed. And to prouoke the elephants to be the more fierce in fight, they helde before them red clothes, died and dipped in the iuic
                  •
                
               of red 
                     〈◊〉
                   and Mulberies. For elephants are enraged and exaſperated at the ſight of any red or bloody Elephants cannot abide the fight of red colour. colour, and therby run they the more e
                  •
               grely and fiercely among the thickeſt of their enimies.
         
         
            The 35. Chapter.
            
               Of the Sycomor
                     •
                  , and wilde Figge tree.
            
            THe Sycomore is a tree, whoſe compounded name ſheweth it to be iointly deriued from the fig tree, and from the mulberie tree. The fruit of it is called Sycaminos. It is deſcribed by Dioſcorides and Plinie to bee a great large tree, like a Fig tree, and hauing leaues much like to the leaues of the mulberie tree. The fruit which it beareth, is nothing pleaſant in taſte, but rather vnſauerie, vnreliſhie, ſowriſh and vnripe: the which groweth not vpon the branches and boughes, as other fruites doe, but vpon the ſtocke or ſtem, and in forme is like to the wilde fig; it neuer waxeth ripe, albeit it is ſomewhat ſweeter than the vnripe greene Fig; neither hath it within it any ſuch ſtore

of ſmall kernels.
            This true ſerued in ſteede of a pulp
                  ••
                to Zach
                     •…
                  , being deſirous to ſee Chriſt. For 
                  •
               e Luk. 19, 4. being of a low ſtature, climbed vp into a ſycomore or wilde Fig tree, withdrawing himſelfe (as it were) from vaine and tranſitorie things, to the intent he might behold and haue a ſight of Ieſus. So that in this Zac
                     •…
                  , we haue a liuely type of the Gentiles expreſly ſet downe vnto vs: For that the Gentiles by faith haue free acceſſe vnto Chriſt, and are reckoned in the number and fellowſhip of the faithfull.
            The power, force, efficacie and effect of this faith, Chriſt himſelfe by commanding the ſodaine withering of a Fig tree, mightily Mat. 21, 19. and ſtrangly deciphereth. By example wherof, he ſtirreth vp his Apoſtles, to ſeeke the ſame, and hauing it daily to feede and nouriſh it: aſſuring them, that if they haue faith, and ſhould ſay vnto a Sycomore tree, Plucke 
               Luk. 17, 6. 
               vp thy ſelfe by the rootes, and plant thy ſelfe in the ſea, it ſhould euen obey them. And that if they ſhould ſay to a mountaine: Remooue thy ſelfe 
               Mat. 17, 20. 
               hence to 
                     •
                  onder place, ſo that the ſame neceſſarily ſerue to the aduancement of the Goſpel, Mark. 4, 31. it ſhal foorthwith remooue: their faith being ſurely and vnmooueably grounded in Chriſt without any maner of wauering or doubting, and hauing ſuch operation and working qualitie, as hath a graine of Muſtard ſeede. L
                     •
                  k. 13, 19. Which albeit it be ſmall and little, yet being

ground and bruiſed, it ſheweth foorth his ſharpe nature, biteth the noſe, and ſhaketh the whole body by prouoking neeſing. Faith therefore and the doctrine of the Goſpell is fitly reſembled to this little graine, for that it enflameth the hart and minde of man, and entirely draweth it vnto the vnfained loue and obedience of God. But of this hath been ſpoken afore.
            Now to returne our ſpeech eftſoones to the Sycomore. The Prophet Iſaiah ſharpely inueigheth againſt Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, for their malapert and rebellious contempt of God.
            For when as the Lord had ſundrie waies afflicted them, with intent to bring them vnto repentance, yet they ſtubbornly in the pride and preſumption of their harts, deſpiſed his correction, and acknowledged not his handie worke: but rather became worſe and more inſolent. Yea, they ſo lightly accounted of the calamities, burnings, ouerthrowes and ſpoiles made vpon their goods and houſes, that they ſeemed in their harts thus ſcoffingly and flowtingly to ſay: Our 
               Iſaie. 9, 9. 
               bricks and tile worke is fallen downe, but we will build it againe with ſquared ſtones: The Sycomore (or wild fig) trees are cut downe, but we wil change them into Cedars. As though they ſhould haue thus ſaid: The loſſe and hinderance which we haue receiued, is but a trifle, and a thing of nothing: we will repaire and reedifie it

againe with little ado and ſmall coſt: yea we will new builde euerie thing in farre br
                  •…
                ſort than afore they were. In ſteede of b
                  •…
                worke, we will ſet vs vp gorgeous houſes of Marble. In ſteede of the Sycomore, which is a common and baſe kinde of wood, we will wainſcot our roofes with Cedar, and 
                  〈◊〉
                thing ſhall be far more ſumptuous and magnificent than earſt it was.
            Thus therfore they turning the deafe eare to all the fatherly admonitions and gentle corrections of the Lord their God, and wantonly (not without ſcoffing terms) deſpiſing his chaſtiſements; prouoked his further wrath to be extended againſt them, and far more greeuous plagues to be woorthily inflicted vpon them.
            There is alſo mention made of this Tree by the Prophet Amos: who being neither a Prophet, nor a Prophets ſonne, neither brought vp in any points of learning, but a plaine herdman, and a Countrie hinde, was extraordinarily called by God to a propheticall function, and inioined to thunder out dreadful ſentences againſt king Ieroboam and Amazia the Prieſt. And when Amazia withſtood him, Amos firſt of all purgeth and excuſeth himſelfe, for that he was enforced to execute this charge, albeit he were neither Prophet nor Prophetically trained vp from his youth. And therefore ſith this office and function was laide vpon him by God himſelfe,

he proteſteth that he ought and muſt obey him, rather than either the king or the prieſt. Yet did not Amazia thus leaue him, but importunely vrged & perſuaded him to deſiſt from Prophecieng againſt the king, and to depart and flee into the land of Iudah out of the precinct and iuriſdiction of Iſrael, and ſo by flight to ſaue his life, leaſt otherwiſe he ſhould be impriſoned, and afterward put to death.
            
               Amos neuer a whit diſmaied with all theſe threates, boldly and conſtantly auouched his vocation, flatly proteſting and directly affirming, that he neither ment to forſake his calling, nor to leaue one iot of his cōmiſſion and embaſſage vnexecuted. And therefore he plainely confeſſeth himſelfe to haue been neither Prophet nor Prophets ſonne, but onely an 
               Amos. 7, 14. 
               herdman, and a gatherer of wilde Figges, or Sycamines. But the Lorde tooke me (ſaith he) as I followed the flocke, and ſaide vnto me: Go, Prophecie vnto my people Iſrael. Not waighing therefore either the Kings commandement, or the Prieſt Amazia his menaces, he frankly diſcharged his office, and freely vttered his meſſage, boldly and without feare denouncing deſtruction vnto them both.
            The like vndaunted boldnes vſed alſo the Apoſtles, when as they were threateningly charged and commanded by the Phariſees, that they ſhould not in anie wiſe ſpeake or teach anie more in the name of Ioſus. But Peter 
               Act. 4, 18.
               
and Iohn boldly (yet modeſtly and without contumelious reproch) anſwered them, ſaieng: Whether it be right in the ſight of God, to obey your commandements rather than Gods judge ye, that know the precepts of the Law. For me cannot but ſpeake the things which we haue ſeen and heard.
            
         
         
            The 36. Chapter.
            
               Of the Pomegranate.
            
            
               THe Pomegranate Tree is named Granata, for the great number of graines, berries or kernels that are in the Apple or fruit thereof. And it groweth moſt plentifully in the Realme of Granado. The Tree is not very great nor tall: the leaues ſtraight and narrow, like vnto Willow leaues, but ſmooth and greene.
            Of this Tree there be two ſorts; the tame, and the wilde. The flower of the tame is called Citinus: and of the wilde, Balaustium. The which be of a ſcarlet or Vermilion colour. The Apple which it beareth, is roud, & within full of red kernels or graines. The rinde, which is called Sydion or Malicorium, before it be drie, is thinne & tender, but being dried, it waxeth hard and in a maner wooddiſh.
            This fruit is in taſte ſomewhat ſweetiſh, of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               
an aſtringent qualitie, and good to alaie thirſt: ſomtime in reliſh like Wine, and hath a kind of ſoweriſh taſte, which is very commodious and good to coole the liuer, and by reaſon of his aſtriction, is of great effect to ſtop the laske and bloodie flixe.
            Often mention is made of this Apple in the Scriptures, & therby is ſignified the honourable titles and ornaments of vertue, integritie, and alſo chaſte, ſweete, comely, and pure ſpeeches. So the Bridegroome ſpeaking to his ſpouſe, and with ſweete perſuading words, alluring hir vnto him, ſaieth thus: I will giue thee drinke of ſpiced wine, and the ſweete 
               Cant. 8, 2. 
               new iuice of the Pomegranate: that is, I will recreate thee with my pleaſant talke and conference: I will refreſh thee with my holeſome doctrine, and cheere thee with a ſpirituall compotation.
            Againe, in another chapter; where the Bridegroome vttereth his tender loue & ſurpaſſing delight which he taketh in his ſpouſe the Church, and in hir beautie, eies, lockes, teeth, lips, and cheeks, he ſaith, that hir cheeks 
               Cant. 4, 3. 
               are like a peece of a Pomegranate: which is, as though he ſhould haue ſaid: Euen as a Pomegranate being cut in the middeſt, ſheweth foorth his delicate and goodly ſcarlet coloured kernels: ſo likewiſe thy cheeks being of a moſt comely and gratious ruddy conſtitution, are amiably delightfull. Thereby is alſo ſignified, chaſtitie, modeſtie, ſhamefaſtnes,

and honeſty, for that perſons furniſhed with theſe vertues will quickly bluſh. And a little after in the ſame Chapter, The fruites that are 
               Verſ. 13. 
               planted in thee, are like a very paradiſe of Pomegranates, with ſweete fruits and other fragrant herbes, which growing neere hand, make all the reſt the ſweeter and more odoriferous. By all which, he ſignifieth all maner of pleaſant, delightfull, and comfortable thinges, ſeruing to refreſh the minde and ſpirites of man.
            And whereas in this Song or Canticle the Bridegroome and his Spouſe, do continually and euery moment almoſt teſtifie their mutuall affection, and with pleaſant conference delight themſelues, qualifieng and driuing away the languiſhing paſſions that vſually 
                  〈◊〉
                found in loue: the one therefore oftentimes inuiteth the other to come for recreation into the gardens, to ſee whether the vines budded and whether the Pomegranates flouriſhed. For Cant. 6, 10. and 7, 12. the one cannot abide to be ſeparated from the company of the other; but deſire to keepe continuall company togither, and the one ſtill to enioy the others familiar conference.
            And bicauſe Pomegranates be delectable to the eie, yeelding a pleaſant taſte & toothſome reliſh, therefore doth God commaund (for a further beautie to the Temple) Pomegranates and Bels to be made, to the end, that the blockiſh & dul Iewes beholding the Exo. 28, 33. and 39, 24.
               
ſame (which yeeld ſuch abundance of goodly 1. King. 7, 18 20. 2. Kings. 25, 17. 2. Chr. 3, 16. Iere. 52, 22 Hag. 2, 20. Ioel. 1, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Eccle. 45, 9. redde and ſappie kernels, being encloſed within a hard skin or rind) ſhould retaine in their memories the harde barke of the Law, vnder which they liued: and that afterwards there ſhoulde enſue through the bright ſhining light of the Goſpell, the moſt ſweete, pleaſant, and comfortable iuice of the Euangelicall doctrine.
         
         
            The 37. Chapter.
            
               Of the Citron, Orenge and Lymontrees, and of their fruits.
            
            
               THe olde people of the Iewes were not without the vſe of Orenges, Citrones and Lymons, as well for delight and pleaſure, as for condiment and ſauce. They be of colour yellow, tawnie, ſaffronlike or paliſh, and for the moſt part, rounde, and ſometime longwiſe, faſhioned like to an egge; ſpecially Citrons, and Lymons, which yeelde foorth a gallant ſmell, & doe ſingularly recreate and comfort the hart.
            Of the pils or rindes of theſe fruits, being cut into ſmall and thinne peeces, or ſlices, and condited in honie, or preſerued in ſugar, there is ordinarily made certaine delicate innkets and dainty bankerting diſhes, called

Sucket, not onely toothſome and pleaſant in taſte, but comfortable and reſtoratiue alſo to the hart. For which purpoſe alſo ſome do vſe to preſerue in hony the flowers of this tree, before they be full blowen: which be very ſoueraigne and cordiall to reſtore the ſpirites being weakned, to comfort the hart, ſtomacke, and inward faculties, and to be giuen to ſuch as be waſted, or fallen into conſumptions.
            And albeit the trees that beare Cytrones, Orenges and Lymons, be ſeuerall & diſtinct one from another: yet were they all three by the ancient writers, contained and comprehended vnder this one name of the Citron tree.
            There is another tree, not the ſame with this, but much differing from it, & is called alſo Citrus, which beareth not any ſuch braue yellow fruit as this doth. And it is not much vnlike to the wilde Cypreſſe or Cedar tree; inſomuch that many hold opinion, that it is the very ſame tree, which is called in the Bible Exod. 25, 5. 10. 23. 28. & 35. 7. 24. and 37, 1. and 38, 1. 
               Shittim wood: whereof God commanded the bars, beames, tables, and offering altars of the Tabernacle to be made. For the wood heereof is precious, and will not rot and putrifie, neither will any woormes breede therein.
            And being plained and ſmoothed, it hath a moſt excellent graine, ful of braue running veines all along, much like as we ſee in our

common Motley cloth, or in braunched Chamlet, Durance, Mockadoe, or Damaske.
            There are vſed to be made of this Wood in ſome places, faire and coſtly folding Tables; of Ioiners worke, which for the naturall varietie of the pleaſant ſtrakes, and amiable colour, and alſo of the eeuenneſſe and ſlicke ſmoothneſſe, be to the eie of the beholder, right gallant and delectable.
            Wherefore I iudge that God would haue ſuch things as ſerued for the building of the Exod. 35, 7. 24. & 37, 1. and 38, 1. Arke of the Couenant, and vſe of the Prieſts in the Temple, among the Iewes, to bee wrought and made of Cedar and Citron wood.
            For, the Iewes being drawen and allured (like children) with the outwarde glittering ſhew of externall things: it pleaſed the Lord, for the better bringing of them forwarde in the race of Religion, and true worſhip; and alſo the better to keepe them in dutifull awe and obedience, to appoint all things in their Rites, Sacrifices and Ceremonies, gorgeous, ſumptuous, magnificent, curious and maieſticall.
         
         
            
            The 38. Chapter.
            
               Of Saffron.
            
            
               SAffron hath a rounde roote like to an Onion; & leaues or blades long and narrowe like graſſe, or ſmal Ruſhes, growing vpwarde, of a watchet or pale blewe color; from out of the middle whereof, there hangeth downe the Saffron blades or threds of a red colour, and fragrant ſmell, and of ſo ſtrong a ſent, that with his ſoporous qualitie, it much affecteth and preiudiceth the braine.
            But it is ſo cōfortable for the hart, that if it be tied to the ring finger of the left hand, it preſently pearceth and ſendeth his vertue to the hart. The agreement and ſympathie betweene it and the hart is ſo great, that being either taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, it foorthward worketh by the Arteries, and ceaſeth not till it get acceſſe vnto it. Whereby it both procureth beautie to the bodie, and cauſeth a freſh colour in the face, ſo that it be moderately and meaſurably vſed: for immoderate vſe thereof will cauſe a man to laugh exceſſiuely, and (as learned

Phyſicions affirm) doth ſo ouerioy him, that it putteth him in danger of his life, if but the waight of three drachmes thereof at once be Dioſco. lib. 1. taken.
            The vertue therefore of Saffron being ſo ſoueraigne and comfortable to the hart of man, it is not without good reaſon, that the ſame is ſo often mentioned among other odorifetous and ſweete herbs, in the Garden and Orchards of the Spouſe, in the Canticles: Cant. 4, 13. ſo that for the greater fragrancie, there are bounde vp togither (as it were into one Noſegay) Camphire, Spikenard, Saffron, Calamus, Cynamom, with al the ſoote trees and herbes in Lebanon, of Incenſe, Myrrhe, Aloe, and ſweete ſpices. By the which is both ſignified the beautie, honor, comelineſſe and ornament of all the Vertues, and alſo the Praiers of the Church, and of the godly, which be as the Prophet Pſal. 40, 6. Eccl. 45, 2. 
               Dauid ſaith, as the incenſe and ſacrifice of a ſweet ſmell.
            
            Moreouer, as liquors, linnen, woollen, or other wares whatſoeuer, be of colour light, or deepe, yellow, browne, watchet, or red, according to the nature of the ſtuffe, and mind of the Dier, ſo hath the ſame his name giuen vnto it from Saffron. Phyſicions alſo in iudging of Vrines, and marking ſuch as be Saffron coloured or reddiſh, doe note the ſame for a token of a burning Ague, and hote diſtempered liuer. So is there a notable vnguent made of the dregs of the oile of Saffron,

called Crocomagm
                     •
                  , of great effect and vſe in Phyſicke.
            But as touching Garments of Saffron, ſcarlet, and purple colours, there is often mention found in the ſacred Bible, as there is alſo in other Writers, in whoſe Bookes we reade of Emperors Scarlet robes, and of the Purple and croceous or Saffron coloured garments of other high perſonages.
            So doth the Prophet Ieremiah in his Lamentations bewaile the miſerable eſtate of Ieruſalem, being ruinated and brought to nothing, diſpoiled of all hir honorable ornaments, and ech way pitifully deformed and ranſacked. They (ſaith he) that were woont to fare delicately, doo periſh and ſterue in the ſtreetes. 
               Lam. 4, 5. 
               They that afore were clad in cloth of Raines, Scarlet and Purple, make now much of doong.
            
         
         
            The 39. Chapter.
            
               Of the Myrtle tree, which retaineth the ſame name, and is ſo called in all countries: and of the wilde Myrtle.
            
            
               THE Myrtle is a ſmall Tree, alwaies greene, dedicated by the Poets to Venus, and conſecrated to Wedlock, wherin is required chaſtitie and concord. It beareth leaues much like

to the Oliue or Priuet, but that they be narrower, & in colour of a dark or deepe green: the berries be blacke & like to the berries of Iuniper, of a winiſh taſte, out of the which (as alſo out of the leaues thereof which be ſoft) there is drawen an excellent princelie Ol
                     •…
                   Myrtinum. Eſth. 2, 12. Oile, wherewith Esther annointed hir ſelfe, when ſhe was married vnto king Ahaſuerus.
            
            There is alſo made of the berries of this Tree an excellent kinde of Wine, called Uinum Myrtiles, which is indued with an aſtringent qualitie or binding vertue; and ſingularly comforteth and ſtrengtheneth the ſtomacke being weake. The ſame is alſo good to waſh ſuch members as haue beene burſten or out of ioint, and them that be bruiſed with any great fall.
            With the boughes of this tree, the Scripture recordeth how the Hebrewes were accuſtomed to trim vp their houſes, and to garniſh the vtter parts of their dores at their ſolemne feaſtes of Tabernacles and others, which they celebrated and kept for ioy of Leu. 23, 40. 1. Eſdr. 4. 47 1. Macc. 10, verſ. 21. 2. Mac. 10, 7 Iohn. 7, 2. Nehe. 8, 15. the reſtauration of the Temple, after their carrieng into exile by the Perſians.
            So did Nehemiah the reſtorer of the Citie, of the Temple, & of the Lawe, command the people, after their returne home to Ieruſalem out of captiuitie and baniſhment, that they ſhould (euerie one of them) go forth into the mountains and woods, & thence bring (as in an high & feſtiuall ſolemnity) Oliue brāches,

Pyne branches, Myrtle branches, Palme branches, and branches of thicke trees to make boothes, for the further furniture of that merrie day of common ioy. Which cuſtome alſo other Regions and countries doe yet obſerue, when as either any royall ſolemnitie for the coronation or receiuing of the prince, or for ſome victorie againſt the enimie, or deliuery from ſome long and dangerous ſiege, or ſome other token of ioy and gladnes, is offered to be ſolemnized and teſtified. Thus did the Troians (as Uirgil writeth) when they thought their Citie ſhoulde haue beene deliuered from the long ſiege, and the Greekes expulſed out of their countrey.
            
               We wretched ſoules in forlorne plight Aeneid. 2.
               
               To ſee this diſmall day,
               To ſtrew the Churches all along
               With boughes and flowers aſſay.
            
            But Iſaiah the Prophet (who ſheweth himſelfe moſt skilfull in the nature and qualitie of Plants and herbes, and who moſt often with the ſame vſeth to garniſh and illuſtrate his prophetical writings) pronounceth them happy and bleſſed that put their truſt in the Lorde, and onely depende vpon his diuine goodnes and prouidence; in ſo much that no harme ſhall touch them, but that rather all ſuch things as ſeemed any way to threaten their harme, ſhall (the caſe being altered) worke to their profite and benefite: which

he bringeth in and ſheweth, where he ſaith, that in ſteede of low thornes there ſhall growe high 
               Iſai. 55, 13. 
               firre trees, and in ſteede of nettles and weeds, which are ſtinging and noiſome, there ſhall growe Myrtle trees, which are goodly, beautifull and ſweet
                  •
                ſmelling ſhrubs. Whereby he noteth that in lieu of greeuous and hurtfull things, there ſhould be thoſe that are holeſome, fruitefull and amiable: that is, for vices there ſhould be vertues; for bondage liberty; for baniſhment, reſtitution and returne vnto our heauenly Countrey.
            Againe, where the Lord ſheweth his merciful kindnes to the afflicted, comfortleſſe, and diſtreſſed Iſraelites, promiſing that he will helpe, releeue and ſuccor them in their extreme and intollerable miſery. I will (ſaith he) open the riuers in the tops of the hils: I wil turne 
               Iſai. 41, 19. 
               the wildernes to waters, and the dry hungry ground to fruit full ſoile. I will plant in the waste ground the Cedar tree, Pyne tree, and Myrtle; the Firre tree, the Olyue, the Elme, and the Boxe. Whereby he ſheweth, that he will alter the courſe of nature, and beyond all hope or expectation of man, will helpe his people in their diſtreſſe; ſo that in a deſart and fruiteleſſe countrey, there ſhall grow goodly, faire, and beautifull trees; that is to ſay, the barren & dry mindes of men ſhould bring foorth the moſt floriſhing buds of renowmed vertues.
            A little after, he proſecuting the ſame argument, promiſeth to his people conſolation

and tranquillity of conſcience, and that he would eftſoones gather togither his diſperſed Church; and that the ſame ſhoulde be reſtored againe after a while, to hir former hue and ancient beautie: the which his gracious promiſe he confirmeth in theſe figuratiue tearmes: The glory of Lebanon ſhall came 
               Iſai. 60, 13. 
               vnto thee, the Fir tree, the Elme and the Boxe tree togither, to beautifie the place of my Sanctuarie. Whereby his meaning is, that his Church ſhould be builded not onely with the excellent trees of Lebanon, but alſo that what elſe ſoeuer in the world, was magnificent, heroical and renowmed, ſhould be brought to the building and garniſhing of the ſame. And that not onely the poore, ſimple, and ſeely people, (whom the worlde leaſt eſteemeth) ſhoulde be called thither: but alſo Kinges, Princes, Dukes, Lords and Nobles ſhoulde be incorporated into this fellowſhip, and endenizoned into this faithfull company.
            But, for that there is mention alſo made of Myrtle trees by the Prophet Zacharie, in a viſion appeering to him, I will deliuer my iudgement breefely, and what I think of the ſame; for fully and thoroughly to diſcuſſe it, requireth further diligence, and exceedeth the reach of my ſimple vnderſtanding.
            Woods and Groues are often denominated of ſuch herbes and trees as moſt plentifully growe therein, as namely of Arund
                     •
                  , 
               
                  〈◊〉
                reede, is the place where it groweth, termed

               Arundinetum, which is vſed for the reedes or ſtubble it ſelfe: whereupon in the Booke of Wiſedome it is ſaide, The iuſt ſhall ſhine and run 
               Wiſd. 3, 7. 
               through, as ſparkes among ſtubble: that is, the brightnes and ſhining of the Saints ſhal burn vp the vngodly, euen as ſtubble or dry reedes with the flaming force of vehement fire. And ſo is the place where ſtore of Date trees grow, called Palmetum; and where any Myrtle trees be, Myrtelum. In this greene plot was the viſion exhibited to Zacharie, the which he reporteth and maketh knowen to the people, that his prophecie being conioyned and accompanied with a viſion, ſhoulde be had in the greater account and eſtimation among them, pearce the deeper into their dull vnderſtandinges, and the ſooner ſtir vp and awaken their drowſie, ſlouthfull and careleſſe mindes. I ſaw (ſaith he) by night, 
               Zach. 1, 8. 
               and behold a man riding vpon a red horſe; and he ſtoode among the Myrtle trees that were in a bottom, and behind him were there red horſes, ſpeckled & white: & I ſaid, O my Lord, what are theſe? And the Angell that talked with me which was he that ſtoode among the Myrtle trees, (by whom, as I thinke, Chriſt is ment, whoſe deſire is to ſee his Church being emblemiſhed with ſins, to be repoliſhed and amended) anſwered me and ſaid; theſe are they whom the Lord hath ſent to go through the world. By which wordes he ſheweth, that in the darke and blinde valley of this worlde, wherein the euill are mingled

with the good, the Lord god by his wonderful prouidēce hath a ſpecial care of al things, turning all to the beſt, for the behoofe of his children, directing, comforting and guiding by his holy ſpirit, the Church, by his Chriſt, by the Apoſtles and other faithful miniſters, that carefully execute their offices and functions, according to the diſpenſation of ſuch gifts as they haue receiued. Vpon whom the charge ſpecially lieth, by holeſome exhortation (as Paule warneth Timothie) to exhort 1. Tim. 6, 2. the people (yea and ſometimes by threats to ſtir them) to amendement of life, and to returne and be reconciled to God, from whom they haue departed. Which thing if they will do, his plagues and puniſhments ſhall ceaſe, and their afflictions ſhall haue an end.
            The Prophet therefore, declaring this his viſion vnto the people, prouoketh them to repentance, whereby God would be appeaſed and agreed with them, and woulde withdraw his cenſures and chaſtiſements, and that they ſhould be as highly in his fauour as euer they were. And thus much of this amiable and ſweete ſhrub, Myrtle.
            Like vnto this, is there alſo another ſort of Myrte or Myrtle which is wilde, whoſe berries Wild Myrtle. the Mauiſſes, Throſſels, Owſels & Thruſhes, delite much to eate, inſomuch that the fleſh of theſe birdes doth yeeld a ſweete (and as it were a ſpiced) reliſh, like to the taſte of the berries.
            
               
Like alſo and of kin to this wilde Myrtle, is another kinde of ſhrub or low plant, called Pſeudomyrtus, of a pleaſant ſmell and ſomwhat Pſeudomyrtus, called alſo Rhus, or Sumach. ſtrong withall, whoſe leaues and wood being dried, are vſed to be laide in wardrobs and preſſes to perfume clothes and keepe them from Moths.
            Among theſe wilde Myrtles is reckoned alſo the Huluer, whoſe leaues (indeede) be like the Myrtle, ſauing that they be broader & ſo prickly pointed, that if a man take not heed in the handling of it, he may quickely pricke his hande: the berries growe on the leaues without any ſtalke, of the bignes of a peaſe, and leſſe than Myrtle berries; of a red corally colour, and the roote thereof is ſaide to be good to prouoke Vrine, and to driue out grauell.
         
         
            The 40. Chapter.
            
               Of the Pine tree, and of the Pine Apple.
            
            
               THE Pine is an high, ſtraight and great tree, with thin, rounde, and ſharpe pointed leaues. The fruit or Nut being well enough knowen needeth no long deſcription: the kernell

with all nations is reputed aſwell nouriſhable as medicinable: the fruit is called a Pine Apple, wheras it is indeede, a Nut, but withall ſo harde, that being hurled at a man, and hitting him, it ouerthroweth & felleth him. Whereuppon there is in Macrobius a pretie wittie ieſt, aſcribed vnto Caſellius the lawier, which grew vpon this occaſion. One Vatinius 
               Lib. 2. Sa
                     •
                  
                  urna l. ca. 2. a Romane that had founded and ſet out certaine Fence games and ſword plaies, being pelted with ſtones by the people, made this ſute to the maiſters of the reuels, and ſo far preuailed with them, that at his requeſt they ſet downe an order, and cauſed the ſame by the publike crier to be proclaimed; that no man ſhould be ſo bolde to throw any thing into the liſts or plaieng place, vnleſſe it were an Apple. It fortuned that this Caſellius being ſought vnto by a certaine fellow, for his counſell and aduiſe in this matter, whether this fruit of the Pine were a nut or an Apple, merrily and wittily thus anſwered him, ſaieng: if thou wilt hurle it at Vatinius head, it is an Apple. So deadly did the people hate ſuch a pernicious Citizen, that they deſired rather to haue him rid out of the way than to haue him liue any longer, to the infection & ill example of the Countrey and Common wealth.
            But the Prophets (as afore hath beene ſhewed) doe often vſe in their propheſies to inſert this Pine tree, and other memorable

plants and herbs. Among others, the Prophet Iſaiah in diſplaieng the deteſtable abhomination of the Heathen in forging vnto themſelues Idols and Images, beautifieth and garniſheth his oration with a learned and artificiall recital of ſundrie Trees: ſhewing the great care and diligence, which the Smithes, Carpenters and other Artificers take to make and faſhion theſe blockiſh toies, and ridiculous bables, which neither ſerue to any vſe, neither can any way helpe, Iſaie. 44, 12. defend, protect, or ſaue them that bow thervnto.
            Yea he ſo preciſely ſetteth downe the Smithes ſenſeleſſe follie, that he omitteth not ſo much as the fyle, hammer and fire, wherewith they toile till they be euen wearie and thirſtie, about the faſhioning thereof. And for the Carpenters trade, he reckoneth vp in a beadroll, his line, his red thred, his rule, his axe, his ſawe, his compaſſe, and ſuch other tooles, as ſerue for the poliſhing and plaining of wood: inſomuch that with ſome of them he heweth down Cedars, Pine trees, Okes and Firres: with the chips thereof, he maketh a fire, warmeth himſelfe, baketh bread, and ſeetheth his meate: with the reſt, he faſhioneth and maketh a god, before whom he kneeleth, worſhipping it, praieng vnto it, and ſaieng: Deliuer me, for thou art my God.
            
            This and much more doth the Prophet

               Iſaiah at large, and with ſundrie repetitions ſet downe in that Chapter, to the ende men ſhould remember; of whom & from whence they ought to ſeeke all helpe, aide, aſſiſtance, ſuccour and ſaluation: before whom onelie they are to bow their knees, and to whome they ought to lift vp their hands, eies and harts, namely, vnto almightie God, to whom onely all honour and glorie is due, and who through his deere ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our Redeemer and Sauiour, abundantly ſtrengtheneth vs with his holie Spirite, that none euill or aduerſitie can either daunt or ouercome vs.
         
         
            The 41. Chapter.
            
               Of Boxe.
            
            
               AMeruell it is to conſider, how farre manie that would faine ſeeme to haue knowledge in Plants and Herbes, are deceiued and ouerſeen in their termes and appellatiōs touching the ſame. So ſome there be, that take the herbe Anethum (which ſignifieth Dill) and is vſed by Chriſt in his ſharpe Sermon againſt the auaritious Phariſees, to be Aniſe. Whereas Mat. 23, 23. Aniſe is a diſtinct herbe by it ſelfe, and bringeth

foorth a ſeede that is excellent good to diſſolue windineſſe. So alſo doe we vſe the leaues of Dil in condiments, broths and decoctions, but not the ſeed. Whereas the ſeed of Aniſe and Fenell is by proofe and practiſe found to be wholeſome, effectuous, and to giue a pleaſant taſte, as well to Beere and Ale, as vnto bread, iunkets, roſted or boiled fruits, &c.
            So alſo the Fir tree called Abies, is not (as ſome ignorantly and erroniouſly haue affirmed) the white Popler, but a Tree which the Prophets for the better and plainer inſtruction of the people, vſe in their propheſies, whenſoeuer they either beate downe pride and arrogancie, or raiſe vp and comfort the weake and comfortleſſe.
            The Firre tree is euer greene, and hath leaues growing all alongſt the ſtemme like vnto a combe, and directly ſtanding oppoſite one againſt another; the flower which it beareth, is of a Saffron colour, and very pleaſant and delectable to the eie.
            As the Larch or Larix tree is like to the Pine, ſo is the Pitch tree like vnto this: of the timber whereof, they make Maſts and Saileyards for ſhips.
            But to come againe to the Boxe tree. They that take the Boxe to be all one with the Palme tree, are greatly deceiued, ſith the one altogither and in ech reſpect differeth from the other, ſauing that they both be euer

greene, and neuer ſhed their leaues. This error grew (as I thinke) at the firſt, for that the common people in ſome Countries vſe to decke their Churches with the boughes and branches thereof, on the Sunday next afore Eaſter, commonly called Palmeſunday: for at that time of the yeere all other trees for the moſt part are not blowen or bloomed.
            Heere abouts whereſoeuer the Boxe tree groweth, we ſee it to beare a holowiſh and ſomwhat round leafe, ſmooth & ſtill greene, with a tender flower, and hauing a ſtrong ſent and fulſome ſmell, which neither men nor beaſtes take delight to ſmell vnto, but loath & turne from it: his wood is hard, ponderous and waightie, inſomuch that being put into the water, it ſinketh to the bottom: his colour pale, inclining to ſome yellowe, whereupon we vſe to call ſuch perſons as be tawnie coloured and weaſell faced, by the name of Boxie cōplexioned. Some there be that beare men in hand, that the powder and ſhauings of this tree is medicinable & good to cure the french pockes, and that it matcheth in goodnes Eben or Guiacum, and the wood called Lignum Indicum: whoſe opinion (as falſe and erronious) I vtterly miſlike. For Lignum Indicum, hath a ſweete and pleaſant ſmell, an oylie or gummy iuice, and a reaſonable good taſte: whereas Boxe is naturally dry, iuiceleſſe, fulſomely and loathſomely ſmelling, vnpleaſant in taſte, indued with a

venemous qualitie, which he that is diſpoſed to taſte it, ſhall finde true.
            Of this wood there are woont to be made by Turners, combes, writing and plaieng tables, handles for tooles and inſtrumentes, pipes, boxes, tops, bowles and ſuch like, for which purpoſe it is fitter, than to be miniſtred any way in medicine.
            I once knew a fooliſh cockbrained Prieſt, which miniſtred to a certaine yoong man the aſhes of Boxe, being (forſooth) hallowed on Palmeſunday, according to the ſuperſtitious order & doctrine of the Romiſh church, which aſhes he mingled with their vnholie holie water, vſing to the ſame a kinde of fantaſticall, or rather fanaticall, doltiſh and ridiculous Exorciſme. Which woorthy worſhipfull medicine (as he perſuaded the ſtanders by) had vertue to driue away any Ague, & to kill the worms. Well, it ſo fel out, that the Ague (indeed) was driuē away; but God knoweth, with the death of the poore yoong man. And no maruell. For, the leaues of Boxe be deletorious, poiſonous, deadlie, and to the bodie of man very noiſome, dangerous and peſtilent: as the ſtrong and lothſome ſmell, and the fulſome bitter taſte therof, doth euidently bewray and diſcouer.
            And nowe to continue my former argument; namely, to ſhew ſome Similitudes taken from hence by the Prophets, which they aptly and fitly haue inſerted into their Sermons

and ſentences. Firſt, ſeeing this 
                  〈◊〉
                is of ſuch an horny or ironlike hardnes, that whatſoeuer is engrauen into it, will not eaſily be blotted out and taken away, the Lorde commanded Iſaiah to amplifie and exaggerate the heinouſnes of the Iewes ſinnes, who truſted to the aide and protection of the Aegyptians: and to notifie vnto them all, how beaſtly and ſhamefully they had forſaken and departed from their good and gracious God, and ſought helpe elſe where than of him. And by the way he giueth vnto him this ſtraite charge, that he ſhoulde ſo ſurely deſcribe and write out their offences, and ſo firmely ſet downe the ſame in noting tables and laſting monuments, that they might neuer be forgotten.
            For as one greatly prouoked and throughly angred for their abhominable trecherie and ſhamefull reuolt, he ſaith thus: Now therfore 
               Iſai. 30, 8. 
               go thy way, and write this prophecy before them vpon Boxe, or in a hard and Boxie table, that it may finally remaine, & be kept ſtill for euer. As though he ſhoulde ſay, looke that thou ſo diligentlie from point to point ſet downe this their heinous offence, that it may neuer be ſcraped out or forgotten, by proceſſe of any time or length of any yeeres: but that it may remaine as an euerlaſting memoriall of their wickednes, and alwaies be ſet before their eies for a ſigne of infidelitie to them, and a warning or example to others, leaſt they alſo

run into the ſame miſcheefe and impiety.
            
               Ieremiah alſo vſeth the like metaphor, and proclaimeth aloud, ſaieng: that the ſinne of Iudah 
               Iere. 17, 1. 
               is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond, and grauen vpon the table of their hart, and vpon the hornes of their altars, at the which they daily ſtande, and on which both they and their children do ſacrifice. He nameth an iron pen, and the point of a Diamond, for that nothing is harder, and therefore he requireth their ſin to be written with ſuch tooles, bicauſe they ſhoulde not lightly fade away, but continue for euer. And the hornes of the altars be ſpecified, as the firſt entry of the temple, that whenſoeuer they did any ſacrifice, they might haue in freſh memory before their eies, the lewdnes of their fact and diſobedience.
            So ſaith Dauid: My ſinne is euer before mee: 
               Pſal. 51, 3. that is, preſenteth it ſelfe continually to mine eies, and lieth as a burden vppon my conſcience, ſo that I haue no way to disburden my ſelfe of theſe inward garboiles and torments of minde, but onely by the meere mercy of my gracious God, to be extended and ſhewed vnto me a moſt vile (yet hartily ſorowfull and truly repentant) ſinner.
            
               Iob alſo being greeuouſly plunged in miſeries, and (as it were) ouerwhelmed with the waues and ſurges of calamitie, yet hoping in the ende to be deliuered, breaketh out into tearms of vehemencie, and taking a Simitude

from the like things as afore, wiſheth that his words might remaine for euer, and be knowne to all ages. For that he was vndoubtedly perſuaded, that in the ende God would remember his miſery, and make an ende of his affliction. Oh (ſaith he) that my 
               Iob. 19, 23. 
               words were now written! oh that they were written euen in a Booke! and grauen with an iron penne 
                     〈◊〉
                   leade, or in ſtone to continue for euer! That they might alwaies remaine, and be ſtill ſeene, read and thought vpon of all men. For I am ſure that my Redeemer liueth, and that I ſhall riſe out of the earth in the last day, and ſhall be couered againe with my skin, and ſhall ſee God in my fleſh: whom I my ſelfe ſhall ſee, and my eies ſhall beholde, and none other for me; this my hope is laide vp in my boſome.
            
            By which wordes beſide the proouing of the true reſurrection of the body, (which as it is already fulfilled in Chriſt our head, ſo alſo ſhall it be in vs his members) he teſtifieth in the hearing of his friendes (which were vnto him more greefe than comfort) and ſo woulde he all others to know, that he ſhoulde one day be rid out of all thoſe his troubles and aduerſities.
            For, albeit God had laide great affliction and trouble vppon him, and had almoſt brought him to nothing: yet reſted he fullie aſſured and vndoubtedly perſuaded, that the ſame God, in his good time would take away the ſame againe from him, and rayſe

him vp out of that filthy and loathſome dunghill wherein he was bemoyled; vnto his old eſtate and former dignitie: ſo that of an heauy and mournfull beginning, ſhould enſue a ioyfull and merry ende, with fruitefull ſupply of children, and plentifull encreaſe of worldly wealth. Which thing prooueth the Iob. 42, 12. Booke of Iob not to be a deuiſed hiſtorie, but a true matter, and ſuch as ought not in any ſort to be diſcredited: ſo that in the ſame, as by a true hiſtory, done and ſuffred according to the tenor of the text and letter, we haue ſet downe vnto vs, a paterne of patience and ſufferance of all aduerſities, as both the Apoſtle Iam. 5, 11. Ezec. 14, 14 
               Iames witneſſeth, and before him the prophet Ezechiell.
            
         
         
            The 42. Chapter.
            
               Of the Nut.
               
            
            
               WHen as the Spouſe (vnder which name is ſignified the Church, and the ſoul of euery godly chriſtian, being engraffed and married vnto Chriſt) ſought all manner of delightfull ſmels, and pleaſant odours iſſuing from the beſt and faireſt fruits, therby to recreate and

pleaſe hir Bridegroome, She went down into the garden of Nuts, to looke about, and ſee the fruites of 
               Cant. 6, 10. 
               the valley, and to looke if the vine budded, or if the pomegranates flouriſhed. Vnder which metaphor is ſhadowed and ment the whole troupe of vertues.
            But it is not the haſell or filberd Nut, that is heere ment, but the Walnut, which is an high and great tree, ful of many armes, branches and boughs, hauing leaues large, broad and long, and of a ſtrong ſent or ſmell; the fruit is fenced and couered on the vttermoſt part with a green huske or tender ſhel, vnder which there is another hard ſhell of a wooddiſh ſubſtance, containing within it the kernell, quartered and deuided as it were into foure parts, with a ſoft tender pill, filme or skin growing betweene them.
            This Nut is tearmed Baſilica, that is royal, for that it was tranſlated and brought by kings out of Perſia into Europe: but commonly it is called Iuglans, as though a man ſhould ſay Iouis glans, for that Iupiter is ſaide to be the firſt that ſhewed the vſe therof vnto men.
            They are better to be eaten and with leſſe danger to health, when they be new, greene and moiſt, than when they be dry and parched. For being long kept, they grow hore and vinewed, cauſe headach, and are hurtfull both to the ſtomacke, and to them that are trobled with the cough & ſhortnes of breth.
            
               
With the greene ſhel of this Nut, there is vſed to be made a ſpeciall medicine againſt al tumors and vlcers, ariſing in the mouth and throte, and the almonds or kernels vnder the toong. They vſe alſo to condite and preſerue theſe nuts when they be greene, and afore the ſhels waxe hard, in honie and ſugar: by which way they may a long while bee kept: and the ſame ſo vſed, be not onely pleaſant, but very good alſo to ſtrengthen the ſtomacke; and are vſed to be ſerued in at the end of meales, for a iunket or banketting diſh, as Sucket, and other daintie conceits likewiſe are.
            There is alſo to be diſtilled out of theſe Nuts while they be greene and tender ſhelled, an excellent Water of great effect and ſoueraigne vertue againſt the plague, vlcers of the iawes and palate, wheales, ſcabs, ſpots, pimples and freckles. For the which purpoſe the Water that droppeth out of the new pruned ſpraie of the Vine in the Spring tide, is of like effect and efficacie: whereof I doe not remember, that any of the Ancients haue made any mention at all.
            But foraſmuch as the Walnut is outwardly hard rinded, and woodden ſhelled, containing inwardly a pleaſant and ſauourie kernell; the life of a Chriſtian man or woman, and the ſtate alſo of the Church may right fitly be thereunto reſembled.
            For, in this world we ſee faire with fowle;

hard with ſoft; rough with ſmooth; bitter with mild; ſweete with ſower; mirth with ſorrow; and comfort with chaſtiſement, interchangeably mingled and interlarded.
            It is painfull now and then, and hard to breake or cracke this Nut; inſomuch that many times the teeth thereby be much indangered. Whereunto alludeth that ſaieng of Plautus: He that deſireth the kernell, must not 
               In Gurgul. 
               refuſe to cracke the Nut. Thereby ſignifieng, that whoſoeuer woulde gladly enioy the ſweete, muſt partake and taſte of the ſower: and that whoſoeuer deſireth to attain commoditie, or releaſement of troubles, muſt not thinke ſcorne to take paines, and endure trauell.
         
         
            The 43. Chapter.
            
               Of Apples and fruits in generall.
            
            
               THe differences and kindes of Apples and Fruites be innumerable; inſomuch that the age wherein we now liue farre ſurpaſſeth the times afore. For the generall delight that men take in graffing and planting, increaſeth daily the number of ſorts and kinds.
            Among the which, there be ſome that as they waxe ſoone ripe, but ſo againe waxe

they ſoone rotten, as all Spring and Sommer Haſtings. fruits doe.
            But the Winter and Autumne fruit will Winter fruit. laſt long, and continue ſound till farre in the Winter, yea till the next Spring or longer.
            Of theſe ſome be ſweet, ſome ſower, ſome ſharpe, ſome winiſh, ſome watriſh, and ſome of a mixt or diuers reliſh: with the which for their gallant forme, colour, quantitie, proportion and taſte (as alſo with peares, which be likewiſe of ſundrie ſorts) mans eie, palate and noſe be woonderfully delighted: inſomuch that he is thereupon brought into the memorie and admiration of Gods bountifull liberalitie; who hath ſo largely, and with ſuch varietie heaped his bleſſings and benefits vpon vs.
            And although all the differences heereof (by reaſon of the ſundrie ſorts of them) are vnpoſſible to be reckoned vp, neither skilleth it greatly for this our purpoſe, to ſtande vpon any ſuch preciſe recitall thereof: yet may this by the way be noted, that thoſe fruits which be reckoned among Apples, be of round proportion and making, whereas Peares, for the moſt part, be longwiſe, and turbinated; that is to ſay, narrow and ſharpe at the one end, and broade (like a top) at the other.
            Omitting therfore Quinees, Medlars, Citrons, Orenges, Peaches, Wardens, Pomegranates, Abrecocks, and ſuch like, let it ſuffice

to admoniſh thus much by the way, that God hath graciouſly and frankly beſtowed theſe delicate fruits vpon man, partly for his nouriſhment, and partly for preſeruation of his health. And that the ſame God, doth ſomtime for mans ingratitude, take away againe theſe his gifts from him.
            In the Prophet Amos there is alledged a notable and elegant Metaphore, taken from Sommer fruite that are rathe ripe, which for their prematuritie and ſoone ripenes, are greatly deſired of many; howbeit, they will not long laſt, but quickly rot and putrifie, The Lord (ſaith he) ſhewed me a basket 
               Amos. 8, 1. 
               of Sommer fruite, and ſaid, What ſeeſt thou, Amos
                     •
                   and I ſaide, a basket of ſommer fruit. Then ſaid the Lorde vnto me: The ende is come vpon my people.
            
            By this metaphor of rath ripe fruit or ſommer apples, which will not long continue without rotting, he ſheweth that deſtruction is neere at hand, and euen ready to fall vpon the heads of the people, and that their corruption and ſpoile ſtandeth euen at the doores, readie to conſume them, as rottennes doth ripe ſommer apples: which being any whit long kept doe putrifie, as plums, damſons, cherries, peaches, cornels, &c. that will not laſt till winter.
            So that the ſenſe and meaning of this his Similitude is, that their iniquitie is ripe, and that for the ſame they are foorthwith to be conſumed, ſpoyled, and deſtroyed.
            
               
The like ſaieng is there in the Reuelation, where vtter deſtruction is threatned and denounced to the whoore of Babilon, and that all hir delites, wanton deuiſes, honour and magnificence ſhall be taken away from hir. The apples (ſaith he) that thy ſoule lusted after, 
               Reue. 18, 14 
               are departed from thee; and all things which were fat and excellent are departed from thee, and thou ſhalt finde them no more. Signifieng therby that all thoſe daintie conceits, ſtately pomps, and ſumptuous banketring diſhes, wherewith at full ſhe vſed to ſolace hir ſelfe (among the which were dainty and delicate fruits, as Apples, Plums, Peaches, and ſuch other like) ſhould be quite taken away from hir.
         
         
            The 44. Chapter.
            
               Of the Oke, and other trees that beare mast.
            
            
               MAnie and ſundrie bee the ſorts of plants and trees, whereof the holie Scripture maketh mention: the which, exactly to reckon vp, were an infinit wolke. The indifferent and gentle Reader therefore ſhall take it well in woorth, although I haue not preciſely ſet downe ech particular.
            
               
Now, forſomuch as the holy Prophetes for the beautifieng and garniſhing of their Sermons, haue inſerted into their writings ſundry plants and trees, not onely of ſuch as growe and are planted in gardens, but of others alſo that be wilde, which for the more part are higher and taller than thoſe that grow in the gardens, I wil (by the way) touch and ſet downe ſome of them.
            Men well enough know the Beech, 
                  ••
               me, Oke, Quickbeame, Maple, Corke, (whoſe rinde or barke is vſed in ſandals, ſlippers, and ſhooes for warmth and drineſſe) and other maſt trees, which in the old time (before the inuention of tillage and the vſe of corne) miniſtred competent foode and nouriſhment. Whereupon afterward grew a prouerbe; It is a meere folly, when we haue Corne, ſtill to eate Acorns.
            
            By theſe trees, the prophets doe ſignifie ſtout, hautie, mightie, loftie and proud perſons, which do oppreſſe and ouercrowe the poore and needy: and yet (notwithſtanding all their ſtately and big lookes) the Lord can and will quickly confound, and with a trice Iſai. 1, 29. and 2, 13. and 44, 14. Pſal. 144, 5. Pſal. 29, 5. bring them downe. For; He toucheth the mountaines, and they ſmoke. Yea, The Lord breaketh the high Cedars, and bringeth them to nothing.
            So alſo the Lorde by his Prophet Amos ſaith: I haue deſtroied the Amorite before thee, 
               Amos. 2, 9. 
               whoſe height was like the height of the Cedars, and whoſe ſtrength was as the Okes. Wherby he meaneth

and ſignifieth, pride, loftines, arrogancie and contempt of God.
            Likewiſe the prophet Zacharie daunteth the ſtately lookes and proud minds of the lofty, prouoking them in reſpect of their forlorne eſtate, to howling, weeping, and lamentation; Howle yee, O Okes of Baſan (ſaith he) for the 
               Zach. 11, 2. 
               mightie ſtrong wood is cut downe: that is, al their ſtrength, power and might wherein they truſted, is taken from them: the which their loftie ſaile, and big bragging might, he there very aptly reſembleth and compareth vnto Okes.
            For as the Oke is a very harde tree, inſomuch that ſome of them can vnneth be cleft aſunder with wedges, nor cut with axe or ſawe, euen ſo they being aduaunced to great honors, and dignities, ſhrowded with multitudes of clientes attending vppon them, and wallowing in wealth at their owne deſire, ſeemed to bee placed in ſuch ſafetie, that they ſhoulde neuer miſcarrie, but continue in their iollitie, as ſurely and as ſtrongly as Okes. But againſt the power and might of God, nothing is able to ſtande.
         
         
            
            The 45. Chapter.
            
               Of the Roſe, and of Metaphores taken from it.
            
            
               THe Roſe among all Nations and in al countries, is accounted a moſt gallant, beautifull, and ſweete ſmelling flower, comfortable both for the braine and alſo the hart. Being inwardly receiued it eaſeth the paines & greefes of ſuch members as be affected, and comforteth alſo, by reaſon of the aſtringent qualitie which is in it.
            The iuice, decoction or infuſion thereof is reckoned among the kindes of gentle and ſoft medicines: for it mildly looſeth and openeth the bellie, purgeth downward yellow Choler, openeth the obſtructions of the liuer, ſtrengthening and cleanſing the ſame. For which purpoſe ſerueth that noble Electuarie or ſolutiue Sirupe thereof, called Rhodopharmacum, which without any danger maketh the bellie ſoluble, and purgeth all ſuch cholerike excrements, as ingender the Tertian Ague.
            There be of this amiable flower ſundrie ſorts. The moſt common and beſt knowen be the white Roſes: next, the Red, and the Purple Roſes, which be as it were of a mixt

colour betweene white and red. Then the Mileſian Roſe, yeelding a moſt ſoote ſmell, and gallant deepe red colour. There be alſo Roſes of Prouince, Carnations, Roſe campions, Muske Roſes, Damaske Roſes, and Caneel Roſes, which yeeld foorth an excellent ſmell, the ſmall white leaued Roſe called Eglantine, Hep or Brierbuſh, whoſe leaues be ſmall and ſweete ſmelling, which is a propertie that the prickly leaues haue, otherwiſe than the common Roſes, whoſe leaues yeeld not foorth any ſuch ſweete ſmell.
            Now, for that nothing ſooner fadeth away and withereth than doth the Roſe, therfore is the fraile, brittle, tranſitorie, and momentanie life of man, with all the gay glorie, pompe, pride & magnificence therof, which quickly paſſeth away, very aptly thereunto reſembled.
            And the Scripture noteth ſome, that nicely dandle themſelues, and wantonly take their delite in ſweete and fragrant odours. As where they daintily and laſciuiouſly conferre togither, alledging that when they bee gone out of this world, all is gone, and that nothing of a man remaineth after death. Go 
               Wiſd. 2, 1. 
               to (ſay they) our life is ſhort and tedious, paſſing away as a ſhadow, and after our end there is no returning: Come on therefore, let vs enioy the pleaſures that are preſent, and let vs cheerefully vſe the creatures as in youth. Let vs fil our ſelues with coſtlie wine and ointments, and let not the flower of

                  
                     •…
                  th paſſe by vs. That is, let vs not suffe
                  •…
                pleaſan
                  •
               eſt time of our age, which is 
                  〈◊〉
                youth, to paſſe away in carking and caring but let vs liue all vpon the hoigh, and b
                  •…
                merrie. Let vs crowne our ſelues with Roſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   before they be withered. Let there be no faire 
                     •…
                  
                  dow, but our lust go through it: let vs leaue ſ
                     •…
                   tokens in euerie place of our wantonneſſe, let 
                     〈◊〉
                   one of vs be partakers of our voluptuouſnes: for th
                     ••
                   is our portion, and this is our lot. Theſe things (saith the Wiſe man) doe they imagine, and go astr
                     •…
                   for their owne wickednes hath blinded them, 
                     〈◊〉
                   doe they vnderſtand the myſteries of God. He therfore reprooueth their vanities, and miſtaking of matters, for that they nothing at all reſpect the vſe of the thing, but go on ſtill and dandle themſelues in their diſſolute life, and riotous prodigalitie, neuer regarding the Creator and Workmaiſter.
            In Eccleſiasticus, puritie, vertue and integritie is reſembled vnto Roſes, and other fragrant and odoriferous Plants. Where the Wiſedome of God the father eternall, in commendation of it ſelfe ſaith: I am ſet vp 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               Eccl. 24, 15. 
               high like a Cedar in Libanus, and as a Cypers tree vpon the mountaines of Hermon: I am exalted 
                     〈◊〉
                   a Palme tree in Cades, and as a Roſe plant in 
                     ••
                  richo. For in theſe places grew the beſt ſorts of theſe aboue rehearſed.
            Againe, where he exhorteth all men to imbrace and ſeeke Wiſedome, he ſaith: Har
                     •…
                  
                
               Eccl. 39, 13. 
               vnto me ye holie children, and bring foorth fruit, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
the Roſe that is planted by the brookes of the field. Giue ye a ſweete ſmell as incenſe, and bring foorth flowers as the Lillie.
            
            And after, entring into the commendation of Simeon the high Prieſt, he exceedingly amplifieth his praiſes by compariſons taken from naturall things: ſaieng, That he was as 
               Eccle. 50, 6. 
               the morning Starre in the middest of a cloud, and as the Moone when it is full: as the flower of the Roſes in the Spring of the yeere, and as Lillies by the ſprings of waters, &c.
            
            Conſider heereby (gentle Reader) what ſhifts he ſhall be put vnto, and how rawe he muſt needes be in the explanation of Metaphors, Reſemblances and Compariſons, that is ignorant of the nature of herbs & plants, from whence theſe Similitudes be taken, for the inlightening and garniſhing of Sentences.
            But, for that I call now to remembrance, a ſaieng of Horace the Poet, where he ſaith:
            
               In penning of matters who two things can hit, In arte Poet.
               
               Namely to pleaſe and to profite with all:
               Delighting and training his Reader to wit,
               The pricke & price rightly to him doth befall;
            
            I will heere therefore adde a common countrey cuſtome, that is vſed to be done with the Roſe: whereby by interlacing things of pleaſance and diſport, with matters of grauitie and ſeriouſnes, the Reader ſhall thinke himſelfe the leſſe accloied.
            In ſome Countries there is a cuſtome vſed,

when pleaſaunt and merry companions doe friendly meete togither to make good cheere, that as ſoone as their feaſt or b
                  •…
                is ended, they giue faithfull promiſe mutually one to another, that whatſoeuer hath been merrily ſpoken by any in that aſſembly, ſhould be wrapped vp in ſilence, and not to bee caried out of the doores. For the aſſurance and performance whereof, the tearme which they vſe, is, that all things there ſaide muſt be taken, as ſpoken, Vnder the Roſe.
            
            Wherevpon, they vſe in their parlours and dining roumes to hang Roſes ouer their tables, to put the companie in memorie of ſecrecie, and not raſhly or vndiſcretly to clatter and blab out what they heare. Likewiſe, if they chaunce to ſhew any trickes of wanton, vnſhamefaſt, immodeſt or vnreuerent behauiour either by word or deed, they proteſting that all was ſpoken, Vnder the Roſe, do giue a ſtraite charge, and paſſe a couenant of ſilence and ſecrecy with the hearers, that the ſame ſhall not be blowne abroad, nor tatled in the ſtreetes among any others.
            To this effect alſo is that old beaten prouerb; I hate that gueſt or companion that re
                     •…
                   br
                     •
                  th what is ſpoken at the table. Which ancient ſentence is appliable vnto ſuch as hauing kept company with pleaſant mates, whe
                  •…
                ſome fanciful words haue eſcaped vnawares, or by the way of merriment, do cal the ſame into freſh memory the next day after, and

make (as it were) publike proclamatiō therof: whereas all ſuch eſcapes and raſhly vttered tearmes at bankets, ought to be forgotten, and to be written in the Wine.
            So alſo the Lacedemonians, by an olde ſtatute lawe left vnto them by Lycurgus, had written in the entry or porch of their houſes this ſentence; Out at the doore let no tale be caried. Nowe from whence this cuſtome firſt grew, of hanging Roſes, and ſtrawing them in parlours and dining chambers, as a ſimbole or token of ſecrecie and ſilence of all words there paſſed and ſpoken, theſe verſes plainely and liuely diſplay:
            
               The Roſe (a ſigne of ſecrecie) pertaines
               To Venus, as dame Regent of the ſame:
               By Cupide then aſſignd (as Poet faines)
               To ſilent God, Harpocrates by name.
               And therevpon at feasts where friends do meet
               They vſe aboue their Boords, to hang the Roſe,
               In token ech ſhould other friendly greet,
               And not to tattle tales abroade, as foes.
            
            And this is to be vnderſtood, that the Myrtle and the Roſe be plants, which antiquitie dedicated to Venus: for that, at brideales the houſes and chambers were woont to bee ſtrawed with theſe odoriferous and ſweete herbes: to ſignifie, that in wedlocke all penſiue ſullennes, and lowring cheer, all wrangling ſtrife, iarring variance and diſcorde ought to be vtterly excluded and abandoned, and that in place thereof, al mirth, plea
               
                  •
               antnes,

cheerefulnes, mildnes, quietnes and loue ſhould be maintained, and that in matters paſſing betweene the husband and the wife, all ſecrecie ſhould be vſed.
            And this is the reaſon, why Cupide, the ſon of Venus is ſaide of Poets to haue dedicated the Roſe vnto Harpocrates the God of ſilence, (who is painted and purtraited holding his finger vppon his mouth) and that therefore the Roſe ſerued as a ſigne of ſilence and token of ſecrecie, to ſuch perſons as be tatling talecariers. And as Harpocrates was inueſted with the title of the God of ſilence, among the Greekes; ſo was Angerona aſſigned ladie and goddeſſe of the ſame, among the old Romaines.
         
         
            The 46. Chapter.
            
               Of Cockle, Darnell, Drawke, Raye and other noiſome weedes.
            
            
               VNDER the name of Cockle and Darnell is comprehended all vicious, noiſom and vnprofitable graine, encombring & hindring good Corne; which, being heerby choaked and deſpoiled of conuenient moiſture, either proſpereth not as it

ſhould, or elſe is vtterly killed and commeth to no proofe at all.
            Darnell therefore, Cockle, and Drawke, being noiſome enimies vnto good corne, ſpecially vnto wheate, are reckoned among the cheefe weedes, and baggage that requireth to be plucked vp. It groweth among other corne, and hath a narrowe ſmall leafe, and many ſmall eares growing vppon the ſides at the top of the ſtrawe, in the which ſmall eares the ſeede is contained, the floure ſomewhat enclining to a darke purple, like wall barley, or red Ray called Phaenix, wherof Dioſcorides ſpeaketh. With this may be ioyned another kinde of weede called Githago, Nigelweede or fielde Nigella, hauing long narrow leaues like vnto a Leeke, a long ſlender hairy ſtalke or ſtem, a browne purple flowre inclining towards red, and his ſeede (being blacke, rounde, and vnpleaſant in taſte) encloſed within certaine rounde bolleins or cuppes, like Poppie, and the meale thereof white. Theophrastus ſaith, that Darnell and Cockle commeth of the ſeedes of wheate and barley, being corrupted, drowned and accloied with ouermuch wet and raine.
            The ſeede thereof being grounde with other corne, and baked into breade, cauſeth headach, and dimnes of ſight, by reaſon of the vaporous humours which it ſendeth vp into the braine: whereupon ſuch perſons as

haue dazeling eies and dim ſight, are ſaide by a common prouerbe, Lolio victitare, to liue Plaut. in Mil. by Darnell.
            But bicauſe vnder theſe names of Darnell and Cockle are generally vnderſtoode (not themſelues onely) but alſo all harmefull encumbrances, lets, hurtes and annoiances, which doe any way hinder the growth of corne; therefore are all manner of weedes whatſoeuer, comprehended and contained vnder the ſame. Virgil approouing the ſame where he ſaith:
            
               Dame Ceres taught how firſt to till Geor. 1.
               
               The land for mans auaile:
               When acornes, wildings, berries, fruits
               In Dodon gan to faile.
               And how by toile of huſbandrie
               Ech danger to preuent,
               Leaſt blasting ſhould the crop destroy
               Or with annoiance teint.
               Or Thiſtels ouergrow the ſame:
               For where ſuch things remaine,
               The corne decaies and goes to wracke
               And yeelds but ſlender gaine.
               Sometimes there ſproutes abundant ſtore
               of baggage noiſome weeds,
               Burres, Brembles, Darnel, Cockle, Drawke
               Wilde Otes and choaking ſeedes.
            
            
               Ouid alſo mentioning theſe foreſaide annoyances, Lib. 1. fast. willeth diligent care and husbandrie to be vſed for the extirping, weeding and baniſhing of them, out of arable groundes and

fieldes emploied to tillage.
            In reſpect of the nature and qualitie of theſe noiſome weedes, which choake vp the good corne, and ſpoile fruitfull fieldes, our Sauiour Chriſt taketh occaſion thereby to ſignifie and paint out aſwell dangerous, hurtfull, pernicious, corrupt and vnſincere doctrine, as alſo the wicked authors and ſetters foorth of the ſame; who through the inſtigation of ſathan with their peſtilent gloſes and ſuttle expoſitions, infect and poyſon the mindes and conſciences of men, and corrupt the pure word of the Goſpel, by obtruding of falſehoode in ſteed of truth, and doting dreames in place of ſindere doctrine; lewdly prophaning the ſound word of God, and infecting the foode whereon our ſoules ſhould feede.
            Which perillous and wicked perſons although the Lord willeth charitably for ſome while to be tolerated and borne with all, in hope of amendement and repentance after due admonition; yet doth he not forbid (as Chryſostome ſaith) but that the conuenticles Cap. 13. in Matth. of heretikes ſhoulde, and ought, to bee put downe, their mouthes ſtopped, and their impudencie of ſpeech inhibited. To the ſame end and purpoſe alſo tendeth that ſentence of the apoſtle Paule vnto Titus: A man that is an heretike, that is, one that wilfully and maliciouſly maintaineth falſe doctrine, and erronious opinions; After once or twice 
               Tit. 3. 10.
               
               admonition, auoide; knowing that he which is ſuch an one, is peruerted and ſinneth, being damned of his owne ſelfe; bicauſe hee wilfully periſheth through his owne folly and fault, in that he being admoniſhed per
                  •
               iſteth ſtill in his obſtinacie and error.
            And although Chriſt would not that the Tares and Cockle ſhould be plucked vp, yet for due puniſhment doth he ſubiect and teferre to the authoritie of the magiſtrate, all thoſe that be factious diſturbers of the peace and tranquillitie, both of the Church and Rom. 13. 1. Common wealth.
         
         
            The 47. Chapter.
            
               Of Roſemarie.
            
            
               ROſemarie, called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  notis, (for that it yeeldeth foorth a ſoote ſmell, like to Frankincenſe) was vſed of the Iewes, as Hyſope in their ceremoniall purifications, Sacrifices, and ſprinklings. It is commonly growing in euery garden, hauing a wooddiſh ſtemme, with many ſmall 
                  〈◊〉
                ches and ſlender boughes of the like hard and wooddie ſubſtance, bearing great ſtore of ſmall, long and thick ſet leaues, white 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
the ſide next the ground, and greene aboue. The flowers whitiſh, & mixt with a litle blew, of a ſtrong and pleaſant ſmell, and full of a certaine oilie iuice, ſo that being diſtilled, the oile wil appeere ſwimming on the top of the water. And this ſame is a ſoueraigne helpe, Water of Roſemary. and of great effect for them that haue the Palſie and Apoplexie, annointing therewith the nucha or nape of their necke.
            The ſmel of this Plant greatly comforteth the braine, memorie and inward ſenſes, refreſheth all the vitall powers, is of excellent vertue in curing the Iaundice: and not a little Iaunders. recreateth and cheereth both the hart and mind of man.
            It is good alſo againſt the falling ſicknes; Falling ſicknes. the ſauour or ſmell thereof preſerueth from the plague, and is a verie excellent perfume to burne in houſes, to driue away infectious and contagious ſmels.
            There is made alſo of the flowers thereof, a noble medicine or Conſerue, which hath very great vertue to comfort this braine, being peſtered or ſurcharged with ſuperfluitie of humors: it woonderfully reſtoreth 
                  〈◊〉
                morie being decaied, and is of no leſſe efficacie to keepe a man or woman from the 
                  •
               alling ſicknes, Apoplexie, Palſie, Crampe, dazeling eies and dim ſight.
            And as the Iewes offered the ſweete perfume of Incenſe, and in their rites and ceremonies vſed this Herbe: ſo let vs Chriſtians

(now in the time of the Goſpell, wherein all ſuch ſhadows are vaniſhed) offer vp our pure and feruent praiers vnto God, through an aſſured faith in his Chriſt, which ſeruice and ſacrifice is far more acceptable to him, than all materiall Incenſe, Suffiments or Perfumes in the world.
            And yet is there nothing to the contrary, but that we may adorne and ſtraw our churches, with ſweete ſmels and comfortable greene herbs for the comforting of our ſenſes, ſo that all maner of ſuperſtition therein be vtterly and flatly ſecluded, and no mite of any holines therein repoſed.
            For theſe and ſuch like indifferent and Adiaphorall things, ought none otherwiſe to be vſed, than for decencie, and tollerable delectation to recreate the ſpirits of the people withall.
            So did Chriſt accept and gratiouſly receiue the gratefull harts of the willing Children, & loiall people, which with ſuch cheerfull Matt. 21. 8. acclamations, teſtified their ioy for his comming, and by ſtrawing the boughes of Palmes, and branches of other trees in the way, made apparant their inward affections and the vnfained loue which they bare towards Ioh. 12. 13. him.
         
         
            
            The 48. Chapter.
            
               Of the Almond tree, whereof there is often mention made in the Scriptures: namely, in the last Chapter of the Preacher.
            
            
               THe Almond tree hath a great, ſtrong & high bodie: otherwiſe not much vnlike to the Peach tree, ſauing that his leaues bee bigger, and his flower white. The fruit of the Peach is round, pulpie, ſucculent, ſauourie, well reliſhed, winiſh-taſted, carrieng a foft moſſie downe on the vtter ſide of the pill or rinde, and within a hard rugged nut: but the Almond nut is ſmoother, and nothing ſo rugged and hoalie as is the Peach.
            The rinde or ſhell of the Almond is not at all to be eaten, but is couered ouer with a ſmall thinne filme or skin, and hath within it the kernell, which is ſometime bitter, and ſometime ſweete. The bitter, being eaten faſting, Bitter Almonds. keepe a man or woman from being eaſily droonken, through the heate and drie nature which is in them. Whereby they diſpatch the moiſtnes and fumes of wine, and ſtoppe the ſame from ſtriking vp into the

braine. And by reaſon of their bitterneſſe, & alſo for that they be of a cutting and extenuating qualitie, they do open the obſtructions of all the inward parts; that is to ſay, they clenſe the liuer, milt and kidneies from all corrupt and groſſe humours: they prouoke vrine, and be excellent good againſt the grauell and ſtone, as the Peach kernels alſo be. They be likewiſe abſterſiue, and cleanſe the face and vtter skinne from all ſpots, pimples and lentils.
            And for that, all hote and drie things be mortiferous and deadly to Foxes, it commeth to paſſe, that if they vſe to eate bitter Almonds, they preſently thereof die, vnleſſe they by and by lap ſome water, and therewith alay and qualifie the bitterneſſe therof, which waſteth vp and conſumeth their vitall iuice.
            Sweete Almonds (ſuch as the Patriarke Iacob furniſhed his ſons withall, when in the Gen. 43, 11. Sweete Almonds. time of dearth, he ſent them for corn into Egypt) do nouriſh the bodie, mollifie the bellie, clenſe the breaſt, prouoke ſleepe, by ſending vp to the braine pleaſant, gentle and ſoporiferous vapors: and alſo for them that be waſted they are reſtoratiue.
            The Gumme which ſweateth out of the Almond tree, through the clefts of the barke Gumme of Almonds. or rind in the Sommer ſeaſon, helpeth them that haue the flixe, or that ſpet blood.
            From this beautifull, faire and fruitfull

Tree, which flowreth betimes, and beareth a whitiſh flower, doth Solomon take a notable Metaphor in the laſt Chapter of his Booke intituled Eccleſiastes or the Preacher, wherein he vſeth ſo manie darke tranſlated terms, and ſo many intricate and metaphoricall Eccl. 12. ſpeeches, that (without ſome familiar expoſition) carrie no ſmall difficultie and obſcuritie.
            In all which Chapter, by fetching Compariſons and Similitudes from common and well knowen things, he putteth man in memorie of his dutie, and that he ought to remember God, and take care for his ſoules health, while he is yet yoong and luſtie, and not to deferre the ſmall till age and decrepicie.
            And by a moſt elegant Periphraſis or circumlocution he ſheweth, how man, being in his beſt flouriſhing time, doth by little and little decay, and (as Iob witneſſeth) vaniſh away 
               Iob. 14, 2. 
               as a ſhadowe, or vapour: ſo that euerie moment he draweth neerer and neerer vnto his end, groweth daily weaker and weaker, and in ſhort ſpace looſeth the vſe of his limmes, and is depriued of the function of all his members.
            For in proceſſe of yeeres, and continuance of time (for Solomon proſecuteth and goeth through all the members of the bodie) the eies waxe dimme; the eares grow to be thick of hearing; the toong fumbleth in pronounciation,

and foltereth in ſpeech; the noſe is not ſo perfect in ſmelling; the handes ſhake and tremble; the legs and feete ſhrinke; the ſhoulders ſtowpe; the backe bendeth: and finally, ech part of the bodie by little and little is brought to decay and diſſolution.
            With theſe words therefore beginneth he his diſcourſe, in that place: Remember thy Maker in the daies of thy youth, before the daies of affliction come, that is, before ſicknes, diſeaſes, and the diſcommodities of olde age catch hold on thee: wherein thou ſhalt ſay, I haue no pleaſure in them. Before the Sunne, the light, the Moone, and the ſtarres be darkened, and ere the clouds returne againe after the raine: that is, before dimneſſe, dazeling, dropping and blearednes of thine eies come vpon thee: When the keepers of the houſe ſhall tremble, that is, before the hands (which be the keepers of the bodie, apparelling, feeding and defending it from inconueniences) doe ſhake: When the ſtrong men ſhall bow themſelues, that is, the legs and feete, which beare vp the bodie: and the millers or grinders ſhall ceaſe, being few in number, that is, when thy teeth ſhall be rotten, blunt, and fallen out, ſo that thou canſt not grinde and chaw thy meate: And they that looke out at the windowes, waxe darke: that is, the eie lids, which are as the windowes, and the eies looking out at thoſe windowes. And when the doores in the ſtreete ſhall be ſhut: to wit, the lips and mouth: and when the voice of the millers shal

be laid downe: that is, when the paſſage and way, by which the meate ſhould deſcend into the ſtomack, ſhall ſcarcely open, and be able to chaw: And when they ſhall wake and riſe vp at the voice of the bird: that is, when they ſhall ſleepe ſo little, that the crowing of a cocke, or chirping of a ſmall bird ſhall awake them: and all the daughters of muſicke be deafe: that is, when the eares be dul and dunch, & not able to heare or diſcerne the tunes of harmonie. The high ones alſo ſhall be afraide and ſhake in the way: that is, when they ſtoupe downe, as though they feared leaſt ſomewhat ſhoulde hit them, and be afraide to climbe, for feare of falling. Before the Almond tree ſhould bloſſome, that is, before thou be gray headed: for by the Almonde tree is ment the head, and by the bloſſoms the gray haires: And the Graſehoppers ſticke vp: to wit, the ſhoulders: for as the legs of the Graſhoppers ſticke vp and appeere aboue the bodie, ſo do the ſhoulders in leane and aged perſons; And the Capers ſhall be waſted, that is, when luſt and concupiſcence ſhall be ended, and appetite to meate taken away. Before the ſiluer coarde be lengthened, and the golden caule do ſhrinke: that is, before the ſinewes, which be white like ſiluer, and which ſtretch out in length at the time of death: and before the thin skinne which encloſeth the braine, and is yellow like gold, do decay. Before the Pitcher be broken at the Well, and the wheele broken at the ceſterne: that

is, before the veines and arteries, (by which be conueied from the fountaine or well being the hart, all the vitall ſpirits into ech part of the body) be periſhed: and before the lyuer waxe faint and vnable to digeſt the meat in the ſtomacke. And dust ſhall be turned to the earth, from whence it came, and the ſpirite ſhall returne to God, who gaue it, that is, the body, conſiſting of fleſh and bones ſhall die and rot in the earth: but the ſoule ſhall incontinently go either to ioy or torment.
            By theſe ſpeeches being partly allegorical, and partly metaphoricall, Solomon awaketh and ſtirreth vp the drowſie mindes of men, being careleſſe of their ſaluation, to remember their Lord and Creator: and not to defer their repentance till they arriue to old age, but to do it euen in their beſt prime and floriſhing youth. Hee vehemently and pithilie therefore calleth vpon them, to begin this their godly exerciſe, from their firſt and tender age, before olde age draw on, and euill daies, full of greefes, troubles and afflictions, come vpon them.
            For, when a man is ſtricken in great yeers, the delights of this life be loathſome and vnpleaſant vnto him, pleaſures, dauncings, ſinging, laughing, paſtime, ieſting, merrie conceites and daliance be gone: yea all delicate diſhes, curious bankets, daintie iunkets, and coſtly viandes be loathed; finallie, all former iollities, diſports and recreations

of luſtie youth, be vtterly forſaken and abandoned. This occaſion therefore taketh Solomon, to ſtir them vp out of their natural ſluggiſhnes, and ordinary forgetfulnes, wiſhing all men not to forſlow and let ſlip oportunitie being offered: for that, in decrepite and ſtowping age, not onely the body, but the minde alſo is empaired; and reaſon, memorie, vnderſtanding, with all the inward faculties ouer clowded.
            For then do the eies dazle, become dim ſighted, and bleared, ſo that they can ſcarcely diſcerne Sunne and Moone. Then bee the hands (whoſe agilitie & miniſterie we neceſſarily vſe in exploiting our buſines) become trembling, ſhaking, vnable and vnfit for any handy labors. Then do ſtitches and coughes growe vppon vs, and ſhortnes of breath en
               
                  ••
               mber vs. Then do the legs and feet (which as baſes and maine pillers vnderprop and beare vp the waight of the whole body) ſhrinke and double vnder vs, that we be not able to go without the ſtay of ā ſtaffe. Then are the teeth (which grinde, breake, and by helpe of the iawes, champe, minſe, bruiſe and ſhred our meat and nouriſhment) either blunted and dulled, or elſe looſed and fallen out.
            Then doth ſight faile, and the eies (which looke out of their holes (as it were) out at two windowes) become pooreblinde, and through weakenes of the muſcles and lids,

do ſee verie little, and as it were through a cloude, ſcarcely able to diſcerne, who they meet in the ſtreet. Then is the throat ſcarcely and with much ado able to ſwallow down any foode, by reaſon of the drines that is in the meate pipe, whereby the nouriſhment can not conueniently be ſent and conueied into the ſtomacke. Then is ſleepe very little and ſhort, by reaſon of the drines of the braine: inſomuch that a man or woman in that age, is eaſily awaked, euen with the chirping of a birde. Then is the voice ſquekiſh and whining, through drines, exaſperating the vocal Arterie, and is vtterly vnfit to ſing. Then is he ready to ſtartle and feare, at euery wagging of a leafe, fearing as it were, leaſt ſome thing ſhoulde fall on him, inſomuch that many times walking alone in the ſtreetes, he looketh backe for feare of danger.
            Then doth the Almond tree flouriſh, that is, the head is then hoary and white, and may a great way of, be perceiued & eſpied, euen as the Almond tree beareth white flowers and bloſſomes in the top, which may be ſeene and diſcerned a great way of. Then will the voice be ſmall, childiſh, weake, buzzing and vnperfect. Then will euery light thing ſeeme heauy, inſomuch that the ſmalleſt burthen will be enough to loade and ſurcharge him. Then will appetite to meate, (which commonly is irrited and prouoked with capers)

be taken away, and al luſt, deſire, and concupiſcence of carnall things, quite aboliſhed.
            Theſe and other diſcommodities doth Solomon reck on vp, and ſhew to be naturally incident vnto man, when he is once old and laden with yeeres. And therfore laieng them downe before all mens eies and conſiderations, hee willeth them to call themſelues home, to reine and qualifie their affections, and in their greene and freſh yeeres to think vpon God, and according to his worde to direct their liues, manners, and behauiours; Before the ſiluer coarde be lengthened, whereby he ſignifieth the ſinewes and the marrow of the backe bone, which being deriued from the ſubſtance of the braine, and of a bright ſiluer colour (as it is alſo to be perceiued and ſeene in brute Beaſtes) beginneth & is ſtretched from the hinder part of the head by 34. Spondyles of the backe, vnto the fundement. This (backbone, whereunto are tied the ribs) is reſembled to the keele of a ſhip; whereinto are peeced the reſt of the maine timber. And as the ſtrongeſt plankes of the whole ſhip are faſtened vnto the keele, ſo doth the ſtrength of mans bodie conſiſt in the pith and marrow of his backe bone: ſo that (as Solomon aptly heere ſaith) if this ſiluer lace or coarde be waſted, deſpoiled, broken or diſſolued, it is an euident token and certaine ſigne of death not far off.
            Going forward in this his figuratiue kind

of ſpeech, he further ſaith; Before the golden caule ſhrinke or bee broken, meaning therby the Hart, which is the fountaine and velſpring of life, and from whom the arteries (as the veines from the liuer) are iſſued: the which do conuey the vital ſpirits and blood, and cheriſh, comfort, moiſten and releeue ech of the members.
            By The Pitcher broken at the Well, may be vnderſtoode the reines, bladder, and conduites of vrine, which in old men commonly be ſo much decaied, that they doe weakely and ſlenderly execute their appointed functions, whereby alſo death is haſtened.
            It followeth, and, Before the wheele be broken at the cesterne, meaning thereby the Head, which in men drawing neere to death, inclineth and falleth downe vpon the ſhoulders. For the head is round, turning and moouing ech way, like a rowling wheele, nowe on the right ſide, now on the left, now vpward, now downeward: from whom the animall ſpirits taking their beginning, are diffuſed and diſtributed through the whole body, and giue both motion and ſenſe to the ſinewes. The head thereof (I ſay) firſt of all commonly drowpeth, ſhrinketh and hangeth downe, (as may appeere by the eies, which firſt of all others die, or at leaſt ſhew plaine tokens of imminent death) carrieng with it for companie all the members to apparant ruine: and ouerthroweth the ſtate of the whole bodie,

euen as a charriot, wagonne, or cart, cannot but fall, when the Axletree is broken. This to bee Solomons meaning, the wordes following plainely ſhewe. For then (ſaith he) Shall dust turne againe to the earth from whence it was taken, and the ſpirite returne to God that gaue it.
            
            But to returne to the Almond tree. The Patriarch Iacob (who afterward, of wreſtling Gen. 32, 28. and preuailing with God, was called Iſrael) being vnkindly, vnconſcionably, and churliſhly dealt withall at the hands of his father in law Laban, vſed a maruellous policie, (not with any intent of fraude or deceit, as at the firſt ſhew, ſome may thinke, but vpon the warrant and appointment of almighty God ſo commanding it) that he might thereby recouer his due wages and hire, which that couetous carle miſerablie denied him. The way whereby he compaſſed and brought the ſame to paſſe was phyſicall, and in this ſort Gen. 30, 37. did he it. He tooke rods of Accepit virgas populeas, amygdalinas, plata
                     •…
                  , &c vt Vulg. lat. habet Muſc. Almond, popular, haſel and cheſtnut trees, and pilled white ſtrakes in them, and put the rods ſo pilled in the gutters and watering troughes when the ſheepe came to drinke: that being in heat in ramming time, they might the ſooner conceiue. For by a certaine hidden and ſecret force in nature, all creatures (yea women alſo) earneſtly fixing their imagination at the time of conception in the formes, ſhapes & repreſentations of things obiect to their

eies and ſenſes, imprint the ſame in their yoong, which they bring foorth. And ſo in this caſe of Iacob: the ſheepe beholding the ſame ſpeckled & pilled rods, brought foorth (by Gods appointment) ſpeckled and partie coloured lambes, whereby Iacob had to his ſhare, ſuch reaſonable number, as was proportionable and agreeable to his paines and labour ſuſtained.
            But there is in the holie Bible a notable and miraculous thing ſet downe, of Aarons rod, which brought foorth buds, and bare bloſſoms and Almonds. Whereby the Lord Num. 17, 8. gaue the ſtubborne and rebellious people plainly to vnderſtand, whom he would haue to miniſter about holie things, and to execute the Prieſts office.
            For after that Corah, Dathan and Abiram, togither with other Captaines of their confederacie, conſpiring againſt Moſes and Aaron, and preſuming to intermeddle in caſes of diuine miniſtration, without any commandement or calling of God, were ſwallowed downe quicke into the earth, that Num. 16. ver. 32. & 49. claue aſunder and opened: and that of the common multitude 14700. were deſtroied with the plague, God commanded Moſes to take twelue rods, according to the number of their princes, with euerie ones name written vpon his rod, among the which there was Aarons rod, being of the tribe of Leui. And Moſes laid the rods before the Lord in the

Tabernacle of the Testimonie. And when Moſes on the next day went into the Tabernacle of the Testimonie, he found the rod of Aaron for the houſe of Leui, to be budded, and to beare ripe Almonds. And Moſes brought foorth all the rods from before the Lord vnto all the children of Iſraell, and they looked vpon them, and tooke euery man his rod. But Aarons rod was brought againe into the Tabernacle, to be kept for a token of the late rebellion: which mutinie and murmuring being quieted, the rude multitude might euer afterward, by beholding that rod, take warning, how they rebelled any more againſt God and his Miniſters.
            This hiſtorie yeeldeth a notable leſſon to all perſons in generall, namely, that no man vſurpe any office, or intrude himſelfe into any function, vnleſſe he be thereunto called by God, or by the aſſent and appointment of ſuch, which haue authority from the ſpirit of God, to deale therein. As the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes witneſſeth, ſaieng: that Christ 
               Heb. 5, 5. 
               tooke not this honour vnto himſelfe to be made the high Prieſt, but had the ſame giuen him, by his heauenly father, who appointed him a Priest for euer after the order of Melchiſedech.
            
            To whomſoeuer therefore this rod, that is, the cure and charge of gouerning and teaching the flocke of Chriſt, by the preaching of the Goſpell, is appointed, let him cheerfully follow his vocation, and couragiouſly execute his function.
            
               
And as Aarons rod (being afore withered and drie) by diuine vertue became greene againe, budded and brought forth good and wholeſome fruit: ſo likewiſe it is meete, that ſuch as be called to the office of the Miniſterie in the Church of God, ſhould ſhew foorth the fruits of vertue and good works in themſelues, and by wholeſome doctrine alſo inſtruct others vnder their charge, to do the like, and to ſhew foorth their ſound and liuely faith by good and Chriſtian actions.
            And this did Chriſt earneſtly require, and vehemently inculke, in his thriſe asking of Peter whether he loued him, and in inioining him to diligent feeding of the flocke. Furthermore, me thinkes the Almond may very aptly and conueniently ſerue for a Symbole or Cognizance of a Chriſtian mans life: wherein (as afore hath beene ſaid of the Walnut) be interchangeably mingled ſower with ſweete, rough with ſmooth, hard with ſoft, affliction with welfare, and aduerſe hap with proſperous ſtate. For by the wooddiſh and hard ſhell of the Almond, are ſignified aduerſities, troubles, miſeries, afflictions, diſcommodities and miſſehaps. Againe, by the ſweete and pleaſant kernell, may be meant proſperitie, comfort, ioy, delectation, releaſe and mitigation of greeues, ſorrowes and all calamities.
         
         
            
            The 49. Chapter.
            
               Of the Plane tree, and the nature thereof.
            
            
               THe Plane is a forraine & ſtrange tree brought out of Aſia hither into Europe, for the goodlie ſhade that it giueth; as appeereth in Pliny, who Lib. 12. ca. 1. writeth, that it was found growing as far as Turwaine in France, which was ſometime the furtheſt bounds and limits of the Romaine Empire. It ſpreadeth his branches and boughes very broade and wide, his rinde is thicke, and his leaues large, much like in ſhape to the Vine, or of that Plant, which (for the reſemblance that it hath to an hand ſtretched out, & ſpred open) is called Palma Chriſti; and of ſome Cataputia maior, the ſeede whereof hath a purging qualitie. But the Plane tree leaues be not altogither ſo bigge and large, as the leaues of this Palma Christi are, and doe hang by long reddiſh ſtemmes. The flowers be ſmall, pale, and grow in ſmall tuffets. The fruit or berries be round, rough, and ſomwhat downiſh or woollie.
            This tree by reaſon of his great, large and broade branches ſtretching out themſelues

euery way moſt pleaſantly, is very fit and commodious to make coole arbours & ſhadowy boothes, to ſit vnder, in hot ſeaſons. Some are of opinion that bicauſe the Tilia or Linden tree, ſerueth for the ſame purpoſe, therefore to be the ſame that the Plane tree is. And ſome thinke no leſſe of the Beech, for that Virgil giueth commendation of it, for the like vſe and purpoſe, ſaieng:
            
               Vnder the ſhade of broade beech tree Eclog. 1.
               
               Thou Tityrus tak'ſt thine eaſe:
               Recording in fine Oaten pype
               Old clowniſh countrey Laies.
            
            But (doubtleſſe) they be much deceiued, ſithence in leaues there is no maner of reſemblance or affinitie betweene them and the Plane. Thoſe trees (indeed) defend the Sun beames, and yeeld very braue and recreatiue arbours to ſit vnder, as the Plane tree doth: but there is not that beauty, proportion, forme, and ſiſe in their leaues, neither ſuch delightſome ſmell and comfortable ſent.
            Moreouer, the Plane tree hath ſuch vertue, that no venemous thing will come neere it, neither will any ſerpentes approch where it is; yea, it is ſo loath ſome and dreadfull to Nature of the Plane tree. Flitter Mice and Backs, that they dare neither build their neſts vnder it, neither can abide the ſhadow of it.
            Holie and ſacred writers therefore vſe this ſame tree in their diuine writings and heauenly narrations; and take from it pithy and

elegant Similitudes. As namely, where Wiſedome, extolling, dignifieng, aduauncing and Eccl. 24, 16. commending hir ſelfe, vſing for the ſame many proper tearmes encomiaſticall, and reckoning vp ſundry excellent and precious trees, prooueth thereby hir ſelfe to be fullie furniſhed and richly adourned with all maner of vertues. For ſhe confeſſeth hir ſelfe to flouriſh, fructifie and ſpread foorth hir beautifull branches, as the goodly Plane tree that groweth by the water ſide. For this tree greatly loueth moiſture, and is of nature ſo dry, that it requireth watering: yea wee doe reade in Macrobius, how Hortenſius for the Saturn. lib. 3 loue that he bare vnto this tree, did vſe to bedew and water it with wine, thereby to make it continue the longer, and to ſhew the beautifuller.
            And as the Plane ſpreadeth his boughes and braunches ſo wide, and giueth ſuch pleaſant ſhadowe, that Xerxes the king of Xerxes king of Perſia. Perſia tooke ſingular delight to ſit vnder it, whole daies togither: ſo likewiſe Wiſedome, comming out of the mouth of the moſt High, with heauenlie comfort protecteth, ſhadoweth, recreateth & defendeth all thoſe that commit themſelues vnder the ſhadowe thereof from all harme and danger.
            And ſo did Dauid pray, ſaieng; Keepe me O 
               Pſal. 17, 8. 
               Lord as the apple of the eie, hide 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnder the ſhadow of thy winges.
            
            And likewiſe Ieremie; The breath of our noſethrils, 
               Lam. 4, 20.
               
               the annointed of the Lord was taken in their nets, of whom we ſaid: Vnder his ſhadow we ſhall be preſerued aliue among the Heathen: that is, vnder his protection we ſhal be ſafe from all inuaſion, danger, and hoſtilitie.
            Now forſomuch as in Iudea, Syria, and all along the region of Arabia felix, by reaſon of the fruitfull ſoile, & temperate aire, there doth growe great ſtore of moſt pleaſaunt and tall trees: the Prophets therfore taking Similitudes from ſuch vſuall and common things, doe reſemble and compare Emperours, Kings, Princes and Potentates cō
                  pared to Trees. kings, princes and potentates; with their maieſtie, honor, magnificence, dignitie, power, and authoritie, vnto high trees, as Cedars.
            And ſuch peeres, nobles, and honourable perſonages, as be not equall in dignitie with monarches and kings, nor of ſuch power as emperours and princes, but in degree inferiour vnto them; be not compared to the Cedar, being an high and very tall tree, but to the Firre or Plane, or other trees not altogither ſo high, beautifull and excellent.
            God therefore by his Prophet Ezechiel, vſeth a moſt excelent metaphor, in deſcribing the ſtately maieſty of Pharao, and of his proſperous, floriſhing, and roiall proceedings, inſomuch that he there pronounceth no king to ſurmount, no, nor yet to match him: and yet that all his glorie, pompe, maieſtie, and royaltie ſhoulde eaſilie and with a trice be

brought downe, ouerthrowen, and turned topſie turuie, euen as the higheſt trees are hewen and cut downe with an axe.
            For thus doth the Prophet begin his matter: that foraſmuch as that proude, hawtie and inſolent king had forgotten God, and cruelly handled his people, therefore deſtruction ſhould come vpon him, and he ſhoulde not be able to auoide it. The word of the Lord 
               Ezec. 31, 1. (ſaith Ezechiel) came vnto me, ſaient: Sonne of man, ſpeake vnto Pharao king of Aegypt, and to his people: whom art thou like vnto, ingreatnes? Behold, Aſſhur was like a Cedar in Lebanon, with faire branches, and thicke ſhadowing boughes, and ſhot vp very high, ſo that his top was among the thicke boughes: the waters nouriſhed him, and the deepe exalted him on high with hir riuers, running round about his plants. His height was exalted aboue all the trees of the field, and his boughes were multiplied, and his branches were long, bicauſe of the multitude of the waters, which the deepe ſent out. All the foules of the heauen made their nests in his boughes, and vnder his branches did all the beasts of the forrest bring foorth their yoong, and vnder his ſhadow dwelt all mightie nations.
            
            By which Metaphor, he meaneth that many nations were ſubiect and tributarie vnto Pharao; who in the largeneſſe of dominions, ſurmounted other Princes. And his root was neere to the plentiful waters, which did conueniently (yea abūdantly) moiſten it. Signifieng that his welth & riches was increaſed infinitely

and ineſtimably, by reaſon of the great intercourſe and traffike to and fro of Merchants from all quarters. The Cedars in the garden of God were no higher than he: the For trees did not match him in height, and the Plant trees were not like to his boughes. Whereby he ſignifieth, that no Prouince in the world was like vnto his: no, not Iudaea, wherin was publiſhed the holie Religion and true worſhip of God, nor any other nation whatſoeuer.
            For this his ſurpaſſing beautie and incomparable excellencie, all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God enuied him: that is, his neighbors bordering vpon him, and worſhipping God aright, were mooued with a kinde of enuie and emulation towards him for the ſame. For the godly be ſometimes greatly greeued in conſcience to ſee It greeueth the godlie to ſee the wicked ſtill to flouriſh and proſper in their wickednes. the wicked ſtill to flouriſh and flaunt in all welfare and proſperitie, inſomuch that they are almoſt ready to giue ouer their hold, and to ſhrinke from their tackling. Which thing the Prophet Dauid witneſſeth, ſaieng: My 
               Psal. 73, 2. 
               feete were almost gone; and my ſteps had welneere ſlipt: for I fretted at the fooleſh, when I ſawe the proſperitie of the wicked.
            
            
               Ieremiah alſo greatly mooued with indignation heereat, diſputeth with God about Iere. 12, 1. the ſame: and expoſtulateth in a maner with him, for that the way of ſinners did ſo proſper, and that the open workers of wickednes had good ſucceſſe, and enioied welfare

in all their attempts and dealings.
            Vpon the ſame argument dwelleth the Prophet Habacuc, reaſoning, and almoſt chiding with God for the ſame, ſaieng: Wherefore, Lord, dost thou looke vpon the tranſgreſſors, 
               Hab. 1, 13. 
               and holdest thy toong, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous thā he? As though he ſhould ſay, Lord, why winkeſt thou at this geare; why holdeſt thou thy peace, at the horrible enormities and wicked dealings of blaſphemous and indurate ſinners?
            Iob alſo is inwardly vexed in ſpirite to ſee the wicked ſo aduanced in pride, and ſo laden with proſperitie, that they contemne and deſpiſe all the godly and vertuous. Wherfore 
               Iob. 21, 7. (ſaith he) doe the wicked liue, and waxe olde, and growe in wealth. Their houſes are peaceable without fear, & the rod of God is not vpō them, &c. Theſe felicities, welfares, proſperities, ſucceſſes and iollities of the wicked, although at the firſt ſight they may ſeeme to be reckoned as things of great happines, inſomuch that the minds and conſciences of the godly be therewith ſometime maruellouſly mated and amazed, and almoſt readie to fall: yet the end thereof doth euidently declare, how fraile, vaine, tranſitorie, brittle, vncertaine, and momentanie the ſame pleaſures of thoſe worldlings are, when as God doth ſuddenly ouerturne and bring to nothing al the pomp thereof: ſo that no iotte, nor appeerance thereof be finally left, as the Prophet in another

place plainely ſheweth: Yet a little while (ſaith he) and the wicked ſhall not appeere: and 
               Pſal. 37, 10. 
               thou ſhalt looke after his place, and he ſhall not be founde. And a little after; I haue ſeene the wicked ſtrong, and ſpreading himſelfe like a green
                     •
                   Bay tree, and he paſſed away, and lo he was gone, and I ſought him, but he coulde not be founde. Signifieng thereby, that the wicked, royſting in their ruffling pride, and bragging in their high huffing ſtate, are brought downe from their inſolent hautines, and vaniſh away euen as ſmoke, with all their pompe and glorie, not leauing their ſtately houſes, reuenewes and inheritance, in ſucceſſion to their ofſpring and poſteritie, as by experience in many noble families of ancient, decent, and honorable parentage is daily ſeene, who, not acknowledging from whom all their dignitie and preeminence commeth, and whom onely they are to thanke for the ſame, are for their ingratitude by the Lord thus condignly puniſhed.
            And this is the meaning of Ezechiel in this metaphore: wherein God threatneth deſtruction Cap. 31, 11. and deſolation to a moſt mightie king, for that his hart was lifted vp againſt the Lorde: and that not onely he himſelfe ſhould taſte theſe miſeries, & become a pray vnto his enimies, but others alſo his complices and confederates ſhould be caſt into the like dolefull calamitie, and receiue many other detriments, afflictions and coroſiues,

which the Prophet in that Chapter by many metaphores reciteth.
            Like vnto this, is that commination of God by his Prophet Iſaiah, againſt the arrogancie, pride, tyranny, cruelty and oppreſſion of the king of Babylon: for whoſe deſtruction, and fall, euen The Firre trees and the Cedars 
               Iſai. 14, 8. 
               of Lebanon reioiced, as the Prophet there ſetteth downe. Vnder which metaphor he ſheweth, how that all the Nobles, Dukes, Peeres and others, ſubiect to his authoritie, and oppreſſion, reioiced and were hartily glad for the fall and deſtruction of ſuch a cruell and bloodie Tyrant.
            This tyrant (Nabuchadnezzar) is compared for the great magnificence and glorious pompe of his huge empire, vnto the goodlie Planet and glittering morning ſtar, Lucifer: which being ſeene after the Sunne is gone downe, is called Veſperugo and Heſperus, and heereof ſpeaketh Virgil where he ſaith,

                  Eclog. vlt.
                  Trudge, trudge apace home, full fed Goates, 
                  The Euening Starre appeeres.
               
But in the morning, preceeding and going afore the Sunne, it is called Lucifer, and Phoſphorus: and (of the glittering brightnes and amiable beautie, and ſhining colour which it hath) named alſo Venus.
            
            To this goodly, bright, and glittering Planet is the king of Babylon reſembled, for that, in the pride of his minde, and inſolencie of his eſtate, he ſo far now forgat himſelfe to be

a man, that he ſuffered diuine honours to be done vnto him, oppreſſing the true and ſincere religion of God, and with outragious crueltie, ſuppreſſing the miniſters and true beleeuers. For arrogant pride and rebellious diſloialtie the Lord ſo vnpatiently took, that he tumbled him downe out of his high throne of maieſtie, wherein he gloried, and quite ſtripped him (as an angell of Sathan, ambiciouſly affecting a diuinitie, and the next place to God) out of all his pompe, glorie, and royaltie: yea, threwe him into that degree of ignominie, that the honor of buriall was denied vnto him: and beſides, the whole kingdome of Babylon and all the inhabitants thereof, lamentably otherwiſe afflicted. Which great fall and ſodaine change of ſuch an high and magnificent king, emboldened thoſe that afore (maugre their wils) were wont to behold and reuerence his ſtatelines and pompe, now to raile, taunt, rate, ſcoffe, mocke, frumpe, and inſult vpon him, as on a dead carcaſſe, or one out of the world. They flouted (I ſay) and derided him, for that of a king a litle while afore, ſo mightie and wealthy, that with a becke or a countenance onely, he made all the world afraide, he was now degraded from ſo high ſublimitie, throwne headlong into ſuch miſerable and ſeruile condition, that he was not permitted after any princely maner to be ſolemnly enterred, but (as Ieremie threateneth Iere. 22, 19.
               
to Iehoiakim king of Iuda) ſhould be buried at an Aſſe. Meaning, that his bodie ſhould be caſt out to be deuoured of the Fowles and wilde beaſts, euen as the carkaſſe of an Aſſe, or an Horſe is.
            To this end is alſo that ironicall inſultation of Iſaiah: All the Princes of the nations ſhall crie and ſay: Thy pompe and thy pride is laid downe into the pit: & ſo is the melodie of thy inſtruments, that is, all thy magnificence, roialtie, pleaſures and delicacies are ceaſed. The woorme is ſpread vnder thee, and the woormes couer thee. That is to ſay; Thy dead bodie ſhall not bee embaulmed, as noble kings are woont to be, to preſerue them from rottennes, but ſhall be gnawen and eaten by woormes, euen as the bodie of the pooreſt and baſeſt pezant in the world. How art thou fallen from heauen, O 
               Iſaie. 14, 10. 
               Lucifer, thou faire morning child? How hast thou gotten a fall, euen to the ground, which diddest weaken the nations? For thou ſaidest in thine hart, I will climbe vp into heauen, and exalt my throne beſide the ſtarres of God: I wil ſit alſo vpon the mount of the Congregation toward the North. I wil aſcend aboue the height of the cloudes, and I will be like the most High. But thou ſhalt be brought downe to the graue, to the ſides of the pit.
            
            Whereby he noteth, how that he forgetting his fraile eſtate, and exalting himſelfe aboue the condition of an humane creature, by vſurping the honor due vnto God onely, was woorthily depriued both of life, wealth

and dignitie; and finally, ſwallowed vp by a moſt ſhamefull end and confuſion. Which variable intercourſe, and fickle mutabilitie of worldly proſperitie, may ſerue as a document or leſſon, not onely for all Kings and Potentates, but euen in generall, for all eſtates of men beſides, to teach them to keepe themſelues within their bounds, and to remember how ſoone the caſe of worldlie iollitie is altered, ſpecially when a man in the arrogant brauerie of an hawtie ſtomacke, diſdainfully ſwelleth againſt men, and rebelliouſly oppoſeth himſelfe againſt the Lord God.
            So doth the Apoſtle Paule denounce an vnhappie, dreadfull and horrible end vnto that Wicked ſonne of perdition, that exalteth himſelfe 
               2. Theſ. 2, 3. 
               aboue all that is called God, or that is worſhipped, inſomuch that he ſitteth as God in the Temple of God, ſhewing himſelfe that he is God, practiſing crueltie, and exerciſing all maner of tyrannie againſt the Saints, that would liue godlie in Chriſt Ieſus: Whom God in his time will conſume with the breath of his mouth, and aboliſh with th
                     •
                   brightnes of his comming: wherein all his deceiueableneſſe and iugling tricks ſhall be reuealed, and all his peſtilent doctrine, and counterfeite religion vaniſh away as ſmoke to the great woonder of many that were e
                  •
                ſotted with his fraudulent deuiſes, and del
                  •
                ded by his lieng woonders.
         
         
            
            The 50. Chapter.
            
               Of Shrubs, Shootes, Slippes, Graffes, Sets, Sprigges, Boughes, Branches, Twigs, yoong Imps, Spray and Buds: from the which are fetched by the Prophets in their diuine writings, ſundrie Metaphors and Similitudes.
            
            
               IN the ſacred ſcriptures is plentifull ſtore of Metaphors and Similitudes, taken not only from the Trees, Plants and Herbs themſelues, but alſo frō their parts and appertinents, as namely, from the root, from which they are nouriſhed; from the trunke and ſtemme, by which the ſap is diffuſed and diſtributed; from the rinde, barke or pill, wherewith they be couered; from the boughes, leaues, bloſſoms & flowers, wherewith they are adorned and beautified; and from their ſeede, by the which they are encreaſed, multiplied and propagated.
            So by the Figge tree, which had nothing but 
               Matt. 21, 19 Mar. 11, 13. 
               leaues, we are taught, how odious and diſpleaſant to God, the outwarde ſhewe and painted appeerance of godlineſſe is, without

an inwarde working faith, producing the fruits of Chriſtian life and honeſt conuerſation.
            So alſo by thoſe vnprofitable trees that bring foorth no good fruite, but are to be cut downe 
               Matt. 3, 10. Matt. 7, 19. Luk. 3, 9, Iude ver. 12 
               with the Axe, and cast into the fire, are meant the wicked and obſtinate, that perſeuere in their malicious blindnes and indurate diſobedience.
            So alſo Chriſt in another place, by a Similitude taken from the Fig tree when his boughes 
               Matt. 24, 32 
               be yet tender, and his leaues newly ſpringing out, whereby men knowe that Sommer is nigh at hand: armeth and warneth all men of the approching of the latter day.
            And euen ſo likewiſe the Apoſtle moſt diuinely diſcourſing of the naturall and of the wilde Oliue tree, with the roote and branches Rom. 11, 17 thereof, beateth downe all arrogancie and hawtie pride of ſuch, as inſolently glorie in the pretended excellencie of their holineſſe, and prerogatiue of their eſtate, deſpiſing and contemning others in reſpect of themſelues.
            So alſo the Prophet Iſaiah ſpeaking of Chriſt and his miniſterie, and ſetting him downe after a moſt excellent manner, and in moſt heauenlie termes, to the view and conſideration of all men, deſcribeth him not as any honorable or beautifull perſonage, but as an abiect and outcast, deſpiſed and reiected of men, full of 
               Iſai. 53, 3. 
               ſorrowes, and hauing experience of infirmities: not

regarded, not eſteemed and accounted of, nor any waies intertained with any fauourable kind of curteſie: but euery way iudged and deemed as plagued and ſmitten of God, and humbled. And he reſembleth him to a Spring comming 
               Iſai. 11, 1. 
               foorth of the ſtemme of Ieſſe, and to a yoong Graffe or ſhoot growing out of his roote: as it were out of a drie, barren, vnfertile and vnmanured field; ſo that to man, it ſhould ſeeme to be of no renown, hope or likelihood euer to be aduanced into any high ſublimitie, or by his comming and doctrine to bring men to ſaluation. Yea many were ſo offended at his baſenes and humilitie, that ſcarcely one among a great number, would giue any credit to the propheſies and predictions of the holy Writers concerning him.
            For ſo long as they looked no further than into his outward pouerty and baſe eſtate, it was no maruell though very few embraced his doctrine, ſith they accounted him ſcarcely woorthy to be looked on, or to bee kept company withall.
            It would be to long, to repeate al that the Prophet in that Chapter at large ſetteth down, concerning the propagation and enlargement of the kingdome of Chriſt: and therefore I refer the Reader to the words of the text it ſelfe, and to the godly expoſitions of ſuch as haue learnedly written vppon the ſame. Wherein (doubtleſſe) euery good Chriſtian ought diligently to exerciſe himſelfe,

and zealouſly to ſearch out the ſenſe and meaning of this Prophet, who moſt liuely & effectually diſplaieth both the glory and alſo the humilitie of Chriſt: and what benefits ech way we receiue by and through him.
            The bleſſed Apoſtle Paule alſo calleth vs backe to the example of Chriſt, exhorting and animating vs, to be Of the ſame minde 
               Phil. 2, 6. 
               that was in Christ Ieſus. Who being in the forme of God, thought it no robberie to be equall with God: But made himſelfe of no reputation, taking on him the forme of a ſeruant, and was made like vnto men, and was found in ſhape as a man. He humbled himſelfe & became obedient vnto death, euen the death of the croſſe. Wherfore God alſo hath highly exalted him, and giuen him a Name, aboue euery name; that at the name of Ieſus ſhoulde euery knee bow, both of things in heauen, and of things in earth, and of things vnder the earth: which is as much to ſaie, as that no power, or ſtrength was ſo great, but that it ſhould ſubmit it ſelfe vnder Matt. 28, 18 Iohn. 17, 2. his empire and dominion.
            But to come againe vnto my firſt purpoſed argument. The Prophet Iſaiah moſt plentifully and largely euery where throughout his prophecie amplifieng Chriſts kingdom, and aduancing his glory, comforteth the afflicted and ſorowful, which think themſelues forſaken and deſtitute of all releefe and ſuccour, and encourageth them to lift vp their harts, and to ſtay themſelues in aſſured hope

of Gods infinite mercies, vndoubted prouidence, and infallible deliuerance.
            For, (by taking a metaphor from a yoong graffe or ſlip) hee ſheweth that the ſpirituall kingdome of Dauid ſhall bee reſtored by Chriſt, and that all the godly which thinke themſelues forſaken, ſhoulde haue one that ſhould be their deliuerer and redeemer out of the thraldome and tyranny of Sathan. For There ſhall come foorth (ſaith he) a Spring, rod, ſhoote, or ſet, out of the ſtocke of Ieſſe, & a graffe 
               Iſai. 11, 1. 
               ſhall growe out of his roote. And the ſpirite of the Lord ſhall rest vpon him: the ſpirite of wiſedome and vnderstanding: the ſpirite of counſell and ſtrength: the ſpirite of knowledge and of the feare of the Lord. Whereby he ſignifieth Chriſt, being without meaſure ineſtimably furniſhed with all gifts, and wherof he giueth by meaſure to thoſe that be his.
            The ſame Similitude doth he afterwarde continue and proſecute, eftſoones repeating it, and ſaieng, that in That day the roote of 
               Verſ. 10. 
               Ieſſe, which ſeemed in that decaied ſtate of the Iewes, to be in a maner rotten and like a drie ſticke; Shall ſtande and be ſet vp for a ſigne vnto the people, and all nations ſhall ſeeke vnto it: that is, all people and kindreds of the earth ſhall fixe their eies vpon Chriſt, as on a token or marke, and al nations ſhall come flocking to him, and doe vnto him homage.
            But from the Roote of trees and Plantes, (which draineth moiſture out of the earth,

and diffuſeth vitall ſap and iuyce proportionablie throughout all the braunches and boughes) be taken and borrowed in the holie Bible, ſundry very proper and apt Similitudes, applied by the Prophets, partly to proſperitie, and floriſhing ſeaſons: partlie to aduerſitie and deſperate times, as namely when deſolation, death and deſtruction is threatened and denounced to the graceleſſe and wicked.
            So, the holy Patriarch Iob, mentioning what wealth, power, dignity and abundance, he had aforetime enioied, when the princes and peeres of the Countrey did vnto him honor and reuerence, ſaith; My roote was ſpred out by the water ſide: and the dew lay vpon my corn. 
               Iob. 29, 19. By which metaphores, taken from trees conueniently and holeſomely watered, and from fields comfortably moiſtened with the ſweet dew of heauen, he meaneth that all thinges went proſperouſly forward with him, and that no loſſe or hinderance did betide him.
            And as the Root is the foundation, wheron trees are ſtaied, and whereby they receiue their nouriſhment: ſo doth God by his prophet Hoſea promiſe vnto all thoſe that are penitent and ſorrowfull for their ſins, and leane onely vnto his mercy and protection, the continuance of all proſperous and happy ſucceſſe; I will be (ſaith he) as the dew vnto 
               Hoſ. 14, 5. 
               Iſrael: he ſhall grow as the Lillie, and fasten his rootes as the trees of Lebanon. Signifieng that

their felicitie ſhoulde not be fading and vaniſhable, but (as ſtrong trees) perdurable and laſting.
            
               Solomon alſo deſcribing the vaine and tranſitorie hope of the wicked, which ſhall be diſappointed of their deſires, and miſſe their wiſhed welfare, ſaith, that The deſire of 
               Pro. 12, 12 
               the vngodly, is a net of euils: that is to ſay, they imagine and deuiſe ſuch things as bring deſtruction and breede their owne miſcheefe; But the roote of the righteous bringeth foorth fruite.
            
            So doth Wiſedome, pronounce and ſaie of hir ſelfe, that She tooke roote in an honourable 
               Eccl. 24, 14. 
               people, euen in the portion of the Lords inheritance: and that ſhe is exalted on high as a Cedar in Libanus, and as a Cypers tree vpon mount Hermon: that is, ſhe diſtributeth and diſperſeth hir vertues far and wide, comfortably ſhadowing and refreſhing all hir louing children.
            Contrariwiſe, when God denounceth deſtruction to the wicked, and proteſteth that all their power (be it neuer ſo ſtrong and mighty) ſhall not continue, he pronounceth that their Roote ſhall be plucked vp. As in that ſaieng of Iob; I haue ſeene my ſelfe when the 
               Iob. 5, 3. 
               fooliſh was deepe rooted, and ſodainely I curſed his habitation. Whereunto alſo agreeth that, which he ſaith in another place; The vngodly 
               Iob. 15, 20. 
               man ſorroweth all the daies of his life, and the number of a tyrants yeeres are vnknowne. He ſhall not 
               Verſ. 29. 
               be rich, neither ſhall his ſubstance continue, neither

ſhall his proſperity take deepe roote vpon earth. The flame ſhall dry vp his branches: and he ſhall go away with the breath of his mouth. Al theſe words and terms do ſhew that all the pompe, glory, inſolencie and pride of the wicked ſhall be quite turned vpſide downe, and brought to nothing.
            No leſſe terrible plagues doth the Prophet Dauid denounce againſt the wicked, who truſting in his worldly wealth and vncertaine riches, oppreſſeth the innocent; God (ſaith he) ſhall destroy thee for euer; he ſhall take 
               Pſal. 52, 5. 
               thee and plucke thee out of thy tabernacle, & roote thee out of the land of the liuing. Thereby ſignifieng, that he ſhould vtterly be rooted out, & plucked vp euen by the rootes: and there ſhoulde be left no hope to him of any poſteritie.
            The ſame metaphor vſed Chriſt, when as he rebuked the Phariſees and Scribes, for tranſgreſſing the commandements of God by their owne hypocriticall traditions, and appeaſed his diſciples, who were offended at him for ſpeaking ſo plainely and freely vnto thoſe high Rabbines: for he ſaith; Euery plant which my heauenly father hath not planted, ſhall be 
               Matt. 15, 13 Iohn. 15, 2. 
               rooted vp. Signifieng, that all doctrine, religion and inſtitution of life, that is not warranted and ſtaied vpon the ſure and ſound foundation of Chriſt, but ſauoreth more of phantaſticall ſuperſtition, than of ſincere and true 1. Cor. 3, 11. holines, ſhall be deſtroied and plucked vp. Al

ſuch things as are attempted and vndertaken either for oſtentation or lucre, by the adle deuiſe of mans fooliſh braine, without the warrant of Gods holy word, and authority of the ſacred Scriptures, neuer attaine to any good effect, but are ſcattered and come to naught.
            Of the Plant it ſelfe, and of the yoong ſprigs, buds or ſlips may the like be ſaid. For, from thence are there Similitudes borowed & taken, appliable either to the good or euil part. So (ſaith Iſaiah;) The houſe of Iſraell is 
               Iſai. 5, 7. 
               the vineyard of the Lord, and the men of Iudah are his pleaſant plant. Againe, in the ſame Chapter it is vſed in the woorſe part; As the flame of 
               Verſ. 24. 
               fire deuoureth the ſtubble, and as the chaffe is conſumed of the flame; euen ſo the roote of the wicked ſhall be as corruption, and their bud ſhall riſe vp like dust. That is, the wicked ſhall be deſtroied, and neuer grow to any bignes.
            Againe, where the ſame Prophet comforteth the people, and aſſureth them that the grace of their Redeemer ſhall not faile them, he ſaith; In that day ſhall the bud of the 
               Iſai. 4, 2. 
               Lord be beautifull and glorious, and the fruit of the earth ſhall be excellent. Whereby he ſheweth, that great honor, glory and dignitie ſhall befall to them that continue ſtedfaſt in faith and hope, through the mercy and fauour of Chriſt to obtaine ſaluation.
            To this purpoſe alſo tendeth that ſurpaſſing ioy, which the godly inwardly in ſpirite

enioieth, and for the which he ſo exceedingly reioiceth, that he is adorned and enriched with ſo many and ſo great bleſſings. For he aſcribeth all and euery the good gifts, wherwith he is indued, vnto Almightie God, with humble and hartie giuing of thanks for the ſame. I will greatly reioice in the Lord (ſaith he) Iſaie. 61, 10. 
               and my ſoule ſhall be ioyfull in my God. For he hath clothed me with the garments of ſaluation, and couered me with the robe of righteouſnes: he hath decked me like a Bridegroome, and as a Bride attireth hirſelfe with hir Iewels. For as the earth bringeth forth hir bud, and as the garden ſhooteth forth his ſeede: ſo will the Lord God cauſe righteouſneſſe and praiſe to flouriſh forth before al the heathen. In which words he ſheweth, how he is graciouſly adorned with al kinds of vertues, and that through the free mercie and benefit of God; to whom for the ſame is due all praiſe and glorie.
            For as the earth being fertile and fruitful, and beautified with the gallant verdure of Iere. 33, 11. freſh flowers and greene herbes, is an argument of the bountifull goodness of God towards vs: euen ſo, righteouſnes, peace, tranquillitie, and other vertues wherewith the mind and ſoule of man is garniſhed, declare the exceeding great goodneſſe and loue of God toward mankinde: ſo that theſe moſt gracious gifts of God, woorthily ought to prouoke and ſtir vs vp to al praiſe and thankfulnes.
            
               
The Vine branches, which ſpreade themſelues abroad, and giue comfortable ſhadow againſt the heate of the Sunne, ſignifie in the Scriptures felicitie, honour, dignitie, magnificence, worſhip and renowme.
            So doth the princely Prophet Dauid by an elegant Allegorie of the Vine and hir branches, reckon vp the proſperous eſtate of the Hebrewes, which was afterward ſauced with ſower and bitter calamities. For thus doth he reaſon with God; Thou hast brought a Vine 
               Pſal. 80, 8. 
               out of Egypt: to wit, the people of the Iewes: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it: that is, thou beſtowedſt great diligence in trimming, manuring and dreſſing it: She ſtretched out hir branches vnto the ſea, and hir boughes vnto the riuer: that is, ſhe inlarged the bounds and limits of hir dominion. Why hast thou then broken downe hir hedge? So that all they which go by, plucke off hir grapes. That is, doe deſpoile, ranſacke, teare aſunder, and diſmember the roiall power of the Iewiſh nation, and that bicauſe they want thy defence and protection. The very ſame argument handleth Iſaiah, in a Similitude taken from the Vineyard, and the Iſaie, 5, 7. buds or branches of the Vine.
            There is in Ezechiel a notable place ſhadowed vnder an aenigmatical Parable of a great 
                     •
                  auenous Egle, (by the which, the Lord meaneth the king of Babylon, who greedily gaped Ezec. 17, 3. 
               
                  •
               or the kingdome of Iſrael) and of a flouriſhing Vine with great and wide ſpreading branches.

Whereof the whole drift is, to ſhew, that there is in this world nothing ſteadie, permanent, durable, or of continuance: and that there is no truſt to be repoſed in anie mortall creature, or worldlie Potentate: for that the leagues, amities, and pacts of Kings and Princes, and all their ſocieties, confederacies, and flouriſhing principalities be liable to ruine, and ſubiect to mutabilitie.
            For, God at his pleaſure, ſomewhile ſubuerteth and ouerturneth them: euen as a Vine is pruned and lopped, when it is too ranke of leaues, branches and boughes: and many times extolleth, dignifieth and aduanceth thoſe things, that in ſight ſeeme to bee abiect, baſe and contemptible: as in the end of that Chapter he plainly affirmeth, in theſe words; And all the trees of the field ſhall knowe: that is, all the proud, ſtately and pompous Verſ. 24. Kings ſhall well vnderſtand, that I the Lorde haue brought downe the high tree, and exalted the lowe tree: that I haue dried vp the greene tree, and made the drie tree to flouriſh. I the Lord haue ſpoken it, and haue done it. Heerby ſignifieng, that the Lord exalteth the humble and contemptible, and bringeth downe the proud and arrogant.
            The ſelfe ſame thing did the bleſſed Virgin alſo acknowledge, leauing it in memorie in that hir moſt godly and heauenly Hymne to all poſterities; that God extendeth his mercie 
               Luke. 1. 50. 
               vnto all them that feare him, but ſcattereth the

proud and arrogant in their owne wicked imaginations: that he filleth the hungrie with good things, and ſuffereth the rich to continue hungrie.
            
            A litle after, the ſame Ezechiel proſecuting ſtil the ſame argument, thundreth out a prophecie againſt the proud, periured, and cruell princes, Iehoas, Iehoiakim, and Zedechiah. For he doth depaint them in their right colours, and liuely ſet them downe according to their peeuiſh diſpoſitions, ſo that in them was verified the olde prouerbe, Mali corui, 
               Ezec. 19, 2. 
               malum ouum. Wherefore lay thy mother that Liones, among the Lions? ſhe nouriſhed hir yoong ones among the Lions whelpes. One of hir whelpes ſhe brought vp, and it became a Lion: it learned to catch the pray, and to deuoure men. The heathen heard of him, and caught him in their nets. The Mother ſeeing hir ſelfe diſappointed of hir hope and expectation, tooke another of hir whelpes, to wit, Iehoiakim, and made him a Lion, that is, a tirant; Who went among the Lions and became a fierce Lion, and learned to catch the pray, and to deuoure men: and to make widowes, and deſtroy cities; who at last was caught and brought in chaines to the king of Babylon.
            
            And the more to exaggerate the heinouſnes of this thing, and to amplifie the crueltie of the king, which he had ſucked (as it were) from his mothers breaſt, he goeth to the very groundworke of the matter, vſing a Phyſicall metaphor, thus; Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood. Which metaphor and the other

that immediately follow, no man can rightly expound that is not skilled in Phiſick, and the works of nature. For he there alludeth to the naturall maner of a childe being yet within the mothers wombe: which is nouriſhed with a menſtrous blood. His meaning therefore is, that his mother (from whom he ſucked crueltie) was exceeding fruitfull and abounding with bloode, as a plentifull vine, planted by the water ſide: whereby it came to paſſe that by reaſon of his ranke nouriſhment wherewith he was franked and glutted, he became to haue great ſtrength and robuſteous might. As that which followeth doth witnes; She brought foorth fruit and branches by the abundant waters: that is, through the abundance of nouriſhing humours in hir wombe; And ſhe had ſtrong rods for the Scepters of them that bare rule: thereby meaning his regall dignitie, princely preeminence, and courtly pompe; And hir ſtature was exalted on high among the branches, and ſhe appeered in hir height with the multitude of hir branches: meaning his power and maieſtie, which ſhoulde ſtretch and extend very far: and His ſtature exalted on high among the branches, ſignifieth, that in magnificence he far ſurmounted any of his neighbour kings and princes, bordering vpon him, and that he victoriouſly enlarged the limits of his kingdome and iuriſdiction.
            But when; As he being thus aduanced to honor,

began to forſake the Lord his God, he (although 
               2. Kings. 23, 32, 33, 34. and 24, 19. Iere. 52, 2. 
               he were as a goodly and broad ſpread Vine) yet was he plucked vp, and his rods withered, and it ſelfe tranſplanted in a dry, thirstie, and deſert place; to wit, into miſerable thraldome, and ſeruile baniſhment, into the which he was carried away captiue, and entierly depriued of al his eſtate and Roialtie, which is ſhewed in theſe next wordes; He hath no more any ſtrong rod to be as a ſcepter to rule: that is, he ſhall be leſt vtterly without any maieſty, honor, magnificence, dignitie, or authoritie to protect or countenance him from contempt.
            Thus far of the roote and of the branches of the Vine, from whence our Sauiour taketh Similitudes: reſembling the godly (which are graffed into him by faith, and doe bring foorth the fruits of good works) vnto fruitfull branches: And the wicked, (void of faith and charitie) he compareth vnto dry, withered, and vnprofitable ſlips, which are accordingly to be caſt into the fire. Whereof we ſpake afore, in the Chapter of the Vine, wherin was explaned that place of S. Iohn the Ioh. 15, 2. Euangeliſt.
            The Boughes alſo, which (like armes) proceede and ſpred out from the trunke or body of the trees, are (by the like metaphore, as branches be) vſed in the Scriptures.
            And vnder this worde is ſignified might, ſtrength, firmitie, ſafetie, health, beauty, honor and ornament of the whole race or family,

togither with the propagation of poſteritie, and continuance of the ſtocke and kindred in one ligne and pedagrew.
            So doth the Wiſeman vſe it, whereby he promiſeth felicitie and proſperous yeeres to him that enſueth and embraceth Wiſedom; The feare of the Lord (ſaith he) is the roote of 
               Eccle. 1, 24. 
               Wiſedome, and hir branches are long life: that is, the date of his daies ſhall be prolonged, and his life ſhall be lengthened.
            The Apoſtle vſeth alſo a notable metaphoricall ſpeech, taken from the boughes broken off from the naturall Oliue tree, and others graffed into their place: whereby by a moſt ſtrong argument, he prooueth and ſheweth, that the Iewes are not ſo intirely cut away, and broken off, that no manner of hope is left for their recouerie; but rather, that they ſhall againe be graffed in, if they abide Rom. 11, 23 not ſtill in vnbeleefe. For if the first fruits be holie, ſo is the whole lumpe: and if the roote bee holie, ſo are the boughes and branches. If Abraham 
               Verſ. 16. 
               the father of beleeuers beleeued God, and it was 
               Gal. 3, 6. Rom. 4, 11. Iam. 2, 23. 
               imputed to him for righteouſnes: why ſhould not his ſucceſſors and poſteritie expreſſe their fathers faith, and imitate him in his godlie example?
            But as faire ſpreading boughes do ſometime ſignifie felicity and proſperous ſucceſſet ſo ſometimes againe in the Scriptures they are applied to the contrarie; that is to ſay, to aduerſitie: and do ſignifie calamitie, miſerie

and trouble that ſhal light vpon the wicked. And in this ſenſe doth holie Iob vſe them, ſaieng; The wicked man is all the daies of his life, 
               Iob. 15, 20. 29, 30. 
               as one trauelling of childe: but he ſhall neither be rich, neither ſhall his ſubstance continue: neither ſhall the proſperitie therof be prolonged vpon earth. The flame ſhall drie vp his boughes, and deuoure his branches: that is to ſay, all things ſhall go backward with him, and turne to his confuſion. And although the wicked ſeeme for a while to flouriſh, and luſtily to ſpreade out their branches, yet ſhall ſudden deſtruction in the end ouertake them, and all their iollitie in a moment be turned topſituruie.
            The ſame (as the Wiſeman pronounceth) ſhall befall to the froward and peruerſe generation of the wicked, ſaieng; Bastard plants 
               Wiſd. 5, 3. 
               ſhall take no deepe roote, nor lay any fast foundation. And though they bud forth in the branches for a time, yet they ſhall be ſhaken with the wind; they ſtand not fast, and therefore ſhall they be rooted vp, and pulled out of their places. Their vnperfect branches ſhall be broken, bicauſe they haue not ſtrength and firmitie, neither are come to any iuſt growth: and their fruit ſhall be vnprofitable, & ſower to eat, yea meet for nothing. Meaning (as by the courſe of the text may plainely be perceiued) that neither ſuch fathers, nor yet ſuch children and poſteritie cōmonly bring any benefit or cōmoditie to the Commonwealth: but as he immediately afterwarde ſaith; Children borne of the wicked bed, are witneſſes 
               Verſ. 6.
               
               of the wickednes against their parents.
            
            In the 23. Chapter of Eccleſiasticus is the ſame Argument handled, wherein be reckoned vp ſundry ſinnes proceeding of Adulterie, and the ſhamefull crime of hir, that plaieng the Whoore, getteth hir children by another Eccl. 23, 22. man than hir owne husband. Which crime he ſo earneſtly and vehemently there diſplaieth, that firſt he ſheweth, how ſhe is iuſtly to be ſmutted with open infamie, that ſhe ſhall be brought out into the congregation, to be a gazing ſtocke to the world, and that examination ſhall be made of hir children: which ſhall not ſucceede in the inheritance of their ſuppoſed father, but liue in contempt, without any honor or eſtimation: and finally, that they ſhall not take roote, nor their branches bring foorth any fruit.
            
            A like ſaieng hath he alſo in another place; The children of the vngodly ſhall not obtaine manie 
               Eccl. 40, 15. 
               branches, and the vncleane rootes as vpon the high rocks ſhall be rooted out. Meaning (as Chriſt ſaid Matt. 13, 5. Mark. 4, 5. Luc. 8, 6. of the ſeede, which fell in hard and ſtonie ground) that the iſſue begotten in vncleannes, cannot take roote, nor ariſe to any hope of poſteritie, but that aſſoone as any of the ſtocke and progenie beginneth to ſproute and come vp, it anon againe withereth away, and is brought to nothing.
            Much like to this, is that ſaieng of Iſaiah: Afore the haruest when the flower is finiſhed, and the fruit is riping in the flower, the Lord ſhall cut

downe the branches with hookes, and ſhall take away and cut off the boughes. By which Metaphor he ſheweth, that all things go proſperouſly forward for a while, with the wicked; their corne ripeth, and their harueſt draweth on, their fruites proſper, and are timely: but euen when all things ſeeme to be at their full ripenes, and they themſelues hoping euen now to enioy their fruits; both corne and graine, crop and fruit, bough and branch are ſweeped away, and the great ſhew of former benefit, with a trice defeated and fruſtrated.
            The Flower, is the ioy, beauty, and delite Flower. of the trees, in the Spring time of the yeere, feeding the beholders eie with pleaſure, and refreſhing his noſe with comfortable ſent & ſmel. Now Plants and Herbs, do bloſſome & flower, ſome at one time, and ſome at another: for ſome there be that burgeine and ſhoote out in the Spring, ſome in Sommer, ſome in Autumne, and ſome (in temperate climates and milde aire, where the biting froſt nippeth not) in Winter.
            And vnder the name of Flower, there is ment, as well in the Scriptures as in other writers, euery ſuch thing as is in his excellent prime, and gallant brauery. So is the luſtie time of youth and adoleſcencie, tearmed by the name of the flower of age. For then is the body in his perfecteſt comelines, beauty and proportion. In the ſame ſenſe are vſed alſo, leaues, greene graſſe, 
                  •
               aie, ſtubble, and other

things of ſmall continuance, which quickly and ſodainly paſſe and fade away.
            So doth the Apoſtle Paule reſemble and compare doctrine that is corrupt, vnſound, dangerous, counterfaite, ſuperſtitious, and hypocritall, vnto Tymber, Haie, and Stubble. 
               1. Cor. 3, 12 For, whoſoeuer are without the ſounde and ſincere truth, comprized & warranted in the volumes of the ſacred and Canonical Scriptures, mouldre and vaniſh away as ſmoke, and cannot abide the triall when the ſtorms of temptation begin to blow, euen as drie ſtickes and rotten woode cannot abide the force of the burning flame, but are ſtraightwaies conſumed.
            But moſt commonly the pleaſant gallantiſe and amorous beautie of the Flower, in the Scriptures is vſually applied to ſuch thinges as be fraile, tranſitory, fading, ruinous and momentanie. As in Iob. Man that is borne of a woman is of ſhort continuance, and full of trouble. He ſhooteth foorth as a flower, and vaniſheth away as a ſhadow. Wherewith agreeth that which the Prophet Dauid writeth; The daies of man 
               Pſa. 103, 15 
               are as graſſe: as a flowre of the fielde, ſo floriſheth he. By which words he meaneth ſuch a thing as quickly periſheth and paſſeth away, albeit for the time it ſeeme to the eie, gallant, beautifull and amiable.
            And to the intent, euery man ſhould on the one ſide, haue daily before the eies of his mind his fraile eſtate & brittle condition: &

on the other ſide, the power, efficacie & eternitie of the word of God, Iſaiah is commanded with a loude voice to proclaime and cry out, that All fleſh is graſſe, and all the grace therof as the flower of the field. The gras withereth 
               Iſai. 40, 7. Eccl. 14, 17. 
               the flower fadeth: bicauſe the ſpirite of the Lord bloweth vpō it: ſurely the people is graſſe. The graſſe is withered, & the flower is faded: But the word of our God endureth for euer. Notifieng thereby that all pompe, glory, dignity, magnificence, or whatſoeuer elſe in man is admirable and highly ſet by, whether they by gifts inward of the minde, or outward of the body, at the breath of God fade and vaniſh away.
            Let euery man therefore ſtande vppon his guard, and take heed that he repoſe not any confidence in theſe brittle, tranſitorie, and momentanie gifts, or in theſe vaine goods of the world, but that he ſtay himſelfe vpon the ſure and infallible worde of God, which is onely permanent, holeſome, ſolide and comfortable.
            To the conſideration of theſe eternal and aie during riches, the two bleſſed Apoſtles 1. Pet. 1, 4. Iam. 1, 21. of our Lord, Peter and Iames do earneſtly exhort vs: that we ſhould leaue ſeeking after the vaine vanities of this wicked world: and ſtudie to attaine the eternall and euerlaſting ioies of heauen, whereunto Chriſt in his bleſſed word inuiteth vs.
            There be many mo the like metaphores and Similitudes taken from leaues and

flowers, which to the conſcience and minde of ech zealous Chriſtian, depainteth and ſetteth foorth the tranſitory traſh and fickle hold that by daily experience is knowen to reſt in theſe worldly things, wherwith men are vſually puft vp into ſuch inſolent pride and arrogancie.
            And thus doth the Prophet Iſaiah compare the pride and loftines of Ephraim (and vnder them, all others, infected with the like vices) vnto fading flowers, & falling leaues. For thus threateneth hee deſtruction vnto them; Wo be vnto the crowne of pride, euen to the 
               Iſai. 28, 1. 
               Drunken people of Ephraim, whoſe great pompe is as a flower that falleth away. The crowne of the pride of the drunken Ephraemites, ſhall be troden vnder foote. For his glorious beautie ſhall be a fading flower, and as the hastie fruite afore Sommer. For as rath ripe fruits and Apples are not long laſting, nor of any great continuaunce: ſo likewiſe ſhall not their felicitie continue in any long proſperitie.
            
               Nahum the Prophet likewiſe by the ſame Similitude ſheweth that there is nothing in the world ſo braue, gallant, beautifull, and amiable, but that God can and will deſtroy and bring it to nothing, when his wrath is kindled againſt the obſtinate and wicked: inſomuch that all the flowers and buds, that is, the pompe and glorie of huffing Royſters be with a trice diſpatched, diſperſed, defeated, and adnihilated: which in theſe words

he ſetteth downe and deſcribeth; Baſan is 
               Nah. 1, 4. 
               wasted, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon is wasted: that is, all the power and ſtrength is decaied, and all the brauerie brought to nothing.
            After flowers, are the Fruits and Seedes Seede. next to be ſpoken of: whereof, for that there be thence Similitudes vſually fetched and borrowed, wee muſt note this by the way: That Seede (as alſo the Fruit) in the Scriptures is taken for the tribe, kindred, ſtocke, pedagrew and ofſpring, from whence a man is iſſued and deſcended: the which God in his word promiſeth to bleſſe with all welfare and proſperitie, in thoſe that folow his lawes and obſerue his commandements. As the Prophet Dauid in one of his Pſalmes witneſſeth, ſaieng; I haue beene yoong, and now am old: 
               Pſal. 37, 25. 
               and yet ſaw I neuer the righteous forſaken, nor his ſeede begging their bread. His ſeede ſhall be bleſſed: and the righteous ſhall inherite the land: as for the ſeede of the vngodlie, it ſhall periſh, and be rooted out.
            
            So, Eliphaz one of Iob his friends that came to reaſon with him, and to comfort him, commendeth the chaſtiſement of the Lord, proouing the ſame to be very beneficial and profitable for man; for that thereby hee is taught and ſchooled to ſubmit himſelfe vnder his mightie hand, and thankfully to receiue his fatherlie correction: being certainly perſuaded that the ſame is ſent vnto him

for his amendement, to trie his conſtancie and patience; and thereby therefore doth man receiue ſingular bleſſing and commoditie. Thou ſhalt ſee (ſaith he) that thy ſeede ſhall be great, & thy posteritie as the graſſe of the earth. 
               Iob. 5, 25. 
               Thou ſhalt go to thy graue in a full age, as a ricke of corne commeth in due ſeaſon into the barne: that is, thou ſhalt (as a man of noble calling and high parentage) be honorably buried, with a great aſſemblie of Nobles, ſolemnizing thy funerals.
            Againe, for that both herbs and trees doe beare and bring foorth ſeede, which afterward produceth the like plant according to his kinde, and ſo from one to another infinitely: therefore the holy Prophets doe alſo vſe it, for the garniſhing and illuſtrating of their Arguments and Sermons.
            
               Seede therfore ſignifieth ſucceſſe, increaſe, plentie, foiſon and abundance. As in the Prophet Iſaiah we may euidently ſee, where the Lord promiſeth to al them that truſt in him, and imbrace his lawes, all felicitie, ſucceſſe and abundance. The Lord (ſaith he) ſhall giue 
               Iſai. 30, 23. 
               raine to thy Seede, when thou ſhalt ſow the ground, and bread of the increaſe of the earth, which ſhall be fat and very plentious. In that day alſo ſhall thy cattell be fed in large pastures. The Oxen alſo and the yoong Aſſes that till the ground, ſhal eate cleane prouender, which is winnowed with the ſhouell and the fanne. Signifieng that his worldly wealth and temporal goods ſhould be maruellouſly

increaſed, and all things ſhould proſper according to his harts deſire.
            The ſame reaſon is for the Fruit: for in Fruit. the Bible, the Fruits of herbs and trees doe betoken and ſignifie plentie, abundance, fertilitie, bleſſednes, proſperitie, works good and euill, ſcarcitie, dearth, penurie, iuſtice, integritie, wickednes, impietie, looſenes, diſhoneſtie, and lewd maners, which are alſo ſignified vnder the name of Corne or Graine. So, the Prophet Hoſea, exhorting men going aſtray, and forgetting themſelues, to vertue, integrity of life, and righteous dealing, ſaith thus; Sowe to your ſelues in righteouſnes and reape 
               Hoſ. 10, 12. 
               after the meaſure of mercie: Breake vp your fallow ground, for it is time to ſeeke the Lord. In which words he counſelleth and aduiſeth them to forſake their woonted maner of life, and to liue in ſuch ſort as may be acceptable and pleaſant to God. For hitherto (ſaith he) you haue plowed wickednes, you haue reaped iniquitie, you haue eaten the fruite of lies. By the which metaphore he ſheweth how, that they practiſed nothing elſe than fraud, quarrels, wrangling, ſuttletie, falſehoode, deceite, and how to entrap, circumuent, vndermine, deceiue, and oppreſſe the innocent. Now heer therefore he admoniſheth them to leaue their filthy practizes, and to plucke vp by the roots all the wicked weedes and noiſome tares out of their harts; and in lieu thereof to ſow in the furrowes of a pure conſcience, honeſt

and Chriſtian dealing, mildenes, lenitie, curteſie, righteouſneſſe, and true neighbourhood.
            The ſelfe ſame thing doth the Lorde likewiſe by his Prophet Ieremie, earneſtly command Ierem. 4, 4. and ſtrictly enioine, ſaieng; Breake vp your fallow ground, and ſow not among the thornes: that is, ſee that your harts be manured and garniſhed with the godly ſeedes of integritie, righteouſnes, innocencie and goodnes, hauing the thornes and briers of wickednes quite plucked vp by the rootes.
            And this is further manifeſtly witneſſed by the Prophet Iſaiah, where as the Lorde by a moſt notable kind of conſolation, aſſureth the minde and conſcience of the godly, that he ſhall not miſſe to obtaine ſaluation. For thus proclaimeth he ſafegard and health vnto them, in their great afflictions and almoſt deſperate troubles; Say to the righteous that it 
               Iſai. 3, 10. 
               ſhall go well with them, for they ſhall eate the fruite of their workes and ſtudies. Aſſuring him thereby of aſſiſtance, and willing him to bee of good comfort and cheere: bicauſe in the extremitie of famine or war, (when others ſhall be ſurprized in calamities and afflictions) he ſhall quietly and ſafely enioy the thinges which he hath receiued from the Lord God, by the worke and trauell of his owne hands. But wo be vnto the wicked (ſaith he) for it ſhall be euill with him: and the reward of his owne handes ſhall be giuen vnto him.
            
            
               
But Fruite is alſo ſometimes taken in the Scriptures for children, iſſue and poſteritie: which the princely Prophet Dauid, teſtiſieth to be an eſpeciall bleſſing of God, as by his words it plainly appeereth; Behold (ſaith he) children and the fruite of the wombe, are an heritage 
               Pſal. 127, 3. 
               and gift that commeth of the Lord.
            
            Againe, where God, vnder the name of Dauid, pronounceth that the kingdome of Chriſt ſhall be euerlaſting. The Lord (ſaith he) hath ſworne in truth vnto Dauid, and he will not 
               Pſa. 132, 11. 
               ſhrinke from it, ſaieng, of the fruite of thy bodie will I ſet vpon thy throne. There will I make the horne of Dauid to floriſh: For I haue ordained a light for mine annointed. As for his enimies, I wil cloth them with ſhame; but on him ſhall his crowne floriſh.
            
            In which words he meruellouſly aduaunceth the honor, ſtrength, and maieſtie of his empire, which ſhould far and wide be extended. And vnder the type and perſon of Dauid he ſignifieth how the kingdome of Chriſt our Sauiour (which is ſpiritual) & his church (which is the congregation of the faithfull,) ſhall neuer be quite ouerthrowne and oppreſſed, nor with any length of yeeres or iniquitie of time aboliſhed: although the enimies thereof neuer ſo fiercely rage againſt it, and bloody perſecutors (maligning & deadly hating the light of the Goſpell, and the doctrine of ſaluation, ſeeke all meanes in the world to deface and quench it. And to this effect is that ſweete and comfortable ſaieng

of our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe, touching a firme and vnmooueable faith, and vnexpugnable profeſſion of his name, promiſing, that The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile against 
               Mat. 16, 18. 
               it.
            
            For, whoſoeuer is ſurely ankored vppon this ſounde and vnmooueable foundation, ſtandeth faſt and needeth not to feare any harme to betide him: but is ſure to be protected and guarded from all maner of miſchiefe whatſoeuer.
            And this thing Chriſt alſo in another place witneſſeth, by bringing in a Similitude of a Wiſeman, that Builded his houſe not vpon the 
               Matt. 7, 24. 
               ſand, but on a ſure rocke; ſo that although the raine fall, the floods come, and the winds blow, and beate vpon that houſe, yet falleth it not, bicauſe it is ſurely grounded vpon a Rocke. By which Similitude he ſignifieth, that ſuch as haue a 
                  •
               ounde and liuely faith, and teſtifie the ſame in their liues and conuerſation, haue their conſciences inuincibly armed againſt all ſtormes and tempeſts, that daily and howerly aſſaile ech true Chriſtian.
            This aſſurance and ſafetie, which all they doe enioy that conſtantly repoſe themſelues vpon the mercies of God by faith, and wholy referre themſelues vnto his diuine wil and protection, is notably alſo deſcribed and ſet out by the Prophet Dauid in his 91. Pſalme. Pſal. 91. Wherein he pronounceth ſafety and protection from all perils and miſhaps that may any

waies betide him, namely, from the noiſome peſtilence and plague, and from any other danger whatſoeuer, as well priuie as apert, by night as by day.
            All which commeth to paſſe, for that hee reſteth vnder the defence of the moſt High, and dwelleth vnder the ſhadowe of the Almightie, and being couered vnder his wings, and protected vnder his feathers, it is vnpoſſible that he ſhould in anie wiſe miſcarrie.
            
               Thomas Newtonus,
Ceſtreſhyrius.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               A
               AArons rod, 244
               Abrecocks, 215
               Agalochum, vide Lignum Aloes.
               Almond tree, 233
               Aloe, 122. 193
               All hope in the Lord alone, 40
               Ambregrice, 122
               Ammoniack, 122
               Angerona, 226
               Anyſe, 169. 204
               Antiochus, 176. 180
               Apples, 214
            
            
               B
               BAal Paeor, the ſame that Priâpus, 113. 163
               Babylon, 137
               Bacchus feast, 176
               Balme, 123. 127
               Baptiſme, 28
               Barlie, 74
               Bastards, 275
               Beech, 218. 248
               Benzewin, 122
               Berberies, 71
               Bough, 274
               Boxe tree, 197. 204
               Borith, 56. 59. 60. 62
               Branch, 269. 275
               Broome, 130
               
                  
Bubble of water, 161
               Bud, 259. 267
               Burre, 228
            
            
               C
               CAmphyre, 193
               Capers, 237. 240
               Caſſia, 122
               Cedar tree, 127. 222. 250
               Cherries, 179. 216
               Chaffe, 156. 26
                     •
                  
               
               Cockle, 226
               Coloquintida, 47
               Condiſi, vide Borith.
               Corne, 283
               Crimſin, 62. 64
               Crocomagma, 194
               Crowtoes, vide Hyacynth.
               Cucumber, 161
               Cummine, 74. 169
               Cinamome, 193
               Cypreſſe tree, 127. 190. 222
               Cyrus king of Perſia, 80
               Cytron, 179. 189. 215
            
            
               D
               DIamoron, 179
               Damſons, 179. 216
               Daniell the Prophet, 83
               Darnell, vide Cockle.
               Date tree, vide Palme tree.
            
            
               
               E
               EGlantine, 221
               Elephantes, 180
               Elme tree, 197. 
                     •
                  18
            
            
               F
               FEnell, 204
               Fig tree, 111. 112. 259
               Fir tree, 205. 250
               Fi
                     •
                  ches, 75
               Flaxe, 154
               Flower, 278
               Frankincenſe, 122. 193
               Fruite, 283
               Fruits of the ſpirite, 55
               Fullers weede, 56. 60. 62
               Furze 67
            
            
               G
               GAll, 103. 105
               Garlicke, 162
               Gilead, a Sanctuary, 136
               Gith, 72. 73. 227
               Githago 227
               Gourd, 164▪ 175▪ 177
               Graffe, 
                     •
                  61
               Graine to die ſilke with all, &c. 62. 67
               Graſſe, 178
               G
                     •
                  iacum vide Hebenus.
            
            
               
               H
               HArpocrates, 226
               Hasting fruite, 216
               Haie, 278
               Heath, 130
               Hebenus, 120
               Hortenſius his delite in the Plane tree, 249
               Hyacinth an herbe, 88. 90. A precious ſtone, 90. 93
               Hyſope, 146. 230
            
            
               I
               IDolatrie reſembled to whooredome, 66. 93
               Iuniper, 164
               Iuie, 174
               Iuorie, 121
            
            
               K
               KIngs, ſtudious of Phyſicke, 1
               Kingdome of Christ, 262
            
            
               L
               LArch tree, 205
               Leekes, 162
               Lentiske tree, 83. 85
               Letuce, 27. 177
               Lignum Aloes, 123
               Lignum Indicum, 206
               Lillie, 173. 2
                     •
                  3. 264
               Lymons, 179
               
                  
Lynden tree, 248
               Lycurgus law for ſecrecie, 225
            
            
               M
               MAndrake, 10. much paltry vſed therewith, ibid. his nature, 13. the time when it is gathered, 16
               Manna, 23. 25. 26
               Maple, 218
               Masticke, 83. 85
               Maidenhaire, 148
               Mault, 48. 74
               Meale, 48
               Medlars, 215
               Melanthion, vide Gith.
               Millet, 75
               Mint, 169
               Miſſelto, 87
               Mulberie tree, 178
               Muske, 122
               Muſhromes, 15
               Mustardſeede, 171. 182
               Myrtle wyne, 194
               Myrtle tree, 194. 199. 22
                     •
                  
               
               Myrrhe, 121. 19
                     •
                  
               
               Mythridate, 2
            
            
               N
               NEbuchadnezzar, 25
                     •
                  
               
               Nettles, 166. 197
               Nigella vide Gith.
               
                  
Nitre, 58
               Nut, 211
            
            
               O
               OKe, 217
               Oliue, 34. 82. 260. 274
               Oliue beries, 37
               Oliue, the enſigne of peace, 34
               Oile, 34. 35. 36. 134
               Onions, 162
               Oppreſſors wherevnto compared, 67. 69. 70
               Orenges, 179. 189. 215
            
            
               P
               PAliurus, 67
               Palma Chriſti, 247
               Palme, 232
               Palme tree, the enſigne of victorie, 34. 115. 116
               Paper ruſh, 96
               Paſchall lambe eaten with ſower herbes, 30
               Paſſeouer, 30
               Peaches, 179. 215. 233
               Peares, 215
               Pepons, 177
               Pine Apple, 202
               Pine tree, 201
               Plane tree, 247. 250
               Plant, 267
               Plums, 216
               Pomegranates, 179. 186. 215
               Potion conſolidatiue, 37
               Prime tree, 83. 85. 87
               
                  
Prophets, most skilfull Herbarists, 6
               Pſeudomyrtus, 201
               Purple, 62. 63. 89
               Purſelane, 177
            
            
               Q
               Quinces, 215
            
            
               R
               REbellion puniſhed, 244
               Reede, 149
               Rhamnus or Chriſts thorne, 43
               Rhodopharmacum, 220
               Rocke, 286
               Roote, 263. 274
               Roſe, 220
               Roſen, 132
               Roſemarie, 230
               Rue, 169
               Ruſhes, 94. 98
            
            
               S
               SAcraments why ordeined, 28
               Saffron, 192
               Saliunca, 53
               Sedge, 94. 98
               Seede, 282
               Shittim wood, 190
               Shrubbe, 259
               Slips, 259
               Solomon a most skilfull Herbarist, 3
               
                  
Sommer fruit, 216
               Sope woort, 56. 60. 62
               Sope, 60. 61
               Spikenard, 193
               Spondyles of the backe, 241
               Stacte, 122
               Strawe, 156
               Struthion, vide Borith,
               Stubble, 155. 199. 
                     •
                  78
               Sucket, 190
               Superstition odious, 59
               Supper of the Lord, 28
               Sycomore, 181
            
            
               T
               Tale carriers, 224
               Tamariske, 130
               Terebinth tree, 124
               Thistles, 106
               Thorne, 43. 67. 69. 106. 108. 197
               Timber, 278
               Tow, 157
               Trichomanes, 148
               Turpentine, 124
               Twigge, 259
            
            
               V
               Vine, 108. 138. 213. 271
            
            
               W
               WAlnut, 212. 246
               Wardens, 215
               
                  
Wedlocke, 225
               Wheate, 75
               Wilde fig tree, 181
               Wilde myrt, 200
               Wilde vine, 166
               Willow, 49. why the Iewes hanged their Harpes thereon, 50. 51. 52
               Wicked, ouertaken in the midst of their pride, 38. 45. 97.
               Wine, 35. 134
               Winter fruite, 215
               Workes of the fleſh, 55
               Woormewood, 100. 101. 102. 103. 105
            
            
               X
               Xerxes, delighted in the Plane tree, 249
            
            
               Z
               ZAchaeus, 182
               Ziuet, 122
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   