
      
         
            
            THE
Touchſtone of
Complexions. Generallye appliable,
expedient and profitable for all
ſuch, as be deſirous & carefull
of their bodylye health. CONTAYNING MOST
eaſie rules & ready tokens, where
                by
euery one may perfectly try, and
throughly know, aſwell the exacte ſtate, habite,
diſpoſition, and conſtitution, of
his owne Body outwordly: as alſo the
inclinations, affections, motions,
& deſires of his
mynd inwardly.
            
            
               Firſt written in Latine, by Leuine
Lemnie, and now engliſhed by
Thomas Newton.
            
            
               Noſce teipſ um.
            
            
               Imprinted at London, in Fleeteſreete,
by Thomas Marſh.
Anno. 1576.
            ❀ Cum Priuilegio.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
honorable, his ſinguler
good Lorde, Sir VVilliam Brooke
Knighte, Baron Cobham, and Lorde
Warden of the Cinque Portes: Thomas
Newton, his humble Orator, wisheth
long life, encreaſe of honor, vvith
proſperous health, and eternall
felicitye.
            
               
                  SVndrye tymes
(right Honorable
and my ſinguler
good Lorde) debating
with my ſelfe
the chiefe cauſes,
why Artes and diſciplines do (in theſe
Alcyon dayes of ours) ſo vniuerſallye
flourishe, althoughe I knowe well
ynoughe that ſundrye men can coigne
ſundry reaſons, and alledge manifolde
verdictes and probable argumentes
therfore: yet in my ſimple iudgement,
nothing more effectually whetteth the
wittes of the studious, nor more luſtelye

he awaketh the courages of the learned,
then doth the fauourable furtheraunce
and cheereful coūtenaunce, of
the Prince and Nobility. For, honor,
preferment, dignity, & prayſe, feedeth
nouriſheth and mainteyneth, bothe
Artes and vertues: and Glorye is a
sharpe ſpurre, that vehementlye pricketh
forward gallāt heades, and pregnaūt
natures, to attempt worthy enterpriſes.
VVe ſee, that thīg to be greedely
(and as it were, with a certayne
kinde of Ambition) on al handes ſoughte
for and purſued, whereunto the
Prince and Peeres are ſtudiouſlye enclined.
And therfore the leſſe meruail
is it, though in Royalmes and Countries
gouerned by barbarous Princes,
& monſtruous Tyrannes, learning be
vtterlye prouigated: and thoughe the
Muſes taking their flight thence, do
abandon that ſoyle, where they ſee thē
               ſelues
ſo ſlenderlye regarded, and ſo

churliſhlie entertayned. As contrarywiſe,
where they be reuerenced, cherished
maynteined & had in pryce, ther
doe they endenizō thēſelues, & ſettle
their dwellings. And this ſurelye (my
L.) do I think to be one, or rather an
only cauſe, which in this old age & later
caste of the worlde, rayſeth vp among
vs, ſuch a plentiful Haruest of
rype and excellent wittes, conſpicuous
in euerye facultie: becauſe by ſpeciall
Priuiledge frō the Almightie, and of
his great bountie and gracious goodneſſe
towardes vs, we haue ſuch a godlye,
vertuous, & learned Princeſſe, &
ſuch an honorable State of noble Perſonages,
themſelues not only in euerye
ſeueral Arte ſingulerly ſkilled, but alſo
to the profeſſors thereof (lyke terrene
Gods) benigne and bounteous.
Of whom, may bee ſayde that, whiche
(though of vnlike perſons) Cicero reported
of Socrates, ſaying, that there

were further & deeper matters to be
conceyued and thought of Socrates,
then in all Plato hys Bookes, coulde be
purported or fully decyphered. VVhoſe
lenities and fauourable inclinations,
would not, neyther ought to bee abuſed
(as they are by ſome to muche)
with the Patronage of euery friuolous
fācy & tryflyng toye, tending neyther
to profitable vſe in the cōmon wealth,
nor to anye auaileable purpoſe, touching
publique ſociety. VVhereas many
of thē, if they coulde finde in theyr
harts, otherwiſe to tickle their pennes
with matters of better importaunce,
and employe their golden giftes to the
aduauncemēt of vertue and commoditye
of their Countrye: in ſteede of
beinge fine Architectes and contriuers
of matters offenſiue and ſcandalous,
they might eternize themſelues
(like good mēbers and worthy Ornamentes
of their Countrey, within the

Beadrolle of Fame and perpetuitie.
VVhat opiniō that inuincible Prince
Alexander of Macedonie, had of all
vayne Artes, foolish baables, phantaſticall
toyes, and curious deuiſes, well
appeareth by the rewarde, whyche he in
preſence of his Nobles, and Souldiers,
publiquely gaue vnto a certain dapper
fellow (one of hys hoaſte) who partlye
vpon a brauery and oſtentation of his
cunninge, but chieflye in hope of ſome
magnificente rewarde, did before the
Kings preſence, cast or throw a kind of
ſmal Pulſe, called a Cichpeaſe, through
a Needles eye, beīg ſet a pretie diſtaūce
of, & that manye times without anye
miſsing. VVhich vayn trick, & thriftleſse
deuiſe, (ſauouringe altogether of
a little foolish curioſitie, and nothing
at al, of any expediēt vſe or cōmodity)
many of the beholders with admiratiō
cōmended, and deemed right worthye
of recompence. In fine, becauſe the

skilfull Squier, shoulde not looſe the
hoped fruicte, of that hys practized
knacke, and notable ſingularitie: the
Kinge rewarded him onelye with a
Bushell of Cichpeasō. A cōdigne guerdon
(doubtleſſe) and verye fitte to
counteruayle ſuch a peeuishe Practiſe
and vnneceſſarie Mataeotechnie.
            A great folly therfore & forwardnes
is it in mannes nature, to bestow ſuch
great ſtudy, payn, care, coſt, & induſtry
in attayning ſuche needleſſe & friuolous
tromperies: the hauinge whereof,
nozzeleth the hauer & Artiſt, in loytering
idlenes, & breedeth otherwiſe
greate inconuenience in the bodie of
the whole common wealth: VVhiche
deformitie and abuſe, manye learned
Clerkes bewaylinge, haue in eche of
their ſeueral profeſsions, by wryting
and otherwiſe graphicallye depainted.
And among many, this Author whom
I now (vppon confidence of the generoſity

of your noble nature) preſume to
preſent and exhibite vnto your Lordshippe,
goinge a neerer way to worcke
then many others, doth not onely) by
artificial contēplation) wade into the
very Gulphe & Camaryne of mannes
apparaūt wilfulneſſe: but alſo rushing
into the verye bowles of Nature, bewrayeth,
& (as with a penſil) liuely ſetteth
downe the affections, condiciōs,
plyghtes, habites, and diſpoſitions, of
euery ſeueral Complexion. And, as
one that wel knew himſelfe not to bee
borne only for himſelfe, hath franckly,
frendly, and learnedly bequeathed the
Talent of his knowledge to a publique
and vniuerſall commoditye. In readinge
whereof, I am perſwaded, that
none of indifferent iudgemente, shall
thinke his oyle & labour loſt, neither
his time and trauaile miſpent: at leaſt
wyſe, if it were with like grace in any
reſpect, deliuered out in English, as he
hath done, and left it in the Latine.
            
               
But ſurelye I haue done my beste, truſting
that others in recompence of my
trauail, wil not, vpō a Splene, requite
me with their worste, neyther miſcō
               ſtrue
my meaning, which was in plain
tearmes and vulgare phraſe to goe as
neere to my Authours plotforme, as
my adle head could well imagine.
            And now being arriued to Land, after
a prety long voyage and pleaſant
ſaylinge, in this hys Philoſophicall Sea,
I approach in moſte dutifull humility,
wyth ſuche Newes and VVares, as I
haue heard, ſeene, read, and gotten,
vnto your Honor, whom for many reſpectes,
I miſtruſte not, but wyll honorablie
daigne to heare mee. And now
doe I ſtande at the Barre of curteſie,
to heare your Lordshippes doome, concerning
this my temerity. The comfortable
expectation wherof, putteth me
in no ſmall hope, that all the better
ſort (mooued by your Lordshippes example

wil bee the more eaſie and readie,
to diſpence with my vnmellowed
adoleſcencie. As for the frowarder
and eluisher Crew, which be ſo daintie
mouthed, that nothinge can pleaſe, &
ſo ſqueymish ſtomacked, that nothing
can ſatiſfie, let this poore Booke (in
Goddes name) take his chaunce amōg
them, as it falleth out: yea let it be as
AEſope his fyle, to grate and grynde
their viperous teeth withall. Sure I
am that their ſeuere and Criticall cē
               ſures,
can no more diſquiet me hereafter,
then the Conſcience of myne own
imbecillitie hath terrified and diſpleaſed
me alreadie. Yet if thinges were
to bee obteyned and compaſſed by wyſhing,
I wold that neither this Booke,
neyther anye other heretofore by mee
publiſhed, ſhould offend anye, no not
the verie waywardeſt. But becauſe
my caſe may peraduenture now ſtande
no better, then it did longe agone,

with the Philoſopher Theodorus Athenienſis,
who complayned of greate diſcurteſy
shewed vnto him, becauſe thoſe
thinges which he gaue with the righte
hand, were ſnatched vp and taken by
his Auditorye, with the lefte: meaning
thereby his workes and Lectures,
whiche he publishinge to good purpoſe,
were wreſted, and ſundrely by captious
carpers, canuaſſed with ſiniſter interpretations:
therfore for refuge I flee
into the Sanctuary of your Lordships
wonted clemencie, with truſt, thence
not to be shouldred out and reiected,
but freely to bee allowed the benefite of
your goodneſſe, that I may leane vpon
the ſtaffe of your approued wiſdome &
aucthoritie, and creepe vnder the
Targe of youre fauorable prorection,
againſt the currish bawling, & rancklinge
tooth of barking Theon. In aſſured
hope whereof I reſt: beſeechinge
God to endue and bleſſe you, with the

Right honourable Lady Francis, your
Lordships vertuous and louing wife,
with the riche giftes of his heauenlye
grace, and with continuaunce of proſperous
health both of ſoule and body,
to his honor and glory, your own deſyres
and comfortes, and to the profite
of this your natiue Countrey.
            
               From Butley in Cheſſhyre, 
                  the 21. of
September. 1576.
                
               Your good Lordships, wholy
to commaunde
Thomas Newton
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶FOR THE MAINTENAVNCE
AND PRESERuation
of Health (being the best and chiefeſt
thing that any man in this life can vviſh
or deſire) it is moſt requiſite to haue a
perfect knovvledge of oure
ovvne bodyes.
            
               The firſt Chapter.
               
                  
                     CICERO that
worthy father of al
learninge and eloquence,Lib. 2. Offic.
ſayth (& in
my opinion righte
pithilre) that man
his healthe is preſerued,
by knowledge
of his owne
body, and by vſing
ſuch things as are
thereto eyther beneficiall or hurtfull: finally in
continencie of life, ordrlye vſage of bodye,Mainteners of health. and
forbearing of pleaſures, which in my iudgement
are not ſo hurtful to the body, as they be pernicious
to the minde. It behoueth therefore and it
ſtandeth euery man vpon, perfectly and thorowly
to know the habite & conſtitution of his owne
bodye, which conſiſteth in a temperament a mixture
of foure qualities, hoate, moyſt, cold and dry.

For by this meanes ſhall he be a great deale better
able to keepe himſelfe in healthe, and to wythſtand
ſicknes or recure diſeaſes whenſoeuer they
happen.
               And ſithens naturall health is nothinge els
but a right conſtitution and ſtate of the body and
all partes thereof,Health. wherby euery ſeuerall mēber
diſchargeth & orderly executeth his proper fūction,
office, duty and action, wythout any maner of
let or greeuaunce: and ſithence Sickneſſe, as an
affecte contrary to nature,Sickenes. eyther makinge worſe
or altogether hindering this action, moleſtinge &
payning nature, cleane contrary to health and naturall
ſoūdneſſe: I cannot ſee how any man conuenientlye
can eyther keepe himſelfe in that preſent
ſtate of good health wherein hee is, or reſtore
the ſame being empayred and diſcraſed, vnleſſe he
haue the knowledge of his owne bodye, & be ripe
and ſkilfull in the temperament thereof.
               And albeit the Soule be farre more excellent
then the body,Soule. and be the better part of mā, for the
furniture and garniſhing wherof, I would haue
the chiefeſt care and induſtry beſtowed: yet notwythſtanding,
I iudge it right needefull alſo to
haue a diligent eye and reſpect to the body, leaſte
(otherwiſe) it ſhould be a burthen to the Soule,
and hinder it from matters of more wayght and
worthines. For the body being healthfull, euerye
member doth his office and dutie, and is to the
minde (at whoſe commaundement it ſtandeth) obeyſaunt
and ſeruiceable. To this ende is that

worthy ſaying of the Poet Iuuenal.
               
               
                  Moſt chiefly ought our prayers to be made,
                  For healthy minde vvithin a body ſound:Sat. 10.
                  
                  Aſke courage ſtoute, and liue in honeſt trade,
                  Feare not at all, of death the lethall vvound:
                  Paſſe forth thy dayes, vſe Natures giftes aright,
                  In pleaſaunt ſort vvith them thy ſelfe delight.
               
               
                  Acquaint thy ſelfe to labour, toyle and drudge:
                  Shrinke not a vvhit, rage not vvith ſvvellinge ire,
                  Haue not to deale vvith trade of ſcraping ſnudge
                  VVho neuer hath ynough to his deſire:
                  To quiet life is no mo vvayes but one,
                  If thou vvilt knovv, it vertue is alone.
               
               Which giftes of bodye & minde,True goods. whoſoeuer is
endued wythall, vnto him can no ſurer and ſtedfaſter
poſſeſſion happen: & agaīſt them preuayleth
neyther the inſtabilitie of fortune, neyther cā
                  the
mutability of worldly ficklenes chalēg either
ryght or ſuperiority. For greate wealth,Health paſſeth gold. large
poſſeſſions, ſumptuous buildinges, huge reuenewes,
ample patrimonyes, glorious titles, and
Honourable Styles in cōpariſon of theſe are of
none accompte, neyther ſerue they to anye vſe, nor
bringe to man any cōtentacion. Conſider what
the Poet doth here ſay, and by theſe, cōſider of all
the reſt.
               
                  
                  Not houſe nor land, not gold nor fee,
                  The Corps can eaſe from craſed plight,
                  Nor minde from cares:Hor. lib. 1 Epiſt. ſound muſt he bee,
                  That gotten goodes vvould vſe aright.
               
               Wherefore ſithe health of bodye and health of
minde are by good righte to be reckened amonge
the chiefeſt goods and of all other the beſt: reaſon
requyreth, and expedient alſo is it for all men, in
procuring and preſeruing ye ſame, to beſtow their
chiefeſt care and whole diligence: and both for
themſelues & for ſo many as depend vpon them,
earneſtlye to deſire theſe comfortable ſtayes, and
cheeriſhmentes of life, the better & more commodiouſly
to paſſe the race of this tranſitory pilgrimage
wythoute diſlykinge or greeuaunce. For if
wee will credite Horace:
                  
                     VVhat better thing can mother vviſhe,
                     her tender Babe vntill,
                     Then vvyſedome,Epiſt. ad Albium. vttraunce, fauour, fame,
                     vvith health and vvealth at vvill?
                  
               
               He therfore that gladly would runne his race &
pleaſaūtly paſſe forth his whole dayes, muſt haue
ſpeciall care to keepe himſelfe in perfect healthe:
but firſt and prīcipally in the health of mind, and
nexte of body, wythoute whoſe perfecte ſtate and
ſoundnes, the minde it ſelfe is not rightly ſuſteyned,
vpholden nor comforted. For by the ignoraunce
or not knowinge of our owne ſelues, and

by negligente loking to the ſtate of our owne bodyes
and mindes,Noſce te ipſum. we are haled, and (will wee nill
wee) throwen into ſondrye diſeaſes and innumerable
affections, and (like a ſhippe ful fraighte wt 
wares in tempeſtuous & boiſterous weather) caryed
and daſhed vppon the rockes of perturbation.
Whereby it commeth to paſſe that manye
are by death cutte of, euen in theyr luſtyeſt time,
which haue no care, no orderly reſpect, nor choiſe,
in preſeruation and maintenaunce of theyr bodely
health. To this very ende and effecte, is that
holeſome admonition of the wyſeman: Take
heede to thy ſelfe,
                  Eccleſ. 7 
                  leaſt thou die before thy time.
               
               By which ſayinge, hee warneth euery one, ſo to
order and diſpoſe his lyfe,Death by ill diet many times haſtened before his due time that throughe riot and
vntemperate dealing, he haſten not his death before
his time, and before he haue in a maner rūne
halfe his race.
               Now let euery man cōſider with himſelf, how
myſerable and how wearyſome alſo it is to haue
a bodye neuer in health but altogether martyred
wt ſicknes and ſoares, & (reaſon beinge maſtered,
baniſhed and oppreſſed) to haue the mind defiled
and vtterly wyth inward vices polluted. Howe
can lyfe (I ſay) be vnto ſuch a man pleaſaunte or
ſweete, or howe can the minde bee quiet and well
ſtayed? Forſomuch therefore as nothing is better
then health, let euery man diligently looke to
the ſame, and marke how much he hath ſwarued
and ſtrayed from moderate order and temperature.
               
                  
This conſideration wyth himſelfe ſhall worke in
him much good effecte, and ſtand him in greate
ſteede, that in caſe his bodye be luſtie and healthfull,
hee maye in the ſame ſtate ſtil continue and
cheeriſh it wyth helpes and preſeruations thereto
conuenient. But if it be fallē into worſe plight,
and not in ſo good caſe of ſoundnes as before it
was, then to ſeeke wayes and meanes how to recure
& bring it againe to his former ſtate of healthines.
For as humours are eaſely chaunged
one into another, and ſuffer mutuall tranſmutacion
throughe moderate exerciſe, and ſuch conuenient
meats and nouriſhmēts, as to natural heat
are cheriſhable: So agayne the ill & diſtempered
ſtate of bodye, throughe holeſome diet and order,
is made luſtier and refourmed into better.
And euen as wee ſee members fractured, burſte,
wrenched and diſlocated, to be brought into theyr
right places agayne: ſo may health (beinge empayred)
bee reſtored and reduced into his former
integritie. For the mindes and bodyes of men
be in a maner as it were yong Sproutes & trees,
which being artificially handled, and cunninglye
dealt wythall (yea although afore wield and vnfruitfull)
yet as Virgill ſayth.
               
                  If they be graft a nevve, and put
                  in other chaunged ſoyle,Lib. 2. Georg.
                  
                  From nature vvilde vvhich earſt they had,
                  They quight and cleane recoyle,
                  And yeld ſuch fruite as beſt you lyke,
                  by force of handy toyle.
               
               
                  
Contrarywyſe, if the huſbande be negligent &
careleſſe, his grounde becommeth barrayne, rugged,
ouergrowen wyth wredes and diſabled frō
bearinge any grayne that is good or profitable.
The like reaſon is to be yelded of the mindes of
men.The minde. For there be many excellent witts and very
towardly natures, which by vnthrifty company
and lewd education, do degenerate from their
good inclination of nature, and become altogether
rebellious, wilfull, lewde and barbarous.
Some againe, whoſe nature is proue and inclinable
to euill, yet by helpe of learninge and good
education are reclaymed and wonne from theyr
froward diſpoſition & become worthy members,
ſtayes & ornamentes in theyr Country. And
therefore no man is to thincke or perſwade himſelfe,
that an ill nature may not be altered, ſithēce
rude wittes, not yet trayned to any diſcipline and
learning, may like ſoft waxe, or as tractable and
moyſt claye, be faſhioned, framed and made applyable
to learne any knowledge, and vertue, any
ciuilitye: and by artificiall inſtruction bee
trayned to conceyue Artes and behauiour both
comely and commendable. Thus likewyſe in
graffinge and planting (which is as wittie a deuiſe
& as proper a feate as any) we ſee wild trees
to chaunge their olde nature, and to beare fruite
both holſome and toothſome. Amonge wyeld
Beaſtes alſo, we ſee how the dilligence, forecaſt,
wit and pollicie of man maketh them tame & ſeruiceable.
An example hereof maye wee ſee in

                  Mago, a worthy Duke amonge the Carthaginiās,
who (as Plinie ſayth)ib. 8. ca. was the firſt among them
that durſte wyth his hande ſtroake and handle a
tamed Lion:7. for which Acte, his Countreyfolks
attaynted him, as one, whom they thought not amiſſe
to reſtrayne from liberty and debarre from
authority,Mago made Liō tame. for yt his wyſedom and wyſe dealings
ſeemed ſo excellent, yt they iudged him a man able
to perſwade any thing yt him liſted, who had thus
ſtraungely trayned and tamed a wylde Lion.
               But that perſons of Melancholique nature
or of any other conſtitution whatſoeuer, (ſo that
the diſtemperature haue not beene of to long cō
                  tinuaunce
and the party to farre ſtriken in age)
may be altered and brought to a better ſtate, there
is no mā that needeth to doubt. For who doth
not plainly ſee, that ſtrong and very hoate wyne,
wyth cold water, or other milder licour, is & may
be alayed? Semblably againe, wyne that is ſmal,
myngled, and of watry relice, yet beinge put to other
licour that is ſtronger and of a better grape,
is quickened, and made both better and ſharper.
And ſo humours in a man being eyther of themſelues
euil, or meeting wyth others of other quality,
are through theyr cōmixtion therewith, qualifyed
and waxe milder, and leauinge theyr owne
naturall qualitie are altered into an other, of
ſtraunger nature, effect, and operation. Thus
is the heate of Choler, by acceſſe and myxture of
bloude & phlegme, mitigated. Thus is phlegme
by admixtion of yelow Choler, heated, and much

                  
                     •
                  bated from his owne colde and moyſte quality,
becomming therby leſſe hurtful to the body. And
in like ſort may we conclude of all the reſt.
               Such nouriſhments and meates as engender
good bloude & iuyce are hereunto very auayleable,
out of which the humours & ſpyrits (which
be the incenſours and ſtirrers forwarde of the
minde) obtayne and receyue theyr nature.VVhat maketh good digeſtion. Now,
there is nothinge more effectuall to make good &
perfecte digeſtion and to ſtirre vp the Spirites,
then ſleepe, exerciſe, and wyne, ſo ye ſame be pure,
good, and moderatelye vſed, as the other alſo
muſt bee. For ſo doth it ſtirre vp & make ſyncere,
liuely and cleare Spirites, from whence proceedeth
cheerefulnes, ioy, quicknes and myrth of the
minde. For the meates & nouriſhments (which
by nature are laboured into humours) being eaten
and waſhed downe wyth good and holſome
wyne, haue freer paſſage into all the parts of the
body, and diſtribute theyr nouriſhment into them
more effectually. There is nothing therefore yt ſo
much baniſheth phāſyes & ſorrow out of a mans
minde,Eccle. 31. as pleaſaunt merye companye, and moderate
vſe of wyne. And of this,VVhat maketh a man merie. did that preciſe
and ſterne natured Zeno, giue a notable example:
whoſe minde was ſo muche eſtraunged from all
pleaſaunte conceites & ordinarye curteſies of cō
                  mon
humanitye, that hee was neuer at all moued
wyth any affections, no not ſuch as be naturallye
incidente and engraffed in euery man. And yet
when he was a litle whittled wyth wyne, he began

to chaunge his copye, and to be as mery and
as bone a companion as who was beſt. And beinge
on a time aſked by one of his merye mates,
how it happened, that he being otherwyſe ſo wō
                  derfully
ſeuere and crabbed, yet at the wyne was
ſo pleaſaunt and conceiptuous: hee merelye aunſwered,
that he was like to a kinde of Pulſe called
Lupines.
                  The nature of Lupines. Which kinde of Pulſe, although
they be naturally bitter, and by their bitternes, of
force to kill wormes, yet the ſame being ſteeped &
ſoaked in water, renounce and leaue all bitternes
and become both ſweete & pleaſaunt. And this
is naturally giuen to all men, that when the body
is refreſhed wyth meate and drinck, al bitternes,
ſorrow and heauines is expelled, and baniſhed.
For the Spirites by moderate drinking of wyne
are ſtyrred vppe, and the mind of man, (which in
them that be faſting and hungry is faynt, weake
and like vnto fier raked ouer wyth aſhes, almoſt
quenched)A dead man heauier thē a lyuing. is reuyued. And this is the cauſe,
why a dead body is heauier thē a lyuing, becauſe
all his Spirites are vaniſhed and departed out
of him: and ſo likewyſe is a faſting perſō heauier
then one that hath filled his belly: and one yt ſlepeth
waightier then one yt watcheth. And therfore
my faſhion is to aduiſe and counſell, Melā
                  cholique
folkes and ſullen natured perſonnes, to
vſe banquetting and good cheere amonge honeſt
and mery cōpany. For thus, after Plato, wryteth
the Poet.
               
                  
                  Euen olde Dan Catoes ſtomacke oft,Hor lib. 3 Oda 21.
                  
                  By vvyne vvas made to come aloft.
               
               Which man (although churliſh, ſterne & frowning)
yet did wyne ſo much driue away his naturall
ſeueritye and grimme countenaunce, that amonge
the other gueſtes, he became a pleaſaunte
companion, and of manners very gentle and familiar.
For this worthy Gentleman, (although
otherwiſe he was a very preciſe comptroller, and
of Stoicall grauity) perceyued wel ynough, that
mās nature required ſom relaxatiōs & delights,
and yt it may not lōg cōtinue, wythout ſom myrth
& pleaſaunt recreation. Let therefore euery man
take ſurueigh of himſelf, and ſerch out, what his
nature moſt deſitreth, in what ſtate his body ſtā
                  deth,
what thinge it is that he feeleth himſelfe to
be holpen, and what to be offended wythall. And
if he finde the plighte and ſtate of his bodye to be
in equability and perfect temperatenes, it ſhalbe
good to cheeriſhe and preſerue it wyth his like:
but if it ſhrinck from his ſayd temperate habite,
and decline to an intēperatenes, then had it neede
to be holpen and recured wyth his contraryes.
               Thus if a man throughe aboundance of humours,Euery man muſt ſearch out his ovvn inclination and nature.
and ſtoare of bloude and Spirites, feele
himſelfe prone to carnalitie and fleſhlye luſte, let
him by altering his order & diet, enioyne to himſelfe
a more ſtrict ordinary, & frame his dealings
to a more ſtayed moderation. But if hee feele

himſelfe to bee of nature ſomewhat ſulleyne and
ſterne, & giuē ſomwhat to be wayward, whyning,
teſtye, churliſhe, and intractable then reaſon wylleth,
ſuche a one to bee reclaymed to an order and
trade of life, gentler and pleaſaunter, inſomuch it
ſhall not be ill for ſuch a one to frequent daūcing,It is ſome
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      time good to chaunge nature.
ſinging, womens flatteryes, alluremēts and embracings:
prouided alwayes, that all the ſame be
not otherwyſe done nor ment, but in honeſtye and
comelines, wythin a reaſonable meaſure, & alſo
within the bounds of lawfull wedlock. For the
ſtate of Matrimony (as Columella aduoucheth
out of Xenophōs booke of Houſehold)Lib. 12. Cap. 1. is in ſuch
ſorte appoynted by nature, that in it is conteyned
not onely the pleasaūteſt, but alſo the profitableſt
ſocietye of life. And leaſt mankinde in proceſſe
of tyme,Geneſ. 2. ſhould come to an vtter ruine and decay,
it pleaſed God by this lawfull meanes to ioyne
man and woman together, that of theyr inſeperable
combinacion, the ſtate of man ſhould & might
by mutual helpe one of an other, be eaſed and cō
                  forted:
and that (beſide the loue and deſire that
they haue to bring furth children)The commoditie of matrimony. they mighte be
tyed and bound together equally and indifferentlye
to participate all fortune whatſoeuer ſhoulde
betyde.
               But for ſo much as approued and ſkilfull mē
that haue written bookes for the mayntenaunce
of mens health generally, doe ſpecially ſet downe
theſe three principall thinges:

                     
                     To eate moderately, and leaue ſomevvhat vvith
an appetite:Three moſt holſome thinges.
                     
                     To vſe conuenient exerciſe:
                     And to liue continently vvithout vvaſtinge ſeede
of generation.
                  
               
               I take it to be the beſt waye, to reduce the whole
ſubſtaunce of the matter & mayntenaūce of health
to this preſcribed rule and direction. For ſeing
that meaſurable repaſte and feeding (all ſurphet
and glotony being baniſhed) maketh a ſound body:
ſeing (I ſay,) exerciſe by ſhaking of all drow
tſineſſe and ſlouth, maketh the bodye ſtronge and
liuely: then no more, but harkē what a ſhort leſſō
                  Virgill giueth for the other.
               
                  No better vvaye the ſtrength of minde,
                  And povvers thereof ſtill to maintaine:Georg. 3,
                  
                  Then Venus play and Loue ſo blinde,
                  To ſhunne and vvarely to refrayne.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the nature and differences of Spirits,
what they worke in mans body, and what
affections they cauſe.
The ſecond Chapter.
               FOraſmuche as the Spirite is the originall
maintener and conueigher of naturall heate,

whereunto moyſture neceſſarilye adhereth: & that
the Soule (by the myniſterye and ayde thereof)
perfourmeth her powers and faculties, and atchieueth
all her actions: it is requiſite here next
to diſcourſe vpon it, and vppon all the differences
thereof. For ſeinge there be three eſpeciall
thinges,The bodye conſiſteth in thre things. in whoſe temperature and moderation,
the health of mans body doth prīcipally cōſiſt, vz.
vitall moyſture, naturall heate, & Spirite, which
combineth all thinges, and imparteth his force,
vertue & nature, vnto them: our preſent purpoſe
being conſidered, we cannot by order chooſe, but
of neceſſity muſt preſētly ſomwhat ſpeake therof.
Vitall moyſture is the nouriſhmente and matter
of naturall heate,Humour. whereupon it woorketh, and by
the benefite therof is maintayned and preſerued.
With this Humour or vitall moyſture, is naturall
heate fed and cheeriſhed, and from the ſame
receyueth continuall mayntenaunce,Heate. and from it
participateth vitall power, whereby all Creatures
do liue, are nouriſhed, encreaſed, preſerued &
procreated. Spirite is the ſeate and caryer of
Heate,Spirite. by whoſe helpe and myniſterye, it is conueyed
and ſente by the conduites and paſſages of
the Arteryes, to euery ſeuerall part of the bodye.
Wherefore worthyly is this Spirite thought to
be the chiefe and principal Inſtrument, that procureth
and executeth euery action.
               Theſe three do vnſeperably cleaue together, &
mutuallye helpe one an other, and cannot be ſundered,
wythout preſent death of the party, and for

this cauſe, do wee thus in one definition expreſſe,
conclude and comprehend, theyr force and nature
wythin one definition. Naturall heat is nothīg
els, but an originall humour, wyth vitall ſpirite
and heate totally moyſtened. But foraſmuch as
Spirite conteyneth vitall heate, and is of all the
faculties, ruler and directer, ſpredeth it ſelf moſt
ſwiftly throughoute the whole body, caryeth and
extendeth his powers into euery part thereof vniuerſally,
& beſyde this, doth manifeſtly chaūge
and alter the ſtate both of body and minde: therefore
as the reſt require great labour and diligēce
vpon them to be beſtowed, ſo ſpecially vpon this
is ye chiefeſt care to be takē, to reſtore, mayntein,
and cheeriſh it. For if it be ſincere and pure, not
mingled wyth anye ſtraunge or forrayne quality,
it cauſeth tranquillity of minde, frameth maners
in good order & faſhiō, and finally qualifyeth and
calmeth all affections.
               
                  The minde of man to honeſtie it frames,
                  And vvith the loue of vertuous life enflames.Perſ. Sat. 
                           •
                        .
                  
               
               But if it be any whitte infected, or wyth anye
vyce ſoyled, then is the quietnes of the minde diſturbed
and ſtirred to manye inconuenient enormities.
For, as great bluſtering wynds vppon
the Sea and Lande, cauſe greeuous, terrible and
raginge tempeſtes, and much other harme to enſue:
So likewyſe, if the Spirites be diſquieted &
oute of frame, they ingender and procure diuers

ſortes of affections in the minde, & carye the ſame
(mauger all reaſon) like a ſhippe wythout guide
and Rother, vppon the rockes of ſondry inconueniences.
Now the thinges wherewyth our inwarde
Spirites are moſte dulled,Things hurt full to the ſpirits of man. quenched, and
damnifyed, are theſe: fulſome Ayre, ouermuich
carnal copulation, vnſeaſonable watching, exceſſiue
heate, chafing and labour, longe faſting, heauines
of the minde and ſadneſſe: Accordinge to
that ſaying of the wyſe man: A mery hart maketh
a luſtie age,
                  Prouer. 17 
                  but a ſorovvfull Spirit dryeth vp
the bones. Heauineſſe bringeth olde age before
the times, and carefulnes vveareth avvaye a mans
dayes.
                  Eccle. 30.
               
               But quiet and ſeaſonable ſleepe, good, pure &
wel reliſhed wyne,Things cō
                     fortinge the Spirits. meery company, moderate exerciſe,
ſweete ſinelles and fragraunt ſauours, refreſhe
the Spirits, quicken and reuiue them, yea
being dulled and greatly impayred. Which is euident
to be ſeene in ſuch as falling into traūces
and lying (for a time) as dead, yet by the ſmell of
ſweete ſauours are broughte againe and recouered
into theyr former ſtate.
               For ſeinge that the Spirite is a certayne vapour,
effluence or expyratiō, proceding out of the
humours,What Spirite is. it ſtandeth vs vppon, to vſe the moſte
exquiſte diet that may be, to thend that the meates
and nouriſhmēts being laboured into good &
holeſome iuyce, may make the Spirits, pure, ſyncere
and perfect. And thus, ſweete ayre, pleaſaūt
ſentes, deuoyd of groſſe and fuſtie vapours, ſtrykinge

vp into the brayne, do marueylouſly comfort
and clarifye the inſtruments of the Senſes,
and enable them to do & perfourme al theyr proper
actions.
               And although ye Heart in a mā, be as the Wel
ſpring or fountaine,The heart is the fountaine of life. from whom the Spirits are
deriued, becauſe the Arteryes come from it, euen
as ſynewes from the Brayne, and veynes from
the Lyuer: yet notwithſtanding, accordinge to ye
diuerſitye and nature of the place, they are called
by other names, and haue other powers appropriate
vnto them. Of theſe and al other faculties
reigning in man, the principall and oryginall beginning
is at the very principles and beginninge
of generation, to witte, generatiue ſeede and femynine
bloude: which be afterwarde conſerued
and maynteyned by nouriſhmentes, euen as the
flame is wyth oyle: and out of theſe the Spirits
proceede.
               For ye better vnderſtāding of all which things,
I will particularly ſet downe the procreation of
the Spirits, wyth theyr nature, power, differēce
and effectes: beginninge firſt at the powers and
faculties natural. For by theyr office is it brought
to paſſe, that the meate we eate is concocted &
turned into the nouriſhmēt of the body. Alſo ther
be foure vertues, whereby all lyuing Creatures
wyth meate receyued, are nouriſſhed & encreaſed:
The firſt attractiue, the ſecōd retentiue,Foure natural povvers. the third
digeſtiue, and the fourth expulſiue. To
wich vertues or powers, appendant and belonging

to all the parts of the body, the firſt & chiefe
originall of the Spirites oughte to be referred.
For firſt, aſſoone as the meate is mynced & chawed
wyth the teeth,The office of digeſtiō. it deſcēdeth into the ſtomack,
beinge thither attracted, then digeſted, and made
ſubſtantiall and turned to the proper nouriſhmēt
and encreaſe of the member. And ſuch part or
porcion thereof, as ſerueth not to this vſe, it refuſeth
and reiecteth. Here therefore the Spirite
hath his firſt beginning. And if nature be good
& ſtronge in this office of digeſtion, it happeneth
thereby that the Spirites be made pure, cleare,
and ſyncere:Howe affections are cauſed. but if concoction bee hindred, or any
other diſtemperatnes happen, thē is the meate
altered and chaunged into vaporous belchinge,
ſtinking fumes, and fulſome breathing, which aſcending
vp out of the ſtomack, diſturbe and hurt
the brayne and minde, inſomuche y• ſuch perſons
are eaſely & quicklye prouoked to brawlinge, chiding,
ſtrife and diſſention. For when the Humours
be not ſufficiently and ynough concoted
and attenuate, vnpure Spirites proceede out of
them, enforcing a manifeſt alteration of the ſtate,
aſwell of the body as of the minde.Cruditie hurtfull. And therefore
in anye wyſe, cruditie is to be auoyded, becauſe it
maketh ill humours & troubled Spirits, aſwell
of meates of good iuyce, as of thoſe y• are bad:
albeit the diſeaſes engendred by want of concoction
of meates hurtfull, bee worſe and of more
daunger. For they cauſe loathſome ſmelles and
fulſome belchings, and make the body to breake

oute illfauourably in euerye place wyth ſcabbes,
botches, blaynes, and mangmeſſe.
               For when there is aboundance of humours in
the body,Oppilation and putrefaction, the original cauſe of diſeaſes. it cānot be choſē but Agues muſt nedes
bee engendred of that continuall obſtruction and
putrefaction: and ſtoare of diſeaſes muſte needes
ſpring oute thereof, vnleſſe thoſe excrementes by
continual labour and conuenient exerciſe be purged,
and the humours reduced into good bloud.
For then a ſweete pleaſaūt ſente proceding therout,
comforteth the head and tempereth and connenientlye
moyſteneth the brayne. Otherwyſe,
if concoction be troubled, there do ſtrike vp into
the head, groſſe & fumie vapours, ſuch as by exā
                  ple
we ſee greene woode to make, that is ſmered
and couered ouer wyth pitch and talowe. And
hereupon it happeneth that the minde ſometime
conceyueth ſtraunge and abſurde imaginations,
yea ſometimes falleth into dotage, rauing, madneſſe,
phrenſie, melancholy, furie or ſome other diſtemperaunce.
               But if the Stomacke do his parte and office
throughly, if concoction be not altogether hindered,
and that the paſſages aboute the Lyuer, and
the other partes of the body, do giue free paſſge
to ye humours, then ye vaspours aſcēding vp into
the head, are nothing ſo hurtfull, neyther do they
greatlye diſturbe and trouble the inward minde:
and yet is not a man altogether cleare and free
from affections: but they be ſuch (I ſaye) as hee
hath in his owne power, eaſely to qualifye, ſtay,

and inhibite. Naturall Spirite therefore beinge
made of the pureſt alimente in the Lyuer, is
the beginninge of the reſidue. For by it is the
vitall ſpirite and the animall alſo nouriſhed, inſomuch
that the power or facultie animall, vſeth
the ſpirit natural as an inſtrument to theſe great
affections and motions, whereunto (retecting
and litle regarding right reaſon) we are many
times prouoked. For euen as in a ciuill tumulte
and ſedicious vprore among the common
people, ye Magiſtrate hath much ado to appeaſe
and mollifye the wilfull peoples rage and headineſſe:
ſo likewiſe reaſon is not able eaſely to ſubdue
the lewd affections, and vnbrydled motions,
that grow by immoderate gurmandyze, ſurphet,
and dronkenneſſe.What riott bringeth a man to. For who is hee, that being
throughly whittled in drinck, doth not beaſtly
ruſhe into venerous luſte, and filthy deſires?
For when the body is bumbaſted wyth drincke,
and bellycheere, the priuities and ſecrete partes
do ſwel, and haue a marueylous deſire to carnal
coiture.
               Hereof it commeth, that ſuche perſons are delighted
wyth vnchaſte Rhythmes, and ſonges of
rybaldry, odious to honeſt eares, and pernicious
to the mind, vndecent hopping and dauncing, vnſeemely
clipping and kiſſing, and much other filthy
behauiour. By this meanes that mynſing
mynion, throughe her fyne and laſciuious daunfynge,Matth. 14 Iohn Baptiſt beheaded.
cauſed the heade of holy Iohn Baptiſte the
forerunner of Chriſte, to be chopped of: for the

kingee mynde was ſo enchaunted wyth her filthy
and pernicious loue, that (cleane abādoning
all reaſon and right iudgemente) he graunted to
her the head of him, whoſe holſome admonitions
and counſell hee was wonte before pacientlye to
heare and well to like of. Which Euangelical
example is a warning to all Noble men, and as
many as haue the gouernmente of common weales,
that they cruelly rage not agaynſte the innocente
neyther tormente and put to death, ſuch as
painefully and ſyncerely preach the truth, but rather
by all meanes to wythſtande and roote oute
ſuch as be fauourers of factions,Diſturbers of publique peace ought to be rooted out. & enter into any
practiſes contrary to righte and conſcience, onely
to diſturbe the publique tranquillity, and to preiudice
theyr Country.
               The workemanſhip and frame of mans body
conſiſteth of manye partes, and therein as in
the ſtate of a Common wealth be conteyned many
orders and ſondry offices.The fourme of a cōmon wealth. In the Common
wealth there be the poore Comminaltie, loweſt
in degree, in which nōber are reckned drudges,
Porters, Saylers, Coblers, Tinkers, Carters,
Tipplers, handy Artyficers, filthy Bauds, Butchers,
Cookes, Botchers and ſuch lyke: next in
degree to them are Marchants and Trafiquers,
amonge whom, ſome by crafte and ſubtiltie, enueigle
and deceyue others of meaner calling and
ability: albeit, there be alſo of them, which practiſe
theyr trade honeſtly and commendablye, not
by colluſion and fraudulēt dealing, but by godly

and neceſſary meanes. After them, are the high
Magiſtrates and Peeres of the Realme, who by
due admyniſtration of the Lawes and politicall
ordinaunces, keepe the rude multitude in due order
of obedience, and ſee publique peace and trā
                  quillity
maynteyned. Laſt of all, are they whoſe
office beinge of higher authority, do inſtructe and
trayne vp the reſidue in the true knowledge of
Chriſtian religion: and to plant in them an vndoubted
fayth, of theyr ſaluation at God the Fathers
hande, throughe his ſonne Chriſte. The
like order, comelyneſſe and agreemente is in the
body of man, wherein euery part doth properly &
orderly execute his peculiar office. And hereuppon
S. Paule by example of the harmonye and
agreement of mans body,1. Cor. 12. and all the parts therof,
taketh occaſion to perſwade and exhort euery
man to do his office and duty,Members of mans body. and carefullye to
labour in his vocation. For all the members
of the body be ſo lyncked and knitte together, and
ſuch participacion and cōſent is betweene them,
that if one of the ſmalleſt toyntes, or the little toe
be hurt or payned, the whole body is diſtempered
and oute of quiet. And thus (as Chryſoſtome
ſayth). if the foote or one of the fingers endes bee
pricked wyth a thorne or other ſharpe thing, al ye
other mēbers are ioyntly greeued aſwel as they,
in ſo much that the head, which is the honourableſt
parte of all other, ſtoupeth to beholde it, the
eyes looke downe, the hands offer theyr diligent
ſeruice to pull out the pricke, and to binde vp the

wounde. So lykewyſe there is no part of the
body, which in ſuch caſe deſyreth not to help his
afflicted fellow member.
               Aptly therefore and very properly (as Liuius
witneſſeth) did Menenius the Oratour for example,Li. 2. Dec. 1.
vſe this perſuaſion, at what time the commō
people in a ciuill broyle, rebelliouſly diſobeyed &
ſtubbernelye maligned the Senatours and Nobility:
likening this theyr iarring and diſcorde,
to the ſedicious contencion and falling out of the
members of mans body amonge themſelues.
               By which witty deuyſed fable, he perſwaded thē
to forſake theyr mad enterpryſes, and to returne
euery man in peace home to his owne houſe. For
as in the bodye, ſo lykewyſe in a common wealth,
mutuall ſedition and ciuill variaunce, tendeth to
the ſpoyle and ouerthrowe of the whole: but contrarywyſe,
Concorde keepeth and vpholdeth all
things, & preſerueth aſwel the Common wealth,
as the body of man in perfecte ſtaye and order.
Howe frendlye they all do agree together, and
how of ſo many partes, euery member doth perfourme
his office and duty, euery man in himſelf
by experience ſeeth.No mēber in the whole body, but it ſerueth to ſome neceſſary vſe. For there is no part nor mē
                  ber
thereof (be it neuer ſo ſmall) but it caryeth wt 
it not onely a comly ſhape and proporcion, but alſo
otherwyſe ſerueth for ſome neceſſary vſe and
purpoſe, of the whole body and euery part thereof.
               And firſt to begin from the loweſt to the higheſt.
The Foundement, Entrailes, Stomacke &

procure the ſuſtenaunce and healthe to the chiefe
members, by whoſe helpe & myniſterie, the meate
being throughly digeſted, is proportionably diſtributed
by the veynes, vnto euery ſeuerall part
of the whole body. But if the Entrayles (appointed
for the concoction of nouriſhmente) bee
weake and feeble, or if any other impedimente or
fault be in them, whereby the meate concocted cā
                  not
haue due recourſe and paſſage to nouriſh the
body, thē doth al go to wrack, and turne into corruption,
myniſtringe matter and occaſion to Agues,
and all other kinde of diſeaſes.Signes wherby to know when a man is not wel at eaſe. Which
by certayne tokens maye partly bee knowen and
felt aforehand, that a man in ſuch caſe commonly
loatheth his meate, hath a puling ſtomacke, and
is enclyned to gaping, vomite, ſtretching, & ſtiffenes
in his body.
               And becauſe the Spirits exhaled by humours,
do participate wt other qualityes, & therby diſtē
                  per
the brayne, it commonly happeneth that ſuch
perſons become thereby wayward, teſtye, and verye
eaſely caryed into ſondrye other affections of
the mynde. For natural Spirite being cauſed
in the Lyuer, cannot be made pure, neyther attenuated
into ayrie ſubſtaūce, vnleſſe that viſcouſneſſe
be clearely purged & free from all affection.
But vitall ſpirite hath his originall procreation
and beginninge of the naturall,Vital ſpirite. which is ſpread
and diffuſed from the hearte by Arteryes into all
the bodye, & frameth in mā diuers maners, accordinge
to that groſſenes or ſubtilitie which it receyueth

partly of the nouriſhmente, and partly of
the condition of the Ayre, and ſtate of the Regiō.
So, they that dwell Northward and in cold regions,Northern people.
by reaſon of groſſe bloud and thicke Spyrites,
are ſeene to be bolde and full of venturous
courage, rude, vnmanerlye, terrible, cruell, fierce,
and ſuch as wyth very threatening countenaunce
and manacinge wordes, make others to ſtande in
feare of them. As concerning any daungerous
exploite, they are not a whitte afrayde to hazarde
theyr bodyes in the aduenture of anye perillous
extremitie. Which courage and diſpoſition of
nature, is not to be founde amonge the people of
Aſia: for they be but mere meycockes, and perſōs
very effeminate, ſhrynkinge at the leaſt miſhappe
that happeneth, and wyth the ſmalleſt griefe and
feare that can bee, theyr hartes fayle theim, & they
as white as a kerchiefe. Which difference of
minde & ſtomacke, Lucane in the hurlyburlies of
the ciuill warres, in theſe Verſes expreſſed and
vttered.
               
                  Such as in th'Eaſt and ſcorching Clymes
                  are bredde: by courſe of kind,Lib. 1.
                  
                  And Countryes influence, meycockes ſoft
                  By daily proofe vve finde.
                  The North, that colde and froſtie it,
                  Such vveaklings none both breede:
                  The folkes there borne novvarres can daunt:
                  of death they haue no dread.
                  In this their errour happie they.,
                  
                     
vvhom greateſt feare of all,
                  (Of death I meane) cannot affray,
                  nor courage once appall.
                  They recke not they, vvhat brunts they beare,
                  they feare not enmyes blade,
                  Theſe laddes dare venture life and lymme,
                  in manly Martiall trade.
               
               For whatſoeuer they be that haue thick groſſe
bloude,Groſſe blud haue conſequently corpulent and ſtronge
ſpirites, and herevppon it groweth that they wil
beare a grudge in memorye a longe time, and not
eaſelye forgette thoſe motions and heddines that
they once take: & hereuppon alſo it happeneth yt
many of them being woūded or hurt in fight, vppon
the ſight of their owne bloude, do runne vpō
their enemy more fiercely and egrely, and beſtow
theyr blowes more vehemently, then afore.
               But they that haue thinne bloude, haue alſo
ſlender ſpirits,Thin bloud. and ſuche as ſoone paſſe awaye.
Such are ſoone angry & at the firſt very raging,
but by and by theyr anger is aſſwaged and cooled,
and aſſone as they haue a wound or ſee theyr
owne bloude, they are readye to faynte and fall
downe.
               But to know how to qualifye, brydle, and ſubdue
thoſe greate affections and motions of the
minde, that are engendred by greate heate of the
ſpirites: I iudge it not amiſſe for euery man, to
ſearch oute, by what kinde of Spirit he is moſt

ledde, to what motions in dealinges hee findeth
himſelfe moſt endaungexed, how feruente
or how remiſſe the agitacions of his minde be.
For by this meanes, may thoſe thinges that conſiſt
without mediocritie, be reduced and brought
to temperatenes and moderation. Nowe, this
diuerſitie of Spyrites, oute of whiche ſpringeth
ſuch and ſo great diuerſities of natures and maners,
conceyue and take ſondry alterations at the
humours. Thus the Soule (although it be ſinguler,
& as Cicero tearmeth it, vnigena, yet bringeth
forth ſondry and manifolde actions, according
to the nature of the Spirites,Whēce the diuerſitie of natures cō
                     meth. and differences
of the inſtrumentes. Hence commeth ſuch
and ſo great variety & diuerſity in the thoughts,
deſyers, affections, actions and perturbatiōs in
mens minds, inſomuch that reaſon and diſcretition
wythoute a ſpeciall aſſiſtaunce of heauenlye
grace, can ſcarcely tame and repreſſe the ſame.
               For when the naturall and vitall facultie, together
wyth the naturall and inwarde Spirites
waxe ſomewhat ſtronge,Rebelliō in the body. and partlye by aboundaunce,
partly by the qualitye of meate and nouriſhment,
haue attayned ſtrength and power: they
reiect and caſt away the brydle of reaſon, & draw
the ſpirit animal alſo (for they be al deryued out
of one fountayne) into their faction & diſordered
rebellion. Wherby it happeneth, that when any
lewde deuyſe or wilfull thoughte aryſeth in the
minde of man, he is prone ynoughe to runne into
diſſolute riot, libidinous luſt, filthy and ſhameful

pleaſures: & if he fortune to eſpy any pretie wēch
or beautifull damſell,Levvde thoughts. that liketh his phantaſie,
his minde is ſtrayght wayes enflamed and ſet on
fire wyth vnlawfull deſyre of her perſon, for the
ſatiſfying of his vnbridled concupiſcence: and by
reaſon of the ſtoare of humours and cōcourſe of
Spyrites reſorting thither frō euery part of his
body, his priuities vndecētly ſwel, & his mēber of
generatiō becometh ſtiffe, ſo yt many times it happeneth,
mans mind to be ouercome & drowned in
fleſhly concupiſcence, vnleſſe by the ſpeciall grace
of Almighty God, and by meditating vppon the
holſome preceptes expreſſed in his ſacred Word,
hee ſtoutlye wythſtande the Sommons of ſuche
naughtye deſyres. This promptnes and inclination
to euill, is naturally ingraffed in man.
The imaginations and thoughtes of mans heart,
                  Gen. 6. & 8.
(ſayth Moſes) are onelye euill and prone to
vvickednes, euen from their youth and firſt beginninges.
But the bleſſed and moſt comfortable
comming of CHRISTE toke away this
blemiſh, who by his precious death and glorious
reſurrection, aboliſhed the calamitie, and cancelled
the bondes of that myſerye, whereto Adams
tranſgreſſion had brought vs.
               The conſideration wherof ought in ys mindes
of all men to worke thus much, that becauſe their
ſpirites are prouokers and prickers forwarde
both to vices & vertues, euerye one ſhoulde wyth
more carefull conſideracion and heede, attende &
loke to conſerue and gouerne them orderly.
               
                  
And althoughe the Animall Spirite be more
excellent thē the other,Spirite animal. and before the reſt in dignity,
yet in order is it the later. For out of the naturall,
which reſembleth vapour, and proceedeth
by vertue of the Lyuer, from bloud, it produceth
the vitall, whiche is of Aerye nature, and myniſtreth
vnto it nouriſhment. And the vitall doth
procreate the Animall, which by reaſon of his
thinneſſe and ſubtility is ayrie. For it being laboured,
prepared and made in the contexed net,
celles and cornerie ventricles of the brayne, is
greatly wyth ſweete ſmelles nouriſhed, and with
fragrant things refreſhed and cheriſhed. From
it is fetched and deryued al the power and facultye
which the ſoule hath, and from it do al actiōs
iſſue and proceede, making the ſame appliable to
all functions. Well worthy therefore is this
animall ſpirite deemed the proper inſtrument of
the ſoule to all the ſences, for mayntenaunce of
mouinge and nimblenes, and for preſeruation of
the ſtrength, and firmitie of the Muſcles & Synewes:
for it tranſporteth and diffuſeth his vertues
and powers (as the workemaiſters of actions)
into the Synewes that haue the power of
feeling and mouing.
               All the inſtruments therfore of the Senſes,
indued wyth this power and vertue of the Spirite
Animall, attayne thereby ſtablenes, for the
atchieuement of their functions and charges: as
for example, If the wayes and paſſages whereby
this ſpirite oughte to goe and haue paſſage, bee

ſtopped & affected, the power of mouing and feeling
is taken away, as we euidently note and ſee
to happen in the Apoplexie, Palſey, Tetanus, and
many diſeaſes moe. And this ſpirite Animall
is conueighed into the Synewes, euen like the
beames of the Sunne through a cleare ſhyninge
glaſſe. And euen as a fiery heate pearceth and entreth
into a glowyng hoate yron, yt is very hard,
inſomuche that the ſome therewyth becommeth
ſofte and tractable: ſo dothe the Spirite that is
fineſt and thuineſt, ſlylte ſlyde into the Synewes.
All thinges therefore that neede feelinge, mouing
and agilitie, requyre the force, ayde and power of
the ſpyrite Animall: As thoſe that by nouriſhment
are to be maynteyned, continued, and kepte,
requyre the naturall and vitall faculties and ſpirites.
Hee therefore that woulde preſerue his
ſpirites vndemnifyed, and them make moſte ſyncere
and perfecte, muſt endeuour at any hande to
keepe his body in right good plight and order.
               For as Galene witneſſeth: The keepinge of a
good temperamente and order,12. Meth. is a ſinguler ayde
and helpe to conſerue the naturall faculties, and
to cheeriſhe the ſpirites. And as vnkindly blaſtes
and vncouth whyrlewyndes, do ſondrywyſe
affect our bodyes, and not of men onely, but alſo
of Beaſtes, Corne and Plants, eyther throughe
their tomuch moyſtnes or tomuch dryneſſe, or finally
by their nipping cold or parching heate: Euen
ſo the Spirites within vs, eyther throughe
their aboundaunce or qualitie, engender & bringe

forth ſondry affectes in vs, and manifeſtly alter y•
ſtate aſwel of body as of mind. For where the
Spirites be groſſe, thicke and cold, it happeneth
the minde to be ouerclowded & (as the dymmed
Sunne) not to ſhyne brighte out. And this is
the reaſon, that perſons in this ſort affected haue
duller wittes, and blunter capacities. For
proofe wherof, we are to ſee and conſider, ſuch as
are borne and bred neere to the Pole Articke &
ycie Sea, who (for the moſt part are very huge &
ſtronge bodyed, but for witte and learning, mere
doltes & Aſſeheads: albeit this Nacion through
the greate care & ſinguler wyſedome of the moſte
noble Prince Erick kinge of Svveden,
                  Erick kinge of Sweden. is nowe
trayned to more ciuill order, & haue their mindes
wyth goodlye qualityes right vertuouſly adourned.
               But ſuch as haue their Spirits moderatelye
cold, are perſons conſtant, ſted faſt,Germans and faythfull
to deale wtal, and euery thing which they atēpte,
is aduiſedlye and earneſtly done, ſo that lightlye
they wil not ſtart from their once conceyued opinion:
but by reaſon of their coldnes & fayntnes
of heate (excepte induſtrious education cauſe the
contrary) commonly they be not very quick witted
nor of very preciſe iudgemēt, neither yet craftye
and deceitfull, nor ſuch as by ſuttle driftes &
wylineſſe, ſeeke to ſupplāte and vndermyne their
ennemie.
               But they that haue moyſt ſpirites (ſo that theHollāders
ſame be moderate) eyther by the nature of the region

or quality of the ayre, where they dwell, are
quicke and readye conceyuers of anye thinge, but
not long retayninge the ſame in memorie, but forgetting
as quicklye, as they conceyue ſpeedelye.
Euen like to very moyſt and ſofte waxe, that wil
not eaſely take anye printe or forme.Hollanders forgetful & ſleepie. And therefore
they bee oblyuious, ſleepie, vnapte to learne
Artes and oecupations, dull witted and groſſe
headed: and as they haue bodyes burlye, bigge &
moyſte, ſo is their memorie ill and forgetfull,
which iudgement is alſo to be giuen of thoſe bodyes
which bee conſtituted in a vehemente dryneſſe.
               And hereuppon it commeth, that olde men by
meanes of their dryneſſe ioyned with coldnes,Old men & children, forgetfull. are
obliuious, & ſo are Childrē likewyſe, by reaſō of
theyr tomuche moyſtnes. And theſe qualities
make men alſo fearefull, timorous and faintharted,
in repulſinge and ſufferinge miſhappes and
aduerſitie, which is a thing peculiar to womenkinde.
               Notwithſtanding, education, inſtitution and
diſcipline,Education altereth nature. altereth the vſuall nature, and ordinary
conditions of euery Region: for we ſee the
common ſorte and multitude, in behauiour and
maners groſſe and vnnurtured whereas the Nobles
and Gentlemen (altering theyr order & diet,
and digreſſing from the common faſhion of their
pezantly countreymē) frame themſelues & theirs,
to a verye commendable order, and ciuill behauiour.
               
                  
But if this moyſtnes bee wt meaſurable heate
ſomwhat warmed, as it is in them which dwel in
playne and open Countryes,Zelāders. where fewe Trees
grow, as in Zeland, where cōmonly in wynter ye
people be greeuouſly nipped wt cold, & in Sōmer
ſcorched wt parching heate, thoſe countreymē (I
ſay) as they haue bodies big, ſtrōg, toyling, painful
& laborious, burly limms, boiſterous mēbers
& rough ſkīnes: ſo likewiſe haue they mīds ſtubborne,
churliſh, teſtie, vncurieous, clubbiſh, & vnmanerly:
Notwtſtanding they be of iudgemente
ſharpe & of induſtrious forecaſt: for tradê of marchan̄diſe
very ready and ſkilful,The nature of ſuch as be borne and bred neere the Sea. and in their dealings
right warie and cyrcumſpecte. The reſt
of the Low Coūtryefolks, being better ſtored wt
Trees ouerſhadinge and defendinge them from
wynds, and which dwell in ſoyles of holeſomer
ayre, wherin is lacke neither of pleaſaūt running
ryuers, or delightfull Springes of freſhe water,
to fructifye the ſame, are of mylder nature, & not
ſo blunte as the others, but of them ſome be
wyſer and fitter to atchieue any waighty matter
then other ſome be.Flemyngs So, the Flemynges for pythyneſſe
in their ſpeach and ſubtility of inuention
are very excellent.
               
                  Brabanders ſetting aſyde all ſternenes and ſeuerity,Brabanders.
wyth their decēt meery natures and frēdly
curteſye, winne the hartye good willes of men:
yea wyth a certayne pleaſaunte grace, facility of
ſpeach, and allurementes of woordes, they ordinarily
enterlard their grauity.
               
                  
But if the breaſt and brayne bee endued wythItalians.
a Spirite perfuſed wyth temperate moyſture
and heate, ſuch as be of that ſpeciall conſtitution,
are in their dealinges, watchfull, ſharpe,
induſtrious, in forecaſt, quicknes of wit, induſtry
of nature, excellencie of learninge, notable vtteraunce,
and flowinge eloqu
                     •
                  nce, ſurpaſſing other
men.Italians wil couertly beare a ſecret grudge in mynde a great while. Finally ſuch perſonnes wil beare in memorie
a long time things paſt, and will not lightly
ſuffer any grudge to grow out of remēbraūce.
And if any wronge bee done vnto them, they will
reuyue the memory therof after many yeares: yea
ſo deſtrous bee they of reuenge, that they will not
forgette a priuate grudge or offence euen amonge
themſelues. Which affection I do aſcribe vnto
heate, which doth ſo exceedinglye exulcerate &
diſtemper their mynds wyth indignacion, that,
humour and moyſtnes, is not able to alay, quēch
and qualefye it. So vnſtayedlye for the more
parte be the myndes of this people caryed with
wilful motions, ſomewhyle inwardly and cloſely
keepyng within theyr owne breſtes theyr conceyued
deuiſes, and ſomewhyle openly to the world,
burſting out in hoate termes of outrage.
               
                  VVith choler hoare, and raging fittes
                  their breſtes ſo boyle and ſvvell:
                  Perſ. Sat. 5
                  That pipkins full of purging drouges,
                  can neither quench ne quell.
               
               Neere approching to them in quality (but yet

ſomewhat differing) are Engliſhmen:Engliſhmen. who being
of heate more weake and leſſe boylinge, (as the
which is well enter medled, ouercome and qualefyed
by moyſtnes) are of ſtature comely and proportionable,
& of body luſtie and well complexioned,
But to the ſtudies of humanity, not ſo greatly
giuen, and in exquiſtie Artes not ſo well furniſhed.
But if they hold on their courſe as they
beginne, I meane, to apply theyr mindes to worthy
and excellent matters, theyr dexterity for the
attaynment of any notable atchieuaunce ſurpaſſeth,
and theyr forwardnes to anye Artes or myſteries,
is foūd to be right apt & inclynable. And
becauſe they haue ſomwhat thick ſpyrits,Engliſhmen and Scottes haue greate ſtomacks & angry. ſlēderly
perfuſed wyth heate, they wil ſtomacke a matter
vehemently, and a long time lodge an inward
grudge in their heartes, whereby it happeneth yt
when theyr rage is vp, they will not eaſily be pacifyed,
neither cā theyr high and hauty ſtomackes
lightly be conquered, otherwyſe then by ſubmiſſion,
& yelding to theyr minde and appetite.
               But if the ſpyrite through heate of the hearte
and quality of the ayre or region,Spaniard
                        •
                     
                   be very hoate,
it likewyſe bringeth forth and cauſeth hoate and
quicke motions, yet ſuch as by reaſon of their tenuitie
and thinneſſe by litle & litle wil be cooled.
And this is the cauſe, that ſome of them when
their bloud is vp, will raſhlye and vnaduiſedlye
attempte any thinge, and not eare for any perills
ſo they may bring to paſſe, what their deſire is to
compaſſe. Alſo when they conceiue in minde the

doing of any thing, as they be at the beginninge,
marueylous wilful & tooto heady with mighte &
main to ſet forward their purpoſe, hardly admitting
anye counſel to the contrary: ſo againe, their
minds many times be wauering, vnſtedfaſt and
vnquiet, except their inclinacions by the reyne of
reaſon be the better bridled.
               
                  Their fickle and vnſtedie heades,
                  novv this novv that deuiſe:
                  They flote in fancie to and fro,Vir. lib. 4. A Enei.
                  
                  and vvrangle ſondry vviſe.
               
               Which thinge is commonly incident to angry
perſons, and ſuch as be deſyrous of reuenge, and
to ſuche alſo as haue ſomewhere fixed their loue
inordinately, whoſe minds flootinge and ballancinge
vp and downe with varietie of phantaſies,
are eaſely and quickly caryed hither and thyther,
by affection, neyther ſtedfaſt nor aduyſedly reſoluing
vppon any certaine reſolution. But this
Countrye borne people,Spaniardes haue good wittes. if they earneſtly frame
themſelues to the attaynemente of anye Artes
(though the ſame be neuer ſo hard and curious)
yet do they profite in the ſame wonderfully, & cary
away great commendation.
               Such as haue thinne ſpirites temperatelye
hoate, haue ſharpe and ready wittes, and prompt
and flowing vtteraunce:Frenchmen. vppon whom alſo theſe
gifts of nature are beſtowed, that for deuyſe and
inuention they be very ſharpe and ingenious: for

braue ſettinge oute and beautifyinge of a matter,Frenchmen prompt and ready witted.
plentyfull and copious: and ſuche as for the explayning
of their meaninges and purpoſes haue
talke and tongue at will. And as touching the
inward inclination of their mindes and maners,
they be liuely felowes, luſty, dapper, nimble, lackinge
no grace of pleaſaunte geſture. Manye of
them which lacke good bringing vp and haue not
beene trayned in learning and ciuilitie, are of diſpoſition,
wauering, vnconſtant, captious, deceitfull,
falſeharted, deſtrous of alterations and tumultes,
babblatiue, and full of muche vaine tattling:
in conſultacion and counſell ſo ſuttle and
craftie, that whatſoeuer they once conceyue in
mynde or purpoſe to do, without delay that do
they iudge beſt, forthwith to be enterpryſed, & out
of hande to be atchieued: and whereunto ſo euer
they addict their mindes, therin proue they right
excellente.
               Seing therefore, the diuerſitie of ſpirits, and
the differences of wittes and maners proceedeth
of the condition and nature of the Place, Ayre,
Countrey and nouriſhmente, let euery man foreſee
in himſelf, which way he may beſt prouide for
the maintenaunce of his health, and to ſhunne all
ſuch thinges as may in any wiſe harme, annoye,
cruſhel, or empaire either his health or Spirits.
               It is therefore moſt expediente to obſerue the
beſt order of diet and life that conueniently maye
be folowed,Good diet, & holeſome Ayre. and to liue in the holeſommeſt ayre.
For theſe be the things that reſtore health when

it is decayed or empaired, and which make the
Spirites moſt pure and ſyncere. For if the bodye
do abounde and be full of ill humours, if the
Spirites bee vnpure, and the brayne ſtuffed full
of thicke fumes proceedinge of humours, the bodye
and Soule conſequentlye cannot but ſuffer
hurte, and bee thereby likewiſe damnifyed.
Hence proceedeth (as from the verye cauſe) ſuch
rauing dotage, & diſtraughtnes of righte witts,
hence iſſueth blockiſhnes, fooliſhnes, madnes,
and furie, in ſo much that they thinck ſometimes
to ſee thoſe thinges that are not before their ſenſes
to ſee, and to heare ſuche woordes as no man
ſpeaketh. For imaginatiō in them is marred,
common ſenſe (which iudgeth and diſcerneth all
thinges) is preiudiced, memorye decayed, ſighte
dymmed, their eyes dazelled, and all the faculties
of the Soule (that is to ſaye) all the naturall powers,
whereby it accompliſheth all his functiōs,
are enfeebled, & perfourme their offices, duties,
and operations both faintly and remiſſely.
               But if the Spirite animall be perfectly pure
& ayrie, (ſuch as is the ſent of Bloud exactlye laboured)
not onely the ſight of their eyes is cleare
and good, but all the other Senſes both external
and internall are perfecte, and perfourme their
functions and miniſteries orderlye, duelie, and
conueniently.
            
            
               
               ¶Of the Spirit vniuerſall, generally inspired
into the whole world, & all ye parts therof.
Which being from God aboue, breathed &
put into man, infuſeth and endueth his
minde wyth ſpeciall and peculiar giftes.
And by the waye alſo, in this Chapter, is
entreated of good and ill Angells, which
being entermingled with the humours &
ſpirites, cauſe ſondry chaūges and mutations
in mens minds.
The thirde Chapter.
               THat power of the Spirite which is infuſed
and breathed by God aboue,Spirite of Nature. into theſe lower
bodyes, is it, that diſpoſeth and moueth this
frame and maſſe of the world, foſtereth, ſtrēgtheneth
and cheeriſheth all that is wythin the compaſſe
and coape of Heauen conteyned, ſtretchinge
and extendinge his force farre and wyde. For
why, this gouerneth and ruleth all thinges, maketh
all thinges fruitfull, and vnto the ſame imparteth
vitall heate. Neyther is there anye
cauſe why a man ſhould thinck or perſwade himſelf,
that there is any other power able to do theſe
things, then that Spirite, by whom from the very
beginninge,The Spirite of the Lord. the world and all ſuch thinges as
are viſiblie ſeene wyth the eyes, and ſenſiblie perceyued
by the ſences, were brought into ſo comely

and beautiful order. For by the VVord of the
Lord,
                  Pſalm. 33 
                  vvere al things made, and by the breath of
his mouth, al the comlynes, beautie and furniture
thereof.
                  Geneſ. 1. 
                  For he doth maintayne and ſtrēgthen al
thinges, and giueth povver vnto euerye thinge to
encreaſe and multiplye in their ovvne kinde,
                  Iohn. 1. 
                  and
to maintayne and conſerue themſelues.
               
               Thus the wonderfull Creatour of Nature,
by his word and Spirite, put into all thinges y•
were created, a power precreatorie, & the order
of their encreaſinge & propagation, for continuaunce
of theyr kinde, poſteritie, and ſucceſſion: y•
is to witte: the Spirite of GOD beinge diffuſed
into euery Creature, ſuſteyneth and maynteyneth
Plantes and all liuing creatures aſwell
man as beaſts, by whom they liue and haue their
beinge. There is nothinge therefore in the whole
worlde, but it feeleth the ſtrong power of God, &
is ſatiſfyed wyth the plenteouſnes and fulneſſe
therof. For when Heaūe and Earth were made,
and the firſt Elemēts, (yt is, the firſt beginnings
of things conſtituted) The Spirite of God moued
vppon the waters: that is to ſaye, made
moyſte and liquide matter (otherwyſe barreyne)
to be fruitefull.
               The very meaning of which ſaying, Basill ſurnamed
the Greate, did verye well and liuelye expound
in theſe woordes: The Spirit of GOD
(ſayth hee) moued vpon the top or vpper face of
the water.Hexa. lib. That is to ſay, did nouriſh and giue
a vitall fruitfulnes and a quickeninge Soule to

the moyſte Element and to all other Creatures,
in ſuch ſort, that all thinges wyth the Spirite of
God were moyſtened & warmed, euen as a Bird
or Fowle that ſitteth vpon her egges, who gyueth
vitall power and heate, to that whereuppon
ſhe doth ſit and couer.
               An example whereof we are to take at a Hen,Gen. 1.
which giueth life vnto her egges, & bringeth oute
frō thence the ſhape of a perfect creature. Now,
whereas the Spirite of God is ſaid to ſwymme
vppon the waters, or to reſt vppon a moyſt Element,
this is to be vnderſtoode of the fecunditie, yt
is infuſed and put into it. But whereas the
vniuerſall nature of thinges, and all Creatures
that breath and haue being, do enioy this gifte of
Diuine ſpirit, & through the vertue thereof haue
their eſſēce, yet namely and aboue al others, Mē,
by ſinguler priuiledge & ſpeciall prerogatiue are
fully endued wyth all things, & haue their minds
taken out of a porcion of Gods owne ſpirite, as
Cicero ſayth, or rather accordīg to the teſtimony
of the holy Scriptures, haue receyued the breath
of life, and an Image after the ſimilitude of God
himſelfe. The Poet Ouid had from the Hebrevves
a litle ſparke of vnderſtanding touching
this opinion, and that did he vtter in theſe Verſes.
               
                  Gods Spirite vvithin vs vvorketh ſtill,Lib. 3. de Arte amā
                        di.
                  
                  His motions in our hartes vve finde:
                  
                     
This ſacred feede directes out vvill,Lib. 6. Faſt.
                  
                  And vvith his povver enflames our mind.
               
               Which ſentence S. Paule beinge ſtudyed in a
more heauenlye kind of Philoſophie, went about
to inculke into the minds of the Athenians, with
intent to draw thē, frō their old rooted ſuperſtitions
& inueterate errours, & to perſwade thē in beholding
the goodly frame & beautiful workemā
                  ſhip
of the world wt al the furniture and ornamēt
therof (wherin Almighty God ſheweth out to al
men a taſte or proofe piece of his diuinitie) therby
to acknowledge his diuine power, and by ſeinge
his woorkes to agnyze his omnipotencie.
For in this ſort he preached vnto them: God
vvhich made the vvorld,
                  Actes. 17. 
                  and all that are in it, and
is Lorde of Heauen and Earth, dvvelleth not in
Temples made vvith handes, neither is vvorſhipped
vvith mens hands, as though hee needed any
thing, ſeing he himſelfe giueth life and breath to
all men euery vvhere. For in him vve liue, moue,
and haue our being: as a certaine of your ovvne
Poets ſayth:
                  Aratus in Pheno. 
                  for vvee are also 
                        〈◊〉
                      Generation.
               
               Now, man at the hands of his Creatour, being
furniſhed wyth ſuch excellent gifts and garniſhmentes
of minde, as firſt to be endued wyth a natural
and internall ſpirite, and then to be moued
and inſpyred wt a Diuine ſpirite, hath alſo (notwithſtanding)
externall ſpirites recourſing into
his body and mynde. Men of olde tyme called

them by the name of Genij,
                  Angels. the bookes of the holy
Byble termeth them (in reſpect of their office
and myniſterye) Angels: which is aſmuch to ſay
as Meſſengers: becauſe they bringe the cōmaūdmentes
and will of God vnto vs.Hebr. 1. 
                  S. Paule calleth
them, myniſtring Spirits, appointed to certayne
offices and purpoſes, and to myniſter for
their ſakes which ſhalbe heyres of Saluation.
Cicero and others that neuer knew God nor religion
aright, calleth them familiar or domeſtical
Gods, hauing vnder their protection the care of
mans lyfe and ſafetye, and giueth them the name
of Lares,
                  Lares. or Penates, or Dij Tutelares. And of
them they make two ſorts, the good Angels and
the badde:Good Angels. becauſe the good pricketh a man forward,
to grace, goodnes, vertue & honeſty: ye other
eggeth him to lewdnes,Ill Angels. miſchiefe, ſhame, villany,
and all kinde of looſe diſhoneſtie. For this is
their onely drift, and pretence ſpecially, to plunge
a man in as much miſcheife as they can, & drawe
him from God as farre as may be.
               Now, for ſo much as Spirits be without bodies,
they ſlyly and ſecretly glyde into the body of
man, euen much like as fulſome ſtenche, or as a
noyſome and ill ayre, is inwardly drawē into the
body: and theſe not onely incenſe and pricke a mā
forward to miſchiefe, but alſo like moſt peſtilent
Counſellers, promyſe to the party reward & impunitye.
By this meanes the wylie Serpente
enueigled Adam, Sayinge: You ſhall not die
therfore, but ye ſhall be as Gods, knovving good

and euill. For the Deuill (hauinge his name
hereof) is moſt ſubtile and crafty,Daemō, à ſciendo. and lacketh not
a thouſand ſleightes and pollicies to bryng a mā
to miſchiefe. Yea, his fetch is ſlyly to inſinuate
himſelfe into our mindes, cogitations, counſelles
and willes,2. Para. 26 albeit it is not eaſye for him to bring
his purpoſe aboute, for ſo muche as Eod alone
knoweth the heartes of men, and vnto him onely
be all our deuyſes and thoughts open and manifeſt.
Hee is (ſayth Paule) the diſcerner of the
thoughtes and of the intentes of the hearte:
                  Hebr. 4. 
                  neyther
is there any Creature, vvhich is not manifeſt
in the ſight of him: but all thinges are naked &
open to his eyes.
                  Pſalm. 7. Which thinge alſo Dauid declareth:
God (ſayth he) is the tryer of the verye
hart and Reynes, That is to ſaye, hee perfectlye
ſearcheth out and knoweth all thinges, findeth a
way into the moſt ſecrete corners, and innermoſt
places. And hee bringeth in an example, taken
from the intrayles that bee fardeſt of. For there
is nothing in mās body, inwarder then the heart
and Reynes: in ſomuch that the concocted meate
muſt be conueyghed by many crooked bywayes &
wyndings, before it can be brought thyther. Furthermore
he ſpecially nameth thoſe partes, for yt,
out of them chiefely the thoughtes and cogitacions
of the mynde, and all lycentious luſtes and
diſſolute deſyers, do proceede and ſpringe, which
are not nor cannot lye hyd, or vneſpyed of God.
               Forſomuch therefore, as theſe deuilles bee
ayrie ſpyrits, and aſwell by long vſe and practiſe,

as alſo by pollicie of nature are of greate experience
and by long tryall know much:How the deuil learneth the thoughts of mē. euen by coniectures
and tokēs which they eſpy in the eyes,
countenaunce, geſture and other motions of the
body of man, they ſlylie gather and gheſſe the inward
diſpoſitions and thoughtes of the mynde,
whych to a man of great experience and witte, is
no great hard matter to do.One man a deuill to an other. And therfore euen
as lewde and deceitfull marchaunts, practyſe all
wayes and meanes to ſpoyle others, leauinge no
occaſion vnattempted, to cyrcumuent and catche
them at vnwares and vnprouyded: ſo lykewyſe
the deuilles lye in wayte to catche vs at a vauntage,
and the godlyer anye one in conuerſation of
life & maners is, the buſyer and earneſter are they
wyth theyr poyſon to ſtinge him. In ſuch ſorte,
the deuill was not awhit afrayde by al maner of
ſhiftes to tempte euen Chriſte himſelfe, thinking
to haue perſwaded or inueigled him with Ambition,Matth. 4.
Gluttonie, or deſyre of rule & Souereignty.
Neyther was he aſhamed to aſſaulte Paule alſo,
partly carying him into a boaſtinge and pryde of
mynde aboue meaſure,2. Cor. 12. and partlye by incenſynge
his aduerſaryes with ſpightfull rage and cruelty
againſt him.
               The holy man Iob alſo was wonderfully ſhaken
vp,Iob. 30. and driuen to ſuffer the violent brunts of
his moſte terrible temptations: but God who
rewardeth and recompenceth all thinges, made
an end of that conflict, preſcribing the Feend his
limitts, how farre he ſhould extend his tyranny.

Whereby we are to learne and vnderſtande, that
deuils can nothinge preuaile againſt vs,Howe farr
                        •
                      deuils are able to hurte vs. neither
do any further harme to vs, thē it pleaſeth God
to ſuffer and permit them to do.
               Now, albeit their vſe and faſhion is, manye &
ſondry wayes to aſſault men which way to hurte
them, yet ſpecially they ſeeke & trye all ſuch meanes
as they can, to vanquiſhe and ſeduce them, wt
those inclynations and properties that are peculiar,
naturall, and indifferente to all.
               Thus, do they incite and egge thoſe that abound
with Bloud,Humours giue occaſion to vices. and be ſanguine complexioned,
to riot, wātonneſſe, drunkēnes, waſtfulnes,
prodigality, flithy and deteſtable loues, horrible
luſtes, inceſt, and buggerie. Them that be Cholericke,
to teſtines & anger, to brawling and chydinge,
contention, rayling, quarellinge, fightinge,
murther, robbery, ſedition, diſcord, and to put all
theſe in proofe and practize, they will miniſter
many allurements and ſondry occaſions. Them
that be Melācholique, vnto enuy, emulation, bitterneſſe,
hatred, ſpright, ſorcery, fraude, ſubtlety,
deceipte, treaſon, ſorrow, heauineſſe, deſperation,
diſtruſt, and laſt of all to a lamētable and ſhamefull
end. Them yt be phlegmatick, they helpe forward,
to ſlouth, drowſyneſſe, bitterneſſe, ſluggardy,
ſlacknes, ſleapines, rechleſſe vnhedynes, and
to a deſpyſinge of all vertuous and good exercyſes.
               And furthermore as pure ſubtyle ayre breatheth
into lyuīg Creatures & into greene herbs,

a liuely and holſome ſpirite: ſo likewiſe the good
Angels imparte holeſome ayre, and with a pleaſaūt
ſweete inſpiratiō refreſh our inward minds.
               Againe as a peſtilente winde induceth ſickeneſſe
and infection: ſo do euill Spirites exhale &
breath out a peſtiferous poyſon, & to the mindes
of men bring miſchiefe and deſtruction.Sapien. 1. For by
them came the firſt ſpot, ruine and deſtruction of
mankinde, ſo yt there was no other way to bryng
him to his firſt excellency, dignity and perfection,
but onely by that moſt wōderful reſtorer,Gen. 2. Christ.
And becauſe the imbecillitye & weakenes of mās
nature is ſuch, that hee is not able to withſtande
the ſubtile ambuſhes & deuiſes of this his moſte
raginge ennemy Sathan, Chriſte being aſcended
into Heauen, cauſed to be ſent downe a Comforter,
to hold vs vp, and giue vs inuincible courage
againſt all the deuils crafty ſuggeſtiōs.What the Holy Gh
                        ••
                      worketh 
                        〈◊〉
                      vs. This
is he that inſpyreth into our mynds ſondry good
giftes, aſſuringe vs of the good will of God towards
vs, and ſhakinge away all diſtruſte, bringeth
vs by Chriſt vnto the father. For he ſtirreth
vp and comforteth our mindes, and encourageth
vs in ſuch ſort, that boldlye & with an aſſured
truſte,Gal. 4. we dare to hope and aſke all thinges
of him, and cry vnto him for helpe, by the name of
Father. Moreouer y• Spirite which God hath
inſpyred into our harts, doth certify and witneſſe
wyth our Spyrits, that wee be his Sonnes, and
Heyres,Rom. 8. yea Coheyres wyth Chriſte. The ſpyrite
of God therefore, confyrming oure mindes,

doth engraffe in vs fayth, grounded vppon the
word of God, which fayth engendreth an aſſured
truſt & confidence toward him, wyth an vndoubted
hope to obtaine his promiſes.
               And foraſmuche as theſe vertues be not ydle,Fayth bringeth forth workes.
they do produce and bringe forth moſte plentifull
fruites of Charity, to the perfourmaunce wherof,
the holy Ghoſte the Comforter, wt his ſtrēgth
armeth vs, and with his ayde protecteth vs in
the truth, to continue and perſeuer conſtant, ſtedfaſt
and immutable, wythout being ſeduced and
caryed lightly into erronious opiniōs and ſuperſtition:
which is nothinge els (as Euſebius
witneſſeth) but a falſe and counterfeyte ſhadowe
of true Relligion,De preparat. Euāg. lib. 1. grounded vpon no ſounde doctrine
or foundation of Scripture: In this
ſorte according to the ſaying of the Poet Horace.
                  Superſtition.
               
               
                  Most of v's Poets old and yonge,
                  Mistake for vertue,Art. Poet. vice and wronge.
                  VVith cloake of vertue clad is vice,
                  deceyuing many one:
                  By bearing face and outvvarde ſhevve,Iuuē. Saty. 14,
                  
                  of honeſtie alone.
                  Seueritie it counterfaictes,
                  in deede yet nothing leſſe:
                  Behauour, counmaunce, rayment, gate,
                  All ſmelles of vertuouſnes.
                  Yea borovved names of honeſtie,
                  and Vertue geeuen bee,
                  
                     
To vices: as, the cancard Chuffe,
                  and Snudge vvith vvealth and fee,
                  Is compted one that geuen is,
                  to thrift and huſbandrie.
               
               And it oftentimes falleth out (ſayth Cicero)
that many in ſeeking after the beſt thinges,Tuſcul. 3. miſſe
their purpoſe, and are deceyued, not ſo much vppon
wyll, as by myſtaking theyr way, and vſinge
a wrong courſe.Rom. 10. Thus doth S. Paule deeme the
Jewes not altogether forlorne, and eſtraunged
from godlyneſſe, but ledde wyth a certayne feruentnes
and zeale to Godward, although not accordinge
to knowledge: ſo that they do not altogether
erre in their affection towarde Godlynes,Zeale withoute knowledge.
but rather vppon ignoraunce and lacke of better
vnderſtandinge: and becauſe they go blindlye to
worke and folter in their dealinges without any
iudgemente, they are deſtitute of the Spirit of
God. Wythin the leuell and daunger of this
vice, are al they, that obſtinately either maintaine
or wilfully ſuffer anye olde inueterate errours, &
ſuch as can abyde nothinge of all that to be altered,
which by little and litle hath crept into vſe, &
by cuſtome had ſome continuance. Which mē
if they had within them this bounteous Spirite,
no doubte there would not be ſuch diuerſity of opinions
and doctrine in mens myndes as nowe
there be. But let no man thinck theſe thinges to
be ſuperfluouſly ſpoken, or cleane beſyde the purpoſe,
neyther let him lay in my diſhe this ſayinge

of Horace.
               
               
                  A Flagon firſt began,
                  VVhy comes novv out a pitcher ſmall,In Arte Poet.
                  
                  or little pretie Canne.
               
               For the heauenly Spirite, is the guyde & gouernour
of the Spyrites of mans bodye, which
are then more qualefyed, quieted, and kept vnder
better order, when they be gouerned and ledde by
the conducte and direction of this Spyrite. For
if they once begin tumultuouſly to ruffle & ſtyre
vp ſedition wythin the bodye,

                     This Spirite their fumiſhe fits reſtraynes,A Eneid. lib. 1.
                     
                     And them to quiet order traynes.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Of the Elements of Humaine body, and of
the firſt qualities of beginnings of generation,
where of man conſisteth and
is made.
The fourth Chapter.
               ALl the Complexion & temperamente of mās
bodye proceedeth from the powers of the Elementes,
and not of the Humours:IIII. Elemētes. and of them
is the whole bodye tempered and compounded.
               
                  
The Elements be in number foure, Fyre, Earth,
Ayre, and Water, and vnto them are appendant
ſo many qualytyes: Hoate, Colde, Moyſt, Drye:
which of the Ayre encompaſſyng vs, and of oure
meates nouriſhinge vs, do take and conceyue eyther
profite or harme. For being eyther in exceſſe
or defecte, the qualityes are depraued and
corrupted, and throughe theyr corruption engender
many and ſondry diſeaſes.
               But the thinges which diſpoſe and affect our
bodyes,Tuēd. valet. lib. 1. are (ſayth Galen) of two ſortes: the one,
takyng his beginning euen at our Natiuity and
byrth, deryued and iſſuying from the very prynciples
of Generation as from a roote, which poſſiblie
cannot bee auoyded: the other, ſuch, as man
may declyne, as thinges eſtraunged from oure
bodyes, not naturallye in vs engraffed, but externally
happening, and yet (natheleſſe) ſuch, as
are as apt and ready to diſquiet and annoy oure
bodyes, as thoſe that be naturally planted in vs.
And theſe bee,Meate and Ayre a like neceſſary. Meate and Dryncke, wherewyth
wee reſtore all ſuch ouerdrye or ouer moyſte ſubſtaunce,
as to the body is requyſite. And theſe
twayne, if they bee eyther immoderately taken, or
bee corrupte and vnholeſome, they do engender
great ſtoare of excrements and ſondry diſeaſes.
Next vnto theſe is the Ayre, that compaſſeth
and on eche ſyde enuyroneth vs, which beinge
eyther extreemelye hoate or drye, or ouermuch
moyſte or colde, cauſeth & enforceth a manifeſt
alteration in the ſtate of the whole body.
               
                  
But to come ſomewhat neere and more aptlye
to declare this matter: it is to be vnderſtanded,
that the verye beginninges of mans nature and
principles of his generation, is feminine Bloud
& Seede generatiue. The one as it were of certayne
apt, conuenient, and tractable matter, like
moyſt claye or ſoft waxe, is ready to faſhion oute
and proportion anye thing that the workemā employeth
it vnto: And the Seede, is as it were ye
workeman himſelfe. Both theſe thinges conſiſt
and are made of the ſame generall Elements,
and conteyne within them the qualityes aboue
ſpecifyed: but the difference amonge themſelues
is in the order and meaſure of their temperamēt.
For in the ſeede,The nature of ſeede and bloud. there is more of fierye and ayrie
ſubſtance, that is to ſay, it is pertaker of aethereal
Spirite. In the Bloud, there is more of watry
and earthy: albeit in this laſt, the heate is aboue
colde, and moyſt aboue dry. For wee maye not
ſay and affirme, that Bloud is dry, like boanes,
but to be moiſt. Now is Seede dryer thē Bloud,
and yet it is alſo moyſte, fluible & liquide. Thus
on both ſydes, the oryginall of mans generation
proceedeth of moyſt ſubſtaunce, & yet ſo, yt thence
is laboured and made other partes of the bodye
yt be drye, as Synewes, Veynes, Arteryes, Bones
and Gryſtles. Now, that which in the wōbe
is conceyued, and together of thoſe principles
fourmed, waxing dryer, taketh (as it were) ye firſt
lineamentes and proportion of euerye member, &
afterward comming to perfect ſhape, taketh further

encreaſe, & ſo groweth to his iuſte bigneſſe
and decente quantitye. And when it hath
raught to his ful growth and bigneſſe, (as when
the boanes for want of nouriſhmente are no longer
plyable) then doth a man ceaſſe from further
growīg,Cauſe of talneſſe. & waxeth neither taller nor broader. For
comely talneſſe and length of perſonage commeth
and is cauſed of the aboundaunce of heate and
moyſture, where the Spyrite is throughlye and
fully perfuſed.
               And if it happen that any, eyther old or yong,
throughe ſicknes or ſome other affect, to fal into
a cold and dry habite or diſpoſition, their bodies
become and are leane, wrynckled, ſlender, illfauoured,
thinne and lancke, and their lymmes
weake and crooked. It fareth by them, muche
like as it doth by Horſes, Oxen, or ſuch like beaſtes,
that are ſkanted & nipped of their fodder &
feeding: or as it doth by Trees and other greene
Herbes, that lacke the iuyce of the ground, & not
conueniently watered.
               Therefore a faſhiō that ſome Scholemaſters
& others that take the charge vpon them to teach
and boorde yonge boyes, is (mee thinckes) both
lewde & vnconſcionable: who beinge at a playne
bargaine and certaine ſtint of money, reaſonably
agreed vppon betweene theym and the childrens
frendes, pinche theyr poore pupills and borders
by the belly, and allowe them meate neyther ſufficient
nor yet holeſome, yea not onely beaſtly, ſluttiſhlye,
& nippinglye vſe they the ſeely childrē, but

threatninglye enforce them to beare oute the labour
of theyr ſtudyes,
                     
                        ••
                     ildren 
                        ••
                     ulde not s
                        •
                     āted of e
                        •
                     r victu
                     
                        •
                     . wyth a ſlender allowance,
and ſmall pittaunce of vnſauery reſty fleſhe, ſtinking
fiſh, and hoary vinewed bread: which thing
cauſeth them to be ill complexioned & coloured,
the ſhape, comlynes and beauty of theyr bodies to
degenerate & growe out of faſhion, the quicknes,
courage, lyuelynes and ſharpenes of their wit to
decay, theyr ſpirits to be dulled, & al ye liuely vertues
& towardnes of ye mynd, which before was
in them (eyther by the benefite of Nature, or by ye
induſtry of the parentes,Naughty & vnholeſome meate ſpilleth nature. or finally by the onely &
ſpecial gift of Almighty God) to be extinct & vtterly
quenched: inſomuch yt neyther theyr mynd is
enflamed wt deſire to attein & atchieue any worthy
attēpt, nether frame they thēſelues vnto thoſe thī
                  gs,
wherūto they were inclinable, & by nature apt
& towardly. As touching ye outward caſe of their
body, they cōmōly breake out, & haue their bodyes
pinked ful of ſcabs, & by reasō of ill humours, ouerwhealed
& engrayled with lothſome bliſters,
blaines,Shorte ſtature how it commeth. byles & botches. Wherby it commeth to
paſſe, yt in growth they ſeldom come to any perſonable
ſtature, to ye vſe of their ful powers, to perfect
ſtrēgth & firmity of theyr members, or to any
hādſom ſcature, or proper cōpo
                     ••
                  iō of bodily proportion:
& the cauſe is, for yt in their tender & growyng
age, being kept vnder by famine, and ſkanted
of conuenient meate and drincke, theyr natiue
moyſture which requyreth cōtinual cheeriſhing &
mainteynaūce, was ſkāted & debarred of his due

nouriſhment & cōpetent allowance. Whereupon,
the vital iuyce being exhauſted & ſpēt, they arriue
to old age ſooner thē otherwiſe they ſhould doe, &
are ſnatched vp by death long before their time.
               Now, that affect & plight which bringeth the
body into a cold & dry diſpoſition,Olde age. is called Olde
age, becauſe it is the cauſe of corruption, decay &
deſtruction of all aſwell Creatures lyuinge, as
Plants & herbes.Death, what it is. For death is nothing els, but
the extinction of nature, that is to ſaye, of the naturall
Heate, & naturall Humour. In which two
things, life conſiſteth: to which extinction & ende
many are brought ſooner then they ſhould be, either
through want and defect of nouriſhment, or
throughe vntemperate life, as toomuche carnall
company with women, vnſeaſonable watchinge,
heauines of mynde, thoughte, and manye other
cauſes, which haſten old age, & bring death vnloked
for, before his time, contrarye to the order of
age and courſe of Nature. Do we not ſee many
old mē,Luſtye olde age wherof it cōmeth. luſty, mery and wel complexioned, ſtrong
of limmes, good footemē, &. in their old dayes as
freſh & actiue as many yong mē be: all which cō
                  meth
vpō no other cauſe, but that in their youthfull
dayes, they liued orderly & wel, and ſpent not
their adoleſcencie in vnruly riot & lechery. Againe,
there be of youngmē a great nūber, weake,
worne to the bare ſtumps, feeble, lame, fainte and
impotēt, dry as a kixe, pale as aſhes, & wāne colored,
for that they ſpent & exhauſted all the pithe
and ſtrength of theyr youth and adoleſcencye,

in wanton ſenſuality, diſordered riot, and immoderate
vſe of Venerous daliaūce, cōſuming therin
the very floure and prime of their luſty age.
For euen as pleaſaūt & gay March floures in ye
Springe of the yeare, with nipping weather and
ſharpe Northernelye wynds,
                     
                        •
                     hat ma
                     
                        •
                     th yonge 
                        •
                     e weake. do fade and wyther
away againe: ſo likewyſe, youth and flouriſhing
age, by vſing ill order and faſhion, is dryed vppe
before his due time, and ere it come to his full
rypenes.
               Therefore, to decline and ſhunne ſuch things
as be hurtful, and to prolonge lyfe many yeares,
and to bring to paſſe, that olde age ſhall not be tedious,
cumberſome, and burdenous, but eaſye,
pleaſaunt, and delightful, it lyeth a man in hand,
to take that order and trade, whereby health may
be maynteyned and ſtill preſerued, or if it happen
to be diſcraſed and empayred, how it may againe
be reſtored and bettered.What thīgs are hurtfull to health. The thinges that hinder
and cruſhe it, and which do weaken, alter and
corrupt the temperament that naturally is in vs,
are not fewe. For the Humours of the body, receiue
and take ſondry qualityes accordinge to the
faculties that be in our nouriſhmente, and in the
order of our vſual diet. Wherunto are to be added,
Bathes, Heate, Exerciſe, Cold, Wearynes,
Thyrſt, Hūger, Sleepe, Reſt, the ſtate of ye Ayre,
and affections of the mynde: all which do ſondry
wayes, alter the habite and ſtate of our bodyes, &
for the moſt part, maketh them worſe. By this
meanes, the bodye that was hoate and moyſte, is

by litle and litle broughte to be cold and drye, or
to ſome other ill qualitye. Alſo as yeares & age
ſteale on vs, as times come and go, as the world
frameth wt vs, eyther forward or backwarde, in
proſperitye or aduerſity, in good fortune or bad,
manye thinges happē vnto a man which ſhake &
ſhrewdly batter a mās good health. Vnto which
effect, the Poet Horace, very aptly in my opynion
wryteth thus:

                     VVhile yeres be freſ he & gallant is our age,
                     Full many ioyes and pleaſures do vve tast.Art. Poet.
                     
                     But elder yeares thoſe iolie ioyes doth ſvvage,
                     And diſaduauntage to vs bringe as faſte.
                  
               
               Wherunto accordeth yt ſame ſentence of holy Iob,
where hee doth liuely expreſſe & ſet out the fraile,
momentanie, vaine, & trāſiory ſtate of mans life,
and to how manye diſcommodities, daūgers aud
chaunges, the ſame is ſubiecte and endaungered:
A man (ſayth hee) that is borne of a vvoman hath
but a ſhort time to liue and is full of myſerie, he
commeth vp and is cut dovvne like a goodlye flovver,
                  Iob. 14.
                  and vaniſheth avvay like a ſhadovv, & neuer
continueth ſtill in one ſtate.
               
               For as yeares do paſſe and mans age doth
march forward, there ſtill happen chaunges and
mutacions. For age is no other thing but the
race or courſe of life, or the time that wee haue to
runne from oure Infancie till wee come to olde
age, in which time, the ſtate and conſtitution of

mans Bodye is altered, and ſteppeth from one
temperamente to an other, and at lengthe (natiue
heate beinge extincte) by death is diuorced
and broughte to finall diſſolution.
               Thus hath Infancie,Infancie. (which of all others
is the moyſteſt) in it, great aboundaunce of naturall
heate, and in the fourth or ſeuenth yeare
ſuffreth mutacion, & in thoſe yeares commonly
we be in great daunger.
               Nexte after it,Childhod is Childhoode, contynuinge
till aboute the fiftenth yeare of oure Age, and
the ſame ſubiecte to no few hazards and diſcommodities.
               Pubertie,Pubertie. is prone and ſubiect to very manye
inconueniences, which taketh his ende at the age
of xviii. yeares.
               As for wylfull and ſlypperye Adoleſcencie
which endeth at xxv. yeares,Adoleſcencie. is (as the others)
ſubiect to ſōdry caſualties & mutacions, as dayly
experience ſheweth.
               Youth or flouriſhing Age, wherein the body
and mynde be in their chiefeſte prime and iolitye,Youth.
laſteth till a man bee xxxv. yeares olde: durynge
which Age, Bloude beareth ſwaye aboundantlye,
and Humours ſomewhat waſte, whereby
it happeneth that this temperamente in continuaunce
and proceſſe of time, beginneth to bee taken
for Hoate and Drye, whereas Adoleſcencye
is aboundantlye ſtoared both of moyſture,
and heate.
               
                  
Mans Age reacheth to the fiftyeth yeare or
ſomewhat further,Mās age. in which tyme man is in his
full rypenes, and leauing former pleaſures and
delightes, his mynde aduyſedlye, carefullye, and
wyſely dealeth in euery thinge that he enterpryſeth.
But the Bodye ſtandeth at one ſtaye, ſuffreth
no great mutacion, till ſixtie three, or ſixtie
fiue yeres of age: for then Age haſteneth on apace,
and draweth towarde his longe home, and
then beginneth the bodye to be colde and drye, beinge
the firſte enteraunce and ſteppe into Oldeage,
which is the nexte neyghboure to decrepicie
and dotage, that ſtandeth at the pittes brincke,
neereſt vnto death. Which as it is not raſhlye
to be wyſhed for, ſo neyther is it amonge Chryſtians
at all to bee feared,Death to the faythful not to be feared. conſyderynge that the
Soule beinge by Fayth aſſured of a better and
ſweeter lyfe, and hauinge an vndoubted hope of
a Reſurrection, oughte in this poynte to bee
throughly perſwaded, and be ful wylling cheerefullye
to departe hence. In the meane ſpace,
whyle hee hath to runne his race in this worlde,
euerye man maye ſo behaue himſelfe and qualefye
his dealynges, that through temperate vſage
and orderlye moderation of lyfe in youth, hee
maye bee furniſhed wyth helpes, and haue in
ſtoare ſome of his former ſtrenghte, the better
to paſſe ouer his Olde Age, and therein to feele
the leſſe tediouſnes. For whereas euerye other
Age hath hys certayne tyme and preſcripte

terme how longe it ſhall laſt: onely Old age, hath
no time to it appointed, but to liue as longe as
hee maye, and to wayte for death and bid it welcome
when ſoeuer it commeth.
               
                  Pythagoras very properly applyeth the foure
quarters of the yeare,The times of the yeare compared to the ages of man. that is, Springe, Sōmer,
Autumne and Wynter, (being times comprehē
                  ded
wythin the two A Equinoctia & the two Solſtitia)
to the fower ages of man: Whoſe ſayinge
and opynion Ouid in Verſes to this effecte deſcrybeth.
               
                  Do vve not ſee the yeare by courſe,
                  in quarters foure deuided:Metam. lib. 15.
                  
                  Hovv iumpe it aunſvveres to our age,
                  if vvell it be decided?
                  For ſucking Babe and tender Impe,
                  the Springe reſembleth right,
                  VVhich into Sommer glides apace,
                  like blade deuoyde of might.
                  VVhen Spring is paſt, then marcheth on,
                  the Sommer tricke and gay,
                  VVhich likened is to luſty youth,
                  ſtrong, dapper, lacking ſtay.
                  VVhen youthfull fancies mellovved be,
                  then Autumen ſteppes in place,
                  Tvvixt yong and olde, of iudgement ripe,
                  vvith medley hayres on face.
                  Old crookebackte Hyems laſt of all,
                  vvith trembling pace appeares;
                  
                     
VVith furrovved face, cleane bald, or els
                  All vvhite and mylky hayres.
               
               This chaungeable alteration, this conuerſion,
mutabilitye, inconſtancye, and inclination of
thinges from one to an other, in the whole courſe
of nature, doth manifeſtlye argue and proue all
thinges to be momentanie, vaine, tranſitory, brittle,
ruinous and vaniſhinge, & as a flower of the
field quickly fading away.
               Seinge therefore the bodye continuallye ſlydeth
into worſe and worſe caſe, ſuffreth many detrimentes,
whereby our ſtrength and powers be
empaired, and manye wayes both inwardlye and
outwardlye enfeebled, it ſtandeth vs vppon, not
negligently, but carefully to loke to the conſeruation
thereof, and ſo carefullye to prouyde for the
ſame, that it may continue in ſtate ſound & health
ful, ſo long as nature hath limitation. Here is
no neede of anye examples, reaſons or proofes,
(ſithens euery man is therein throughly experienced
and perſwaded) how vnwillinge al men in
generall bee, to leaue the ſweetenes of this lyfe,
wt what greate care, ſtudy & induſtrye euery man
will ſtriue to keepe his body in health, and ridde
it from ſickneſſes and diſeaſes, which do not onely
for the time greuouſly aſſault, bruiſe, torment &
afflict the body with paine and doloure, but alſo
ſet before oure eyes a certayne repreſentation or
ſhew of death it ſelfe.
               I will not here ſpeake of the diſquietnes and

trouble, wherin the mynde thereby is plunged, &
of the manyfolde affections at ſuch a time ſpecially
oppreſſing the ſame. Who is he I pray you,
that being in theſe ſo great and ſo many calamities
turmoyled, in theſe vexatiōs, miſeries, griefe
and ſhortnes of life ſo charged and ouerwhelmed,
would not gladly ſeeke ſome remedy and mitigation
of his dolors, and prouyde for ſome helpes
to comfort & eaſe his irkſome labours? Which
thinges who ſoeuer is deſyrous to ſeeke and obtayne,
muſt not thincke, that things momentany,Trāquillity and quietnes of mind
as wealthe, rycheſſe, honours, Lordſhippes,
greate poſſeſſions, fayre houſes, ſumptuous and
coſtly apparell after the braueſt guyſe and maner
wrought and deuyſed,Temperament. can helpe him thereto: but
a quiet & well ſtayed mynde, free and cleare from
all perturbations: and next to that, a ſound and
healthfull body, that is free from ſicknes: which
be the beſt and chiefeſt things that a mā can aſke
and haue at the bountefull hands of God, ſo lōg
as hee hath in this world to continue his pylgrimage.
            
            
               ¶The fift Chapter, deſcribing what Craſis
or Temperamēt is: wherin conſiſteth
the plighte, ſtate, conſtitution, and
complexion of euery mans
bodie.
               
                  
CRaſis or temperamente (for the order of oure
worke requyreth the ſame by definition to be
declared) is an agreemēt,Temperament. and conueniencie of the
firſt qualities & Elementes amonge themſelues:
Or, and equall mixture or proportion of the qualityes
of the Elements, wherin no exceſſe blameworthy
or faultye is to be founde. Contrarywyſe,
Intēperature is that,Intemperatures. which is compact of
the diſagreeable and vnlike powers of Elemēts
and qualities, and ſwarueth from moderation.
And as in Muſicall Inſtruments there is perceyued
a certayne accord of times and a ſweete agreeable
harmonie in ſtryking the ſtringes, yt no
vnpleaſaūt diſcord or būgling iarre, diſlyke ye curious
eare of the hearer: ſo lykewyſe in a temperate
habite of the body, there is an apt and conuenient
mixture and temperature of the Elements
and qualities, inſomuch that no one qualitye can
by it ſelfe be ſhewed, but a conſtante, abſolute and
perfect compoſition, & minglinge of the qualities
and Elements all together. And as in makinge
Salades, Sauces, or medicines of many & ſōdry
herbes, the Compounds be al mingled together,
and euery of the ingredients becom as one, inſomuch
yt no one thinge appeareth or can by it ſelfe
be diſcerned or perceyued: ſo likewyſe happeneth
it in ye qualities of the Elemēts, of whoſe mixture
cōmeth & is made at our creatiō & natiuity, ye firſt
original of our ſubſtāce. In which tēperatures &
mixtures, there be ix. ſeueral differences, wherof
one is temperate, & in eche reſpecte abſolute, lac

nothing that is thereto requiſite, in the which no
one of the clementall qualityes exceedeth or paſſeth
an other, but be in an equal meaſure & euen
proportiō, wtout any thing amyſſe or any diſtēperaunce
at all. Eyght bee intemperate, whereof
Foure be ſymple, and Foure compounde.
               That temperature which is only hoate (wherin
heate ſurmoūteth cold) is the equality of moyſture
and dryneſſe. Cold, wherein coldnes beareth
dominton: Moyſt, wherein moyſture chiefly
ruleth: And dry: where dryneſſe is aboue moyſture,
the reſte beinge a lyke and equall, that is to
ſay, tempered wyth hoate, and cold.
               The compound temperatures which be compoūd
of two qualities together, are theſe: hoate &
moiſt, Hoate and dry: Cold & moyſt: Cold & dry:
of whom the conſtituion of the bodye (which the
Greekes do call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and the common ſort,
Complexion) amonge the Phiſitions is named
and termed, of that which in the myxture, beareth
chiefeſt ſwaye: For wyth them, that body is called
hoate, where is moſte ſtoare of heate. Drye,
wherin drynes raygneth. And lykewyſe of the reſidue.
So, the compoſition of medicynall
drouges, wherin be ſōdry ingredientes, hath hys
name of ſome ſuch one of the ſame as is chiefeſt,
and more of force then the other: as Dianucum,
Diacappar.
                  Compound drouges named of ſome one of the chiefeſt Ingredientes. 
                  Hiera picra, Diaphenicum, Oleum
Vulphinum. &c.
               
               Now, becauſe I would haue this matter exactly
vnderſtoode (as a thyng not onely to Phyſitions,

but to all y• deſtre to lyue in health) right
holeſome and auayleable, I will as farre as I
am able, and as diligentlye as I can, declare and
ſet out the reaſons, order and effecte of euery one.
And firſt wil I begin with the ſtate of the Temperate
nature, or at leaſt, I will pourtraict & ſet
before your eyes, a patterne and image thereof,
firſt cōceyued in mynd or imaginatiō: not yt there
is any ſuch to be ſhewed in the whole world, neither
can any ſuch be found in deede (vnleſſe peraduenture
(as a man ſhould ſay, that God ſpeciallye
and originallye had priuiledged ſome ſuche
from heauen:) but I wil ſet it downe, for y• all yt
other natures in mē are & ought hyther to be referred,
& by this rule to be tryed: that euery man
may perfectly behold, what in himſelf is to much
and what too litle. Neyther let a mā be ouerraſh
and haſty in ſeing a body that is of hoate habite,
to iudge heate in the ſame, to be aboue moyſture,
or colde to preuayle aboue dryneſſe: vnleſſe
hee haue a very diligente and carefull reſpecte to
this perfecte temperature, and firſt ſet it before
his eyes as a marke whereunto to leuell and
direct his dealing and iudgement.
            
            
               ¶Of a Complexion, perfectly and exactly
temperate.
The Sixt Chapter.
               
                  
THe temperate ſtate of bodye that is in ech reſpect
perfecte & abſolute, requyreth very diligentlye
to be handled, and throughlye to be diſcourſed,
for that I would haue the whole mynde
therevnto to be directed, & al the reſt of the ſtates
or habites of the body to it applyed and leuelled,
as it were by rule & lyne, y• euery man may note
and obſerue in himſelf howe farre he is of, from
good & ſound diſpoſition, or integritye of temperature,
& what way he were beſt to take, to bring
himſelf (as neere as he can poſſibly) into his former
ſtate againe. For the farther from this, that
any man is, in worſe caſe of health is hee, and a
great deale readier to fall into diſeaſes of body, &
perturbatiōs of mynde. A body yt is in eche reſpect
perfect & ſound, may moſt aptly be termed &
called Polycletlabus Rule.
                  Polycleti Regula. Which prouerbe is appliable
to al ſuch thīgs as are done moſt perfectly &
wel, wherin there is nothīg lacking nor amiſſe: ſo
yt all other thīgs ought by it, as by a Touchſtone
to be tryed. The Metaphore is takē of one Polycletus
an excellent & ſkilful Image maker, whoſe
cunning & grace of workmanſhip (as Fabius witneſſeth)Lib. 20. Cap. 10.
farre ſurpaſſed al others. He in ihs art of
Imagery ſo artificially hādled his worke, & finiſhed
the ſame wt ſuch excellent perfectiō, that al other
Caruers & Statuaryes in proportioning &
framynge theyr Images, ſet hym before them as
an abſolute Patterne for imitation. This Prouerbial
fygure or phraſe of ſpeach, vſed Galen in
his booke De tuēd. valetud. Where he deſcribeth
and ſetteth downe the beſt ſtate of body that may

be as Polycletus Rule, that is to ſay, ſo neately &
comely ſet out, wt ſuch iuſt congruēt Symmetry
& proportionable commenſuration, as to beholde
is right pleaſaunt and delyghtful. And therefore
ſuch thinges as are wrytten of the beſte ſtate
of body, worthely and by good reaſon ought to be
referred to a thing y• is moſt perfect & abſolute.
Whereupon wee heere do deſcribe and ſet oute a
ſtate and habyte of body after ſuch a ſorte, as Cicero
& Fabius do an Oratour, whom they would
haue to be ymitated, & after ſuch ſort as S. Chryſoſtome
and Eraſmus do deſcribe and furniſh out
a Preacher:De Sacerd. De ratione conc
                        •
                     onandi. to thend that ſuch as ſtudy Eloquēce
or as are appointed to inſtruct & preach to the ignorāt,
ſhould frame thēſelues (as neere as poſſibly
they may) after the exāple & patterne there ſet
downe before them. And although he do not in al
points throughly attaine to yt perfection that hee
doth conceiue in mind, yet ought he, & reaſon it is
that he ſhould go forward therin: and although ye
things which we ſtudy & ſeeke for, be very hard &
difficult, yet ought we not to deſpayre of ye obtayning
our purpoſe, nor cowardly to recoyle & faint
in induſtry. Many mē (ſayth Cicero)De Oratore. being in deſpayre
& out of hope euer to com to thend of their
purpoſe, are afraid to giue any onſet, or to put the
matter in any tryal & practiſe: becauſe (forſothe)
they haue no hope euer to winne it. For the beſt
things, ought not vpō diſpairt to be giuē ouer, &
in things yt be excellent, thoſe are to be accōpted
great, which are next & neereſt to ye beſt.
               
                  
Therefore haue I thought good to ſet downe &
to ſhadow out the beſt ſtate of Bodye, that by the
view and paterne therof, diligently imprynted in
mynde, and ſtedfaſtlye marked by eye, euery man
may imitate & expreſſe the ſame, or come as neere
thereunto as poſſibly he may.
               Such a body therefore,Notes or markes of a body perfectly tēperate. whoſe patterne wee
do here exhibite and ſhewe, hath all his Senſes
freſh & perfect, euery of ye faculties natural, duelie
doing his office and function wythoute ſtop, impediment
or greeuaūce. His memory is ſtedfaſt
and holding faſt, for that, his brayn is neither too
moyſt nor too drye: his mynde quick, ſharpe and
induſtrious, wyſelye and cyrcumſpectly dealinge
in euery thing that he taketh in hand, his maners
and conuerſation honeſte and vertuous, in
none of his doinges and conuerſacion, digreſſing
or ſwaruing from comelynes, his witte ſinguler
and excellent, of nature quiet, curteous, and ſubiect
to no ill affections, abandoninge all raſhnes,
and workinge all things by good iudgement and
conſideration, of notable and ſurpaſſing towardneſſe,
plenteouſlye garniſhed wyth many ſinguler
gyfes and commendable qualities, in lyfe and cō
                  uerſatiō,
vpright & vnreprooueable, in ſo much
that hee maye well ſerue for a notable paterne of
vertue (that is to ſay) a moſt abſolute perfection
of nature in euery point. For in him plentifully
appeareth and is euidētly deſcryed, humanity,
gentlenes, frugality, equitye, modeſtie, and a continent
moderation of all affectiōs: in attemptinge

and atchieuing his affayres and buſynes, neither
raſh and heady, neyther ſlow and lingryng, as one
that forſloweth and delayeth his buſineſſe from
day to day: but in forcaſting and forſcinge what
may betyde, vſeth aduyſe & counſaile, and in bringing
ye ſame to effect & paſſe, adhibiteth cōuenient
ſpeede and quickenes: in the mutable happes &
ſodayne chaunces of fickle Fortune, hee is not
lightly diſmayed, nor brought into feare, & therefore
neyther puffed vp wt ſwellinge pryde in proſperitye,
neyther throwen downe and vtterly diſcouraged
in aduerſitye, but ſuffereth all the diſcommodityes
of lyfe with a mynde ſtoute, cheerefull
and inuincible, and ſuch a one as will not at
any hande be drawen away frō his cōſtancy and
ſettled determination. To which effect, this ſaying
of the Poet Horace aptly agreeth:

                     A man thats armde vvith Conſtancie,
                     and vertue hath in price,Lib. 3. Ode. 3.
                     
                     Cares not a ruſhe for frantique fits,
                     of peoples fonde deuice.
                     Ne frovvning brovv of Tyraunt dreads,
                     no chaunce can him diſmay:
                     Though Heauen and Earth runne all to vvracke,
                     he ſtill is at one ſtay.
                  
               
               Unto which diſpoſition S. Paule framed
himſelfe,Rom. 8. and requireth the ſame affection in all
them that are ingraffed in Chriſte, and haue conſecrated
themſelues to embrace his truth and religion,

that euen as he was for his part, ſo euery
mā ſemblably ſhould certaynly and vndoubtedly
be reſolued & perſwaded, that nothing (be it neuer
ſo dreadful and terrible) ſhould be able to ſeperate
and pull vs frō the loue of God which is
in Chriſte Ieſus, to whō wee haue addicted and
ſurrendred our ſelues by profeſſion.
               Such a one therefore as we do here ſhadow out
and deſcribe, is in heart and mynd ſo well ſettled
and perfectly ſtayed, that he is not to be drawē to
either party, or to wauer and totter this way and
y• way, but perſeuereth ſtill in one ſtay of ſtedfaſtnes
& cōſtancy, without any kind of alteration or
mutability. In him there are (in deede) affectiōs,
but yet ſuch as bee natural & not diſcōmendable,Affections naturall.
as, loue and zealous affectiō to his wife, Childrē
and ſuch as hee wiſheth wel vnto, whom as hee
doth not fondly cocker and ſuffer to runne at rā
                  don,
or to haue the ful ſcope of theyr owne wanion
wils: ſo againe, is he not to thē bitter, ſtrait,
rigorous, ſpightful, wayward nor ſtubborne, but
ſo, that in familiar communication and company
with them, he vſeth a gentle mi
                     ••
                  es, ſeaſoned wt 
an earneſt and reuerend grauity, wythoute much
prattling & tatrlīg, wythout byring ſkoffes, & vpbrayding
tauntes, 
                     ••
                  oural vncomely and vnciull
ieſ
                     ••
                  hinge, pleaſauntlye conceyted, and meerye
wyth honeſtye, not Vſing therein anye filthynes or
rybauldrye: and as hee is moſte farre of from all
malapert ſcurrility and ſcenicall geſture, ſo is he

agayne moſt farre from ſulleyne ſterne ſeuerity, &
from Stoycall indolency: for who wyll not iudge
them boyde of all humanity, and wythoute anye
ſenſe of mans nature?
               
                  VVhom gentle ſpeach and language ſvveete,A Enei. 4.
                  
                  no more can mollyfie.
                  Then if they Flint or Marble vvere,
                  that grovves in Marpeſie.
               
               Lykewyſe in maners & order of lyfe hee is altogether
vnlyke both to Democritus and alſo to
Heraclitus: whych two perſons in nyppinge Satyre,
were by the Poet ſhaken vp and ſet oute in
theyr cōlours. For

                     To gygling laughter geeuen vvasIuuenal. Sat. 10. The nature of Democritus and Hetaclitus.
                     
                     Democritus alvvay:
                     Contraryvviſe, Heraclitus
                     to vveping night and day.
                  
               
               And not onely in the inward mynd of man, do
theſe ornamentes and giftes of nature appeare
& expreſſelye ſhew out themſelues, but euen in the
outward ſhew, ſhape and behauiour of the bodye
there is euidētly deſcryed and perceyued a comely
grace and portlye dignity. For in the countenaunce,
whych is the Image of the mynde, in the
eyes, which are the bewrayers and tokentellers
of the inward conceiptes: in the colour, lineamentes,
proportion and feacture of the whole

bodye, there appeareth a kinde of heroicall grace
and amyablenes, inſomuch that the very viewe &
ſighte thereof, allureth and draweth euery one by
a certayne ſecrete ſympathie or cōſent of Nature
to loue it, wythout any hope of profite or commodity
thereby to bee reaped or receyued. The body
is decently made & featly framed, conteyninge
an abſolute conſtruction and comely frame of al
the parts together. The head not aſlope cornered,
but rounde and globewyſe faſhioned, the
hayre of fayre aburne or cheſten colour: the forhead
ſmoth, cheerefull and vnwrynckled, beautifyed
wyth comely eyebrowes, and greatly honoured
wyth a paire of amyable eyes, not holow, but
delightfully ſtandinge out. The colour freſhe,
ſweete and pleaſaunte. The cheekes and the
balles therof ſteygned and dyed in a perfect hew
of whyte and redde, and that naturally, ſpeciallye
in the luſty yeares of Adoleſcencie. The porte &
ſtate of the body bolt vprighte, the gate or goinge
framed to comelynes, not nycely affected nor curiouſly
counterfaicted, as it were Players & diſguyſed
Maſquers,Counterfaite gate. who by a kinde of vpſtarte &
ſtately gate, hopeth the rather to winne credite, eſtimation
and authority, and to be made more accompte
of, amonge the common people. The
tongue prompt and ready, diſtinctly and ſenſibly
able to pronounce and deliuer out his meaning,
in wordes of gallant vtteraunce.
               There are beſyde theſe, certayne other things,
neceſſarily and according to the condition of mās

nature, requiſite. For in eating and drinking he
vſeth moderacion, and through holſome exerciſe,
concocteth well his meate and diſtributeth the
ſame to the good nouriſhment of the body: for the
better perfourmaunce wherof, he eyther vſeth a
liuelye & ſtraynable voyce, or els conuenient walkinge.
Whereby it happeneth that in the bodye
there is gathered very ſmall ſtore of excrements,
and ſleepe is the quieter and ſounder, not diſturbed,
not empeached, nor troubled wt anye abſurde
and troubleſome dreames. And if anye ſhapes,
fourmes or likenes of thīgs do viſſblye ſeeme in
dreames, to appeare and offer themſelues to his
mynde, when the night is well ſpent, and the cō
                  coction
of meates throughlye finiſhed, ſuch repreſentations
ſurelye happen not withoute ſome
diuination, that is to ſaye, they import & ſignifie
no vayne, nor friuolous predictiō or foreſhewing
of thīgs to come, but earyeth a preſage that is wel
to bee conſidered, and not lightlye to be neglected.
               But in this frayle and tranſitory lyfe of man,
in this ſo great corruptiō & inclinatiō of nature,
I do not ſee, to whō theſe thīgs ought more aptly
to be applyed thē to Chriſt himſelfe, of whom
Dauid prophecyed: calling him,Pſalm. 45. 
                  Fayrer then the
childrē of mē, ful of grace & ſweetenes of words,
vnto whō no mā may be thought cōparable. For
as he, aboue al others in all kindes of vertues aboundātly
garniſhed, with integrity of lyfe, mildnes
of maners, excellencye of doctrine, ſtraungenes

of myracles, and vnſpeakeable diuinity, drew
and allured ye greateſt part of the World into an
admyration and loue of him: ſo alſo hee wanted
nothing of all thoſe things that can eyther be deuyſed
or in mynde conceyued.Chriſt a paterne of perfection. Who therefore
doubteth, but that he which had al gifts, had alſo
a body moſt beautifull & comely? And although
his Diuinity be rather to be reſpected and conſidered,
and the vſe and purpoſe for which hee was
ſent and giuē vnto vs: yet is there nothing to the
contrary, but wee may in mynde ſuppoſe & iudge
that there was in him ſuch an excelling forme of
bodelye ſhape, as for ſuch a dignitye and maieſtie
was fit and worthy. For his outward port and
heroicall ſtature was agreeable to his worthynes,
and conſonante to the Diuinity and inward
gifts of his mynd,Ioan. 1. which he bountefully powred
oute vppon vs. And therefore in deſcrybing an
exact conſtitution of the bodely ſtate of man, wee
ought to choſe no better patterne, nor ſet any perfecter
exemplar before oure eyes, eyther for the
bodye or the mynde, then him alone. For in hym
(as S. Paule ſayth)Colloſ. 2. are hidde all the treaſures
of knowledge and wyſedome, and in whom dwelleth
corporallye all fulneſſe of Diuinitie. For
no blemiſhe nor faulte was in him,Heb. 4. to no ſicknes
or ſinne was hee prone and ſubiect.
               Nowe, whereas wee reade, that ſomeiyme he
was in ſpeache very earneſte and hoate: in reprouing
vyces,Ioan. 11. very vehement, & ſharpe: wyth teares
and weepinge to haue ſorrowed and lamented,

and in angry moode to haue teſtifyed howe much
he deteſted the haynouſneſſe of ſome lewde facte:
the ſame was a token and argumente of his ſinguler
gentlenes, gracious fauoure and hartye
goodwill that he bare to all men. For, hee beinge
wonderfullye deſyrous of the Soule health
of all mankinde, was angrye and ſorye that many,
(whoſe amendemente and not deſtruction hee
ſo earneſtlye wyſhed) did ſo wilfullye and ſtubbernelye
perſiſte in theyr errour,Chriſt voyd of all ill affections. refuſinge and
deſpyſinge ſuch a fitte occaſion to repente, and
attayne theyr Saluation, there ſo freely and fitly
to them offered.
               Let this ſuffice, as touching the abſolute ſtate
and perfecte diſpoſition of mans bodye. Nexte
whereunto is that age that is freſh, flouriſhing, &
in his chiefe prime: ſpecially that, which from very
infancie hath bin well inſtituted, and commē
                  dablye
trayned vp, which (yet notwythſtanding)
doth euen ſtrayghtwayes fade, & in continuaūce
cannot but at length vtterly faynt & paſſe awaye.
For as in other thīgs, ſo likewyſe in mās nature,
all things that had beginning, do dye and decay,
and things that had increaſing, waxe alſo olde, &
after a certaine race of time here runne, do haſten
towards their death, & vaniſh away to nothinge.
Which mutability & inconſtancie is a good warninge
& leſſon for euery one of vs, to deſpyſe theſe
fraile and tranſitory things, which ſo ſoone paſſe
away, & to lift vp our hearts and mynds, to ſuch
thinges as are parmanent and eternall.
               
                  
                  Which thing S. Paule, goeth earneſtly about to
beate into our heads, where he ſayth: If yee be
ryſen againe vvith Chriſte,Colloſ. 3. ſeeke thoſe thinges
vvhich are aboue, vvhere Chriſte ſitteth on the
righte hand of God: Set your affections on heauenly
things and not on earthly things.Heb. 13. For vve
haue not here any abyding Citie or place of continuall
dvvelling, but vve ſeeke for one to come,
vvhoſe builder and maker is God:Heb. 11. VVho (as S.
Peter ſayth) hath called vs out of darckenes into
his merueylous lighte and appointed vs to life euerlaſting.1. Pet. 2.
               
            
            
               ¶Of a hoate Complexion.
The vij. Chapter.
               AMonge thoſe that digreſſe from a meane, and
differ from temperatenes, the hoate complexioned
bodye is firſt to be ſpoken of. For as
it is the firſt in order, ſo for cōſeruation of health,
it is better then the reſte.Hoate complexion. And hee namely is to
be thoughte and accompted hoate, in whom that
quality of heate aboundeth & excelleth the other
that be moderately conſtituted, that is, thoſe that
be tempered wyth moyſt & drye. Of which ſtate
and condition if a man bee diſpoſed throughly to
ſearche oute, and marke all the notes and ſignes,
he ſhall by proofe finde, that whoſoeuer is of that
Complexion & conſtitution, is of ſtature comely

and of ſhape and beauty agreeable and conſouāte
to manly dignitye:Tokens of a hoate Complexion. of body not groſſe ſat or corpulent,
but reaſonably & faſte fleſhed For heate
diſſolueth and diſſipateth all fatte things: of conler
red or (if bloude be too hoate and boyling, as
in them that dwel in hoate regions and parching
countryes) browne or tawnie. For there be
in euery bodye (accordinge to the condition of the
ayre and region (ſondry degrees of heate,Degrees of heate in man. and diuers
conſiderations and differēces, both of this
and of the other qualities alſo. The Indians,
AEthiopians, Moores, Aſians, AEgyptians, Paleſtines,
Arabians, Greekes, Italians, Spanyatds, Polonians,
Muſcouites, Germaines, Frenchmen,
Duchmen, &c. are of ſondry and different Complexions,
& euerye one in his kinde hath of heate,
ſeuerall and ſondry differences.
               For euen as fewel and matter combuſtible for
Fier, is ſome hoater and more burning then ſome
other is, and as the fier panne or hearth wherein
is burnt eyther Seacoales, fattie turues of the
nature of bitumen, the burning lyme of chaulkye
clay called Naphtha, oyle, pitch, roſen, or (finally
to ſpeake of wood,) Oke, Hornebeame, Larche,
Byrch, Elme, Popler, Wyllow, the fier is vehementer
and the hearth is of heate ſometime extreme,
ſometime more ſoft & mylde: So likewyſe
in euery mās body according to the nature of the
place, and order of lyfe and dyet, this heate is encreaſed
or dyminiſhed, and this is the very cauſe
that men be of ſo ſondry colours, and of hayres ſo

diuers & differēt: for in euery hoate Cōplexioned
body mixed with moderate humour, the ſkīne is
rough & hayrie, the beard fayreand comly, but the
hayres of the head ſomwhat differ, & by reaſon of
heate, are of other colour. For hayres being generated
of a fuliginous & groſſe excremente of the
third concoction,Black haytes. become black, when as (the vapour
being aduſte by force & power of heate) the
excrement is turned into an exact fuliginouſnes.
               Curled and crooked hayres proceede of a dryneſſe
of Complexiō,Curled hayres. cauſed through immoderate
heate: or els, by reaſon of the ſtraictnes and narrow
iſſue of the pores, where ye rootes of the hayres
be faſtened. For then haue they much adoe to
peepe vp and finde any right way to appere out,
whereby it happeneth that they growe crooked,
curled & fryſled, & ſpecially in them, in whō it ſo
happeneth naturally, beīg not artyficially procured
nor by toto ſuperfine curioſtly friſled: as ſome
nyce dames & Prickmedainties, which curiouſly
combe & bring theyr hayres into a curled faſhion
and cryſped lockes, therby ye more to ſet out their
beauty, & to cōmend themſelues (as they thinck)
after a more glorious ſhewe to the beholders.
               Therfore all they yt dwel in hoate & dry regions,
haue hayre black, & of ſmal growīg, curled, criſp,
and as the Egyptians, Spaniardes, AEthiopians,
Moores, and all other which in nature and condition,
ars lyke vnto them. For we ſee many in euery
region, yea of them that dwell Northwarde
towarde the Pole Arctick, which (if we conſider

theyr hayres, colour, & cōplexiō of their whole body)
ſeeme rather like foreyners & ſtraūgers, then
Con̄trey borne people. So amōg y• Netherlāders
& low Duchmē bordering vpon ye Sea, many be
black & curle heyred, & tawnyſkīned, ſpecially they
which in Sōmer are much in ye heat of ye Sūne, &
vſe much labour: howbeit this variety of bodyes
may be referred to ſondry cauſes,Varietie & diuerſity of body. as eyther to the
nature of the Coūtrey & Regiō, or to the power &
facultie of theyr meats & nouriſhmēt, or els finally
to the hiddē ymaginatiōs of the womā or, mother.
Which ymaginations are of ſo great force &
efficacie,Imagination. that the things by her in mynd earneſtly
ymagined in & at the very inſtant time of her cō
                  ceptiō,
is deryued into the infant & child then begotten.
For this Sexe being wanton,VVomēs intemperaunce. toying, &
ſtedfaſtly eying euery thing yt is offered to ſight,
it happeneth that the naturall facultie being then
in workinge & formyng of the child, directeth her
cogitatiōs & inward cōceiptes y• way, & bringeth
vnto ye Infāt, an other forein ſhape & forme, in nature
& cōditiō altogether vnlike ye right parēts.
               This euen in oure dayes and of late yeares
hath bin by experience found true:A true report. at what time ye
Emperour Charles, ye ſi
                     •
                  t of yt name, coming out
of Spaine into y• lowe Countryes, arryued there
wyth a wel appointed nauy of royal ſhippes, hauing
in his cōpany a goodly trayne of noble Gē
                  tlemē
& yeomē. Many womē therabout, being thē
great wt child, through much beholdīg & wel eying
thoſe galāt Spaniards, after ix monethes brought

theyr Infantes and children, hauing eyebrowes
and hayres blacke and curled, and in all reſpects
coloured like Spaniards. And this happened
not amonge filthye Corteghians & common brothelles
(whom it might well be thought to haue
bin vnderlinges & hackeneyes to thoſe hoate natured
and lecherous Nation) but the ſame fell ſo
oute alſo, among right honeſt & tryed Matrones,
(whoſe approued chaſtitye and vertuous diſpoſitiōs
were ſo irreprooueable, that they were not
to be once charged wyth the leſt ſuſpicion of any
ſuch lewednes) and yet theſe affections and impreſſions
in theyr children tooke place accordingly.
               In lyke maner, whē y• Emperour Maximilian
(who was deſcēded of the houſe of Auſtrich) had
alſo the gouernment ouer the Low Countreyes,
the women being much in compaignie and ſighte
of the Germaynes, brought forth theyr Children
with yelowe flexen hayres, and in eche poynt lyke
to Germaynes. For they and all other as many
as are borne and bred in cold and moyke Countryes,
haue hayres fine, ſtreight and ſomewhat
ruddie, and beardes of the colour of braſſe: for yt
the heares are neyther aduſted by the Sūne, nor
yet by any inward heate: for hauinge moyſture
plentifully and iſſues oute at the poores eaſye ynough,
the aboundance of the excrements, wherwyth
they be nouriſhed, maketh the hayres thick,
and the aduſtion which cauſeth the colour to bee
blacke, it maketh weake. Blacke hayre therfore

commeth of vapour by heat aduſte, when the excrement
is wrought and turned into an exact fuliginouſnes.Black hayre
The cauſe that produceth yellow
hayre, is when the vapour is not much aduſt and
heated, for that which is then impreſſed in the
ſkinne,Yelovv. and ſeeketh eruption, is the feculent excrement
of yelow Choler, and not of Melancholie.
But white hayre cōmeth of Phlegme and of
a humoure cold and moyſt.Whyte. Redde hayres, as they
be meane betweene yelow and whyte,Redde. ſo doth the
generation of it proceede of a certayne nature,
meane betweene Phlegme and Choler.
               Now, they that dwel in countryes temperate
and betweene theſe, haue of hayre much ſtoare,
ſtronge, ſomewhat blackiſhe, meanely thicke, and
neyther altogether thicke and groſſe, nor altogether
ſtreight & plaine. Which differēces Galene
applyeth to euery ſeuerall age. For as touching
the colour,Lib. 2. de Temper. he aſcrybeth ſuch hayres as yong Infantes
haue, to the Germaynes: of ſuche as be in
their beſt flouriſhynge yeares, to Spaniards and
Mauritanians: and of them that be Spryngalds
or in the beginning of theyr Adoleſcencie, to ſuch
as inhabite temperate Countryes. In the natures
alſo of bodyes, the hayre is of forme & colour
according to the difference and reſpect of Ages
and Countryes.
               For tender age and Childhoode is bare without
hayres on the bodye,Why children h
                        ••
                     e no bea
                        •
                     des. or els wyth verye ſmal,
ſoft and moſye hayre onelye, becauſe eyther there
be n
                     •
                   pores in theyr ſkinnes for the exhalatiō to

euaporate and grow to the bigneſſe of hayres, or
els there wanteth effluxe and fuliginous excrement,
wherewithall the ſmall threads of the hayres,
are wont to be drawen and produced oute.
But when they bee come neere aboute the age of
xiiii. yeares, they beginne to bourgen and ſhewe
forth, lytle and weake. Luſtye and flouriſhinge
Age, hath hayres ſtronger, fuller buſhed & blackiſhe,
for that, the pores and paſſages then beginne
to open and be enlarged: and finally ſtoare
of fumous exhalation aboundeth in thoſe partes
of the bodye, which are apte to generate and produce
hayre, as the Heade, Chinne, Arme pittes, &
Priuities. For although the Breaſte, Armes, &
Thighes, in ſome that be of very hoate complexion
& abound with fuliginous vapoure, be ſeene
to be rough and hayrie, yet do thoſe hayres grow,
neither ſo copiouſlye nor to anye greate length:
which thing (for example ſake) in certayne drye
and muſculious places of the bodye, as the eyebrowes
& eyelyddes may euidētly be perceyued.
               Therefore the muche ſtoare and thicknes of
hayre commeth of aboundaūce of humours:Much ſtore of hayre how it commeth. and
the colour thereof is according as the heate is of
greatnes. Therefore all thoſe partes in mans
body are moſt rough and hayrie, which abounde
in moſte heate. For it attracteth the vaporous
fumes that iſſue from humours, and faſhioneth
the ſame into a hayrie nature. And for this cauſe,
many Springhaldes haue not in that Age anye
heardes, neither any other partes of their bodies
hayrie.
               
                  
My order is (to ſuch as reſort to me for aduiſe
and counſell, howe they maye make their beardes
to growe) to open and make wide their pores &
paſſages, by applying and geeuinge to them ſuch
thinges as ſtirre vp heate in thoſe partes, & bring
out humours, altering & concocting the ſame into
the vſe of hayres. The Lintment that I cuſtomably
make for this purpoſe is this.To make the bearde grow. 
                  R. of Reede
or Cane rootes, Brionie rootes, Beete, Radiſh,
Floure de lice, Onions, of ech alike, viz the quantity
of foure Ounces, ſixe fatte figges bruſed &
ſtamped very ſmall, Maydenheare, Sothernvvod,
Dill, of eche one handfull: ſeethe theſe all together
in ſweete and well relyced wyne, then force &
wringe out the licoure and ſtreine it throughe a
ſtrayner, then put to it freſhe butter neuer ſalted,
pure honie, Ana. ii. oun mces, Oyle of Almonds
both ſweete and ſower, Oyle of Seſama about the
quantity of i. oūce, Oximel Scyllitic. halfe an oz.
the powder or meale of Lineſeede, Nigella, Fenugreke,
wel ſifted and throughly boulted in a
fine boulter, one Pugil or ſmal graſpe, of ye gūme
Labdanū
                   one oūce. Let al theſe be ſet vpon ye fier
and ſtirred with a ſticke til they be thick ynough
to make a Limment withall. To what part of ye
body ſoeuer this liniment is layd and applyed, it
maketh hayre to grow: and if the Chinne or bare
Cheekes bee therewith annoynted, the ſame wil
quickly be hayrie and haue a comely bearde.
               For it openeth and relaxeth the ſkinne beynge
thycke, and maketh the paſſage and

and euaporaciō for ye humours, of whō throughe
the helpe and operation of heate, the firſt buddīg
out and generation of hayres proceedeth. And
if the baldnes or bareneſſe of hayre proceede
not eyther of elderſhippe in yeares, or els by
reaſō of ſome ſickneſſe, or vicious humours as
bodyes infected wyth ſome lothſome diſeaſe, or
wyth French Pockes, commonly are (for the bodyes
of ſuch perſons euen in the ſecreteſt partes,
become in eche place pylde, and ſheedeth all their
hayre like vnto Trees, whoſe leaues fall of, if in
the roote raigne anye ſaltiſhnes or venemous licoure)
this liniment is a preſent helpe and remedy:
but the body muſt firſt by Purgation be clē
                  ſed
from all ill and filthy humours inwardly.
               But to proceede in my purpoſe & matter: womē
by ye very ſame reaſon that yong Stryplings
are, haue no hayre on theyr bodyes, but be ſmothe
and ſlicke ſkinned, ſauinge onelye theyr heades &
crowne where their hayre groweth in marueylous
great plentye,Women ful of hayres on their head. for that the vapours do very
much & aboundantly aſcend vpward. In their
other partes their ſkinne is ſmothe and vnhayrye,
becauſe moyſture is aboue heate. Sauing y•
in and about theyr ſecrete pryuityes,Hayrie women, lecherous. where alſo
hayrineſſe appeareth, ſuch women as be greatlye
deſtrous of carnall luſt and copulacion, be verye
roughe and thick growenr with hayre thereabout,
and the more lecherous, the more hayrie & fruictfull.
And the cause whye ſome women (otherwyſe
aboundinge wyth generatiue ſeede) do not

conceyue and beare children, is nothing els but y•
want of heate. For euen as a fenny and very wet
grounde beareth no corne but choketh it vppe, ſo
likewyſe a wombe that is ſlypperie,Barenueſſe inwomē & vnablenes in men to get Childrē. is not fit for
conception. In like maner alſo, there be ſome
yonge men, who maryinge to ſoone, and ere they
be fully rype, are vnfruictfull and not able to get
any children, for that they lacke manly ſtrength, &
theyr ſeede to cold and thinne. It is therefore
by reaſon of heate, that men be hayrie and bolder
then women be. But if heate encreaſe in mans
body vnmeaſurably and aboue a mediocrity, and
that through Choler ye bloud be ſtyrred and toomuch
enflamed, it oftentimes turneth into meere
deſperate rage & furie.Heate cauſeth holdnes. And hereof it commeth,
that many beinge angred and theyr bloud eyther
wyth publicke or wyth pryuate iniuryes ſtyrred,
in theyr deſperate moode, will Bedlemlyke
runne vppon theyr Ennemyes wyth myndes enraged.
The hoater of complexion therefore y•
euery man is, and further of from moderate temperature,
the hayryer is his bodye, and the fiercer
is his courage. Which thinge by Iuuenal is
right well expreſſed, where he ſayth:

                     A buſshie Beard, and Armes ouergrovven
                     vvith briſtled hayres, Sat. 2. declare
                     In man, a ſauage cruell mynde
                     deuoyde of any care.
                  
               
               For vehemēt heate maketh men ſtoute of courage,

rage, fierce, teſtie, crafty, ſuttle, induſtrious, politicke,
of which ſorte of men wee fynde in wryting,
ſome, that not onely in their outward parts,
but in their very Entrailes and inwarde partes,
alſo haue bin found rough and hayrie.Lib. 11, Cap. 37 
                  Plinie
maketh mention of one Ariſtomenes Meſſenius,
who by his ſubtyle Stratagemes and warlicke
ſhiftes is ſayd (being alone) to haue put to flight,
whole Bands of men. Which thing is a plaine
Argumente and tokē aſwel of his craftineſſe and
ſuttletie, as alſo of his excellente and wonderfull
fortitude. This man after he had ſlaine CCC.
Lacedemonians, was by them once or twyſe takē
captiue & caſt into pryſō, but eſcaped their hands
by creepinge oute at a litle narrowe hoale in the
pryſon as Foxes and Weeſels do.The ſuttlety of Ariſtomenes. Beinge agayne
taken he eſpyed conuenient time when his
keepers & Iaylers were well whittled wt wyne &
faſte 
                     •
                  ulled, & then crawled & rolled himſelf to the
fler, and there burninge a flonder the Cordes and
Gyues wherewyth he was tyed, together wyth y•
parte of his body where they were faſtened, eſcaped
agayne. Being taken the third time, the Lacedemonians
his ennemyes, meaninge to make
ſure woorke wyth him, and deſyringe to ſee what
was within him, ripped his breaſt, and foūd his
heart to be ouergrowen wyth hayre.Iudie. 15. & 16. Hereby we
are to coniecture and geſſe, what māly heate and
ſtrength there was in Sampſon, who wt the Iaw
bone of an Aſſe ſlue a Thouſād perſons, and pullinge
vp the Doares of the gate of the Citie, the

two ſyde poaſtes, wyth the barres and all, layed
them vpon his ſhoulders and caryed them vp to
the toppe of an hill: Who breaking a ſonder the
coardes & bandes wherewith he was tyed, boldly
and wythout any feare ſet vppon them yt lay in
wayte for him: and pulling downe the mayne pillers
of the houſe, oppreſſed and ſlue a wonderful
multitude of his ennemies. No leſſe notable &
wonderfull was the ſtoute valiaunce of Dauid,
                  1. Reg. 17.
who flercelye flyinge vpon a Lyon, and likewiſe
vppon a Beare that came with open mouth to
haue deuoured his flocke of Sheepe, ſlewe them
both, and afterwarde vanquiſhinge and foylinge
that proude and deſpiteful Philiſtine Goliah, cut
of his head, and brought the ſame wyth him into
the Cittie as a worthy Trophee and Monumēt
of his noble Proweſſe and victorie. For this
cauſe alſo is Sangar the ſonne of Anath in Sacred
Chronicles regiſtred & enrolled,Iud. 3. who flew of
the Philiſtines vi. hundred men wyth a Ploughe
ſhare, or (as ſome do tranſlate it) wyth an Oxe
goade. And althoughe ſuch men as theſe for the
moſt part be of ſtrength and courage inuincible,
yet is it manye tymes ſeene, that a great ſorte of
them are ledde and caryed headlonge by wilfull
affection and vnrulyneſſe of mynde, to committe
and attempte thinges neyther honeſt nor allowable.
Whoſe inclination being ſuch, that (if they
woulde be guided by vertue) they were able and
of power to compaſſe right worthy exployts, and
lacke no meanes nor helpes for the atchieuinge

and furtheraunce thereof, yet do they oftentimes
take the worſe waye, geuing themſelues to notable
vyces, and by craftines, ſubtilitye, coſeninge,
filching, murther, and bloudſhedding, ſeeke to enriche
themſelues and to come by wealth, dominion,
power and authority. Theſe men quighte abandoning
the vertues, of Maguanimitie & Fortitude,
deſyre rather ye name of harebrayned boldnes
and cruelty, then of valiaunce and ſtoutenes.
               In the attempte and aduenture of anye
daunger,Bold raſhnes. they ſhewe themſelues couragious and
hardy, but this theyr courage and hardyneſſe tendeth
not to any commodity or profite of their common
wealth and Country, but of a certayne pryuate
luſte, affection, and diſorderlye outrage in
themſelues, to feede theyr owne ſenſual phantaſyes,
and wylfulnes: and ſo they maye haue theyr
willes & theyr turnes ſerued, they make no great
conſcience, how the common ſtate of theyr Country
fareth.
               Thus, manye times by proofe wee ſee, yonge
men of ryght good hope and towardnes, through
lewde compaignie of diſordered Rakehelles,Vertues defaced and marred by vices. to
degenerate frō the vertuous inclynation of theyr
owne maners, into lewdenes and villa
                     •••
                  e and
whereas by foldwing ye diſpoſition of theyr owne
vertuous nature, they mighte full well thryue, &
be in great likelyhoode to become righte worthy
and famous members of their Countrey, they
ſeeke to compaſſe and bringe the ſame to effecte,
through ill Artes and diſcommendable meanes,

in the learninge and practiſe wherof, they ſhewe
themſelues as induſtrious and take as greate
paynes, as woulde conducte and bringe them to
matters of better excellencie, and a greate deale
worthier renowne.
               And as dull ſpirited, heauy, ſlouthfull & ſleapy
perſons, commonly do not bringe to paſſe nor
atchieue anye memorable acte, either for goodnes
or harme notorious, neither attempte any greate
feactes or noble enterpryſes: So contrariwiſe
theſe perſons are ſit and apt to euery thinge, that
they ſet theyr myndes vnto, whether it be good or
badde, vertue or vice: neither is anye thinge ſo
harde and cumberſome, but (if they bende thereto
their minde and induſtry, they will compaſſe and
ouercome it, and therein attaine to a notable excellencie.
And therefore in my opinion Plato
iudged right wiſely,Lib. 6. de Rep. in ſaying that, horrible wickednes,
and graceleſſe deſperate villanie proceedeth
not of a lowtiſhe and dull nature, but rather
of a noble and excellente minde, that is marred &
corrupted by ill cuſtome and lewde education.
And ſuch perſones as theſe, bee of a hoate complexion
and diſpoſition of bodye, which pricketh
them forward to do and execute ſuch pranckes.
For they that be cold (becauſe they be fearefull &
daſtardly) neuer yet (as the prouerbe ſayth) deſerued
tryūph for any worthy exploite done, neither
dare to giue the onſet and enterpriſe, to anye
thing wherin is any great difficulty, daunger, or
odde ſingularity.
               
                  
They therefore that haue hoate bodyes, are alſo
of nature variable, and chaūgeable, readyprōpt,
liuely, luſty and applyable: of tongue, trowling,
perfect, & perſwaſiue: delyuering their words diſtinctly,
plainlye and pleaſauntlye, with a voyce
thereto not ſquekinge and ſlender, but ſtreynable,
comely and audible.Bigge voyce. The thing that maketh
the voyce bigge, is partlye the wydenes of the
breaſt and vocall Artery, and partly the inwarde
or internall heate, from whence proceedeth the
earneſt affections, vehemente motions, and feruent
deſyers of the mynde. But if ciuil and vertuous
education be lacking, they many tymes become
cogging ſhifters, crafty coſoners, ſlye makeſhiftes,
nymble conueighers & foyſtinge filchers,
troubleſome and ſeditiouſly natured, vnconſtante,
waueryng, fraudulent vntruſty and factious.
               
                  VVho taketh ioy and pleaſure ſtill,
                  In vvarres,AEnei. 1. in ſhiftes, and vices ill.
               
               And for that their loynes be verye hoate, they
are alſo for the moſt parte greatlye geeuen to leacherie
and whoorehunting, and thrall to all other
pleaſures of the body. Unto which vyce if they
muche yelde and addicte themſelues, frequenting
it exceſſiuely aboue meaſure, it happeneth y•
by reaſon of ouermuch profuſion and waſt of humour,
they become bald and pilde on the forparte

of their head ſooner then otherwyſe they ſhoulde:
their colour alſo fadeth away and decayeth, their
eyes waxe dimme and bleared, their temples fall
down, their legges & buttocks waxe thīne & weariſh,
their luſtines fayleth, their face is lanke and
leane, and finally all the beautye and comelyneſſe
of the body thereby decayeth and peryſheth, beſyde
a greate many of other diſcommodyties and
inconueniences whereunto they be ſubiecte: As
firſt, to Conſumptions and ill fauoured habites
or lyking of the bodye, Feeuers hecticke, which
takinge once holde in the inwardeſt partes, and
throughlye ſettling in the boanes and marowe,
bryngeth the body into apparante conſumption.
But if men of this conſtitution and complexion
do circumſpectly looke to theyr health, and order
their bodyes and minds well and conuenientlye,
they are healthfuller and luſtyer then anye other
men, and ſeldome happen to be ſicke, or to gather
anye ſuperfluous aboundaunce of ill humours,
which bringe putrefaction and corruption to the
whole body. For the moderate ſubſtaunce of
naturall heate, defendeth and maketh them
free from all ſickeneſſes and greeuaunces.
               It is expediente therefore and behoouefull,
to vſe a ryghte orderlye diet and good trade of
life. And beſyde theſe, that ſerue to the conſtitution
of Mannes bodye, there be Sixe
thinges which beinge carefully looked vnto, and

diligently obſerued, are able to keepe vs in good
health,Things not naturall. ſo that wee vſe and not abuſe the ſame, otherwiſe
then orderly and conueniently. For
the will of God the maker of all things, hath put
theſe thinges to diſpoſe at our owne choiſe
and election. Galene calleth them, cauſes conſeruatorie,
becauſe they ſerue & are able to keepe
our bodies in good ſtate,Artis Medicae 85. if they bee orderlye and
conuenientlye vſed. The Phiſitions of later
time call them by the name of thinges not naturall:
not for yt they bee withoute nature: but for y•
they be thinges that be not naturally within but
wythout vs: and for that, by theyr vſe and effect
and by the order of their qualitye and meaſure,
they do empaire and dainnyflte nature if they bee
not well and aptlye vſed. Of the which ſorte
are theſe: Ayre that enclooſeth vs, Meate and
Drincke, Exercyſe and Reſte, Sleepe & Watch,
Euacuation and retention, and the Affections of
the mynde: all which, natural heate requireth as
things neceſſary and needefull to her conſeruation
and healthfull mayntenaunce.
               Firſt the Ayre doth ſomtime ſlyly and cloſely,
ſometime manifeſtlye and apparantlye,Ayre. enter and
breathe into ye bodye, where it either corrupteth
or els refreſheth the ſpyrites within, ſometime wt 
corrupt and ſtinking ſauour, and ſometyme wyth
holeſome and ſweete afflation.Fulſome & peſtilēt ayre more hurtful then peſtilent meat And this is to
be noted, that vnholeſome Ayre, and contagious
or peſtilēt ſents, do more harme to ſound health,
then meate that is of veuemous qualitye. For

the meate may by vomite be caſt vp again, wheras
the Ayre and all thinges liquide, if they once
catch poſſeſſion in the vitall partes, and enter into
the veynes, they ſettle ſo ſurelye and take ſuche
ſtrong poſſeſſion, that hardlye it is to remedy and
againe thence to diſpoſſeſſe them. Seing therfore,
that the Ayre encompaſſinge and conteyning vs,
doth ſo diuerſly affecte our bodyes (for beſide the
peſtilente exhalations that ſlylie by it bee conueighed
into the lappes of the lunges, it either heateth,
dryeth, cooleth or moyſteneth to much) euery
man is to ſtand ſurely vppon his owne gard and
diligently to loke to himſelfe, that he be not therby
harmed. For as to temperate bodyes, holeſomeſt
ayre is fit and requiſite: ſo to bodyes lacking
of temperatenes, that ayre is to be accompted
beſt, wherein contrary qualityes excel. Thus
to a body that is hoat, cold ayre is to be applyed:
to moyſt,Contraryes are remedied by their cōtraryes. drye beſt ſerueth: for cold, hoate: and for
dry, moyſt: and if the ſame may not otherwyſe be
had, it is expediente by Arte to procure it. And
therefore in hoate and drye diſeaſes, or in verye
ſoultery hoate weather,

                     VVhen ſchorching Doggedayes extreeme heat
                           •
                        :
                     VVith parching drought and ſicknes great,A Enei. 10
                     
                     In ſcovvling Skie doth rage and raigne,
                     And putts poore ſeelie vvightes to paine.
                  
               
               The better to qualefie and mitigate this hea
                     •
                  e,Doggedayes.
it ſhalbe verye good to ſprinckle on the pauemē is

and coole the floores of our houſes or chambers
wyth ſpringing water, and then to ſtrew them ouer
wyth Sedge, & to trimme vp our Parlours
with greene boughes, freſhe herbes or vyne leaues:
which thing although in the Low Coūtrey
it be vſually frequented, yet no Nation more decētly,
more trymmely, nor more ſightly then they
do in Englande. For, not long agone traueylinge
into that flouriſhinge Ilande,Englande prayſed for clenly trim minge their houſes. partlye to ſee
the faſhions of that wealthy Countrey, wyth mē
of fame and worthyneſſe ſo bruited and renowined,
and partlye to viſite VVilliam Lemnie, in
whoſe company and weldoing, I greatly reioyce
(as a father can not but doe) and take ſinguler
cōtentatiō inwardly, euen at my firſt arryual at
Douer, and ſo alōg my iourney toward London,
which I diſpatched partly vppon Horſebacke,
and partly by water, I ſawe and noted manye
thinges able to rauiſhe and allure any man in the
worlde, with deſyre to trauatle and ſee that ſo
noble
                     •
                   Countrey. For beinge broughte by
D. Lemnie (a ſkilfull Phiſicion and w
                     •
                  l
thoughte of there for his knowledge and experience)
into the companye of honourable and worſhipfull
Perſonages, euerye Gentleman and other
woorthy Perſon ſhewed vnto mee (beinge a
Straunger borne and one that neuer, had beene
there before) all pointes of moſt fre
                     •
                  dly curteſye,
and taking me firſt by the hand louingly embraced
and badde me righte hartely welcome.
               For they be people very ciuill and wel affected to

men well ſtryken in yeares, and to ſuch as beare
anye countenaunce and eſtimation of learninge,
which thing they that halfe ſuſpect and haue not
had the full tryall of the maners and faſhions of
this countrey, wil ſkarcely bee perſwaded to beleeue.
Therefore,Learned me and aged greatly reuerenced in England. francklye to vtter what I
thincke of the incredible curteſie, and frendlineſſe
in ſpeache and affabilitie vſed in this famous
Royalme, I muſte needes confeſſe, it doth ſurmount
and carye away the pricke and price of al
others. And beſyde this, the neate cleanlines, the
exquiſite fineneſſe, the pleaſaunte and delightfull
furniture in euery point for houſehold, wonderfully
reioyced mee, their Chambers & Parlours
ſtrawed ouer with ſweete herbes, refreſhed mee,
their Noſegayes finelye entermingled wyth ſondry
ſortes of fragaunte floures in their bedchā
                  bers
and priuie roomes, with comfortable ſmell
cheered mee vp and entierlye delighted all my
Sences And this do I thinck to be the cauſe yt
Engliſhmen, lyuing by ſuch holſome and exquiſite
meate, and in ſo holeſome and healthful ayre,
be ſo freſhe and cleane coloured: their faces, eyes
and countenaunce carying with it, and repreſenting
a portly grace and comelyneſſe, geueth out euident
tokens of an honeſt mind: in language verye
ſmoth and allectiue, but yet ſeaſoned and tempered
within the limits and bonds of moderation,
not bumbaſted with any vnſeemely termes or
infarced wt any clawing flatteries or allurementes.
At their Tables althoughe they be verye

ſumptuous, and loue to haue good fare, yet neyther
vſe they to ouercharge themſelues wyth exceſſe
of drincke, neither thereto greatly prouoke &
vrge others, but ſuffer euery man to drincke, in
ſuch meaſure as beſte pleaſeth himſelfe, which
drinck (being eyther Ale or Beere) moſt pleaſaūt
in taſte and holeſomely relyced, they fetch not frō
foreine places, but haue it amonge themſelues
brewed.
               As touching their populous and great haū
                  ted
Cities, ye fruictfulnes of their ground & ſoyle,
their liuely Springes and mighty Riuers, their
great Heards and flockes of cattel, their myſteries
and Art of weauing and clothmaking, their
ſkilfulnes in ſhootīg, it is needleſſe heere to diſcourſe:
ſeing the multitude of Marchaunts, exercyſinge
the traffique and Arte of Marchaundize
amonge them, and Ambaſſadours alſo ſenſe
thyther from forraine Princes, are able aboundantly
to teſtifie, that nothing needeful & expediente
for mans vſe and commoditie lacketh in that
moſt noble Ilande.
               But to fal into my matter againe, from whēce
I haue a little digreſſed: we muſt be no leſſe warie
and preciſe in choiſe of the Ayre, wherein wee
liue, then of the meate and drincke wherby we be
fedde, ſuſteyned and nouriſhed. Wherefore, to
defende the bodye from being lightly and eaſelye
attainted with Sicknes,Meate & drincke. or frō being made ſubiect
and open to Agues, it ſtandeth vs vppon, to
acquaint and accuſtome our ſelues to the beſte

meates, and ſuch as encreaſe or engender no ill
iuyce nor corrupt humours: the ſame meates to
be taken at due houres and ſeaſonable times; and
alſo in good order and moder
                     •
                  te quātity.
               For (as Columella ſayth) like as it is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the fielde or ground arable to be weaker then the
huſbandman that tilleth and breaketh it vp,Lib. 1, Cap. 3. leaſt
if the ground be ſtronger and p
                     •
                  euayle, the tyller
or huſband be cruſhed or ouermayſtered 
                     •••
                   likewyſe
expedient and meete it is, that the meate be
weaker and vnder the powers and 
                     ••
                  ayſtrye of
nature, both that the ſtomacke be not ouer
                     •
                  loyed
and charged wyth superabundance or excesse, &
alſo for the ſpeedſer concoctiō and better digeſtion
thereof. Which thinge is hardly brought to
paſſe, 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſtomacke is too muche pampered
and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the meates either ill and vnholeſome,

                     〈…〉
                   diuers and repugnaunt qualities
amonge themſelues: or finallye when neyther reſpect,
order nor mean
                     •
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                  , cuſtome, houres,
age, nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   is obſerued.
               Theſe c
                     ••
                  cumſtances alſo thincke I good to
bee preſcribed in the Acte of carnall copulation,
namely to yong 
                     〈◊〉
                   folkes, who vppon their
new ma
                     •
                  y
                     •
                  g
                     •
                  , wyth vnaciable beaſtlyneſſe and
frequ
                     ••
                  ci
                     •
                   of coiture, thincke to ouercome and
tyre their wyues, whereas they yet remayne ſtill
vnſatiſfyed, and the men vtterly ſpend and ſoked.
In diet alſo and order of lyfe this thing is to bee
obſerued, ſpecially where the body paſſeth not the
bounds of temperaunce and moderation, that as

neere as is poſſible, nothing be eaten & vſed, but
thoſe things that be lyke or as very agreeable to
nature as conuentently may be: for to feede vpon
contraryes is a thing righte hurtfull and daungerous,
which thinge in eche ſeuerall age, tyme,
countrey, and cuſtome (which altereth a man frō
his owne nature to an other) is greatly to be reſpected,
wayghed and conſidered.
               Thus no children requyre moyſt nouriſhmēt,Moyſt nourishmēt fitteſt for children.
and thinges that be very hoate and dry are not to
be preſcribed and giuen to them, becauſe ye ſame
is a hinderaunce to there growth. For which
cauſe Plato and Galene do forbidde Children ye
drinkyng,Lib. 2 de leg lib 1. de tuend. Valetud. yea the
                     ••
                  ſtinge of Wyne, becauſe the
drinkinge thereof ſetteth their bodyes in heate,
filleth their heads wythfumes, & bringeth great
annoyaunce to their myndes.Wyne hurt full to children. Yea they be of opinion,
that for bigge Stryplings of full growth
to drincke wyne, is not allowable, except: it be verye
ſparinglye and litle 
                     ••
                  e cauſe it caryeth them
headlonge into anger, maketh them prompte and
readye to purſue 
                     •
                  centious luſtes and inordinate
affections, and alſo dulleth and troubleth
that part of the mynde which is rationall. But
they that be entryng into mās ſtate (becauſe they
then conſyſte and be in theyr beſt temperamente)
requyre ſuch dyer and nouriſhmente as is holeſome
and temperate. As for example, Veale,
Muttō, Porke, Henne, Kydde, Egges, fine Mā
                  thet
bread of the beſt and cleaneſt Wheate. For
Youth and mās Age, becauſe, they draw 
                     〈◊〉
                   ard

heate and ſomwhat to dryneſſe:Qualefiers and al
                        •
                     yers of the heate of bloud. and for that their
bloud waxeth hoate, ſpeciallye in Sōmer ſeaſon:
it is beſt to alay and qualefie y• ſame heate, wyth
thinges that be moderately moyſte: ſuch as theſe,
Bugloſſe, Orrage, Mallowes, Spinach, ye herbe
Pacience, Lactuce, Purſelane, Melons, Cucumbers,
Cheeries, Corncile berryes, and of theſe
many, for hurtinge and annoyinge the ſtomacke,
may be boy
                     •
                  ed: or if we eate thē raw in Saletts,
it ſhalbe righte good to myngle & put vnto them,
Rocket, Creſſes, Mynte, Watercreſſes & Gardē
Dragon worte, which nowe a dayes groweth in a
maner in euerye Garden. By this meanes ſhall
wee bringe to paſſe that heate ſhall not too much
preuayle or get the vpperhand by ouermayſtring
naturall moyſture. Therefore when a man of
a hoate complexion, or of an other conſtitution,
beginneth to grow into diſtemperature, it ſhalbe
expediente for him to alter nature to her contratyes:
for by thinges lyke,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   are diſeaſes procured,
and by diſtemperaunce nouriſhed.
               Therefore at anye time, when ſoeuer thou art
diſpoſed to alter y• ſtate of thy bodye and to driue
away ſicknes, enioyne to thy ſelfe a contrarye order
of Dret and vſage, but yet ſo, that nature bee
not in poſthaſte, but leyſurely and by litle and 
                     ••
                  
                  ſle
tranſlated to an other cuſtome. For as it is
a wyſemans parte (ſayth 
                     
                        •
                     ullye) by litle and litle
to wy
                     •
                  d oute himſelf and ſhyft of thoſe frendſhips
which he greatly lyketh not:Li. 1. Off. ſo likewiſe an

old rooted cuſtome may not be haſtely and ſodēly
chaūged, but ſoftly, leyſurely, and diſcretely. For
ſodaine alteration and chaung bringeth the body
into daunger, and is very preiudicial to health.
But this is ſpecially ment of the body: for in the
ſtate of the mynde, there ought to be neither ſtop
nor delay, but immediately and oute of hand to abandon
and baniſhe all lewde maners and diſhoneſt
enormities.
               Furthermore as in yong men all thinges are
to be reduced to the perfection and ſyne of temperature,
and euery way to be attempted for the amendement
of that which in them is amyſſe, and
for framyng of their bodies to a right proportion
or agreeableneſſe: ſo in Aged perſons nothinge
ought to be raſhly taken in hād or inconſiderately
attempted: for that, it is a great deale better for
that Age, ſtill to continue in ſuch thinges as they
haue been trayned vp and accuſtomed vnto,Ill cuſtomes muſt by little and litle be taken away. (yea
although they be ſomewhat butifull) then to beginne
any newe alteration in their diet and order
of lyuing. Contrary wyſe yong men muſt ſtriue
and aſſaye to alter, and bringe themſelues from
thoſe things yt be nought and hurtfull, although
they haue ben vſed therto euen ſince they were
children. For their ſtrength and powers are wel
ynough able to ſuffer a moderate alteration: and
becauſe they may lyue a longer while, it is to bee
hoped that they (by chaunginge and framynge
themſelues to a better cuſtome and order) maye
receyue therby profite, and be otherwyſe beneficiall

to their countrey:Chaunge in olde men, daūgerous. But an olde man, if he goe
aboute to ſhake from him or to chaunge that order
of life, which by long vſe and domeſtically hee
hath frequented, doth but looſe all his labour, &
trauayleth therein all in vayne. For althoughe
he proceede ſomewhat forward therin, and ſeeme
to haue wonne thereby ſome parte of his deſyre,
yet ſhal he lacke tyme and ſpace to gleane and enioy
any fruite of his wyſhed eſtate.
               He doth heerein much like to him that (being
ſpent in yeares & euen at the pittes brincke, carefully
and buſely ſaueth and purueigheth (the neerer
yt hee cōmeth to his iourneyes end & hath leſſe
way to go)Cicero in Senect. greater ſtore and foyſon of victual for
his wayfaring expences: a thinge, in the opinion
and iudgemente of Cato ſo abſurde, as nothinge
more. In which doinge hee waſteth all his labour
and dealeth much like (ſayth Galene) to 
                     •
                  
man that in his old doating and decrepite dayes,Lib. 5. de tuēd. Val.
goeth aboute to learne ſome Arte or occupation:
whereas more meete it were for ſuch a one to cal
to remembraunce what a ſmall time by courſe of
nature he hath here to remaine, and that his cō
                  tinuaunce
here cannot be long, but muſte be packing
awaye and depart to his long home.
               Seinge therefore olde Age is to enioye and
take no commoditie by chaunginge vſuall diet &
ordinary cuſtome of lyuing, it is better by euerye
maner of way to cheeriſhe and comforte it, and to
heate and humect his colde and drye bodye wyth
nouriſhment conueinente, then doubtfully and by

haphazard, and otherwyſe then that age permitteth,
to begin any new order: ſythence olde age is
weake and feeble, and not well able to beare oute
euen the leaſt diſdiete that maye bee: but if it fall
thereinto, hardly and with very much adoe can it
eſcape and recouer it ſelfe out againe.
               But foraſmuch as naturall heate by moderate
motion or exerciſe is encreaſed and ſtrēgthened,The profite th
                        •
                     t cōmeth by exerciſe.
and the Body and mynd of man (wearyed
wyth troubleſome buſyneſſe and cares) is deſtrous
with reſte & quietnes to bee refreſhed, & to
haue ſome reaſonable truce & relaxation: euen as
good heede and greate regard hereof in euery ſeueral
Cōplexion would be had (for according to
euery mās nature, is ye ſame ſonderly to be vſed)
ſo in this hoate ſtate & Cōplexion of body for the
better maintenaunce and conſeruation of health,
it would be well loked vnto and cyrcumſpectyle
conſidered. Nothinge is holeſomer nor more auayleable
for health, then ſeaſonable Exercyſe &
conuenient motion. For by it the quicknes and
vigour of the mynde is reuyued, the faynt drowſye
Spyrites ſtyrred vp and awaked, the ſoule
and mynde checred and exhilarated, all the parts
of the body & all the ſenſes both within and wtout
made nimble, actiue, perfect and ready to do their
proper functions: the colour fayrer & freſher, appetite
prouoked & ſharpened, ye poſſages & pores
opened, & ye cōceptories of the Veynes enlarged
and made bigger, (whereby humours haue freer
paſſage & way into euery ſeuerall part of the body)

excremēts commodiouſly purged, concoction
ſpeedelyer finiſhed, & the iuyce or humours (being
well cococted) better diſtributed to the ſuſtenaunce
and nouriſhmente of euery member in the
body: laſt of all, when the mynd is quyet & calme,
then is ſleepe ſound and quiet alſo, and not interrupted
nor broken wyth phantaſtical dreames &
nightly imaginations, yea then be al things duly,
ſeaſonably, and orderly vſed and done, when the
meate is throughly concocred and excrements by
euacuation purged: which by too vehement motion
are drawen into the diſpoſition or habite of
the body, & ſtop the ſtreit & narrow, pores therof.
               When a man is diſpoſed to exerciſe himſelf,Order of exerciſe. it
ſhalbe good to prepare his body therto by bēding
and bowing thereof, & to ſtretch out his ſynewes
and other parts of his body, which peraduēture
for want of exerciſe are ſtiffe, thereby to make thē nymble
& plyable. By this meanes ſhal hee wyth
no greeuaunce or wearines vſe exerciſe, and ſo
lōg is it good for him to beſtirre his body, til his
lymmes begin ſomewhat to ſwel, & a freſh ruddy
colour in his face & body, wt ſweating to appeare:
which ſo ſoone as it happeneth & is plainly to be
perceyued, it behoueth ſtreightwayes to ceas frō
exerciſe, & to chafe ye body no further: for if it be
cōtinued lōger & not ſtinted, by & by ye colour vaniſheth
awaye, & the body becōmeth dry & lancke.
And like as hoat cōplexioned mē, if they vſe vehement
& ſwift motion, & wyth exerciſe heat & chafe
thēſelues throughly, they haue thereby bodyes

ſlender and (by reaſon their naturall humoure is
ſpent) ſomewhat enclyning to dryneſſe: ſo againe,Slouthe and eaſe hurtful.
if they liue idly or giue themſelues to drawſynes,
or to ſpending their time in riot; diſtemperaunce,
loytringe, ſlouth, wantonnes, eaſe & nyce delytes,
they growe full of humours, and ware wouderous
groſſe, fatte and corpulent. I maye peraduenture
ſeeme to the ſ
                     ••
                  emiſh and full ſtomacked
Reader, to beſtawe herein 
                     •
                  o wo
                     ••
                  des then for
ſuch a matter are needeful, but le
                     •
                   him vnderſtād
that our purpoſe herein tēdeth to this onely end,
to admoniſh al men in general and namely Students
and men of honourable byrth,Aduertiſement to the ſ
                        ••
                     dious. a
                     •
                  d ſuch as
further and fauour goad Studies and vertuous
Arts and diſciplines, not to meddle with painful
and vehemente ſtronge exerciſes (ſpecially when
they be faſting or immediatly after meales;) neyther
to ſit at their Bookes at vnſeaſonable houres,
wearing away themſelues ſtill wythin doores,
and greatly waſsing their animall ſpirites &
the faculties naturall of their bodyes. For in
both theſe ſortes; I see meaſure or meane in them
wantinge: whereof I purpoſe more at large to
ſpeake, when I come to the diſcourſe of the drye
Complexion. Furthermore foraſmuch as there
be ſondry and diuers ſorts of Exeraiſe, and euery
ſort not apte & decente for euery Age: let euerye
man trye and conſider in himſelfe whereto hee is
by nature moſt apt and inclinable.Horace in Arte Poet.
               
               
                  Hovv much his ſhoulders carye maye,
                  And vvhat they can not vvell vpſtaye.
               
               
                  
As for Wreſtling,Sortes of exerciſe. Coytingo, Tennis, Bowlinge,
Whorlehattinge, liftinge greate waightes,
pitching the harre. Ryding, Running, Leapinge,
ſhooting in Gunnes, ſwymming, toſſing ye Pyke,
Tyltinge, Barryers and Tourney, are reckened
amonge the exerciſes of ſtrong men: albeit ſome,
of them (becauſe they are violently and forciblye,
done, haue of a mery beginninge, a heauy and lamentable
endinge: as of late yeares it happened
vnto the French King Henry the ſeconde of that
name,Frēch king killed in runninge at the Tylt. 1559. & ſtoute Prince and of courage muincible:
who in a royall. Iuſting or running at the Tylt,
for the more ſolemnization of a nuptiall Pompe
thē prepared, receyued his deathes wounde, with
a ſplint or ſhyuer of a broken ſpeare, which pearced
& gotte in at the ſight hoales or beauer of his
Helmet, and ſtroke the king into the eye, and ſo to
the braine, whereof he ſodainly fell into an Ague,
and after a few dayes dyed.
               There be other kinds of exerciſe not of ſo great
trauaile as theſe,Gentler exerciſes. and leſſe troubleſome: as to bee
caryed in wagons, or to be rowed in Boates: ſō
                  drye
ſortes of frictions: walking eyther ſoftly or
apace, Singinge and Muſicall melodie, chaunted
eyther with liuely voyce,Muſick chere
                        •
                     h & maketh meerie the mynd of man. or played vpon ſwete
Inſtrumentes, to the eares & mynde righte pleaſaunt
and delightfull, dryuing awaye heauynes,
and cheering and reuyunge the Spyrites, when
they are damped wyth thoughtes, and carefull
penſiuenes. And if thereto be vſed a cleare and
lowde reading of bigge tuned ſounds by ſtoppes

and certayne Pauſes, as our Comicall felowes
now do, that meaſure Rhetorick by theyr peeuiſh
Rhythmes, it will bryng exceeding much good to
the Breaſt and Muſcles. No leſſe eaſe and profite
lykewyſe ſhall a man thereby finde for the openyng
of hys pypes, and expelling thence al obſtructions,
ſpecially if hee vſe himſelfe a litle to
holde in his breath, and pinching together his
lyppes, wyth his cheekes full blowen, to let his
breath guſhe oute wyth a full & ſturdye ſounde.De valet. lib. 5.
But this, in yonge men (ſayth Galene) is to bee
moderated till they be at conſiſtente Age, and in
mornynges when the body is emptye and not infarced,
neyther wyth the nightly exercyſe of venerous
paſtimes afore, wearyed and weakened.
               This Exercyſe alſo of al others is moſt chiefly
cōueniēt & good for them yt eyther by imperfectiō
                  A fit exerciſe for crokebacked perſons
of nature or by negligēce of Nurſes are crookebacked:
For ye Muſcles of their bulke & breaſt,
and the lappes or bellowes of theyr Lōges being
drawen together & crooked toward, theyr backs,
cauſeth thē to be ſhortwynded, which by this meanes
is greatly eaſed, & they therby made to fetche
their wynd a great deale better & wt more facility.
Horſes of good courage & breed
                     •
                  , when they feele
the Spurre, with courſinge, tramplinge and
f
                     •
                  tching the capre, caryre, or curuetty, do ye very
ſame thinge naturally, with their ſnuffing Noſethrils
(a tokē wherby to know & good coragious
Horſe) which men do, when they holde in theyr
breath, & ſtroute out their C. jeekes. This trick

to make thē ſnuffe, y• Horſcorſers vſe, by pinching
them by the Noſes:To try good horſes. and if thereupon they forthwyth
puffe and blowe, they take it for a certayne
ſigne and ſure token that the ſame horſe is good,
and hath in him no hidden nor ſecrete fault. For
if he pace not well, if he fling oute wyth his heeles
and kicke, if he haue a ſtiffe legge or a blynde
eye, and ſuch like outward impediment, it is euident
by ſight and loking on to be perceyued, & by
other outward tokens, ought and may eaſelye be
found out and tryed.
               I could heere repeate a great ſort of other exerciſes
moe,Recreatiōs not commē
                     dable. as Dyce, Tables & Cardes, but becauſe
they bee the paſtimes & recreations of ydle
perſons & to be done ſtanding ſtill or ſittinge, and
againe, be not in y• nōber of cōmendable delights,
& laudable ſolaces, I haue ſpared in this place
to ſpeake anye thing of them. For men of good
nature and diſpoſition, when they haue any ſpare
time from their other earneſte buſyneſſe, deſyre &
frequente ſuch ſolaces & ſportes as are ioyned wt 
honeſty,Huſbandry prayſed. ſuch as are the pleaſures of ye countrye &
practize of huſbādry, which brīgeth wt it not only
pleaſure but profite & gaine alſo, & ye plentifully &
wtout any diſlykīg toyle. For the maſter or owner
of the ground needes not wt his owne handes, to
moyle & toyle, digge and delue, plough, and carte,
ſow, harrowe, & breake cloddes, to digge aboute
his trees and cleanſe awaye the ſuperfluous and
hurtful earth, ſithence he may take leſſe paynes,
by committing the doing thereof to his Hindes

and meigniall Hyerlings whom he may dayly ouerſee
and by word of mouth, berke, or figne, appointe
what he will haue to be done and taken in
hand. Which thing is meant by Terence, where
he bringeth in one old mā reprouing an other, for
drudging and moylinge in his grounde himſelfe,
ſaying thus: The toyle and labour vvhich thou
takeſt vvith thyne ovvne hands,
                  Heau. ſce. 1. Act. 1. 
                  if thou vvouldeſt
beſtovv the ſame in ouerſeeinge thy folkes, and
ſetinge them to their buſyneſſe, thou ſhouldeſt
haue more vvorke done by a great deale.
               
               The owners foote maketh a fruitfull fielde,
(ſayth the Prouerbe) and the Mayſters eye fatteth
the horſe. Now when we leaue of from exercyſe
and come to our meate and drincke, which
reſtoreth ſtrength, we muſt be very wary & carefull
that we ouercharge not our ſtomackes wyth
ſuperabundaunce and ſaciety. For as too much
abſtinence and hunger is oftentymes hurtfull,Saciety or fulnes of Stomacke to be eſelievved. ſo
too much fulnes and ſaciety is neuer profitable &
holeſome: for there wyth the Stomacke is too-much
ſtuffed and diſtempered with cruditye, engendring
oppilation and putrefaction, the verye
breeders and procurers of Agewes and al other
diſeaſes. To maynteyne & preſerue bodely health
in perfect ſtay and ſoundnes, all thinges are to be
done in due order and by right choyſe of iudgement,
ſo yt according to the precept of Hyppocrates,
                  Epidi 6. Aphor. 5.
Labour or Exercyſe, Meate, Drynck, carnal
Acte, all muſte be vſed in meaſure, and be done in
their due time and order. Hereby wee ſee, that by

his opynion, healthynes muſt take his beginning
at Exercyſe, after which meate and drincke commeth
next,The harme of Venerie or Carnall Copulatiō. then: Slepe and laſt of an carnall Act,
meeteſt for them (ſayth Galene) 
                     •
                   vſually haue
recourſe thereto and feele ſheve by leaſte harme, &
that is for 
                     〈◊〉
                   Age: for ſo Olde age and dry
bodyes it is exceedingly hurtfull and moſt pernitious.
               Neyther 
                     ••
                  it without daunger and harme, to
be frequēted of thoſe that be of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Complexions,
ſpecially being vſed oute of ſeaſon or immoderately,
or when the weather is hote. In the
Spring time it is more tolilerable and holeſome,
after that the bodye is with moderate 
                     〈…〉
                  
meate and brincke heated and moyſtened, and being
alſo before ſleepe. For by this meanes, the
wearyneſſe 
                     〈…〉
                   doing, is
by Sleepe incontineutly 
                     〈◊〉
                   caſed, and repayred.
               
                  ¶Emptyneſſe and Repletion.
                  THis moderation is in other thinges alſo to
be obſerued, as when the body requyreth wt 
meate and brincke to the refreſhed, or being wyth
humours app
                        •
                     ete, defyreth 
                        〈◊〉
                      prouided
alwayes that good conſideration be had, what
ſtrength the bodye is of, what nature is able to
beare, and how farre herein a man may ſafely apuenture.
Which thing alſo in well and cyrcumspectly
to be waighed and 
                        〈◊〉
                      of, in openyng

of Veynes, in prouokinge ſweate, in procuring
laſkes, in ſkowringe and purginge the Entrailes,
and prouokinge vomites: for in theſe, regard
and reſpecte muſte be had both of time, age,
cuſtome, nature and Countrey.
                  Neither ought any man of cuſtome to vſe and
try any of theſe experiences raſhly vpon himſelf,
except great cauſe therunto moue him, or that he
be troubled with much aboundaunce of noyſome
humours, which requyre eyther by purgation or
els by euacuation to bee expelled.Bloudlettīg not raſhlye to be enter pryled. For in euerye
Coūtry almoſt there be ſome, which at all ſeaſōs
of the yeare vſe to be let bloude, or els by ſcaryfyinge
the ſkinne to be cupped, to the no ſmall hindraunce
daunger and empechmēt of their health:
for together with the bloude (which is the treaſure
of lyfe)Bloud & spirite the treaſure of life. there paſſeth out no smal deale of the
vitall Spirite; whereby the whole bodye falleth
into great coldnes, and nature weakened, & therby
made leſſe hable to performe her woorke and
function.Not good for men in health to vſe medicine. So likewyſe, others without any aduyſe
of the Phyſitions wyll ſwallowe Pylles &
dryncke Purgations, whereby they enfeeble
their ſtrength and haſten old age before the time.
                  The ſame now and then happeneth to ſondry
in prouoking vomite,Vomite ſeldome to be prouoked. wha thinke it good & holeſom
once or twyſe in a Moneth, to cleare, & emptye
ye filthy sincke of their gorged. Carkaſſes this
waye: whereas it is at no hand expedient & good
for them that be in health, to haunt this beaſtlye
cuſtome, neyther to be ruled by anye that ſhoulde

thereunto counſell them.
                  And whereas ſome take hold of a certaine ſaying
in Hippocrates,
                     De ratione vict. lib. 1. whereby they ground the vſe
hereof to be good, ſuch men in my opynion do not
throughlye conceiue and vnderſtande his full
meanyng in that place. For he beinge dayly cō
                     uerſaunt
and practizinge Phyſicke, amonge ſuch
a Nation and people, whoſe faſhion and ordinarye
cuſtome was to keepe reuell rexe, and vſe all
kinde of ryotous and ingluuious guimandyze,
did not preſcrybe vnto them any lawes or orders
for vomitinge: but if they ſhoulde fortune to ouercharge
themſelues wyth exceſſe and ſurphet,
he iudgeth it a better way for him that hath vſed
himſelf to vomite euery Moneth, to continue the
ſame two dayes together, that the ſeconde daye
maye make cleare ryddaunce of the remaynder of
the firſt daye, rather then at the ende of xv. dayes
eftſones to renue the ſame. For by that meanes
ſhall hee expell and ſende oute the humours that
were engēdred of his former ſurphet and diſtemperaunce,
& kepe his body free from future ſickenes.
So that this reuerente and Aged Phiſtition
in that place exhorteth no man to vomite,When to vomite. for
anye holeſomenes that is therein, but iudgeth
ſuche manet of euacuation to bee expediente for
them that wyth exceſſe and immoderate feedinge
haue ſurphetted or whoſe ſtomackes throughe
crudity & corruptiō of the meate, & drincke before
eaten, betch vp ſower ſtynkinge fumes, whereof y•
one cōmonly happeneth in cold ſtomackes, & the

other, in hoate. So the wyſe Hebrevv, Ieſus the
ſonne of Syrach, in euery place exhort̄g to frugalitye
& moderation,Eccle. 31. willeth thee if thou feeleſt thy
ſelfe to haue eaten too muche and more then thy
health cā well brooke, to aryſe and go thy wayes
and to caſt it our of thy ſtomacke, leaſt otherwyſe
thou bring thy body in daunger of Sickneſſe, but
he would not haue any man cuſtomably to vſe it.
Let not him that deſyreth to lyue till hee be olde,To what perſons vomyting is hurtfull.
vſe vomytinge often, ſpecially if hee be longe and
round necked, eyther very ſlender or verye groſſe
bodyed, or ſtreict and narow breſtes. But hee yt
leadeth his lyre temperatelye, ſhall not neede to
ſeeke anye helpe at vomytinge for conſeruation &
mayntenaunce of his health.
               
               
                  Sleepe and Watch.
                  SLeepe and watche are after one lyke reaſon &
waye to bee conſidered of, which being moderatelye
vſed, & within the bounds of mediocrity
frequēted, are very auayleable to health, & bring
wyth them moſt needefull commodityes.
                  Sleepe is nothing els but a reſtinge of the Animal
facultie, and a Pawſ
                        •
                     ng from the actions and
buſynes of the day, wherby the vertues of the bodyes
being faynt, and the powers thereof beinge
reſolued, are reuyued and made freſh againe, and
all the wearie members & Senſes recomforted.
For when the powers natural be freſh and luſty,
natiue heate gathering it ſelf inward, is of more

force and ſtrongly applyeth concoction, perfourming
the ſame not onely in the Stomack, but alſo
through the whole body beſyde, whoſe vapour
and pleaſaunt ſent moyſteneth the brayne, & bringeth
aſleepe the Inſtrumentes of the Senſes.The commodities of ſleepe.
Nothing therfore after meate moderately taken,
is to the body holſommer thē ſeaſonable Sleepe:
for it refreſheth the wearyed powers of the body,
ſtyreth vp the Spirites, recreateth the mynde,
putteth away ſorow, & bringeth a man into good
and quiet temper. Neyther can health in anye
wyſe be continued and maynteyned in any parte
of the bodye, withoute this amyable recourſe and
due vſe of watch and Sleepe: whereby we wythdraw
our ſelues for the time, from oure earneſte
buſyneſſe, and at ſeaſonable houres geeue recreation
to our wearyed Spyrits. And after ſleepe,
fal againe to our buſyneſſe and affayres, whether
they be to be done wyth labour of the body or induſtry
of mynde. For howe could mans mynde
continue ſtill in his perfect vigour and ſtrength,
if theſe thīgs by turnes be not vſed, if this varietye
of lyfe and quiet reſting after labours of the
day, be not intermingled? Theſe make the ſtate
of oure life the leſſe yrkſome and burdenous, and
vs to be thereof leſſe wearye & cloyed. For as
Ouid doth rightlye ſay,

                        That thing that lackes alternal reſt,
                        continue cannot long,Epiſt. 4.
                        
                        It makes the povvers of bodye fresh,
                        and vvearyed members, ſtronge.
                     
                     
The Sūne beīg once vp, ſōdry delightful ſights
appeare, & innumerable galant ſpectacles of the
world & nature, preſēt thēſelues vnto vs, to chaſe
& driue troubleſom fācies, dūps, & cogitaciōs, out
of our careful & p̄ēsiue minds. And loke what cō
                     modity
we reape by the dayes trauaile, that doth
Sleepe in ye night coūteruayle & requite.The day appointed for labour, and the night for reſt. For as
the day ſeruīg for watch & diſpatch of our needefull
buſyneſſe, doth exerciſe the body, & in hope
of Sleepe maketh al thinges lighter and eaſyer:
ſo the nighte being appointed for reſt, bringeth wt 
it a forgetfulnes of the dayes toyle, & a ſweete end
of ye labour therof. Wherfore we may not be negligent,
remiſſe and ſlacke in the due conſideracion
of theſe thinges, but carefully beware ye they bee
not, eyther vnſeaſonably, diſorderly, or vnmeaſurably
frequented. So that Sleepe (which belongeth
toEight hours for Sleepe. ye night) may be continued neere about the
ſpace of 8. houres, or (if Supper were ſomewhat
large and full) ſomewhat longer. Howbeit in
ſome perſons it is not to be meaſured, ſo much by
the nomber of houres, as by the ſoundnes & profundity
of Sleepīg, as Porters, Whyrrimē, vehement
Laborers,Sound Sleepers. Caryers, Saylers &c. For
theſe & ſuch lyke (for that, their braynes are very
moyſt) do ſleepe marueylous ſoundlye and cānot
be awaked but with much adoe: becauſe their naturall
vertue being reſolued wyth ouermuch exercyſe,
deſyreth by Sleepe, to be refreſhed, and wt
the humydity yt deſcendeth from the brayne, to be
repayred & reſtored: whereby it happeneth that yt
vertue Animall, and Inſtrumentes of the Senſes,

being lulled in eaſe and faſt deteyned, Sleepe
moſt ſoundly ſeazeth vppon them. And yt thing
which wearyneſſe cauſeth in greate labourers &
ſuch as vſe much exercyſe,Whye children and Dronkerdes be ſleepye. ye ſame doth moyſture
and refrigeration in children and dronken folks:
for in both of them, heate recuyling to the hearte,
(which is the welſpring of ye vitalfaculty) & the
head likewiſe ſtuffed wt tumoſities, ſleepe happeneth
and ſtealeth vpon them.
                  But they y• haue the nookes & celles of theyr
brain ſlēderly moyſt,Who bee ſoone awaked oute of ſleepe. are ready to awake at euery
litle ſtyrīg or waggīg, for yt the thinne vapour &
ſmal fume which poſſeſſeth ye head, being nothing
thicke, doth quickly vaniſh & paſſe away. For I
haue knowē mauy, worne in a maner to ye ſtumpes,
partly by ouermuch ſtudy, partly by Agues
& Uenerie, who in their ſleepe, plainly & perfectly
vnderſtoode euery word ſpoken by the ſtāders
by, inſomuch yt beinge awaked wt the leaſt noyſe y•
might be, they could recōpt & rechearſe ye moſt part
of thoſe things which had bin there ſpoken & vttered.
Not after the guiſe & faſhiō of ſome, which
of ſet purpoſe at bāquets will coūterfaite thēſelues
dronken & a ſleepe.Wylie winkers. For theſe good fellowes
vnder colour of being cupſhot & heauy headed, do
ſlily vndermine, eſpie & marke what euerye man
ſayth at y• boord, ſpecially of ſuch words, intētes
& meanings, as mē being heated & wel whytteled
in wyne, do then report, and vnaduyſedly vtter.
This trick not they only, but promoting Catchpoles,Catchpoles.
and crafty Scoutes, that raung about the
country, to eſpye how men liue & what they doe,

notīg the dealings and narrowly ſifting the lyfe,
behauiour, and maners of other men, whereby
they gleane to themſelues no ſmall gaine & commoditye.
For the fourth parte of the goodes, for
their catchpollinge, falleth to them, for their lot
and ſhare: which thing maketh them to be very
prying, double diligent, and inquiſitiue, where to
haue a purchaſe, and by other mens loſſes to enrich
and greaze themſelues. The Poet Iuuenal
(a very preciſe and notable reprehender of vyces,
and one that would neuer go behind the doore to
tell men their faults) ſheweth that this was a cuſtome
vſuall and ordinary amonge Baudes and
Cuckolds (nay rather wyttoldes) which for hyre
would be contented to let out theyr wyues to opē
proſtitution, or whē they had anye perſons in ſuſpicion
and iealouſye. And to the intent the Adulterous
Lecherers mighte the more freely and
licentiouſlye haue the vſe of their wyues bodyes,
theſe fellowes as thoughe they had beene buſyed
in other matters, and looking an other waye, or
as thoughe their myndes, eyes, and facultyes
animal had bin earneſtlye fixed and bente vppon
other cogitations, tooted and gazed into the
toppe of the houſe and vewed ſome trimme feelings,
or Images and pictures, liuely paynted &
ſet out in their Parlours and Chambers. For
thus doth the Poet depaynt and ſet forth in his
colours, one of this generation: and by this one,
geueth a light to lead and dyrect our coniectures
to iudge of the reſt.
                  
                     
                     To his ovvne vvyfe, a Baude and Pandar vyle,
                     A vvittold,Iuuen. Sat. 1. feigning ſleepe and vvynking many a vvyle,
                     VVho can his lyrypoope, and gaze full manerly
                     For birdes nestes in the roofe, vvhile others ſyckerly,
                     Dubbes him an horned knight, and that right vvorthily.
                  
                  The very ſame thinge alſo ſetteth downe Ouid,
and to the ſame purpoſe, albeit by other occaſion
taken.
                  
                     If that the goodman haue an heauy noll,Lib. 1. Amor.
                     
                     Or els a Burdeaux hammer beating in his head,
                     Both time and place ſhall vs direct and toll,
                     Till vvith his vvyfe, our purpoſe vve haue ſpedd.
                  
                  But now againe to fal into my byas, and leauinge
this digreſſion to retourne to my purpoſe:
I ſay, nothing doth ſo much conſerue, renue, reuiue
and cheeriſh the powers of body and mynd
as Sleepe in the night, takē about an houre and
a halfe after Supper.The maner howe to lye in bedde. At which time it is beſt,
firſt to lye on the righte ſyde, that the meate maye
deſcende and approche better to the Lyuer, and
be the eaſelyer digeſted. Howbeit it is not altogether
amyſſe nor vnholeſome for them that haue
feeble digeſtions, to lye ſomewhat groueling and
proſtrate on their bealyes, ſpecially if their Stomacke
bee charged wyth anye ſuperfluity. The
commoditye whereof, to them whoſe bellyes bee
ſomewhat ſwelled and ſtyffe, is right profitable,

both for the digeſtiō of the meate, & aſſwaging of
all inflation and paine of the Stomacke,Lying vpon the backe very vnholſome & daū
                        gerous. & caſing
of ache and gryping in the bowelles. Lying flat
vpon the backe is moſt hurtful and daungerous:
for ſo manye as ſleepe after y• ſorte, lye wyth their
mouthes open, their eyes ſtaryng, their eyelyddes
vncloſed, ſleeping very vnquietly, and without any
refreſhing or eaſe, by reaſon that the Muſkles
of their breaſt & necke be drawen hard together.
And beſyde diuers other diſcommodityes, they
be oftentimes troubled with the night Mare, and
falling ſicknes, and are alſo ſubiecte to Palſeys,
Crampes and Apoplexies: which diſeaſes alſo
are incidēt to them that ſleepe at Noone, or mydday
vppon their beddes.
                  Let no man therefore of cuſtome vſe himſelfe
to ſleepe in the day time,Sleeping in the day hurtfull. vnleſſe he be thereto driuen
by wearyneſſe and laſſitude gotten throughe
heate or labour, or when hee hath ouerwatched
himſelfe the night before. For in ſuch caſe, a nap
at noone may without harme be allowed & borne
wtall. And euen as Sleepe vnſeaſonablye or vnmeſurably
takē either by day or night maketh mē
dull,The harmes of ouerwatching. obliuious, lazye, faint, heauy, blockiſhe, and
marreth both wtt and memory: ſo agayne, watching
being not within medtocrytie and meaſure
vſed, dryeth the brayne, affecteth the ſenſes, empayreth
memory, dymmeth eyeſighte, marreth the
Spirites, waſteth naturall humour, hyndereth
concoction, and finallye conſumeth all the grace,
beauty, comelynes and ſtate of the whole body.
               
               
                  
                  The Perturbations and affections
of the mynde.
                  VVHat harme and inconuenience the mynd
ſuffereth throughe perturbations & vnruly
affections bearing ſway in the ſame, as Hatred,
Anger, Wrath, Enuy, Feare, Sadnes, immoderate
ioy, anguiſh, penſiue cares & thoughts,
wyth many other troubleſome motions, repugnaunt
and greatly ſquaring from reaſon, there is
no man but he hath eyther in himſelfe by experience
tryed, or by obſeruation in others ſufficiently
noted. For what man in this ſo great imbecillity
and frowardnes of nature, is not wyth ſome
of theſe tempted and aſſayled?All mē ſubiect to affections. And althoughe
ſome bee better able then other ſome, eyther to
withſtande or to qualefie and ſubdue his affections,
yet is there no mā ſo perfect yt is not to ſome
of them thrall and ſubiecte. How violent and vnrulye
theſe affections be in ſome, which yeld their
natures whollye to the impatencie thereof, and
how greatly they diſturbe and bring out of frame
both the mynde and body, by manyfeſt examples
is daily ſeene For many haue procured to themſelues
preſent death & deſtruction throughe rage,The greate hurts of affections.
anger, ſhame and immoderate ioy: by reaſon, that
the heart being lefte deſtitute of bloud and vitall
Spirite fainteth, ſhrynketh, and is diſſolued.
Which felfe ſame thing (albeit by an other and
diuers reaſō) oftētimes happeneth alſo in feare,

sorrow and ſodaine frightes, at which times the
heart is oppreſſed wyth too much abundaunce of
bloude, and the vitall Spirite choak
                        •
                     d and ſtopped.
Angre (which is a paſſion ſo lyke to fury
and madneſſe,Angre. as nothing in ye world more) what
force it hath, and how much it altereth the ſtate &
outward ſhewe of the body, appeareth chiefly by
countenaunce, colour, grymme viſage, cruell
and fierye eyes, puffinge & wrynkled noſethrilles,
byting lyppes, enraged mouth, trembling & ſhakinge
lymmes, vnſteadye gate, ſtammerynge and
fearefull voyce. This affection or rather perturbation
of the mynd, when it once reiecteth the
rule of reaſon, and groweth into diſordered outrage,
is offenſiue and troublous to others, but
chieflye and ſpecially, the party himſelfe (therewt
affected) throweth himſelf into perill of death, or
at leaſt into diſeaſes very daūgerous. The mynd
therfore muſt be reyned by reaſon, and curbed by
temperaunce, that it yeld not to affections, but
procure to it ſelfe quietnes & tranquillity,Tuſcul. 5. which
(as Tullye witneſſeth) is the chiefeſte pointe that
helpeth vs in this lyfe to lyue well and happely.Tranquility of mynde.
Which none can haue, ſauing he, that can ſubdue
and mayſter his affections, and ſhake of the tyrannous
yoke of lewd vices: & this is by no other
meanes to be brought to paſſe, but by a fyrme &
aſſured truſte and beliefe in God onelye, and the
ſame to bee ſtedfaſtly grounded vppon his holye
Worde and Heauenlye Spyrite: by whoſe directiō
a mā ſhal not fayle to haue the gyft of Tēpeperaunce,

to qualefye all his wilful affections,Temperāce. &
to withdraw and keepe him backe from all licentious
luſt,Goddes holye ſpirite ſubdueth & qualy fieth outragyous affections. Inſolencie, immoderate ioye, exceſſiue
myrth, hatred, angre, deſyre of reuenge, greedye
ſcrapyng, couetouſneſſe, and all other victous affections
whatſoeuer. And by this meanes both
the partes of man, that is to ſaye, both Soule &
Body, (which by a certayne Sympathie or mutuall
conſent and conſpyracie agree together) ſhal
be in perfect ſtate and ſoundnes withoute beinge
wyth any Sickneſſe, or greeuous malady diſtempered.
               
            
            
               ¶Of a cold Complexion.
The viij. Chapter.
               BEcauſe the cold Cōplexion is cleane cōtrary
and oppoſite to the hoate Conſtitution: and
for that, this is the worſt of al others, & furtheſt
from yt ſtate which is perfecteſt & beſt: I wil addreſſe
my next ſpeach to diſcourſe vpon it, to thēd
(if it be poſſible) it may be amended and brought
to a better caſe. For ſithens lyfe doth conſiſt in
a temperature of hoate & moyſte, whereby bodies
encreaſe to their growth, and attaine to manlye
ſtrength and ſtature: worthelye and by good reaſon,
may this be accompted of al others ye worſt,
for that, in euery point and reſpecte (that tendeth
to the furtheraunce of ſtrength & mayntenaunce

of health) it helpeth no whit, neyther geeueth any
encreaſe thereto at all. For conſideringe that in
it there lacketh heate, and all the powers and faculties
naturall, it is not able for the weakenes
of the Inſtrumentes and Organes, to attracte &
digeſt that nouriſhment y• is moyſte, nor to make
it lyke and conſubſtantial witht he body and mē
                  bers.Heate the ſtayer and maintener of lyfe.
And euen as naturall heate of all the faculties
in the bodye is ſtrongeſt to do his functions:
ſo, Cold is cleane contrarye vnto it, and fit
for no function, ſpecially concerninge the Acte of
Nature in the alteration of nouriſhment.Cold the decay & ſpoile of life. For in
it, is no maner of vtilitie or help touchīg the conſeruation
& maintenaunce of the bodye, eyther in
the offyce of concoction and digeſtion, or in anye
of the other vertues or powers of Nature. But
yet,Cold coupled wyth heate. in this quality (although it wāt of integritye
and temperature) there is alwayes ſome heate,
but the ſame is very fainte, weake, and throughe
colde, blunte and feeble. For if heat ſhoulde totallye
fayle, or bee vtterlye extinguiſhed, life
coulde not continue. Therefore in this body,
heate is not altogether conſumed and waſted,
but cold is aboue it and ouercommeth it, and in
the mixture of ye other qualityes,In cold bodyes heate doth not altogether lacke. is more in quā
                  tity
and ſtronger then any other, and thereuppon
hath it his name to be termed, Cold. And therefore
ſo longe as lyfe remayneth in man, and anye
portion of vitall heate in the body, it is good and
expedient by al wayes and meanes to ſtyrre vp &
cheeriſhe naturall heate with nouriſhment & exercyſe
conuenient, that it be not through cold, oppreſſed

and troden downe. For there is no greater
enemyes thereto, then Slouth, ydlenes and
cold meats: as hereafter ſhalbe more at large declared.
Some (I thincke) do marueile how men
of this conſtitution and complexion can continue
and liue, ſithens their bloud being cold, theyr vertues
Animal and Spirable be decayed and dead.Creatures in touching cold.
But let euery mā note, that there be many Creatures
of moſt cold nature, as the Salamandet, the
Fyer worme, the Torpedo of the Sea, and many
fiſhes moe, wherof ſome be of nature ſo extreeme
colde and chillinge, that if they touch fyer, they
ſtreightwayes quenche it, as it were yce: & ſome
do ſo aſtonne the lymmes of them, that touche
them, that they haue no feelinge nor ſenſe in their
handes or lymmes a good whyle after.The bloude of Fiſhes is cold.
               
               There is no kinde of Fyſhes (which by myne
owne experience I am able to aduouch and teſtifye)
that hath warme bloud, ſauynge Whorlepooles,
Porpeſes and Seales, or Sea Calues,
which haue hayrie ſkīnes, Tonyes, Dolphines,
and as many as are rough ſkinned or thicke leatherye
hyded, ſuch as (amonge thoſe that liue aſwell
vppon land as in water) are the Beuer and
the Otter.What ſorts of fiſhes beinge taken oute of the water liue longeſt. Theſe haue warme bloude, but all
others haue cold. And for this cauſe Monſters
of the Sea being taken oute of the Water, do by
reaſon of theyr inward heate and ſtore of warme
bloude, liue longe: whereas other ſortes of fiſhes
aſwell of the Sea, as of freſh waters, aſſoone
as they bee taken oute of the Water,

or caſt on ſhore geeue but certaine gaſpes and die
immediatly: which is an vndoubted argumente
and certaine token, that in them is very muche
cold and congealed humour, and of heate very litle.
For which reaſon, they bee not able to bee
kept longe, but will ſoone putreſſe, if they be not
ſtreightwayes ſalted,Eatynge of fishe hurtfull to them that are giuen to be ſolytarie. or put in pickle.
               By this may eaſie contecture be made, of what
plight & bodely ſtate, those perſōs be, which ſtil
eate fyſhe, and lyue a ſolytarye life, withoute keeping
company with others, and being forbidden
fleſhe (which the Father of Nature hath created
and appointed wyth thankeſgeeuinge of all menGenes. 1. Act. 10.
to be eaten) do commonly feede vpon rotten ſtinking
Saltfyſh.1. Tim. 4. Which kind of people (for many
of that ſtampe and diſpoſition haue for many
yeares vſed may aduyſe in Phiſicke) I am wont
to perſwade & counſell, that they ſhoulde drincke
after them, good, ſtronge and pure wyne, and abandoning
all idleneſſe and ſlouth, vſe continuall
Exerciſe.
               I haue knowen ſondry of them that throughe
groſſe and claminie glewyſh phlegme, haue gotten
the Letharge or drowſſe euill, the Apoplexie,
the Crampe,Solytary lyuers ſubiect to the Apoplexie. Polſey and W
                     •
                  ye mouthes. There
is none of theſe perſons, but hee aboundeth and
is replete wyth much Phlegme, and Phlegmaticke
excrementes, which maketh them lumpiſh,
and ſleapie, forgetfull, 
                     •
                  low of body and mynde, &
pale coloured, except ſome time at the comminge
of ſome of their eſpeciall frendes they bee heated

with wyne, and thereby haue dumpes dryuen out
of their myndes. For by this meanes their colour
is made freſher, and all heauie drowſyneſſe
baniſhed and chaſed out of their myndes.
               If therfore thou deſyre to haue a paterne of a
colde complexioned perſon, ryghtlye pourtrayed
oute vnto thee, ſet before thine eyes, men that by
profeſſion of lyfe, liue in this order, and by their
former wonted trade of dyet, are broughte vnto
this habite, yea although aforetime they were of a
diſpoſition and maner of lyfe cleane contrary.
               Theſe men doe liue,A Snayles life. but their life is like the
Periwinkle or Snaile, whoſe ſubſtaunce conſiſting
of a congealed licour, & concrete moyſture,
is liquefied and reſolued into the ſame. Which
thing is to be tryed and prooued by caſtinge vpō
them Salt, or glaſſe, or Alume: for therwith they
preſently reſolue and conſume into a liquide ſubſtaunce.
               And as men and mute Creatures, ſo alſo ſondry
Plantes and great ſtemmed hearbes,Venemous Herbes. are endued
with this quality: which by reaſon of their
deletory coldnes bringe deſtruction vnto Creatures,
as 
                     •
                  ēbane, Mādrake, Napellus, Solanum
Mortiferum, Aconitum, the iuyce of black Popie
called Opium, which although in reſpect of their
temperament and clementary qualitie, they bee
colde in the fourth and higheſte degree, yet by the
benefite of vitall heate diſſuſing it ſelfe from celeſtiall
thinges into theſe lower bodyes, they doe
liue and flouriſh in a freſhe verdure. For in euery

nature, & eſpecially humayne, there is a certaine
celeſtial or diuine vertue, ouer & beſide that
which is conſtituted of feede and of the feminine
bloud. For ye warme & calefactiue Spyrit, which
a litle afore we ſayde was infuſed into the whole
worlde, and into all the particuler parts thereof,
laboureth vppon the Elementes, and geeueth life
to all thinges, and finally woorketh in them that
vertue and efficacie, whereby throughe propagation
they encreaſe, and procreate kindes like to
themſelues, and produce a Creature of the ſame
nature they themſelues be. For the firſt procreation
of lyuing creatures being produced & made
of Elementall concretion and of the Parentes
Seede, which is a portion or parte of the
pureſt & beſt concocted bloude, then doth nature,
(whoſe ſkilful workmāſhip no hand nor curious
crafteſmā is able by imitation to reſēble or reach
vnto) hauing her original, diuine & ſupernal, applyeth
the woorke ſhe hath in framynge, bringeth
her thinges to perfect paſſe, conueigheth the powers
animall, wyth the Spyrites vital, and vertues
effectuall into the matter ſhe hath in hande,
by whoſe myniſtery ſhee perfectly finiſheth all the
lymmes, proportioneth all the lineaments, fitteth
them to the reſt of the mēbers of the bodye, & gyueth
ſuch ſhape & proportion to the thinges animated,
as daily we ſee repreſēted & ſet before our
eyes. This wonderfull force of nature which we
elſwhere haue ſhewed to yſſue & flow frō the moſt
abundant fountaine of Diuinity, beinge diffuſed

into ech part of ye whole bodye, moueth & ſlyrreth
the maſſe thereof, directeth & gouerneth the mynd
and vnderſtanding, & maketh the ſame applyable
to ſondry actions: by whoſe benefite and help euē
thoſe thīgs do liue & haue their being, which are
ſtiffe and nummed wt cold, althoughe heate in thē
be faint & feeble: which (leaſt it ſhould altogether
droupe & be vtterly extīguiſhed, & leaſt yu cold quality,
wherto ye drye is of affinity ſhould toomuch
preuaile & encreaſe) muſt be ſtyrred vp & excyted
wt hoate fomentatiōs. For whē natural moyſture
is all waſted & inward heat extinct, thē death approcheth
& the whole frame of the body tēdeth to
diſſolution & ruine. It cōmeth thē to paſſe euē as
Salomō
                   by an elegāt & apt ſimilitude deſcribeth,Eccle. 12.
yt when the cōpoſition & knittinge together of the
body is lewſed a ſonder & ſtrēgth decayed & gone,
thē ſhal mā be tourned again into duſt, frō whēce
he was taken & made, & the Spirite ſhal retourne
into his euerlaſtinge dwellinge, & to God which
made it. But to theud euery mā may perfectlye
know the nature & cōdicion of this cōplexion and
conſtitucion. I wil compendiouſly as it were by
the way, ſet downe certaine marks & tokēs wherby
it ſhal eaſely be knowen.Tokens of a colde Complexion. A cold Complexiō
if it be cōpared to a hoate, hath al properties cō
                  trary.
For euē as heat beīg diffuſed into ech part
of ye body imparteth his quality vnto ye humours
& maketh ye body, & y• parts therof to be of colour
ruddie: ſo cold imperteth his quality vnto ye mē
                  bers
& humours, & maketh ye body of colour pale
and vnſightly.
               
                  
But if we be diſpoſed particulerly to marke &
obſerue al the notes and tokens thereto incident,
we ſhall finde in the colde complexioned body, all
things contrary and diuerſe from the hoate. For
the bodye is pilde and ſmoth, the hayre looſe and
ſoft, of colour partakinge wyth redde and white,
and quickly ſhedding. The ſkinne in touching,
cold,Idlenes maketh the body fat and cold. & vnder it, ſome ſtore of fatnes. For when
heat in mās body is faīt & dul, fatnes engēdreth:
which, as it much happeneth to ye feminine Sexe,
ſo alſo breedeth it in many others that liue ydle &
at eaſe, withoute labour or exerciſe. And for this
cauſe through immoderate coldnes ye bodye waxeth
groſſe, fat, and corpulent: againe, by immoderate
heate, (which melteth awaye and diſſolueth
fat) the body is made leane and drye.
               For there be manye thinges not comminge to
man by nature, or from his natiuitye and beginning,
but accidentally and otherwiſe procured: as
eyther by chaunginge of the ordinary cuſtome of
life, or by alteration of diet, or by heate, labour,
ſlouth, ſolitarineſſe, lumpiſhnes, feare, ſorrowe,
care and ſondry others: many wayes chaunginge
the ſtate of the body: making it ſomtime ſlender &
leane, ſometime fat & corpulent. Which thinges
alſo to the making of the colour of ye face & bodye
fayre or foule, good or badde, are of no leſſe force,
and efficacie.Heate maketh good colour. For what thinges ſoeuer do excite
and ſtirre vp natiue heate, as Laughter, myrthe,
exerciſe, wyne &c. do make the face pleaſauntlye &
freſhlye coloured: but ſuch thinges as be cold, &

ſuppreſſe heate,Cold waſteth and taketh awaye colour. as cold ayre and nypping wynd,
toomuch drynkinge of water, immoderate ſleepe,
ouermuch eatinge of cold meates, feare, ſadneſſe,
carefulnes, & ſuch like, make the body to be white
coloured.
               Thus, they that be of cold Complexions, are
white coloured, vnleſſe this quality grow & ſurmount
to an exceſſe and great intenſion. For then
it declyneth to aſwart and leaden colour,Wanne colour. ſuch as
we ſee in men in the cold Wynter, the wynde being
at North, whoſe cheekes, Noſes, lyppes, fyngers
and eares are ſwart and wanne, wyth ſtiffe
cold benummed. But yet this commodity they
haue by colde, that it maketh them very hungry &
greedye of meate, and not eaſely ſatiſfyed, albeit
they do not well digeſte nor concocte it. And if
the tunicles of their Stomack together wyth the
cold, haue in them any ſowriſh or ſharpe humour,
they are in eating inſaciable and very rauenous
feeders:The hungry Sickneſſe. which affecte is called Canina appetē
                     tia,
the Dogges appetite, or ye hungry Sicknes:
which is qualefyed and taken away by drynking
the pureſt & ſtrōgeſt Wyne. To proue yt appetite
is ſharpened wyth colde,Cold things ſtirre vp appetite. maye well appeare by
Salades and ſondry other ſower and tarte Condimentes,
which wee vſe in Sommer ſeaſon to
prouoke appetite wythal. And as natiue heate
maketh men nymble and actyue,Cold perſōs drowſie and vnweldie. ſo cold cauſeth
them to be ſlouthfull, loytering, ſluggiſhe, drowſy
and vnapt to any labour or exercyſe: becauſe they
lacke the Inſtruments wherwyth to do any ſuch

functions.
               Such perſons haue foltering tongues, and nothing
ready in vtteraūce, a nyce, ſoft, and womā
                  niſh
voyce, weake & feeble faculties of Nature, ill
memory, blockiſh wit, doltiſh mynde, courage (for
lack of heate & ſlendernes of vital ſpyrit) feareful
and tymorous, & at the wagginge of euery ſtrawe
afrayed. Theſe and ſuch like defects and wāts
of Nature,The help & cure of a cold body. muſt we to y• vttermoſt of our power
ſtudy to amende, by vſing a wholeſome diete and
exquiſite trade of lyuing, which conſiſteth in a tē
                  perament
of hoate and moyſt.
               In this body eſpecially it is expediēt to excite
and cheeriſhe natiue heate wt exercyſe, and wyne yt
is pure & good, and with meates yt be calefactiue:
of which ſort are ſuch Byrds as beſtyrre & much
exerciſe themſelues wt flying,Foules hard of digeſtion as Sparrowes, Lynets,
Chaffinches, Culuers, Partriches, Pheſauntes,
Blackbyrdes, Thruſhes, Figgebyrds &
(among thoſe that be homiſh and tame) Capons
and Cockes: for Duckes, Swānes, Geeſe, Cootes,
Gulles, Hearneſhoes & other Water foules,
requyre a very ſtrong ſtomacke to digeſt them.
Of foure footed beaſts fitteſt for this nature, are
Veale,Meates fit for cold perſons. Mutton, Pigge, and Conye. Amonge
fruicts and ſuch as the earth by tillage and induſtrye
of man bringeth forth, ye beſt are theſe, Almonds
ſweete & ſower, Peachkernelles, Dates,
dry Figges, Reyſons y• kernels being taken out,
Coraunts, Pyne apples.
               And becauſe the increaſe of our Gardeins lē
                  deth

vs many helpes to this vſe and purpoſe, I
thincke it good alſo not to omit them, for yt they be
eaſye euery where to be had & neither coſtly nor
chargeable:Gardeine ſtore. of which ſort is Parſeley, certayne
kinds of Carrets, Seahollie, Skirwyke rootes,
Thyſtle, Artichoke, Nauew, radiſh, Chichpeaſe,
Creſſes, Rocket, Mynte, Wormewodde gentle, &
ſuch as in Wynter ſerue for Cōdiments & ſauce,
Onyons, Garlicke, Leekes, ſteeped in water to
take away their ranke ſauour & ſtrōg ſmel: or els
for them yt cannot wel abyde the ſtrong ayre & ſent
of theſe, maye put into their meate outlandiſh and
forraine ſpyces, as the Germaines and Engliſhe
Nacion cōmonly vſe: as Ginger, Saffron, Peper,
Graynes, Caſſia Cynamome, Nutmigges.
And perſons of meaner callinge & ſmaller abilitie,
& ſuch as are not wel able to beare out the coſt
of theſe things, may take out of their owne hoomiſh
gardeins & groūd, ſuch things as in ſtrēgh
and operation counteruayle theſe aforeſayd, yt is
to wit, Roſemarie, Baſil, ſauerie, Organie, Maiorame,
Dill,Hoat Condimentes. Sage, Baulme &c. For wt theſe &
many others of like ſort, may the defects of Nature
be beaten down, & ye faults therof of ouercome,
and therby ye body by litle & litle, maye be to a better
and quieter ſtate reduced. For if dryneſſe or
Siccity ſhould līck in & ioyne wt this quality, thē
truly life (which conſiſteth in hoat & moyſt) cānot
long continue: but needes muſt out of hand, come
to finall ende: whereof in the Chapter folowing
I purpoſe ſomwhat more at large to diſcourſe.
            
            
               
               ¶Of a Drye Complexion.
The ix. Chapter.
               FOraſmuche as that diſpoſition and habite of
bodye which is drye, is muche like to that
ſtate and complexiō which is cold, yea next vnto
it: I will briefly declare, what I thincke thereof,
& by what meanes it maye be expunged and bettered.
Theſe ii. qualityes bee in a maner alike
diſtant from perfecte and good temperatenes, in
what age ſoeuer they happen: howbeit in Oldeage
this drye diſtemperaunce, can hardelyer and
wyth much more adoe be qualefyed and vanquiſhed
then in Youth, whē the ſame ill habite commeth
through Sickenes or incontinencie of lyfe.
For as Oldmen by reaſon of theyr age and long
continuaunce of yeares haue bodyes drye, barreyne
and forworne: So lykewyſe Yongmen by
diſſolute lyuing, vnſeaſonable watching, and immoderate
Venerye, brynge their bodyes before
their due time to a cold and drye diſtemperaunce:
& haſtening their owne deathes by waſting theyr
vitall humour, arryue to their laſt endes, and dye
by naturall death aſwell as Oldmē do, although
in deede ſooner then otherwyſe they might do.
               And it is called naturall, becauſe it is common
to all men alike, and not able by anye meanes to
be declyned. For Oldage or the laſte caſt of mā,
is not to be accompted naturall, in ſuch ſorte as

encreaſing & nouriſhing be, which are the workes
of nature, and whereby the naturall facultye continueth
and maynteyneth it ſelfe: but becauſe it
ſo falleth oute neceſſarily and by the due courſe &
right order of Nature. For this is natures decreed
order, that all thinges hauynge beginning,
muſt alſo haue endyng, and arryue to their finall
decaye: for otherwyſe death ſhould vnproperlye
and vnaptly be termed Naturall, conſideringe it
is rather againſt Nature, and a profeſſed enemye
to our life.
               For if Sickneſſe (which I accompt as a ſtep
or as a Summer to death) be an habite & ſtate cō
                  trary
to Nature,If men bee loath to be ſicke, it followeth that they be loth to die. either deprauing or at leaſt hindring
the actiō therof: how much more is Death
to be deemed a thing contrary to Nature, which
quight abolyſheth and vtterly deſpoyleth lyfe?
               For nothyng is more repugnaūt to the lawes of
Nature, then to dye, & to be depryued of this moſt
pleaſaunt light and breath. Which thing euerye
man maye trye, and in himſelfe fynde moſt true,
when ſoeuer hee calleth to mynde, and deepely
wyth himſelfe falleth into anye cogitacion of the
ſame:Death dreadfull. for it dryueth a certayne fearefulnes, terrour
& dread into his mynde, that (were not his
mynde armed & ſtrengthened wyth an vndoubted
hope and expectation of an other better lyfe
hereafter) there could nothing be more miſerable
nor in worſe caſe, then mans life is. For what
thing could delyuer vs out of feare, carefulneſſe,
deſperation and diſtruſte, ſauinge onely a firme

truſt in Gods mercy, that our Soules after this
corporall diſſolution, ſhalbe trāſported to a place
of eternal ioy and felicitie? As for death, it was
not brought into the world by Nature: for y• vglye
face of Sinne,Sinne the cauſe of ſicknes & death and the wilful tranſgreſſion of
Gods preceptes at the beginninge of the worlde
gaue vnto vs this deadly wounde, & wrapped vs
in: all this myſery. Therfore death is called Naturall,
not in reſpecte of Nature, but of the conſequence:
becauſe it hangeth indifferently ouer all
mens heads,Sap. 2. as common indifferently to all, and
ſparing none: yea all thinges be wythin the compaſſe
and reach thereof.
               Now foraſmuch as there be two ſorts of death,
the one Violente & the other Natural:2. Kindes of death. that kind
of death is of Philoſophers & Phyſitions called
naturall, which happeneth vnto Oldemen & ſuch
as are in that bodely ſtate that Oldemen be: that
is to ſay Cold and Drye, wythout ſenſe or feeling
of any payne: for in them, their languiſhinge and
forſpent body forſaketh their Soule, and not the
Soule their body. Inſomuch that they dye in a
maner as though they fell ſoftly aſleepe, whereas
others (dyinge by meanes of caſualty, ruine,
fyer, ſword, Squinſte, Pleuryſſe, Inflāmatiōs of
the Lunges or other diſeaſes happening to a mā
in his fulneſſe of humours) dye a violent death,
ſtruggling painfully, and long languiſhing in extreme
agonies before they giue by the Ghoſt. So
that the Soule is perforce compelled to abandō
and forſake the body, lyke a Gheſt that fleethout

of a ruynous houſe, that is weatherbeaten and
much ſhakē wt force of tēpeſt, only to auoyde further
daūger. And hereupon doth Cicero very notablye
wryte,De Senect. that Yongmen and ſuche as bee in
their flouriſhinge and luſtye Age and full of humours,
do dye and take their ende muche like as
when a great flaming fyer is ſodeinlye quenched
with great ſtoare of Water: Againe, he ſayth
that Oldmen deceaſe like fyer, that of it owne accord
quencheth and wythout anye other violence
goeth out. What a deale of ſmoake, what ſoote,
what ſparkles do we ſee fly vp into ye ayre? what
crackling & noyſe doth the great nūbre of ſparkes
make, when we aſſay to quench a light burninge
flame? or with powring great abundaunce of water,
to ſlecke a great heape of woode layed al vppon
one fyer? Wherby we may coniecte, what
vehement and painefull ſtruggling, what ſharpe
conflicte, what raginge ſturre and ſtryuing is in
a Yonge bodye: when as throughe violence of
Sickneſſe or other deſtenie, the luſtyneſſe of his
Nature (being not yet ſpent) & his warme heat,
and lyuely Spyrites be oppreſſed and ſtifled.
               To this ende, is that elegante and apt compariſon
of Cicero: For (ſayth hee) as rawe and vnrype
apples are not plucked from the Tree but
by violence and force: but beyng rype, fall downe
of theyr owne accord, or wyth little touchinge:
So lykewyſe the lyfe of Yonge men is taken away
with force, but of Oldmen, by maturitie and
rypenes.
               
                  
This thought I good heere to enterlace, as a
thing not greatly beſyde my purpoſe, diligentlye
aduertyzing all men euen from theyr infancy and
childhoode to ſhunne and declyne all ſuch things
as are preiudiciall to their bodyes and harmeful
to theyr health, whether the ſame procede of outward
or of inward cauſes.
               Whoſoeuer therefore is deſyrous to keepe himſelf
from beynge tooſoone Old,To be long lyued. and to prolonge
his lyfe as longe as may be, muſt very diligently
take heede of many lettes and hinderaunces that
damuifye and lye in wayte to preiudice hys lyfe,
but namely and ſpecially let him haue a carefull
eye to keepe himſelfe from this Dry plight & ſtate
of body. And by what mennes he may ſo do, after
certaine 
                     ••
                  tes firſt geeuen, whereby to knowe
what perſon is of this Complexion, I will briefly
and compendiouſly geeue plaine inſtructions:
asking to all Students and perſonnes politick,
(doubtleſſe) right 
                     〈◊〉
                   me, profitable and expedi
                     ••
                  t
to be know
                     ••
                  .
               All they therfore that eyther of the Nature of
their owne bodelye ſtate and Complexion,Notes of a dry Cōplexion. or by
any defect in their Parents at theyr byrth & procreation,
or finally by any accidentall myſſehappe
or cuſtome of lyuing, as by wāt of foode, thought,
watch, heauynes of mynd, or immoderate labour,
haue commonly bodyes ſlender and thinne: and
their ſhinne (where dryneſſe is great) ſkuruye,
rugged, vnſeemely and lancke, like vnto hungerſtarued
horſes, that lacke meate and attendaunce:

of colour ill fauoured, ſwarte, and yelowe as a
Kites foote, and at the last grymme viſaged, ſower
coūtenaunced, faced lyke death, fylthy, loothſome,
and leane as a Rake: to conclude, in all
reſpects reſembling the Phyſſognomy and ſhape
of Enuye, deſcribed by Ouid.
               
               
                  A face like Aſhes pale and vvanne,
                  a body ſkraggie leane,
                  A learning looke, and teeth all furde
                  vvith droſſe and fylth vncleane:Lib. 2. Metam.
                  
                  Her Stomacke greeniſh is vvith Gall,
                  her Tongue vvyth venime fraught,
                  And neuer laughes, but vvhen miſſehappe
                  or harme hath others caught.
                  No vvink of Sleepe comes in her eyes,
                  and reſt ſhe can none take,
                  For fretting carke and cancred care,
                  her vvatchfull ſtill doth make.
                  Full ſore againſt her vvill it is,
                  that any man ſhould thryue
                  Or proſper in his buſyneſſe:
                  For that doth her depryue
                  Of all her reſt and quietnes,
                  thereat the helliſh Elfe,
                  Doth ſtampe and ſtare, doth fret and fume,
                  and pynes avvay herſelfe.
                  And to her ſelfe a torment is,
                  for ſeeking to annoye
                  The vvealth and ſtate of other folkes,
                  herſelfe ſhe doth deſtroye.
               
               
                  
And becauſe dryneſſe feedeth vppon, and waſteth
all their humour,Baldnes cō
                     meth for lacke of humour. they be thinne hayred and
waxe ſoone bald, crooke nayled, their voyce feeble
and ſlender, and ſometime ſqueakinge, (by meanes
that drynes exaſperateth their vocall artery)
their pulſes beatīg faintly, ſlow gate, holow eyed,
pale lypped, ſhrunken temples, hanging cheekes,
cold & crūpled eares, of ſtature not greatly tal, &
of ſleepe (which is a moſt ſweete refuge, releaſe, &
truce from laboures and cares) through diſtemperature
of the braine, very litle. And if theyr
braine be altogether drye and hoate,Dry brayne cauſeth ill Memory. then is theyr
Memory nought and in a maner none at all: then
be they very oblyuious, blockeheaded and heauye
ſpyrited. For ſythens the Spyrits fayle and be
defectiue, which (as cleare & ſyncere vapoure)
proceede out of purest bloud by ye benefit of heate
& haue great force & vertue in directing & mouīg
forward actiōs: it is not poſſible yt the faculties &
powers naturall beinge deſtitute of their forces,
ſhould performe & rightly diſcharge their due &
peculiar functions. But if the vertue or power
Animal be perfect & vigorous, & the brain not altogether
deſtitute of heate, thē is ye memory ſtedfaſt,
firme & retentiue, for as immoderat moyſtnes
cauſeth forgetfulnes & doltiſh foliſhnes, as
in yong Children & dronkards appeareth: ſo moderate
dryneſſe wt the helpe of meaſurable heate,
maketh a good and faithfull Memory,Good Mē
                     morye. & highlye
furthereth toward the attainment of Prudence &
Wyſedome. For a drye brightnes, induceth a

mynde full fraught wyth wyſedome: & the more
ſtore of moyſtnes that is therein, the leſſe is the
wit: which thing wee do alſo note and ſee to come
to paſſe by the ayre, when ye weather is ſkowling
and not cleare. For the Starres ſhine not bright
out, when the ayre is wyth cloudes and foggye
myſtes ouercaſt and darckened.
               Nowe the cauſe why manye in their Oldage,
doate and become very forgetful (albeit this Age
be ſayd to be moſt dry) yet ye ſame happeneth not
by reaſon of drynes, but of coldnes: which manifeſtly
preiudiceth and hindereth all the vertues &
offices of ye mynd. For out of it ſpryngeth madneſſe,
loſſe of right wits, amazednes, rauing, dotage,
and wante of the righte vſe of the Senſes,
whereby the vertues of Nature be ſo oppreſſed &
ouercharged, ye they be thereby eyther altogether
diſabled from perfourming their functions, or at
leaſt, do the ſame very faintly and feeblie.
               Therefore when Memory is periſhed or affected,
it procedeth of ſome cold diſtēperature,Reſtoring
                        •
                      of the memorye. which
muſt with things moderately hoate▪ be remoued
and expugned. For to humect or to arefie, is not
the beſt way. But if coldnes be ioyned wt moyſtnes,
then to vſe arefactiō: & if it be lynked wt dryneſſe,
then to vſe humectacion. Now, if this
quality be not throughly ſettled and rooted, theſe
ſignes and tokens aforeſayd, do not exactly aunſwere
to this deſcriptiō: but as the diſtēperaūce
by litle & litle groweth & encreaſeth, ſo do they appeare
& ſhew forth thēſelues euery day more and
more.
               
                  
Which happeneth namely to them that be affected
wyth this habite, not naturally but caſuallye
and accidentally, or by ſome ſicknes of the bodye,
or by ſome vexation of mynde. For Temperamentes
are ſubiect to many and ſondrye alterations:
In ſome, heate waſting & ſpending vp moyſture,
induceth a dry diſtemperaunce, and manye
tymes too much ſtoare of moyſture quight quencheth
heate: and manye there are, vnto whom vehement
coldnes bringeth dryneſſe: which is the
worſt diſtemperuance of all others, and to Nature
moſte hurtfull: for that it haſtenethe Oldeage
and bringeth a man to death longe before his
time.
               The body of euery one is then inwardly drye,Galen lib. 5. de tuen. Val.
when it is neyther able to attract and draw nouriſhment
into the Veynes, neyther ſufficiently able
to digeſt and enioy the benefite therof: wherby
it happeneth, that the pryncipall partes and
Entrailes (appointed for concoction of the meates)
be dryed vp, & the reſitdue (ſeruinge to purge
excrementes) do abound wyth Phleginatick humours.
Which thing hath made many to ſtumble
& ouerſhoote themſelues, who haue thoughte
Old men to be moyſt of Complexion, whereas
me ſolide parts, the Arteryes, Panicles, ſkinnes
ſynewes and muſkles are not moyſte, but the capacities,
receptoryes and pores which ſtande the
body in ſteede, to expell ſuperfluityes, are endued
wyth ſome moyſture: and hereupon the body (by
reaſon of weake and feeble heate) ceaſſeth to bee

nouriſhed, and is finally brought into an exteme
dryneſſe. And therefore not without good reaſon
doth Galene thinck that this is the worſt plightLib. 6. de tuend. val.
and ſtate that the body can be in. For the ſame
thinge that happeneth to men aged and ſtryken
in yeares, happeneth to manye Yongmē euen frō
their firſt beginninge. And therfore it is needeful
to humect and warme them with moderate exercyſe,
moyſt and hoate nouriſhment, but ſpeciallye
with hoate and ſweetiſh wyne: for ſower & harde
wynes be hurtfull to this Complexion,Hard wynes or of the ſecond ſort. & namely
to Old men, excepte they be well ſweetened wyth
Sugar or honie. This thing also ought to be
obſerued in the eating of Mylke,Mylke. which is made
for them a greate deale better and holeſomer,
if it be well ſeaſoned with theſe or ſuch like condimentes.
For by this meanes, ſhall no obſtructions
by eating therof be engendred, neyther
needeth the Stone and grauel in the reynes therby
to be feared: And for doubte of beinge at anye
time wyth the ſame troubled, (becauſe it cōmeth
and is bredde of groſſe toughe humour and meat
of hard digeſtion) ſuch thinges ſhould be preſcribed
vnto them, as open obſtructiōs and prouoke
Uryne,Herbes hauing vertue to make one to piſſe, of which ſort theſe Herbes, Gardenſmallage,
Sperage, Alkakēgie, Cheruyle, Saxifrage,
Chriſta marina, Betonie, Maydenheare,
Roſemarie flowers: and (if the bealy be bound or
coſtiue) Mercurye Fumitorie, baſtarde Saffron
with a Pryſane, Sea colewortes boyled in broth
wyth fat fleſh, Malowes, Arrage, Elite, all ſorts

of Dockes, Nettles, Hoppes, yong Elderbuds,
ſpecially in the Spring time of the yeare, or ſuch
other as be in their chiefeſt vertue in Sommer &
Autumne, as Cheries, Plummes, Figges, and
Mulberyes being eaten at beginning of Meales.
For whereas Horace in a learned and elegante
Verſe commēdeth vnto vs Mulberies, thinking
the ſame beſt to be eaten laſt and at the lat
                     •
                  er end
of dinner, he did it not by way of any Phiſicke or
holſomnes y• is therein (being ſo taken,) but for
that, the common vſe and cuſtome, was so to eate
them. His Verſes be to this effect:

                     At ende of Dinner, Mulberies,
                     vvho vſeth ſtill to eate,
                     Ech morning earlye gathered,Lib. 2. Sat. 4.
                     
                     himſelfe in Somers heate
                     Shall ſafely keepe in holeſome plight,
                     deuoyd of Sicknes all,
                     VVhereby no kinde of maladie,
                     attach his body ſhall.
                  
               
               For theſe and alſo Grapes, Peaches, Corneilbearies
& ſuch as will not be kepte long in Sō
                  mer,
oughte to be eaten before other meates, for if
they be otherwyſe prepoſterouſly taken or oute
of order, they putrefie and corrupt the bodye and
fill the bealy full of wynd. In Wynter ſeaſon
alſo there are many things yt make the bealy ſoluble
and ſkowre ye Gutts & Entrailes: as Muſte,
dry Figges, & great Reyſons, Damaſke prunes,

eyther ſtewed or ſteeped in ſome licoure, puttinge
thereunto a good quantitie of Sugar or honie.
Wherunto are to be added, theſe that haue an expediēt
vertue in medicines, Sene, Polipodie,
Manna, Epythyme, Caſſia, Rhabarbe, and the infuſion
of Hebene or Lignum Indicum, Mirobalanes,
Thamar or Dates of India, and all theſe to
be geeuen eyther in Whaye, or in the broath of a
Henne.
               And foraſmuch as for preſeruation of health,
and dryuing away diſeaſes not onely in Oldmē
but in all others that be ſubiect to any ſicklie affection,
there cannot be any holeſomer thinge then
Turpentine,Turpentine holeſome. it deſerueth alſo to be reckened in ye
number of theſe aforeſayd. For it not onely mollyfyeth
and looſeth the healy without all harme &
daunger, but alſo purgeth and ſkowreth all the
Entrailes, and inwarde partes, as the Lyuer,
Mylte, Reynes, Lunges and Lightes: but it
muſt be of ye beſt ſort and cleare ſhyning through,
not counterfecte nor paltered withall.
               And ye beſt is that, which iſſueth out of ye Larch,
the Pyne, or the Firre tree. I haue prooued
this to bee of moſte effectuall and ſoueraigne
force to prouoke Vryne in them that coulde not
well pyſſe, to breake the ſtone and grauell: in the
Strangurie: and in the fylthye & vlcerous dropping
or effluxion of ye Vryne, called of the Duchmen
Den Druyper: in the Goute aſwell of the
hands as feete: in curing the loathſome botches, &

contagious pollutions of the Priuye members &
ſecrete parts, gottē by hauing carnal knowledge
wt cōmon Brothelles & Pocky harlots: in curīg
and helping al inwarde grieues & infections accōpanying
the ſame diſeaſe: wherof many ſettle ſo
deepely wtin the boanes, yt the pellicles, rymmes,
Synewes, Muſkles, Tēdons or Chords throughe
outrage of humours are ſhrunkē, crumpled,
ſpoyled, & haled a ſonder. And albeit Galenes vſe
was,Lib. 3. de tuen. Val. lib. 5. tuē. val. to myniſter the ſame in the bignes & quātity
of a Fylberd Nutte, ſometime of two & ſometime
three: yet my cuſtome is (becauſe I would that it
ſhould the better penetrate and ſearche into all
the Veynes and parts of the body) to make it after
the maner of a Potion, myngling wyth it ſom
diſtilled water, or els ſome wyne. For it wyll
become liquide without any fier, and through cō
                  tinuall
chaſing it wyll eaſely be brought to a notable
whiteneſſe, and that is this ſorte to bee
done:
               First I take an oūce or two of right and perfect
Turpentine (wherein is neyther fraude nor
legter du mayne vſed)Preparīg of Turpē
                     tine. it doe I bruyſe & diſſolue
wyth a Peſtil in a Mortar, and adde thereto a litle
of the Yolke of an Egge: then do I myngle
and put to it two or three ounces of the water of
Alkakengie or Smallage,To make Turpentine liquide and potable. or ſome other licour,
accordingly as the Nature of the diſeaſe, or ſtate
of the perſon ſeemeth to requyre: All theſe do I
beate together, till they be wel myxt and incorporate:
the myxture wilbe of ſuch a pleaſaunt mylkye

whytenes as though it were Creame: yea my
pacientes are perſwaded that it is ſoe in deede, &
none other thing which I giue them to drincke.
I alſo vſe to make it into litle round Pilles, and
rouling it in fine vnleauened wafer Paſt, to giue
it them to ſwallow downe, or els in y• ſofte pappe
of a Quince, but firſt muſt the Turpētine be wel
waſhed in Roſe water, or Fenel water, to take away
his reſinie tallage.
               And becauſe nothing to this Cōplexion which
we heere deſcribe,Sleepe. is holeſomer then ſounde and
quiet Sleepe, (for therwith all the members are
generally moyſtened, and wt conuenient warmth
refreſhed) it ſhalbe good for a perſon thus complexioned,
to take his full eaſe and ſleepe in a ſoft
bedde, largely and ſomewhat plentifully: For
Sleepe in the night is the refreſhing & makinge
luſty agayne both of the body and mynde.
               
                  The invvard peace of mynde, is Sleepe.
                  To vvearyed bodye; eaſe it brings.
                  By it, themſelues men luſty keepe,
                  And freſh to doe their needefull things.
               
               And when Sleepe is ſhaken of, it ſhalbe righte
commodious to vſe rubbing or friction, neither
ſoft nor hard,Friction. but meane betweene both, the profit
whereof to them that vſe it is almoſt incredible:
For it ſtyreth vp vital ſtrength, it calefyeth moderately,
and maketh diſtribution of the nouriſhment
into the body eaſyer, and readier, ſpeciallye

if it be done with the wette hand, or with a moyſt
and courſe cloth. For who doth not perceiue yt
the hands, cheekes, armes, neck and cares, being
rubbed, will waxe ruddie, and with heate gather
bloud into thoſe parts.
               And although the vſe of rubbing and annoynting,
amonge vs nowe a dayes be cleane growen
out of cuſtome, yet in tholde tyme men vſed it very
often, as a meane to keepe themſelues in perfect
health, and to ſtrengthē their bodily powers.
So Augustus Caeſar on a certayne tyme eſpyinge
his old compaignion Pollio, being aboue an hū
                  dreth
yeares olde, demaunded of him what order
he vſed in conſeruinge himſelfe in ſuch perfecte
ſounde ſtrength, and in ſo luſtye and greene olde
age: vnto whom his aunſwere was, that he came
to it, by vſing, within, Wyne: wythout, Oyle,
               Men in tholde time did not riottouſlye abuſe
oyntmentes and Oyles, to ſatiſfye their effeminate
delicatenes & nyce wantonnes, but for ſafegard
and preſeruation of health, thereby the better
to keepe themſelues from Sickneſſe. For
vnctions and Frictions orderlye and duelye vſed
(for there by many ſorts thereof as Galene witneſſeth)
eyther indenſe the body,Lib. 2. de tuen. Val. that the Ayre &
wyndes ſhould not batter and damnyfie it: or els
rarefie it, that it be not ſtopped and inwardly peſtered,
which abūdaunce of fullginous humours
and oppilacions.Sixe ſorts of Frictions. Hard Rubbing doth ſnarle together
and condenſe the body: Soſt, lewſeth and
reſolueth it: Much, doth extenuate & dimyniſhe:

Meane, hath a power to make it encreaſe & fill:
Rough draweth out humours to the vtter parts:
Gentle and ſmooth taketh away nothing, but reteyneth
his force and power in the parts. Among
theſe ſorts of frictions, that which is in a mediocritie,
is moſt behoouefull for thoſe perſons yt be
olde and leane. For as hard and ſtyffeleathered
bootes yt haue lyen lōg vnoccupyed, by being ſuppled
in Oyle are made ſofte: So likewyſe ye bodyes
of Fol & Dry perſōs, being ſtroaked ouer &
humected inwardly wt Wyne, & outwardlye with
Oyle, lay aſyde al ſeueritie, z loke wt a cheerefull
and liuely countenaunce.
               To proue that this vſe of vnctions in the old
time was of diuers ſorts, beſide the teſtimony of
ſacred Scriptures,Lucae. 7. beſyde ye reporte of Solinus, &
Plinie. Strabo in his deſcription of the maners &
faſhions of the Indians doth ſufficientlye teſtifye.Lib. 15.
Phyſicke (ſayth hee) amonge them conſiſteth in
meates, not in medicines: and of Medicines, they
beſt allow of vnctiōs & Cataplaſmes: al other being
(as they thinck) not voyde of harme & annoyaunce.
Therewt they cuſtomablye propulſe ſickneſſe,
mitigate heate, driue away laſſitude & wearyneſſe,
reuiue their wearyed powers & feeble
Spyrites, refreſhing themſelues therewith, euen
as we by ſweete ſmelles do recreate our inward
ſoule, and reſtore the faint faculties of naure.
               No leſſe commodious and profitable to this
body,Artificiall Bath. is a warme Bathe of ſweete water: for it
doth humect and calefie, it diſſolueth laſſitude, it

mollyfyeth hard and ſtiffe partes, it diſperſeth by
euaporation the abundaunce of humours, it reſolueth
wyn
                     •
                  yn
                     •
                  ſſe, and procureth Sleepe: for yt
it humecteth the brayne wyth a pleaſaunt vaporous
and deawye moyſture. But the naturall
Bathes,Naturall Bathes. which haue all their vertues of Alume,
Yron, Lyme, Ockre, Brymſtone, Saltpeter, Bitumen,
Leade, Braſſe, Copper &c. are not ſo holeſome
for this Complexion and Nature, vnleſſe ye
party do firſt aſke aduyſe of ſome fkilfull and
truſty Phiſition, openymge vnto him the whole
ſtate of his body, whereby he may vppon the consſideration
therof, geeue iudgement whether it be
good and expedient for him to aduenture into the
ſame.
               Carnall luſt and Venerous Act,Carnal dealing wyth womē very hurtfull to dry and cold complexiōs as it is an
vtter ennemye to all drye Natures, ſo eſpecially
to it moſte hurtfull to them that beſyde dryneſſe
are alſo cold. No leſſe hurtfull is ouer much exercyſe,
wearyneſſe, watch, carefuneſſe & thought,
longe abſtynence from meate and drincke, heauynes
of mynde and anger, wherewyth ſuch complexioned
mens myndes are ſeldome ſtyrred: but
when they be throughly chafed & angred, hardly
will they be pacifyed and quieted againe.
               And becauſe vnſeaſonable Study is a thinge
that greatly wearyeth & weareth Students,Studying by night and Candlelight hurtful, making,
when leane, and exhauſting their bodyes: a
meaſure and meane alſo would be therein vſed.
For we ſe
                     •
                   many great and painfull Studentes,
ſtill ſitting at their Bookes, wythout taking any

regard to their bodily health (by the helpe wherof
the good ſtate of the mynde is holden vp & mainteyned)
to looke wyth wearyſhe faces, pale and
without bloude, nothing almoſt on their bodyes,
but ſkinne and boane, the ventricle and ſtomacke
feeble & vnable to digeſt their meate their ſtrēgth
and powers cleane worne out and exhauſted.
               For by wearying themſelues wyth late watchīg,
and ſittinge at their ſtudy till farre in the nighte,
their Animall Spyrites through toomuch intē
                  ſion
be reſolued, and their natiue humyditie dryed
vp. Wherefore it is requiſite to vſe therein
a moderacion, and narowlye to looke to the
preſeruation of health,Bodelye health. leaſt otherwyſe throughe
continuall poring and ſtudy▪ the body chaunce to
pyne away & fall into ſome Conſumption. For
as Plutarch ſayth: Of al the good thinges that
learninge bryngeth to man,De tuēd. Valet. nothinge more excellent
can be geuen to the body, then to be in perfect
health, and wythout impedimente, eyther for
the attaynmente of the knowledge of Vertue, or
for the neceſſarye vſe of lyfe. For if ſickneſſe or
gyddyneſſe of the head hyppē, ſtreightwayes the
mynde beinge deſtitute of the helpe of the bodye,
drowpeth,Bodye and mynde ſick and wel together▪
                   quayleth, and is neyther luſtye nor actyue
in doynge his ordinary functions: but together
wyth his Companion and fellow of all his
labours the bodye, is mutuallye affected and alyke
diſtempered. For which cauſe Pla
                        •
                     o hys
counſell is right commendable, aduyſing vs neither
to exercyſe the body wythout the mynde, nor

the mynde without the bodye: but to keepe as it
were an equal poyze of matrymoniall cōſent and
agreemente together betweene them, as it were
betweene man & wyfe.
               Foraſmuch therefore as the inwarde and natiue
heate by exercyſe and motion, is encreaſed &
ſtrengthened, and the mynde reuyued and made
luſtyer: it ſtandeth all Studentes vppon, and as
many as be ſickly & of weariſh or quayſie health,
to vſe themſelues thereunto, and namelye to ſuch
kinde of exercyſe as bryngeth wyth it no wearyſōnes
or laſſitude, but which is ſtayed wtin y• boū
                  des
of mediocrity: of which ſort is a decēt ſtraynable
and cleare voyce, and reading or declaming
wyth a lowde and bigge ſound, which is as expedient
and as profitable a thing as any, to open ye
breaſt, to ſtirre vp the Spyrites, and to cleare the
heart from all groſſe and fulſome vapours.A holeſome exerciſe for ſtudents.
               
               Notwythſtandyng, this muſt by the way diligētly
bee obſerued, that they maye not ſtreyne theyr
voyce to ſpeake ouerbigge and lowde, when they
be eyther throughly harneyſed wyth wyne, or ful
gorged wyth meate. For the Spyrit and breath
ouerreaching and ſtreyning it ſelf wyth toomuch
and too violēt braying out, exaſperateth the vocal
Arterie, and many tymes cauſeth eyther inflammation
in the throate, or els by breaking ſome of
the ſmall veynes, maketh them to ſpit bloud.
               There be other ſortes of recreations, wherewyth
men of this calling and vocation, may wel
refreſh themſelues, takinge (for ye tyme) reaſonable

truce wyth theyr other appoynted ſtudyes &
buſyneſſe:Moderate banquetting not diſcommēdable. as moderate banquetting and making
mery among honeſt and pleaſaunt conceipted cō
                  pany,
ſuch (I meane) as know how to vſe themſelues
in eche reſpect, and can frame theyr talke, &
place their wordes according to time,Recreation of the mynd age, perſon
preſent, and to ſome profitable purpoſe of Iyfe: in
earneſt and graue matter vſing graue ſpeach,Comelye mirth at the Table. and
in ſporting myrth, merye deuyſes and pleaſaunte
cōferēces: hauīg in their mouthes no kind of lauiſh
talke, but onely ſuch as to the hearer may be
both pleaſaunt and profitable. In which poynt,
many digreſſe from comelyneſſe, & do not greatly
delighte theyr Audience, for that theyr table talke
neyther ſerueth for the tyme, neither is to the hearers
eyther pleaſaunt or commodious. For whēanye
wayghty & perplexed matters be in queſtion,
or among them debated, theſe buſie tāglers
be euer buzzinge. Thus, many euen in their
Wagons, at the Myll, in the open ſtreates and
croſſe wayes, in theyr Wheries & Boates, yea euen
vpon theyr Alebenches, will take vpon them
to reaſon of the holy Scriptures, and to diſpute
of Religion. But how? forſooth, euen after ſuch
a ſorte as men, whoſe bellyes be full paunched, &
bumbaſted as much as the ſkinne will holde, doe
argue and reaſon of frugalitie & thryft. Which
kinde of people, right aptly & worthely (although
in a matter of leſſe accompt) the Poete Perſius in
his tyme quipped and rahated, where hee ſayth:

                     
                     Ech Peazante novv vvith pamperd paunch,
                     on Alebench and at vvyne,
                     Sat. 1.
                     Dare chaunt and prate of Sacred lore,
                     and Myſteries Diuine.
                  
               
               But let them rather yelde to the holeſome admonition
of Horace, wryting thus:

                     Diſcuſſe not matters myſticall,
                     vvhen ſtoare of Bellycheere,
                     And daintie fare, the Tables gay
                     Lib. Ser.
                     doth furniſhe eu'ry vvhere.
                     2. Sat. 2.
                     Learne (Frends) but yet in due time learne,
                     not vvith the Stomacke full,
                     VVhen belching fumes of ſurphetting,
                     your eyeſight maketh dul.
                     VVhen mynd thats prone to vvickednes,
                     and follovving of vvill,
                     Reiecteth Vertue ſtubbornely,
                     and vice frequenteth ſtill.
                     Come ſober, and not ouerchardge
                     vvith gurmandize I ſay,
                     VVhen ſo ye euer meane of ſearch,
                     the true and perfect vvay.
                     And vvhy? forſooth I vvill you tell
                     (at leaſt vvyſe if I canne:)
                     A brybed Iudge, that gapes for gaine,
                     the truth to
                           •
                         yft and ſkanne
                     Is farre vnmeere and eke vnlike,
                     to iudge tvvixt man and man.
                  
               
               
                  
Hereuppon it commeth, that many vtterly ignorant
and meere blinde in the Holy Scriptures
and matters touching the ſtate of their Soules,
ſuffer themſelues ſo wilfullye and headlongly to
be faryed away by theyr owne ſenſual affections:
for that, they buſye themſelues where they ſhould
not,Curioſity in ſearching to high miſte-ries. and leauell not at that mark wherevnto their
mynde ought principally to direct it ſelfe, entermedlyng
and troubling their braynes wyth ſcrupulous
quiddities and diffuſe queſtions, hauing
ſuch ſpyced conſciences, that ſometime they are
myered and ſland in doubt of things moſt plaine
and manyfeſt: and lodging once wtin their harts
any erronious doctrine or ſuperſtitious opyniō,
wauer n Fayth, and doubt in conſcience, & myſſyng
the ryght Hauen & ſure Ankerholde, wherevnto
they ſhoulde onely truſte, runne vppon the
rockes of humaine tradicions, and throwe themſelues
wilfully vppon the daungerous Shelues
of mens phantaſticall traditions and inuented
trumperyes. And therefore becauſe, the mynde of
man is euer buſye and diuerſlye iarring and vnſettled
wythin it ſelfe, and neither in word, deede,
opyniō, nor in the whole order of life ſo firme and
conſtant as is to be wyſhed: I woulde aduyſe &
counſell euery one, that deſyreth to liue in tranquillity
of conſcience and quietnes of mynde, to
diſpoſe all his actions, purpoſes, deuyſes and
meaninges, into tymes and oportunityes thereto
conuenient, doing euery thinge in his due order, &
apoyncting to ech function his proper turne, and

tempeſtiuitye: and not confuſely to ſhuffle vp and
myngle one thing wyth an other in diſorder, nor
to wrap and entangle himſelfe in many matters
at once: which thing is ment by theſe ſayinges of
the Preacher,Eccle. 3. where hee appoynteth conueniente
ſeasſons and orderlye times for eche functions of
this lyfe, and aſſigneth to euery thing his proper
and due office: ſo that the nighte which is a time
appoynted for reſt (baniſhyng all phantaſyes) is
to be paſſed and ſpente in Sleepe, & not to be entermedled
wyth thoſe buſyneſſes & cares which
belong to the daye. The tyme to eate his meate,
the time to relaxe and ſport his body, the tyme to
refreſh his powers and reuyue his Spyrites, let
him ſo precyſely and orderly obſerue: that laying
aſyde (for the time) all other cares and cogitations,
he onely attende to his meate,Eche thinge ought to be done in his due time & right order. meerilye & decently
cheeriſhyng his body, not ſuffering himſelf
to be interrupted, or otherwyſe diſquieted during
the time fo his ordinarie repaſte, and vſuall
meales.
               Thus, whē we reſort to the places of publique
prayer, to heare godly Sermons, when we pray,
and offer vp vnto God our deuout meditations,
al ſuch things as may in any wiſe hinder our deuotion,
ought then to be ſecluded and layed aſyde
from vs, that our mynds may onely erect it ſelfe
vpward to Godward, and to thincke on nothing
but heauenly thinges. This alſo both in publicke
and pryuate matters, in common Pleas &
domeſtical Affayres, in the traffique and trade of

Marchaundize, when a man hath dealings with
himſelfe or bargaining wyth other men, oughte
circūſpectly to be obſerued: for by vſing this ordinarye
cuſtome and trade of lyfe, hee ſhall reape
great commodity and feele great eaſe in himſelfe,
al the dayes of this his earthly Pylgrimage.
            
            
               ¶Of a Moyſt Complexion.
The X. Chapter.
               BEcauſe radicall or originall humour is the
maynteiner and feeder of naturall heate, and
the thinge that preſerueth and maynteyneth lyfe,
euen as Oyle doth nouriſh the flame in the Candlewieke:
therefore the Complexion that is therof
conſtituted is not ill, neyther to be myſlyked.
For both Phiſitions & Philoſophers cōmend ye
temperature which is moyſte, as not altogether
diſagreeing and ſtraunge from naturall dispoſition.
And although in yong yeres it be not
all of the best:Moyſt Cō
                     plexion. Yet when further age and heate be
ioyned to it, it becommeth much better and perfecter.
For moyſtnes will quickly conceyue and
take heate, and is both ready and plyaunte to be
wrought and framed which way a man wyl, euen
lyke moyſt clay that will take any maner of print
or forme. It helpeth therefore wonderfullye to
nouriſhment, and is of very great force and efficacy
touching ye height, talnes & growth of man.
               
                  
For albeit moyſtnes hindreth the other functiōs,
and of it ſelfe helpeth them in executing theyr actions
nothing at all, but is rather altogether
weake, and vneffectuall, (becauſe it is neyther fit
to attract, neyther to reteyne, neyther to expell:)
yet being ioyned and perfuſed wyth heate, it helpeth
and bringeth ſomething to paſſe, and furthereth
the other qualitye in the alteracion of thoſe
thinges which bee conioygned amonge themſelues.
               For as water being no leſſe cold then moyſte,
through heat of fyer, boyleth things that be raw:
making the ſame wholeſome foode for mans body:
Or, as Oyle in the fryinge panne, throughe
the heate of fyer & burning coales,Heate in mā likened to the Sūne, and moyſture to the Moone. becōmeth moſt
ſkaldynge, & boyleth & fryeth fiſhes fitte & meete
for the ſuſtenaunce and meate of man: So likewyſe
moyſtnes in a mās body ioyned wyth naturall
heate, worketh many effects in the body, euen
as the Moone doth in y• Earth, through the light
that ſhee boroweth at the Beames and ſhyninge
rayes of the Sunne.The influēce & force of the Moone. For as this Planet in
her monthly courſe refreſheth woods and fields,
geeuing to all earthly things growth & encreaſe,
cauſing ye Sea to obſerue his tydes in Creekes,
Hauens, Roades and Shoares, and to ebbe and
flow according to her courſe and motion, & as ſhe
is neerer or further of, ſometime wyth ſwellynge
floudes filling them, ſometime wyth lowe ebbes
emptying them, as ſhe alſo doth Oyſters and all
ſhelfiſh beſide: So lyſewyſe this wholeſome vital

humour, moyſtening eche mēber in the body, maketh
the ſame full of iuyce and moyſture: & therefore
they that bee of this nature and complexion,
are long liuers, if they keepe themſelues within
moderation, and that the moyſtnes for wante of
heate, growe not toomuch oute of ſquare and beyonde
meaſure. For as toomuch abundaunce of
water quight quenche fier: ſo too much ſtoare of
moyſture oppreſſeth naturall heate.
               But if theſe ii. qualities, concurre and meete
together in a moderate temperatenes, and that
neyther moyſture be too abundaunt, neither heat
too remiſſe and faint, thē (certes) all the offices of
nature are moſt exactly perfourmed. For when
heate hath moyſtnes plyant, ready and obedient,
it attracteth the meate, and verye well concocteth
the ſame: and beinge reduced and broughte into
the likeneſſe or faſhion of deawe, diſtributeth and
diſperſeth the ſame into the verye innermoſt and
ſecreteſt partes of the whole body, geeuinge nouriſhment
to the members, wherevnto it is made
like and conſubſtantiall.
               Moyſtnes therefore throughe the helpe & furtheraunce
of heate is of wonderfull force in geeuing
nouriſhmente to the body, cauſinge it to encreaſe
and grow vppe, in other functions beynge
weake and feeble. For in it, is neither vertue
attractiue, concoctiue, alteratiue nor digeſtiue,
but yet it is of ſome force as touching the vertue
expulſiue, by reaſō of the ſlyppery nature which
is in it.
               
                  
For wee commonly ſee that thoſe perſons which
be groſſe, corpulent and moyſt of body, are for the
moſt part looſe bealted and ſoluble, by reaſō that
their power retentiue is not fyrme and ſtronge, &
becauſe their pores and paſſages are made open
and wyde, for the humours to paſſe out.
               In Bodyes which be hoate and drye, al things
happen contrary, becauſe in them the power retentiue
is ſtrong, but the expulſyue (by meanes of
dryneſſe, and for that, the paſſages be empayred &
decayed) is faint and weake: whereby it happeneth
that in their auoyding of excrements, going
to the ſtoole and ſkowringe theyr Entrailes, they
ſtrayne themſelues ſometime all in vaine wyth
Coughing, hawkinge & vomytinge, & yet be not
able by euacuation to eaſe themſelues.
               Thus the moyſt Complexion being aduerſary
to the dry, hath all things and propertyes in a
maner from it contrary, euen as the caſe ſtandeth
betweene Children and Olde folke. For in
Childhoode, heate by litle and litle encreaſeth, &
hauyng more ſtore of moyſtneſſe, groweth more &
more, til they come to ful age and mans ſtrength.
But in Old age, this heate by litle and litle decayeth,
and when moyſture is all waſted a man
falleth into a cold and drye diſtemperaunce, and
finally thereby brought to his death. The conditiō
of which qualities, as we haue a litle before
deſcribed, ſo in this place the order of our preſent
matter now in hand, craueth to haue ſome certaine
argumentes and tokens ſhewed, howe and

whereby to knowe a moyſte Complexion. Hee
that is of this Conſtitution and temperature,The tokens of a moyſte body.
(cleane contrary to the dry diſpoſition) hath a body
ſoft, not rugged and roughe, whyte ſkinned,
and withoute hayre, the veynes and ioyntes not
ſtandinge oute nor greatlye appearinge, heyre
plaine and flatte, and for the moſte parte thicke
withall, which in women euidently appeareth.
For yong damſelles and Maydens, beinge anye
thing growē in luſtie age, haue their heads thick
heyred, and longer then Yongmen haue.
               Albeit manye tymes it happeneth to this bodye,
as it doth to plaſhie wet grounde, wherein
by reaſon of ouermuch moyſtnes and wette, no
yong trees, no Shrubbes, nor graſſe groweth, as
it alſo falleth out in very dry and hungry groūd,
where no moyſture is at all. For where toomuch
wette is, there the hayres grow thinne, becauſe
heate wanteth power and lacketh ſtrengthe, to
bring out the pores and worke the humour vnder
the ſkinne into hayre: and for this ſame cauſe,
happeneth it alſo that the heyres bee of coloure
Whyte, bright, Yealow or Redde, which in continuaunce
of tyme and ſpace of yeares (as heate
more encreaſeth) begynne a litle to incline to
blacke colour: theyr countenaunce and foreheade
pleaſaunte and cheerefull,Graye eyes. their eyes Greye and
bright, ſtanding out forwarde, liuely and quicke,
and by reaſon of the purenes of theyr Cryſtalline
humour, cleare, brighte, amyable and ſmylinge:
all which bee tokens and ſignes of a good

nature and vertuous diſpoſition, a quiet mynde,
plaine, ſimple & vprighte dealinge, and finallye of
ſuch good towardnes as geeueth an vndoubted
and certayne proofe of curteſye and humenity.
               For in them is no gallie bitterneſſe, as is in Cholericke
perſons,Moyſt complexiōs not geuen to be malicious & ſpightful. whoſe malignaunt humours incite
and pricke them forwarde into ſondry inconuenient
affections: whereas they that be of moyſt
complexions are not ſo lightly angred, nor so fumyſh
and deſyrous of reuenge. And foraſmuch
as heate doth not incende & ſet on fyer moyſture,Moyſte natures not fumiſh and teſty.
the mynde of theſe mē is nothing ſo eaſely heated
and chafed, but rather is farre more quiet, calme
and myelde.
               Now, as touching the ſhape, feacture, proporcion
and forme of their bodyes:Tokens of a moyſt complexioned body. it is to be bee noted
that theſe complexioned perſonnes be of ſtature
meane, bigge ſet, rather then tall, graunde paunched,
& ſtroutingly bellyed, which commeth partly
by nature, and partly by the cuſtome and order
of lyuing, by ydleneſſe and eaſe, wante of exerciſe,
bolling, ſwilling, longe ſleepe, and manye wayes
beſyde, whereby the body groweth and becommeth
burly, fat and corpulent.
               I could heere recite al the other tokens of ech
ſeuerall part of mans body, that is of this moyſt
conſtitution and complexion, as ye Noſe in a maner
camoyſed and flat, wyth the gryſtlie end blūt
and bigge, ſwollen and blowen Cheekes, rounde
Chinne, & many ſignes moe: but they do ſhew the

ſeuerall nature and quality of ech ſinguler parte
by it ſelfe, and not of the whole bodye in generall:Euery parte of the body is by it ſelfe ſeuerally to be conſidered & hath his proper temperature.
ſo that we may not by one ſmall part geue iudgment
of the whole body, but of euery proper in
                     •
                  
                  ber,
ſpeciall conſideration muſt be taken: albeit
for the moſt parte, they reſemble and participate
in nature and temperament wyth their chiefe and
principall Entraile, that is to ſay, the Heart and
Lyeuer.
               Concerning the inwarde notes and tokens of
the mynde: Men of this Complexion, as theyr
mynde is nothinge quicke,The ſtate of the mynde in moyſt cō
                     plexions. ſo neyther is theyr
tongue (being the interpreter of ye ſame) prompt,
readye or quicke, becauſe it is ſo drowned in ouermuch
moyſture, that it is not well able to aduaunce
and ſet out it ſelfe in good and cleane vtteraunce:
their wit neyther ſharpe nor fine, theyr
courage baſe and nothing haultie, not attēptinge
any high enterpryſes, nor caryng for any glorious
and difficult aduentures: and the cauſe is, for y•,
heate whych is the thing that pricketh forward &
emboldeneth to take in hand worthy attempts, is
in them very weake and ſmall: for this cauſe, are
mē quicker witted,Why men be wyſer then womē. deeper ſearchers out of matters,
and more diligente and rype of iudgemente
then women: for a woman compaſſeth and doth
al thinges after a worſe ſort, and in goyng about
affayres and making bargeins, hath not the lyke
dexterity and ſeemelyneſſe that a man hath. And
vnto this ende apperteyneth and may be referred
that ſaying of the wyſe man.Eccl. 42 
                  It is better to be

vvith an ill Man, thē vvith a frendly VVomā. &c.
Whych is by reaſon and effecte of heate, which
whoſoeuer lacketh, or els haue feeble and faynt,
are for the moſt part perſons effeminate, nyce, tē
                  dor,
wythout courage and ſpyrite, ſleepie, ſlouthfull,
weakelings, meycockes, and not apt nor able
to beget any Children, becauſe their Sperme is
too thinne and moyſt, and therby vnable to peece
and ioyne together wyth the womans ſeede generatiue.
For albeit the deſire of carnall knowledge
and venerous actes for the moſt parte proceedeth
of a ſlypperie & moyſt diſpoſitiō of body,
and is to perſons of this temperature leſſe hurtfull
then to others: yet foraſmuche as this moyſtnes
& humour is ſlowly forced forward by heate,
and the members of generatiō not filled wt ſwelling
ſpyrit, it foloweth yt they be vnto carnall coiture
fūbling, ſlow, & not greatly therto addicted,
neither therein take anye greate delectacion or
pleaſure. And hereupon it happeneth, yt fat womē
and corpulente, haue greater deſire to fleſhly concupiſcence
and bodely luſte in Sommer,Carnall luſt in Sommer to mē hurtfull. then in
Wynter: becauſe in Sōmer, heat enkindleth moyſture
& ſtyrreth vp Venus, but in men (cōtrarily)
it quencheth it: for manly ſtrength, by immoderat
heate, is reſolued and enfeebliſhed.
               Likewyſe theſe herbes,Rue prouoketh luſt in women, but taketh it vtterly awaye in men. Thyme, Rue, & many
others that be very hoat & dry, quēch and take away
in men all deſire of carnall luſt, becauſe they
waſt the generatiue humour, whereas women
therby are much prouoked, & ſtirred to venerie, by
enforcing heat into theyr ſecret parts & pryuities.

And for this cauſe, whē y• Genitoryes or mēbers
of generation begin once to grow into coldnes, &
yt ye generatiue humor is not forced nor calefyed
by natural heat, then are ſuch things good to bee
myniſtred to the parties, as are of power able to
ſtirre vp the loynes & wt a certaine tickling cōcupiſcēce
to prouoke the genital ſeede wt deſire to be
expelled. Now, how ſuch perſōs may keepe thē
ſelues in bodely health, cleare & free frō ſicknes,
heere meane I briefly to decy
                     •
                  hre.
               Firſt,Diet meete for a moyſt Cōplexiō. becauſe health conſiſteth in a tēperamēt of
hoat & moyſt, this cōſtitutiō ought to vſe a moyſt
diet, yt is to ſaye, ſuch nouriſhment & foode as is
therunto famyliar & much of affmity: & ſuch whert
in is reaſonable good ſtore of heat, of which ſorte
is ſweete wyne, Mylke, Rye breade, Rere egges,
Veale, Porke, Pigge, bigge lābes waterfoules,
beanes, Cheſtnuts, Chitchpeaſe, Dates, Reyſs,
Figges, Almonds, Pyne apple kernels, hāginge
& ſweete grapes, ſuch as Muſkadell grapes are,
Sea fiſh, Braynes. Amōg garden or pot herbes:
Lettice, Arrage, Rape, Parſeips, Carets, Melons,
Cucumbers, but good heede muſt be takē y•
he vſe not to eate to
                     •
                  much of any of theſe, for feare
of making the body excede to much in moyſtnes.
For by ouermuch moyſt diet & fare, Phlegme &
cold 
                     •
                  āmy humours, cauſing ſundry daūgerous
diſeaſes be engēdred, to wit, y• Apoplexie, Crāpe
(through fulnes or, els abundante of Phlegme)
browſy euil, Palſey, fallīg Sicknes, Aſtonmēt &
inſenſiblenes, of the lymmes, when as the power

Animall is ſo venummed and depryued of his
function, that all ſenſe of feelynge and moouinge
is taken away,Diet ouer moyſt, hurtful. and a man ſodainly thereby (as it
were by ſome preſēt reueng ſent to him by Gods
great wrath) is ſtyfled. This bodye therefore
muſt be conſerued wythin the boundes and rules
of healthyneſſe and temperaunce, vſing expedient
exercyſe, and ſhaking away al ſlouth and ydlenes:
ſpecially, it ſhal behooue him to haue good
regard orderly to euacuate and purge his bodelye
excrements, to go to the Stoole, to pyſſe, to aryſe
betymes in the morning, and frequente ſome
conuenient exercyſe, and by vſing a ſomewhat vehemente
motion or walkinge, to ſtyre vp his inward
or naturall heate.
               As concerning Sleepe, in this body it ought
to be moderately vſed,Moderate ſleepe good for moyſt perſons. not exceedinge the ſpace of
vi. houres at the furtheſt. For it is better to
Sleepe lyttle and ſomewhat wyth watching to
ſoke away humous, then immoderatly to bolne,Moyſt folks muſt ſleepe but very litle.
ſwell and therewyth throughly to be cloyed. As
for example, we ſee thoſe which geeue themſelues
too much to bellycheere and Sleepe, to become
therwyth ſo groſſe and corpulent, yt their Chinne
hangeth downe danglinge, and ioyneth to theyr
breaſt, and as the Poet Perſius ſayeth:

                     Their paunch and gullet vvith fat beares out,Sat. 1.
                     
                     A good foote and halfe, of aſſiſe about.
                  
               
               Whereby it happeneth that ſuche perſons are

oftentimes euen vpon the ſodaine caſt into diſeaſes.
For their veynes and arteryes being ſlender
and ſtreict, and alſo voyd of bloud and Spyrite,
theyr natural heate is quickly and for euery light
cauſe oppreſſed and ſtyfeled, which thing is ment
by Hyppocrates where he ſayth:Lib. 2. Aphor. 44. They that be by
nature very porzy & groſſe, liue as long as they
that be ſlender bodyed: becauſe theyr pores bee
wyde, and their conceptacles of bloude large, ſo
that lightlye no outwarde or inwarde cauſes can
greatly hurte them. Which perſons althoughe
with dainty fare, idle life and much Sleepe, they
bring themſelues many times to this porzynes &
corpulencie, yet they be not ſo daungerouſly ſicke,
whē any diſcraſie happeneth, as they that be of ye
ſame conſtitution and ſtate from their firſte begīning.
For although ſome which in their youth
were ſlender & leane, happen afterward to be fat,
groſſe, and fleſhie: yet their veynes, Arteryes and
other paſſages and cunduites of their bodyes remaine
ſtill large and wyde: which thing plainlye
appeareth, whenſoeuer they (feeling themſelues
not wel at eaſe) haue any occaſion to be let bloud.
For in this accidentall habite of body, althoughe
the party be fat and forgrowen, yet the veynes lye
not hid & vnappearing, as in them that naturally
be groſſe: but ſwel out and plainlye appeare to
the eye, offering thēſelues to the Laūce, by inciſiō
hāſomly to be cut. Therfore although this moyſt
Cōplexion, being cheriſhed by heat, be laudable &
good, for that it prolongeth life, differreth and

keepeth away Oldage, & ſuffereth not the body to
grow into dryneſſe: yet if it exceede toofarre, or
ſtand in the point of extremity, it is daungerous.
For when by reaſon of the veynes beinge ful, the
body ceaſſeth to be nouriſhed, and the faculties of
nature (which diſtribute nouriſhmente) intermit
their office and cannot worke, in this caſe needes
muſt the body go to wracke and incurre inconuenience,
ſo that eyther ſodaine death therupon enſueth,
or els (al leaſt) ſome rupture of y• Veſſels
and veynes happeneth.
               Theſe things being conſidered, it ſhalbe good,
ſpeedely and in time to forſee & breake this habite
and diſpoſition, and by y• meanes of moderate euacuation,
abſtynence, and watchinge to preuente
further daunger: vſing ſuch a preſcripte diet and
ordinary, as beſt ſerueth to reduce the bodye into
a ſafer and leſſe daungerous Conſtitution. For
this is genera lye to be noted, yt a bodye is not to
be accompted & reckened moyſt,Moyſtare feedeth & nouriſheth heate. in reſpecte of abundaunce
of excrements and humours, but of a
temperate moyſtnes of all the parts and of the
whole, proportionably together: wyth which
tēperate moyſture, naturall heate is fedde
and nouryſhed, and life therby many
yeares prolonged.
               Finis Libri Primi.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECONDE BOOKE,
WHER IN AS IN A GLASSE
is plainly and liuelye deſcribed the perfecte
ſtate and expreſſe Image of euery particuler Nature:
By the vvhich euery man may moſt readily
finde out the very right Constitution, plight,
condition, affect and diſpoſition of
his ovvne Body.
            
               ¶Of a Compounde Complexion.
The firſt Chapter.
               
                  COmpounde Complexions,
conſiſtinge of two qualities
a piece, are in nūber foure,
like as y• ſymple be: vz, hoat
and Moyſt: Hoat and Dry:
Cold and Moyſt: Colde &
Drye: vnto whom there belong
and are appendant ſo many Humours, diffuſed
into euery parte of the whole body: Bloud,
Phlegme, Choler & Melācholie.Accordinge to the nouriſhment that a mā is fed withall, humours eyther encreſe or diminiſh. Theſe, according
to ye nature of nouriſhmēt receyued, are encreaſed
or diminiſhed: & ſuffring chaūg & alteration
are eaſelye one into an other tranſmuted. And
albeit theſe humours (being of great force diuers
wayes, and ſondryly affecting the bodye, yea the

wyth fulſome, and vnpleaſaunte exhalations and
ſentes is oftentimes greatly annoyed and encū
                  bred,
euen as ill & naughtye wyne bringeth to the
brayne affects both hurtful and daūgerous)The groſſe exhalacion of humours hurtfull to the minde: as dead and fulſome wyne, is to the body. may
not be accompted Elementes, neyther are able to
conſtitute any Complexion: yet are they endued
wyth Elementall qualitye and vertue, and helpe
much to the conſeruation & keeping of the whole
body in good plight and order.
               For as wee ſee the fyer to be fedde wyth matter
combuſtible: and Torches, Lynkes, Candles
and ſuch like nouryſhed wyth Oyle or ſome other
roſennye and fattie ſubſtaunce: ſo lykewiſe the elementall
qualities and all the powers and faculties
of nature derpued into ye vital & ſpermaticke
ſeede of our Parents, do ſtande in continuall
neede of nouriſhment. For if the body ſhould
not be ſuſteyned wyth nouriſhment, or if the humours
(which moyſtē euery particuler member)
ſhould lack the preſeruatyues and fomentations
wherewyth they be maynteyned, the whole frame
of mans body muſt of neceſſity decaye, and be vtterly
diſſolued, and euery part thereof vaniſhe away
into his lyke, whereof it was generated, or
into that; whoſe nature it conteyneth wythin it
ſelfe, whether it do participate with Fyer, Apre,
Earth,Concord & harmony in mans body. Water, or drawe neere in nature and be
famylier to any of them. They depend mutually
one of an other, and are ſtedfaſtly maynteyned
by the helpe and ſtay one of an other. Neyther
is there any parte in mans body ſo ſmall, ſo vyle

or ſo abiect, that hath not reſpect to the comelyneſſe
and conſeruation of the whole bodye, & doth
orderly diſcharge his due office and proper function
whereunto it was created. And this I
would not haue to be onely ſpoken and ment of y•
vſe and vtility of euery of the members & partes
ſeuerally, but alſo of the humours, which by the
helpe of nouriſhment, do meynteine, ſupporte and
vnderproppe the temperamente and complexion
of eche body: and by the helpe of naturall heate,
do geeue increaſe and growth to al the members
generally.
               For which cauſe Hippocrates and Galene,
                  De Natu▪ humana.
not wythout good reaſon apoint the foure naturall
humours (being perfect and pure) the Elements
of Creatures endued wyth bloud:Humours after a ſort are the elemēts of man. for out
of theym commeth a ſecundarie oryginall of oure
procreation. For they myniſter matter plentifully,
and helpe highly in the breedinge and ſhaping
of the Infante or yonglinge, ſpecially if the
body be well ballaſſed wyth good holeſome meates,
and now and then heated wyth a draught of
good wyne: for without theſe, Venus games are
perfourmed but faintly & ſorilie: which thing ſeemeth
to be ment by the yong Strypling Chremes
in Terence, who being ſober beganne to abhorre
and loath his harlot and Concubine: but beynge
wel whittled in wyne, to take therin gret delight
and pleaſure, and not ſcarſe able to qualefie himſelfe
from committinge further follie wyth her,
as in this Prouerbiall ſentence he flatly profeſſed.
               
                  
                  Take meate and drincke and vvyne avvay.Eunuch. Act. 4. Scaen. 5.
                  
                  Small is the luſt to Venus play.
               
               For the Teſticles, Genitories and members
of generation draw vnto them frō the principall
mēbers and conuert into Seede, the beſt &
moſt exquiſtielye concocted humours. Which
ſeede, hauing 
                     〈◊〉
                   great ſtore of effectuous & profitable
Spyrit is the worker of heate & of all the
other faculties, and in the begetting and procreation
of Children is the chiefe parent and cauſer.
Into it, is a wonderful vertue and diuine power
(by Gods good will and appoyntmente) infuſed,
for the ſhaping and faſhioning of the yong Creature,The force, and vertue of Seede.
wythin the mothers wombe: for it produceth
a fruict of ſeemely & moſt beautifull workemanſhip,
rightly ſhapen and in ech poynt perfectly
proporcioned, if the Seede (wherof it was begotten)
do iſſue from a ſound and holeſome body:
for otherwyſe, if the ſeede be of a diſeaſed, corrupt
and infected bodye,Sounde parents beget ſound Children. the iſſue and ofſpringe cannot
chooſe but be monſtruous and deformed.
               Somewhat therfore to recreate the Reader &
to make this argument more plauſible, delightfull
and populer, I will depaint and ſet downe y•
nature and condition of the Humours that rule
and beare ſway in mans bodye, becauſe they produce
and bringe forth their lyke qualities. For
Bloud is partaker of Hoat and moyſte: Choler
of hoat and Dry: Phlegme of Cold and moyſte:

and Melancholie of Cold and dry. Therefore
that Temperament which is Hoate and moyſt,
may very well be referred to a Sanguine man:
Hoat and dry, to a Cholerique: and ſo forth of the
reſt: but yet ſo, that wee confeſſe the Complexion
and temperament of mā not to grow or proceede
elſewhere, then of the Elemental qualities, for of
thē haue they theyr names & not of y• Humours.
               Firſt therefore there be iiii. Elements, Fyer,Elemētes 4. Qualities 4. Humours 4.
Ayre, Earth & Water, which of al things made,
are the original beginnings. Next are the Qualities,
that is to ſay, the myxture of Hoat, Cold,
Mayſt and Dry: of whō, proceede the differences
of Complexions. Laſt of all, the foure Humours,
whoſe force and Nature, ye ſeede comprehendeth
and conteyneth wythin it: vnto whom
(beſyde the qualities which are to it in ſteede of
an Inſtrumente and not of a woorker) the chiefe
cauſe next vnder God, of the fourmyng and creation
of al ye parts is truly to be attributed. Theſe
holeſome humours, to the conſeruation of health
and mayntenaunce of lyfe are right neceſſary and
profitable. For of them do conſiſt and of them are
nouriſhed the entyer parts of all Creatures, and
for this cauſe, ſo long as a man lyueth, he can neuer
want theſe without great detrimēt & daūger
of his health. Notwythſtanding according to the
courſe of time and ſeaſon of the yere, according to
the quality of ye ayre encloſing vs, accordinge to ye
condition of the place where we dwel, and according
to the nature of ech age, they are encreaſed or
dimyniſhed.
               
                  
For Bloud being the beſt of all the humours
and endued with heate and moyſture,The nature of bloud. is in his
chiefe pryme & force in the Spring ſeaſon: namely
peculier and proper to luſtye flouriſhinge age,
which commonly is of a ſanguine and ruddie colour,
which neuertheleſſe wanteth not alſo in the
other Natures.
               Phlegme,Phlegme being like vnto water, is of nature
colde and moyſt, and taketh his encreaſe in wynter,
and engendreth diſeaſes like vnto it ſelfe.
               Choler,Choler. beinge of qualitie hoate and drye, reſembleth
tyer, & hath his moſt force in Sommer,
which although in ſight and touching, it appeare
moyſt, and of colour yelowiſh, like Malueſey, yet
in operacion, power and effect, it is hoat & of ardent
nature.
               Melancholie,Melācholie. not vnlike to Earth, cold & drye,
encreaſeth and taketh force in Autumne, this is
the dryer and groſſer part of bloud, and the dreggie
refuſe thereof.
               All theſe differences of humours, whē a veine
is opened (for it is not all pure bloude that guſſheth
thereout)In bloud all the other humous are mixed. is plainly of all men to be perceyued.
Firſt, before it be cold, it doth ſhewe and repreſent
to the eye, an ayrie & fomy Spirit, which
by and by vaniſheth awaye: then an exact & pure
licour of moſt perfect and excellente ruddyneſſe, y•
which is pure and right bloude:When a veine is opened, all the humours are ocularly to be ſeene. in which there
ſwymmeth Choler, and ſometime toughe clammye
Phlegme, ſometime liquide and thinne, according
to the nature, condition and ſtate of mā:

Laſt of all, if you tourne vp the whole maſſe or
lumpe, you ſhall finde Melancholie, altogether of
colour blacke. And thus euerye humour abundinge
in the bodye, bewrayeth it ſelfe by his owne
proper colour: inſomuch that ſometime y• bloud
that iſſueth out of the veynes, liquefyeth and is
diſſolued into Choler or Phlegme, or clottereth &
thickeneth into Melācholie, & reteyneth either no
colour or very litle of bloud. And if a man were
diſpoſed by taſte to haue further knowledge in
theſe humours,Humours haue both colour and taſt. he maye with his tongue and palate
aſwell iudge and diſcerne the relyce and tallage
thereof, as he doth their colour by his eye.
For Bloud is ſweete & in a maner of the relyſhe
and taſt of mylke, because it is much like and of
kinne vnto it: Choler is bitter, of the nature of
Gall: Phlegme, vnſauery as water, and without
all qualitye, ſo longe as it is not rotten, nor
myxt wyth other humours, for then is it eyther
ſalt or ſowriſhe. Melancholie, is ſharpe, eigre
                     •
                  
tarte. Theſe taſtes and relyſhes there is no mā
                  
                     •
                  hat perceyueth and feeleth not, when as in voanyting
& perbraking hee caſteth vp any of them:
yea in ſweate and euen in the ſpettle, theſe taſtes
are manyfeſtlye deſcryed & perceiued:Spettle and Sweat, haue their force & power of humours. for of theſe
h
                     ••
                  mours they haue & participate their powers &
facultyes, and with their qualityes are they endned.
            
            
               
               ¶Of a Hoate and moyst Complexion: and
by the way: of the dispoſition and nature
of a Sanguine man.
The ij. Chapter.
               HAuing heretofore ſet downe the deſcriptiō of
ſymple Complexions and temperatures,
which bee ſo termed, for that they conſiſte of one
onely quality, bearyng ſwaye and dominion more
thē any of y• reſt: by courſe of my purpoſed work,
I am next to entreate of them that are compoūd.
               For in the very beginning and firſt entraūce of
this worke, my promyſe and ful intent was to ſet
downe and deſcribe ſuch a Complexion and ſtate
of body, as was in euery point perfect and abſolute:
and to repulfe & keepe away al ſuch harmes
and inconueniences as in anye wyſe mighte empayre,
health, or brynge the bodye from his good
ſtate into worſe caſe and taking. I haue therfore
thought it good here in this place firſt to inſerte
the temperament that is hoat and moyſt: becauſe
it is n
                     •
                  ereſte and lykeſt to the beſt. For no
ſtate of body (sauing onely the beſt and chiefeſte)
is better or more commendable then this, nor any
that longer prolongeth life, and keepeth backe
Didage, ſo that the ſame conſiſt and be wythin y•
limittes and compaſſe of temperatnes, that is, of
hoate and moyſt. Therfore ſithens this ſtate among
al that be compound, is accōpted chiefeſte:
wee muſte ſtande vppon the diſcourſe therof
the more narowly and precyſely, and the rather

becauſe ſundry Phyſitiōs make no mo but ſoure
differences, grounding their reaſons (and not altogether
painly) yt it is not poſſible (as Galene
wytneſſeth
                     •
                  ) that any temperature or diſtemperatureTuēd. Val Lib. 6. De Tēp. 1
can long continue alone and ſymple: For ſomuch
as neceſſarilye it adopteth and taketh to it
an other. For y• Hoate (conſumynge & wastinge
moyſture) engendreth and bryngeth dryneſſe:Temperatures ſubiect to chaſige.
Cold, conſuming & waſting nothing, after a ſorte
encreaſeth humour. Semblably, the Dry quality
in thoſe ages that a Creature groweth and encreaſeth,
maketh it hoater: but when it decreaſeth
and draweth towarde decay, it maketh colde and
dryeth the ſolide partes of the body: but the Receyuers
and conceptacles of the humours it filleth
wyth excrements, which thing in Oldmen is
plainly to be diſcerned & perceyued, who aboūde
and are ful of Phlegme,Old men by nature dry: but in conditiō moyſt. ſpitting & ſpatteringe a
                     •
                  
theyr mouth, wt their Noſes euer dropping and
ſneuillye.
               Which thing later Phiſitions (euē of our time)
as yet obſeruing, reiecting ſymple temperatures
(which notwythſtanding may not wel be ſo ſhak
                     •
                  
of and forgottē) appoint onely foure, to wit, them
that be cōpound: vnto whō they haue geeuen names
(not of their qualities but (ſomwhat vnaptly)
of thoſe cōmonly termed & knowē humours, y•
is to ſay Sāguine, Cholerique. Phlegmatique, &
Melācholique: by y• ſquyer & leauel of whō, they
wold haue theſe 4. differēces of cōplexiō or tēperature,
to be reduced & tryed. Which dealīg & reaſonīg
of theirs, as it ſauoreth of populer iudgmēt &

learning to the common ſort, very plauſſble: ſo
ſtandeth it not with the preciſe opynion and cenſure
of them that would haue eche thing ſkanned
and meaſured in his righte nature and kinde.
               In the meane ſeaſon,Diſſenſiō & diuerſitie of opinions, daungerous I as one deſirous to recō
                  cyle
Phyſitions thus factiouſly iarrynge in opynion
(and woulde God this vniformitye and attonement
were alſo broughte to paſſe in matters
of Religiō, for the better quieting of many mens
Conſciences) both parties ſhall ſuffer the
chiefe place to be aſſigned and geeuen to ye hoate
and moyſt Complexion (excepting alwayes as I
ſaid before, the temperateſt of all, whereunto as
at a marcke we muſt direct our mynd and leauel
our whole matter, that by it euery man may trye
his owne nature) which ſo lōg as it is in his perfect
ſtrength, vigour & quality, produceth & bringeth
foorth a Sanguine man.
               And thus, there is in a maner no differēce, neither
preiudiciall to anye partye, eyther to call it
by the name of a hoate and moyſt Complexion, or
els by the terme of a Sanguine man: who by the
benefite of this holeſome humour, conteyneth &
hath within him theſe qualities; albeit Bloud it
ſelfe (for wee will keepe all thinges wythin their
preſcripte limittes) doth not engender and cauſe
heate and moyſtnes, but rather heate and moyſture
produceth Bloud.
               Now, Bloud of all iuyces and humours, is ye
beſt, and to mans life an alimente and maintener
chiefly appropriat, famylier and domeſticall: for

throughe the force &The profite of bloud. furtheraunce of vitall Spirite
(which is the preſeruer, and ſēder of natural
heate into euery part of the bodye, Bloud is conueighed
by the cunduytes and Veſſelles of ye Arteryes
and Veynes, & ſo both nouriſheth, mainteyneth
and preſerueth the whole body.
               And for that, this pure, cleare, defecate, loouely
and amyable Iuyce, is the ſpecial thing yt conſerueth
euery lyuinge Creature in his beynge, &
wherein alſo conſiſteth the lyfe and vigour of euerye
nature that lyueth by breath: therefore the
Hebrew Lawmaker Moſes,
                  Leuit. 17. The cauſe why Moſes forbad the eating of Bloud
                        •
                     
                   by the direction and
appointmente of God himſelfe, forbadde all maner
of bloud to be eatē, becauſe ye lyfe of al Creatures
cōſiſteth in bloud, & is therwyth nouriſhed
and mainteyned euen as the flame of a Candle is
with the Oylie weeke: as it plainly appeareth, by
a man that bleedeth verye much, whoſe bodye is
then in euery part cold, wanne & (for want thereof)
fayntinge, and in a maner readye to geeue vp
the Ghoſt. I haue knowen many,Bloude not raſhlye nor vnaduiſedly to be let. whoſe vitall
ſpyrite bleedinge out and yſſuinge together wyth
their bloud, haue been thereby brought into great
daunger of their liues. And therefore this treaſure
of Lyfe, muſt moſte carefullye be conſerued,
becauſe it is of all Humours the moſt excellent &
wholeſome.
               Nowe,Whēce th
                        •
                      Arteries & Veynes ſpring. as the Arteries (which abounde more
wyth vitall ſpyrite then wyth bloud) ſpring from
the heart: ſo, the Veynes (which conteyne more
bloud then ayrie ſpyrite,) proceede and ſpryng frō
                  
the Lyeuer, and are diſperſed abroad in brauches
and fibres into euerye, yea the verye furtheſte
places of the body.The Lyuer, the ſhop of Bloud. For the Lyuer is the ſhoppe
and chiefe workemaſter of groſſe & thicke bloude,
althoughe the firſt oryginall thereof be aſcribed
to the Heart,The heart, fountaine of bloud. by whoſe power & faculty the bloud
is made and throughly wrought: & being endued
wyth vitall ſpyrite, conueigheth naturall heat to
eche part of the body.
               Bloud and vital Spyrite are in their chiefeſt
Pryme and moſt abound in luſty and flouriſhing
yeares,The colour ſheweth what humours be in the body. albeit there is no age yt lacketh the ſame:
although in old worne age, bloud begynneth to
draw to a coldnes, & the vital ſpyrit, then neyther
ſo hoate, neither ſo ſtronge and effectuous: which
thinge as it is in them well to bee obſerued and
perceyued by their frequente geſtures and often
moouing of the body and the partes thereof: yet
ſpecially maye it be ſeene & noted by their colour,
which in a yonge luſty Stryplyng and youthfull
body of good conſtitution is ruddy and freſh: but
in them that be further ſtryken in yeares, or further
of from this temperamente, is not ſo pure, ſo
beautifull, nor ſo pleaſaunt to behold, for that, all
their comelyneſſe & beauty is eyther faded awaye,
or throughe ſome euill humours, and hidden imperfection
or blemiſhe appeareth in them worſe
then in the yonger ſort.
               So, many being affected or diſtēpered in their
Splene, wombe, Lyuer, ventricle and Lunges,
are commonly either pale, yelow, tawnie, dunne,

duſkie, or of ſome other ill fauoured colour.
               There is no ſurer way (ſayth Galene) certainly
to knowe the humours and iuyce in a Creature,Tuend. val. lib. 4.
then by the colour and outward complexion. If
the body loke very whyte, it is a token yt phlegme
in that body, chiefely reigneth & moſt aboundeth.
If it be pale or yelow,Affectes of the mynde chaung the colour of the face and body. it argueth the humour to
bee greatly Melancholique and Cholerique, and
the bloude to be freſhe and reddye: if it be blackiſh,
it betokeneth blacke aduſt Choler, ſpecially
if no outwarde accidentall occaſion happen, as
great heate or chafing, labour or wearyneſſe: or if
the mynde bee not intoxicate, and perplexed wyth
affectes and paſſions, as Angre, Ioye, Sorow,
Care, penſyuenes: for theſe make the humours
ſometyme to reſort vnto the ſkynne & vtter parts,
and ſometime to hyde and conueyghe themſelues
farre inwardly: and for this cauſe, wee ſee men y•
are fumiſh and teſty to be in a marueylous heat,
proceeding not of any ſtickneſſe or diſcraſſe but of
▪the motion and ſtirring of the humours: againe,
them that be affrighted and in mynde amazed, to
be pale. Some to loke as wanne as Lead, ſome
whyte and ſwartie, ſometyme blewyſhe, ſometime
of ſondrye colours: all which betoken crude humours
and raw iuyce to beare rule and ſwaye in
the bodye, eyther of phlegme, glaſſelyke & toughe,
or of ſome other ſort, or els many rottē humours
clamped vp in y• bodye, which by outward tokēs
and ſignes bewray & ſhew themſelues what they
be, and what they ſignifie.
               
                  
They therefore that be of a hoate and moyſt conſtitution,
and haue greate ſtore of bloude wythin
theim, are of a purple and reddie coloure, ſofte,
warme and ſmooth ſkinned: comely of ſtature, &
of reaſonable feacture, fleſhye bodyed, and a little
roughe, aburne heyred, redde or yealow bearded,
and comely buſhed: of which feac
                     •
                  ure, plight and
bodely ſhape the Scripture witneſſeth that Dauid
was:1. Reg. 16. who beyng (after that Saule was caſt of
and reiected) appointed King, and onnoy
                     •
                  ted by
Samuel, was of a browniſh Complex
                     •
                  ō, excellent
beauty, well fauoured in ſight, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  tenaūce
very cheerefull and amyable. Such a comety
grace and Princelye ſhape, was to be ſcene in
the moſte victorious Prince Philip Kinge
of Spayne,Philip king of Spaine. and ſouereigne Ruler of all the lowe
Countreyes, his Grace being heere wyth vs the
laſt yeare at Zickzey outwardly arguyng in him
a moſt myld nature and a mynde moſt vertuouſly
diſp
                     •
                  ſed.
               There be yet manye other notes, markes, and
tokēs appertayning to this Conſtitucion, which
a man may not alwayes ſafely truſte vnto as infallible,
becauſe they ſuffer alteration and chaūge
by age, and yeares, yea almoſt in euery momente
of tyme: but yet ſo, that by them appeareth alwayes
certayne and vndoubted tokens, that the
ſtate of the ſame bodye aforetime hath beene and
was in this ryght good caſe, plight & conſtitutiō,
albeit now altered or perhaps clene decayed. For
as greate, huige and ſumptuous houſes, beynge

falne downe and decayed, ſhewe euidently by the
ruynes and delapidations therof, of what hugeneſſe
and magnificence they earſt were, howe curious
and buſye the frame was, howe ſkilful and
induſtrious the Architecte and workeman was:
ſo in a laudable ſtate, Conſtitution and habite of
body, which is decayed and faded from his former
diſpoſition, there appeare certayne reliques,
notes, and tokens of the good temperament that
aforetime was in the ſame. Albeit ſometime
through greeuous ſicknes or by ſome great myſfortune
and outward calamity, mans nature is ſo
fruſhed and damped, that al the vigour of the body,
all the beauty, comelynes and ſhape thereof is
nypped and cleane abolyſhed, like a goodly fayre
buildyng that is eyther by tempeſte ſhaken & battered,
or by myſfortune of fyer vtterly burnte and
waſted. Thus, feare, aſtonment, ſodaine a
                     •
                  
                  frighting,
the dread of daungers or death ſodainly
threatened, do ſo waſt and deſtroy the powers,
forme, ſhape and beauty, and ſo cleane altereth
ſome mē frō that they were afore, as though they
had neuer bene the ſame.
               Whereof there happened in our tyme a notable
and ſtraunge example in a yong GentlemanA ſtraunge example of a yongman, ſodainly become graye headed.
of noble byrthe and Parentage. Who in the
Court of the late Emperour Charles they farre
ouerſhooting himſelfe, wythout regard of dutye,
remorſe, or reuerence of the place, had carnallye
defloured a certayne yong Gentlewoman, whom
he loued exceedingly: which fac
                     •
                   to be perpetrated

vpon the bodyes of yonge Ladyes, and noble
virgins, is accompted a thinge moſt haynous, &
puniſhable by death, yea although no force be offered
to the damoſell: and although by ſecrete cō
                  ſent
and apparant likelyhoodes ſhe greatly ſeeme
not to ret
                     ••
                  t an amorous ſuite to her, in ſuch ſort
tendered. This Gentleman therfore was cōmitted
to pryſon, lookynge the next day folowinge
to be executed & put to death. For this is narowly
loked vnto, y• no
                     •
                  e preſumyng or daring to cō
                  mit
any ſuch villanie, or to diſtein the Honour of
the Princes Court wt ſuch lewd & filthy pollution,
ſhal eſcape ſcotfree or go away vnpuniſhed, according
to the greatnes of thoſe his wilful & libidinous
demerites. Languiſhyng all y• nighte in
great perplexitye, griefe, agonie & ſorowe, & al the
while conceyuyng inwardly in mind, the terrour
& dread of death ſo neere approchīg, he was ſo altered
and chaunged, that at his arreignment the
next day, none of his owne famyliar acquaintāce,
neyther yet the Emperour himſelfe could knowe
him. So much had the horrour of death & the deſpayre
of any pardon win fewe houres pallifyed
his colour, and altered the ſtate of his former cō
                  ſtitution.
All his beauty, comely ſhape & freſh cō
                  plexion
was (as it were) ſo faded and exiled, his
face ſo incrediblie diſ
                     •
                  nowledged, his colour (of
freſh & cleare) turned into wan, ſwartye, & deathlike,
his countenaunce to behold, loathſome & vglie,
his head couered ouer (wt graye heyres, (farre
vnmeete for thoſe yeres) his beard ſluttiſh, dryueling

& filthy, wt ſpattering ſneuel deformed. The
Emperour earneſtly fixing his eye vppon him &
ſuſpecting him not to be the ſelf ſame man which
had committed the fact,One ſodainly gray headed. miſtruſted that ſome other
perſon had beene put in his place: whereuppon
he commaunded preſent ſearch to be made, &
y• matter to be throughly boulted out, whether it
were the ſelfe ſame party or no, and whether his
hoare heyres and gray beard, were counterfeited
by ſome confectioned oyntments, (artificially for
the nonce coloured) or no. But the matter being
found true and plaine, and no deceipte nor coloured
colluſion therein vſed: his Maieſtie was at
the ſight therof ſo aſtonned: that his former reſolution
and purpoſe to haue the ſaide Gentleman
puniſhed, was now tourned into compaſſiō ouer
his pytifull caſe, and iudging him to haue alreadye
ſuffered punyſhment ſuffycient, pardoned him
hys lyfe and remitted his offence.
               The honourable, Nicholas Mychault of Indeuelda,
a Gentleman in great fauour wyth hygh
Prynces, & of all Noblemen worthylie eſteemed,
demaunding of mee on a tyme, ſitting at the table,
the cauſe of thys ſo ſtraunge and ſodayne
chaunge: I aunſwered, that ye very cauſe thereof
proceeded of nothinge els then of his extreeme
feare, and vehement thinking vpon that daunger
wherewyth he ſaw himſelfe diſtreſſed: the remē
                  braunce
and cogitation whereof ſearched the very
innermoſt Senſes in his body. For that trouble
& affection ſo neerely touched him and ſo greuouſly
perplexed his mynd, y• al vital heat & ſpyrit

was in him in a maner vtterly extincte, whereby
eche part of the body, ſtreightwayes altered and
chaūged frō the freſh & comely colour which they
had before, into an vglie and vnſightly habite: inſomuch
that the rootes of the hayres (which he y•
vaporous humyditie that lyeth within the ſkinne
be nouriſhed and preſerued freſh in colour)Why ſome men euen ſodainly are chaunged in Complex i
                        •
                     n and colour. when
the ſame humydity fayleth, and in place thereof a
cold & dry quality reigneth, do drye vp and cleane
loſe their former 
                     •
                  atyue Complexiō and colour:
euen as graſſe, that wantinge the moyſtnes of the
earth to cōfort it, cānnot but wyther & patch away.
For euen as the Leaues of Trees, & the braū
                  ches
of greene (Vynes ſeruing to defend y• grapes
from the iniury of weather) are by extremyty
of heate, hayle, rayne, and Northren blaſtes,
(which ſometime bluſterouſlye blowe in the Sō
                  mer
ſeaſon) altered from a pleaſaunt greene verdure
into a yealowyſh tawnie colour: So lykewyſe
the natural Complexion, Iuſtyneſſe, and
ſhape of the body, drowpeth and decayeth, and the
hayres (which of thēſelues are no part of y• body,
but an appentiſe, ſuperfluitye and ornamente to
the body) lackinge the ſtrength and humyditye ye
nouriſheth them, become hoarye and graye longe
before their due time: which thinge wee ſee commonly
happen to all thoſe that ſpende their time
in the warres or in daungerous traueyles on the
Sea, or which bee much troubled & viſited with
ſickneſſe, wherein is a certaine ymagination of

verye death in their myndes. For they remember
and looke for nothing els, they thinck vppon nothing
ſomuch when they ſtand in battayle array,
ready at the ſound of the Trompet to ioyne with
the Enemye, and to try it out by dent of ſworde,
but euen there preſently eyther to ſlay or be ſlaine,
makinge accompte thence neuer to eſcape aliue:
vnleſſe peraduenture they be ſuch, as wyth longe
cuſtome haue ſo hardened and enured theyr mindes
in many lyke daungerous bruntes, that they
neyther feare death nor care for daunger. Of
which ſort we ſee ſondry old beatē Souldiours,
and ſuch as haue been long and throughly experienced
in many a ſharpe ſtorme vpon the raging
Sea.
               Of ſuch force is a throughly ſettled ymagination
(as by many Argumentes elſewhere I haue
declared)Imagination. that a woman at the time of her conception,
ſtedfaſtly fixing her ymagination vppon
any thinge, deryueth & enduceth certayne markes
and tokens thereof into the Infant: which thinge
is well ynough knowen to happen alſo vnto mē,
that ardentlye & earneſtly fixe theyr imaginatiōs
and thoughtes vppon any thing. And thus, did
the cōtemplation of Chriſt, nayled on the Croſſe,
imprinte certayne ſtrakes, ſtampes, and marks,
vppon the handes and feete of S. Frauncis, if (at
leaſtwiſe his religious ſectaryes, fautours, & followers
deſerue herein any credit:) for ye Images
and Pictures in his name & reſemblaunce made
and enthronyzed in Churches, holding his hāds

ſtretched out and open, are carued of ſuch faſhiō,
and ſhew him to haue been ſuch a one.
               In what perplexity, diſtreſſe, agonie and feare
our Sauiour Chriſt was, euen by this to euery
man euidently appeareth, that, he fixing his mind
vppon the inſtant daunger wherein he preſently
ſtoode,Luke. 22. and as it were before his eyes beholding
his death now imminent and at hand, the ſweate
trickeled downe his body to ye groūd lyke drops
of bloude.Feare of death more terrible thē death it ſelf. For the terrour and feare of death,
deepely ſinking into a mās imagination, is farre
more greeuous & terrible then death it ſelfe: for
many haue theyr Senſes ſo aſtonnyed & benummed,
y• death happeneth vnto them wtout any feeling
of paine at all,Who dye in maner with out paine. as they y• dye of ye Apoplexie,
or drowſie Euill, or ſuch as fall into traunces,
whom the beholders cannot perceiue to feele any
maner of paine, but to ſynck down, fallyng (as it
were) into a ſleepe or ſlumber.
               And thus, in daungerous aduētures and perilles
hazarded by Sea and lande (which to the
eyes and mynd repreſent a very Image of death)
there is no man but feeleth in himſelfe motions
of feare,The cauſe of fearefulnes when a man is in daūger and looketh pale vpon the matter, for y•,
his bloud at the ſight of ſuch dreadfull extremytie,
recuyleth and fleeth into the innermoſt partes
of his body. For when as all the parts of the body
be forſaken of theyr vitall iuyce, there is none
of them that throughlye and well executeth his
righte function and office: the feete ſtagger and
ſtumble, the eyes dazzel, the luſtyneſſe of the mind

drowpeth and is dulled, the cheeks ſeeme flaggie
and hanging downe, the tongue ſtammering and
the teeth gnaſhing and whetting.
               
                  His hayres for feare ſtand ſtaring vp,Lib. 3. Aeneid.
                  
                  his tongue is tyed faſt.
               
               There is no man (be he neuer of ſo conſtant &
ſtout a heart) but is at one ſodayne chaunce or other
appaulled,A wyſeman ſometime is put in▪ feare. & therewith ſhrinketh in courage:
but yet ſo, that ſtraight wayes abandoning feare,
and ankoring his firme truſt vppon God, he eftſones
recouereth his courage, and banyſhing daſtardly
feare, remayneth conſtant & vnterryfyed:
And if ye caſe ſo ſtand thoſe imminent daungers
be not conueniently to be auoyded, couragiouſly
and ſtcutly obiecteth himſelfe to the puſh
of any hazards, with vnappaulled ſtomacke going
through ſtitch wyth his purpoſe.
               Therefore, there is no creature lyuinge by
breath, vnto whom death is not dreadfull and
terrible,Aſtonniſhmēt of mind taketh away the feeling of pain. becauſe it bringeth deſtructiō and vtter
diſſolution vnto all: vnleſſe onelye to ſuche whoſe
myndes bee ſtupefyed and their Senſes blunted
and vnperfecte: as, olde decrepite perſons, yong
Infantes, fooles, Madmen and Rauers, which
haue no remembraunce or cogitatiō of any thing
that is fearefull and formidable, neyther feele
anye payne and griefe, as others, whoſe brayne
is firme and ſounde, and theyr Anymall

faculty perfect do: but ſpecially (as I ſayd before)
they that are oppreſſed wyth the Lethargie,
Apoplexie or in Traunces & ſownings wt do as
it were by litle & litle cloaſe their eyes, and ſeeme
as though they fell into a gentle ſlumber without
feeling any payne at all.
               The effect of this my ouerlong diſcourſe tendeth
to this end, that although there be in the body
of man many goodlye furnitures, and in the
mynde ſondry excellent ornamentes, yet notwithſtanding,
the life of man is ſubiect euery where &
in all places to innumerable caſualties, myſſehapps
and inconueniences, and is on ech ſyde beſet
& torne in peeces wyth ſuche a number of myſeryes
and byrecknyngs, as euery way weaken
and appayre the perfecte vigoure and luſtye ſtate
thereof. But if no myſchaunce or harme aſſault
the ſame, it may in good caſe & temper many
yeares continue: as by frugality, holeſome diet, &
orderly qualification of all affections: inſomuche
that euen till the yeares of decrepicie, there doe
appeare the tokens and markes, of a righte good
Conſtitucion and habite: which thinge is manifeſtlye
to bee ſeene by ſome that in Oldage are as
luſty, and haue their wittes as freſhe and youthlyke,
and their bodyes not ſo barreine, vnactiue &
fruitleſſe, as many Yong men haue.
               Now, foraſmuch as the luſtly and full growen
age of Adoleſcencie, doth conſiſte in a temperament
of hoate and moyſt, continuyng in a maner
for the moſt part in a moderate meane of equability,

and perfourming all his actions throughlye
and inculpablye, ſo alſo as touchinge the maner
and order of Sleepe, it keepeth ſuch ſtinte and
meaſure as is not greatly to be myſliked. For
their Sleepe is quiet and nothing troubleſome,
nor diſturbed with any diſtemperaunce or nightlye
vanityes. For the brayne is moyſtened and
refreſhed with a ſweete pleaſaunt vapour, ſo that
the mynde thereby is not troubled with any maner
of abſurde annoyaunces, but onelye the labours,
exercyſes and deuyſes of the daye, and the
needefull cares for the dailye mayntenaunce of
this life: the perfourmaunce whereof reſteth
and apperteyneth for the daye to accompliſh.
               Theſe doth the mynde and imaginatiue parte of
man deuyſe and ſtudye vpon, toward mornyng,
after a man hath ſlept his deade or ſounde ſleepe:
which is ſo quietly done, that therein is no phā
                  taſticall
dreamyng. And if the mynde and ſpyrite
do then reuolue and debate in dreame anye other
ſtraunge or vnaccuſtomed thing, then onely ſuche
as falleth out for the day to conſider vppon, the
ſame (certes) ſignifyeth abundaunce of ill Humours
to be peſtered within the bodye, cauſinge
the troubled ſpyrites to ſende manye confuſed ymaginations
and vaine fooliſhe viſions vp into
the chiefe Caſtle of the mynde: and of ſuch ſonde
dreames to interprete, or prognoſticate any euent
or happe of future thinges to depend, or raſhlye
to gather any ſignification or meaninge, is childiſhe,
vayne, wicked, and ſuperſtitious, as the

Scripture plainly & flatly witneſſeth. Notwtſtā
                  ding,Leuit. 19.
ſometimes dreames (ſuch I meane as are
ſent heauenly ſuggeſtion) happen not without
ſome diuination and infallible preſage or foreſight
of things to come.Deut. 13. For our heauenlye father
vſeth now and then to admoniſh and awake
our drowſy myndes and retchleſſe natures,Dreames ſometime ſent from God. laying
before vs in viſions and dreames ſomewhile
good and holeſome, ſometime ill and lamentable
happes, thereby to try, whether yet at length wee
will be obeyſaunt to his admonitions or ſhryncke
aſyde and refuſe the lore of his preſcriptions and
commaundmēts. For many being hoodwinked
and bewitched wyth the tryfling doctrine and friuolous
traditions of mans inuention, reiecte
and forſake the pure and cleare founteyne that
perpetually yeldeth moſt aboūdant ſtore of the euerlaſting
water of lyfe, and ſeeke after ryuers
that are dryed vp (and as Hieremie termeth it)Cap. 2.
digge to themſelues Ceſternes and broken pitts
that can holde no licour or drop of holeſome dotryne.
That worthy conſtante, and throughlye
tryed Souldiour Iob,
                  Cap. 7. bemoaneth his owne caſe,
offirming that in the nighte ſeaſon hee was ſore
diſquieted with troubleſom dreames and dreadfull
vyſions.To what vſe and purpoſe ſleepe ſerueth. For the nature & office of Sleepe,
being nothinge elſe then a mitigation of labours
& a quiet ſurceaſſing (for the time) frō toyle, and a
refreſhinge of the bodye, with the buſy cares and
dealings of the day before wearied: from theſe cares
& troubles, did not his Sleepe in the nighte

diſburden and eaſe him, but rather encreaſed and
doubled the ſame: that his minde ſtill remayning
terryfied with dreadful dreames and apparitiōs.
For thus doth he reaſon with himſelf, and theſe
complaints doth he vtter in that his worthy dialogue
or rather Tragicomicall diſcourſe: If I
thincke to my ſelfe, that my bed d
                        •
                      ſhall comfort
mee and mitigate my griefe, and that I ſhal haue
ſome eaſe and refreſhing vppon my Couch, then
troubleſt thou me vvith dreames and makeſt me
afrayed throughe viſions, inſomuch that I vviſhe
for death, to come and make an end of al my ſorovves.
               
               As touching the inwarde notes of this complexionedThe vertue and force of bloud as touching the framinge of the inwarde diſpoſitiō & maners of the mynde.
body and his inclination of mynde (for
a man ought in ech point and reſpect throughlye
to be viewed and conſidered) a hoate and moyſte
quality incident to bloude, produceth in men diuerſe
natures, and accordinge to the more or leſſe
mixture of other humours, frameth in them ſondry
maners and diuers diſpoſitions. They that
be meere Sanguine,Perſōs mere Sanguine, for the moſt part ſtarcke fooles. and haue none or very litle
Melancholy or Choler mixed therwyth (as moſt
neerelye approchinge to the nature and Senſe of
brute beaſts) are commonly doltes and fooles, or
at leaſt, not greatly cumbred wyth much witte.
For ſythēs (as Galene ſayth) ſharpnes & finenes
of wit cōmeth of Choler, Conſtācy and ſtedfaſtnes
of Melancholie,Commēt 1. de nat human & Phlegme to the framynge
and diſpoſinge of the maners, helpeth nothing,
neyther ſtandeth in anye ſteede: it remayneth

then, that ſimplicity and fooliſhnes proceedeth of
Bloud. Thus are yong Cattell (which in comparyſon
of the elder ones, haue greate ſtoare of
Bloude) for the moſt part (as wee ſee) fooliſhe,
ſotlike and bettleheaded: as Kyddes, Calues,
yonge Sheepe, Lambes, young wyeld Kidds or
Roebuckes, yong Kyttons, and the yonge of all
other dumme Creatures beſyde: and amonge
Men, the neerer that any one approcheth to the
nature of brute Beaſts, the more lyke vnto them
in maners and conditions is hee. Which thing
any yt is but meanely ſkilled in Natures works,
may eaſely iudge and diſcerne, euen by certayne
ſignifications of theyr eyes and countenaunce:
eche of which is as a glaſſe wherin to behold, and
whereby to diſcouer the inward affections of the
mynde.
               In many men there is a greate reſemblance &
affynitie in nature wyth other Beaſtes, and the
further that theſe digreſſe from the puritie of tē
                  perament,
the leſſe ſway in them beareth Reaſon,
Iudgment, Vnderſtanding, willingnes to doe
good, Wyſedome, and diſcretion: to be ſhort, they
are partakers of all thoſe things that are commō
to Beaſts.
               And thus, there bee many which eyther for
lack of good educatiō, or through this deprauatiō
of Nature, degenerate into Beaſtes, and in all
their actiōs in one poynt or other, reſemble them
in conditions.Man a Wolfe. Many, like Wolues are bloudſuckers,
extortioners & raueners: Many like

                  
                     ••
                  erce,Mic. ca. 7. cruell, outragious and terrible, lyinge
in wayte to ſheede bloud,Man a Lyon and hunting theyr brother
to death. As the Prīce vvil, ſo ſayth the Iudge.
Lykewyſe ſayth Ezechiel:
                  Cap. 19. 
                  Iehoakim is become a
Lyō, vvhich hath learned to ſpoyle & deuour folk
to make vvidovves,
                  Mā an Ape. 
                  deſtroy their houſes, & make
their Cities deſert. Some be as foyinge, geſturous,
and counterfe
                     •
                  cting of any thing by ymitacion
as Apes.Man a Foxe Some Forlyke, are ſuttle, wylie,
deceiptfull, and crafty to entrappe and catche
the innocent at aduauntage. And in lyke ſorte,
there be others, which reſemblyng the nature and
conditions of other beaſtes, and degeneratinge
from theyr integrity and excellencie humaine, eyther
degenerate quite into Beaſts, or at leaſt become
much lyke vnto them.Children▪ quick, ſtir
                     
                        ••
                     nge and playing, and the cauſe why. As for Childrē &
yonge Stryplinges aboute 14. or 15. yeares of
age or vnder, by reaſon that theyr bloude is pure
and ful of ſwelling ſpyrit, are ſtill ſtyrring, quick,
nymble, actiue, wanton, vnmodeſt, malapert, ſaucie,
proude, wythoute wit, and much giuen to toying
and playinge: for wee ſee them as wanton as
Calues, that is to ſay, in mowyng wt theyr mouthes,
in voyce, geſture, becks, clapping of hands,
light ſonges, vayne ioyfulnes, where there is no
cauſe, immoderate myrth, diſordered fyſking Vp &
downe, and vncertayne motion & gate: all which
do ſignify a ſhuttle waueryng nature, & a mynde
ſubiect to great mutability and vncōſtancy, procedyng
and cauſed of the boyling of theyr bloude
wythin them, which boyleth vp, & as it were ſeetheth

in theyr V
                     •
                  ynes,Boylinge of bloud in youth, like to ſpurging of newe wyne in the Tunne. euen as new Wyne, Ale,
or Beere ſpurgeth and worketh in the Tunne.
               Hereuppon the Netherlanders and Lowe
Duchmen, haue deuyſed certayne prouerbial termes,
wherewyth they are wonte commonlye to
quippe thoſe yonge princockes and luſtye gallantes
whom they ſee ouerioyed or toofarre gone
in wanton iolity, makynge themſelues as ridiculous
and ieſtyng ſtockes to the whole companye.
Neyther are they incited to theſe immoderate
pleaſures through reaſon or auy well ſtayed diſcretion,
but by impotencie of mynde and wylfull
affection, digreſſing and ſwaruyng from modeſtye,
temperaunce and moderacion: y• lack wherof
googleth theyr vnſtayed heades, and caryeth
them into many inordinate pranckes of childiſhe
inſolencie.Playig with the heade what it ſignifyeth. They alſo bewraye theyr owne vnconſtancie
and vnſtayed mynds by much ſhaking
of their heads, and continual playing and toying
wyth theyr handes and feete, inſomuch that ſome
accompt them no better then ſtarke mad, or perſons
diſtract of their right wittes. Neyther
do they ſind themſelues occupyed in any earneſt
matter that is to any good purpoſe, neyther ſhew
they forth eyther in woordes or deedes any piece
of wyſedome, but vndecētly for theyr age, & laſciuiouſlye
retourne vnto their boyiſhnes agayne,
whereas meeter it were in reſpect of theyr time
paſſed, nowe to fall to ſome thryft, and to frame
theyr lyfe after the preſcription of ſome good order.
               
                  
Hereuppon doe wee vſe a Prouerbiall ſimilitude
taken of the nature and conditions of yonge
Calues, which in the Sprynge tyme of the yeare
(in ye greene paſtures, when theyr bellyes be ful)
ſkippe and leape vp and downe, wantonlye and
toyingly fyſking and iumpynge, now this waye,
nowe that waye, nowe rounde about, one whyle
rayſing themſelues vppon the forefeete, an otherwhyle
vpon the hynder Leggs: whoſe maners &
faſhyōs, ſuch yōg youthes as in their daily order
of lyfe do imitate and reſemble, are ſayde in latine
vitulari, which is, to bee as wanton and toying
as a yonge Calfe: or not to haue ſhedde all
theyr Calues teeth: or that theyr Iawes ytche
with Caluiſhe wantonnes:
               
                  The Booke of Wyſedome (fathered and aſſcrybed
vnto Salomon ſayth:
                  Sapien. 4. Spuria vitulamina
nō agent radices altas, nec ſtabile fundamentum
collocabunt: Baſtarde Slippes ſhal
take no deepe rootes nor laye any faſt foundation.
               
               By theſe Phraſes of ſpeach, we meane that wilfull
and vnruly age, which lacketh rypenes and
diſcretion, and (as wee ſaye) hath not ſowed all
theyr wyeld Oates, but as yet remayne withoute
eyther forcaſt or conſideration of any thinge that
may afterward turne them to benefite, playe the
wanton yonkers, and wilfull Careawayes.
Seyng therfore yt Adoleſcencie and youthful age

conſiſteth in a conſtitucion of Hoat and moyſt, &
is fuller of bloud then anye other: it is to this
place therefore namely and ſpecially to be referred.
Neither can any plighte or Complexion of
the body more aptly be applyed vnto it, then this:
for all the qualityes, faſhions and marks of this
Age and State, agree thereunto. Which thing
I ſee was well obſerued by Horace in his deſcription
of the Nature & inclination of youthful
Age, where he ſayth:

                     A youthfull beardleſſe Strypling, voyde
                     and free from Tutours checke,In Art. Poet.
                     
                     VVith Horſe and Hound doth raunge the fields,
                     and braue himſelfe doth decke.
                     To vyce he pliant is as vvaxe:
                     to them that vviſhe him vvell
                     And vvarne him for his ovvne auayle,
                     rough, churliſh, ſharpe and fell.
                     A ſlender Huſband for himſelfe,
                     a vvaſter of his gold,
                     High mynded, raſhe, preſumptuous,
                     in loue ſoone hoat, ſoone cold.
                  
               
               And if they happen to lyncke themſelues in
companye wyth anye lewde CounſelloursLewd and ill diſpoſed Coūſellours do youth mutch harm (as in
this ſlypperie and daungerous age commonlye
is ſeene) theyr fickle heades, & flingbrayned wits
be eaſelye allured and drawen into follye, and to
purſue that waye which is worſte. For beynge
now in theyr moſt wilfull age, and ſtanding vppon

the moſt doubtful and daungerous poynt of
al, betweene vertue and vyce, lacking experience,
and voyde of all good aduyſe and counſel, & miſſeled
by the peeuiſh allurements of theyr aſſociats,
they runne for the moſt part headlong vnto that
which they ſee the common multitude embrace, &
are readye to ſlyde into that trade of lyfe which of
all other is worſt and moſt pernicious.
               
                  Greene heades in greateſt daunger are,
                  in doubtfull choyſe they ſtand,Perſ. Sa. 5
                  
                  And hange in Ballaunce of deuyſe
                  vvhat trade to take in hand.
               
               But if (in lieu of theſe) they harken and geeue
good care to the holſome admonitions of ſome
faythfull and vertuous Tutour,Good counſell and vertuous education bringeth youth to goodnes. and by his preſcription
frame the order of theyr lyfe and conuerſation
in theyr tender yeares (for in this Age
is Stuffe, matter, and towardnes, both good
and excellent, if good education do poliſhe, and a
ſkilfull workeman haue it in handling) no doubt
they are to be broughte to much goodneſſe. For
ſuch is the force and power of bloud in mans body,
ſpecially when throughe acceſſe of age it groweth
to heate, and dailye more & more encreaſeth
in vitall ſpyrite, that it cauſeth a promptnes of
mynde,Bloud vſeth the helpe of other humours in framing the manners. quickneſſe in deuyſe, and ſharpeneſſe in
practyze, which by dailye vſe & exercyſe atteyneth
in thend to wyſedome, knowledge and experience
of many things. And thus by the benefite of nature

and good bringinge vp, it is broughte to
paſſe that they be garniſhed wyth many excellent
giftes of the mynde, and throughe a readye vtteraunce
in the diſcourſe of matters, bee to theyr
Countrey a greate ſtaye and ornament.
               And althoughe hoate and drye natured men
(which are the Cholerique) be right well furniſhed
and ſkilfull in perfecte vtteraunce,Difference betweene Sang
                        •
                     ine & Cholerick. vehemence
of ſpeach and readyneſſe of tongue: yet is
there not in them ſuch waighte of woordes and
pythyneſſe of Sentences, neyther can they ſo well
rule their owne affections, becauſe in theyr reaſonynges
and diſcourſes they be very earneſt and
haſtye. And this in ſuch perſons is not onelye
by the pronunciation of their woordes, but alſo
by their ſwyft gate and haſtye pace, eaſye to be
perceyued.
               This difference alſo is betweene them, that
the Cholerique are bitter taunters,Cholericke perſōs great flouters. dry bobbers,
nyppinge gybers and ſkornefull mockers of others,
but the Sanguine nothinge giuen that
waye,Sāguine curteous and myld natured. meddle not at all wyth ſuch dogge eloquence,
neyther vſe to hit men ouer the thummes
wyth any ſuch figuratyue flowtes, whereat manye
men are commonlye as heynouſlye offended,
and take the matter in as greate ſnuffe, as they
would, to be Crowned wyth a Pyſſebolle: but
they be pleaſaunt and curteous natured, meerye

without ſcurrility, and ciuill without fylthy rybauldrye,
behauinge themſelues orderlye in all
companyes, cumberſome and odious to none, but
delightfull and welcome to all.
               But if it happen that Bloude bee alayed or
myngled with other Humours, and by courſe of
Age to become hoate, as namely if it bee mixed
with yelowe Choler, wherewyth the Humours
are ſtirred vp, or to participate with anye other
Humoure whatſoeuer:Inciination of nature. It is ſeene, that as
the mixture is, ſo the manners, diſpoſition,
delighte, trade, and inclination of man, falleth
oute accordinglye. As thus, ſuppoſe a Bodye
c
                     •
                  ieflye to conſiſte of theſe three,Beſt proportion & meaſure of blod to other humours. Bloude,
Choler, and Melancholye, whereof two partes
to be Bloude, and the other thirde parte to
bee Choler and Melancholye equallye proportioned:
Of theſe three, thus mixed together,
proceedeth ſuch a Complexion and bodelye habite.
as produceth ſundry motions, affections,
and inclinations of the minde, and which doth
inwardlye diſpoſe, faſhion and frame their Natures
and diſpoſitions (yea before they breake
oute into woordes) enhablinge them fitte and
meete to diſcharge and execute the parte of anye
perſonne, that wee either of oure ſelues take in
hande, or which by nature and publicke function
is to vs aſſigned.
               
                  
                  Firſt Nature frames vs apt and meete,
                  To euery kinde of chaunce:
                  Sometimes ſhe helpes,Horat. in Art, Poet. ſomtimes vvith ire,
                  our harts doth vvound and launce.
                  Sometimes vvith thoughte to throvv vs dovvne,
                  vvith griefe and dule amayne:
                  Then, aftervvard the tongue declares,
                  the mynds deuyſes playne.
               
               And as we ſee, Nature in producing hearbes
and floures, and paintyng them out in braue attyre
and colours, to ſhew forth a moſt excellente
and inimitable workemāſhip, and right gallantly
to ſette the ſame out to the gazing view of ech
greedie eye, clad wyth many, and the ſame moſt
pleaſurable differences of goodly verdure, ſome
lyghte and entermedled wyth whytiſhe, ſome of a
ſadde or darke greene, ſome watriſhe, blunkette,
gray, graſſie, hoarie, and Lecke coloured,
whereof euerye one hath theyr proper vertues, &
peculier effectes: So likewyſe, Bloud beinge
myngled wyth humours of other quality, conceyueth
other force and other colour and yet (natheleſſe)
not quite bereft and depryued of a Bloudy
of Sanguine colour: inſomuch that it pearceth
into the very innermoſt corners of the mynde, incenſing
to ſundry actions. And althoughe the
Planetts and Starres, ſtretch oute theyr influence,
and extend theyr force mightely vppon theſe
lower bodyes: yet is it the Humours and Elemental

qualityes which doe conſtitute the complexion
of humayne body, and cauſe diuers ſorts
and ſondry differences of Natures and maners.Humours of more force then the pl
                        •
                     
                     nets.
And in this ſorte, doth this conſtitution whereof
wee now ſpeake, breede and bring foorth into the
Theatre of this world, ſome that be ſtout Braggers
and ſhameleſſe praters, ſome Paraſites &
clawbackes, ſome Dolts and cockſcombes, ſome
ſelfe pleaſers, which thinke more of themſelues,
then all the reſt of the Towne beſyde doth, ſome
Mynſtrelles and Pypers, ſome graceleſſe Ruffians
and Spendalls, ryotouſly waſtyng and conſumyng
their Patrimony: Some Dycers and
Gamſters, ſome Trēcher frends and Coſeners:
ſome Counterfaiters, Skoffers, Tumblers and
Geſturers, ſome Iugglers, & Legier du maine
players, wyth a great rablemente of other lewde
Lubbers of other ſorts beſyde.
               
                  A rabling route of ydle loutes,
                  conſuming grayne and corne,
                  Deuoyde of thryft,Hor. lib. 1 Epiſt. 2. cyphers to fill
                  vp roume and tale, forlorne:
                  Right vvoers of Penelope,
                  ſtarke verlettes, flattringe mates,
                  And Bellygoddes, addict toomuch
                  to cheere and dainty cates.
                  VVho loue to ſnort in bedde till none,
                  and heare the mynſtrelles playe
                  On vvarbling Harpes to baniſh dumpes
                  and chaſe all care avvay.
               
               
                  
For ſlthens they neither obſerue ſtay, nor moderation
in their liues and conuerſation, neither
frame to liue in any good and laudable order, but
loyter and haunte the companye of wilfull and
lewdly diſpoſed perſons,Bloude eggeth a man to riot and wilfuines. it commeth to paſſe that
in maners they proue ſtarke noughte and graceleſſe
and by meanes of the heate and abundaunce
of bloude, prone and prompte to purſue the
inticements of all ſenſuall luſtes and vnbrydled
affections, reputinge the chiefeſt felicitye to conſiſt
in pleaſure. And of this ſort are al Riotours,
all Banqueters and diſſolute lecherers, whoſe
whole care, induſtry and delight, night and daye,
is to drowne themſelues in the gulph of Senſuality
and bellycheere. They liue (as the Prouerbe
is) a Minſtrelles life, that is to ſay, nycely,
ydly, & altogether in a maner vpon other mens
coſte: and for that they keepe neither ho, nor meaſure
in their affections, but wholly addicte themſelues
to ingluuions exceſſe, vnſeaſonable watchinge,
and immoderate luſt of carnall venerie,
therefore their bodies lye open to al ſuch diſeaſes
and Sicknes, as conſiſt in ye fulnes of humours:
namely, the Squinzye, and ſwellinge of the Iawes,
Inflammations of the kernels of y• mouth,
and the Uuula, ſwelling of the fundemēt, Pyles,
Hemorrhoydes, bleeding at the Noſe, Pleuryſie,
Stitches, Inflammation of the Lunges, and
many other: for all theſe, it ſhalbe moſte expedient
to be let bloud. To this number is alſo to
be added the Ague Ephemera, or Diaria, ſo named

becauſe cōmonly it is of no longer thē one dayes
continuance,Ephemera, or Diaria albeit ſometime it laſteth till the
fourth daye: and hereunto is to bee referred the
Sweating Sickneſſe (which becauſe it beganne
firſt in England, is called the Engliſh Sweate)
the Accident of which diſeaſe is ſowning & greenous
pame at the heart, ioyned with a bytinge at
the Stomacke,The Engliſh Sweate a kinde of the Ague Ephemera. whereby a man is no leſſe payned
then if the heart if ſelfe (beinge the fountcyne of
life) ſhould through anye contagious ayre, be infected
and oppreſſed: As by proofe it fell out in
the Moneth of September 1529. at what time al
the Low Countreyes were in a maner generally
viſited with this contagious Sweate,When the Sweatinge ſicknes firſt began in Belgie. and peſtilent
Ephemera, proceedinge of corruption of the
Ayre, wherewith ſo many as were infected, were
brought into great terrour, tremblinge and ſowning
throughe feeblenes of mynde and pantinge:
their heart labouring & beating within them extremely.
During which infectious time of viſtacion,
there happened an other miſchiefe and
inconuenience which made the matter a greate
deale more lamentable: For certaine ignorante
Empyrykes contrary to the Rules of Arte,Blinde Byards. and
without taking any regard or conſideration to ye
ſtrength and powers of nature, violentlye kepte
their Patients, ſweating the ſpace of xii. houres:
whereby many by extreeme heat, ouercome, were
with their bolſters & many bedclothes ſtyfled vp.
               Seing now that corruption of the Ayre is the
cauſe of this greeuous maladye or Ephemerall
                  
Ague, and that the Symptoma or Accidēt therof
(which euen attendeth and wayteth vppon it,
lyke as the ſhadow on ye body) is greeuous payne
at the heart and ſownyng, ſo is the Sweat it ſelf
the Cryſis thereof, wherby Nature being ſtrong,
diſpelleth and ſendeth oute moyſte fulſome fumes
and ſty kinge Humours, and conſequentlye
baniſheth the diſeaſe:In what ſort 
                        •
                     o ſweat and how longe. it muſt therfore at any hād
be moderate, and not aboue the ſpace of iiii. or vi.
houres at the moſt, according to the imbecillitye
and ſtrength of nature. For toomuche, cleane
throweth downe all the ſtrength, and vtterly deſtroyeth
the vitall ſpyrites.
               Nowe, why this diſeaſe is tearmed by ye name
of the Engliſh Sweat, I ſuppoſe grewe hereuppon,
for that the people of that Countrey be oftē
therewith attached, partly through theyr curious
and dainty fare and great abundance of meates,
wherewyth they cramme themſelues very ingluuiouſly,
euen as the Germaynes & Netherlāders
do wyth dryncke: and partly (which I noted at
my late beyng in that Realme, about the tyme of
Mydſommer) by reaſon that the ayre wyth them
is troubled, cloudy and many tymes wyth foggie
dampes ouercaſt, wherby is engendred the cauſe
and originall both inwardlye and outwardlye of
this diſeaſe:Engliſhmen ſubiect aboue other Countreyes to the ſwearinge ſickeneſſe. the vehemēcy wherof, bryngeth thē
into a bloudy ſweating, wherwt they muſt wreſtle
& ſtryue as wyth a moſt fierce & ſtrong ennemy,
and which they muſt endeuour wyth al might to
ſupplant: hereupon happen Traunces and ſownynges

throughe feebleneſſe of body and mynde,
faynting and drowpyng of the ſpyrites, decaye of
powers, ſtopping of the pypes and voyce, and life
almoſt thereby cleane yelded vppe, and the partye
brought euen vnto deathes doore.
               For this Countrey people (not able to abyde
any great trauayle and labour, as beinge perſōs
cockering themſelues in much tender nicetye and
effeminate lyfe, are verye procliue and apte to
be throwen thereby into the languiſhyng extremity
of this perillous diſeaſe. It is expediente
for them therefore to be recomforted, cheryſhed,
reuiued and refreſhed wyth ſweete odours, and
with the drynkinge of pure good Wyne. And
hereupon commeth it that this Nation peculiarly
and almoſt daily vſeth to dryncke Malueſay
or Secke, to comfort & reſtore their Stomackes
when they be quayſie or ſurcharged wyth exceſſe
of ſundry curious diſhes: which thing I finde to
haue beene vſed and put in vre by men of elder
time, to helpe ſuch diſcraſyes: whoſe order was
with this wyne, to dryue away, payne at the hart,
Stitches, Sowning or Traūces, Cholick, fretting
of the guttes, and bellye ache. Thus, the
Poet luuenal trumpeth a certayne myſerable
Chuffe and niggardlye Pinchpenie, for that, he
denyed to geeue a litle wyne to one of his frends
that fell into a ſowne or traunce, through feeblenes
& toomuch ſweating 'being in great daūger of
his lyfe.
               
                  
                  He ſtoares and drincks old vvyne, long kept:
                  Euen ſince the cyuile ſtryfe
                  VVhen garboyles and diſſenſionIuuen. Sat. 5.
                  
                  in Common vvealth vvere ryfe.
                  VVho Snudgelike to his frend (vvhoſe heart
                  vvas paynd vvith ſtitch and griefe)
                  Not one poore draught thereof vvould ſend,
                  to eaſe him vvith reliefe.
               
               They that be of this conſtitution (ouer & beſide
theſe afore rehearſed greeuaunces and diſcommodities)
are ſubiect to other Agues no leſſe
daungerous: wherof one proceedeth of putrefyed
and rotten bloud, the other withoute anye note or
ſigne of putrefaction is cauſed of inflammation
of bloud. Both theſe ſorts of Agewes ye Greekes
comprehend in this word Synochus, and the
Latiniſtes Continuum, becauſe it is continuall,
without geeuing to the Pattent anye truce or intermiſſion:
for whē the fit commeth, it leaueth not
of,Hoat and moyſt Complexiōs ſubiect to putre faction. but continueth for many dayes together. And
that Age which is hoate and moyſte is more ſubiect
to theſe kinds of Agues then anye other, for
it quickly conceyueth & taketh putrefaction throughe
oppilation, ſpecially in the Spryng time of
the yeare, when as Humours freſhly encreaſe: &
much the ſooner if they vſe anye diſtemperan̄ce or
leade on ydle and reſtfull lyfe wythout ordinary
exerciſe. For when the Pores and ſpyramēts
whereout bloud is wont to haue difflation & vaporous

expulſion be ſtopped, the partye cannot
chooſe, but growe into putrefaction and ye vitall
partes with fulſome corruption to be infected.
               For euen as cloſe houſes whereinto the winde,
hath no maner of acceſſe: and as Garmentes, fetherbeds
and Mattreſſes, Cuſhions, Sheetes &
Blankets, Carpets and Counterpoynts become
muſtie and ill ſented, vnleſſe they bee now & then
ſhaken and hanged out in the open Ayre: ſo likewiſe
doth the body of man become putrefyed, corrupte,
ſtinkinge and rotten, if it accuſtome not
it ſelfe to exercyſe and agitation. For by that
order and meane, are excrementes euacuated, &
al fulſome fumes and exhalations proceding out
of them, diſſipated.
               To keepe themſelues therefore the better frō
Sicknes, and to be the leſſe open and ſubiecte to
Agewes, it ſhall behoue thē, to vſe ſeaſonable exerciſe,
(abādoning al ſlouth and drowſynes) duly
obſeruing a moderation in meat & drinck, ſleepe,
watche, and carnall coniunction. And in the begining
of the Springe, it ſhall be good for them
to be let bloud, or by fcaryſycation to be cupped.
But if they be loath or vnwilling after that way
to be emptyed,Receiptes Laxatiue & ſoluble. to preuent future daungers, let
them take ſome ſuch purgatiue medicines, as
make the bealy ſoluble, namely Caſſia fiſtula, Syrup.
Roſ. Laxat: Diaprunum ſimplex, Syrup. de
Epythymo, and Fumitorie, Polypodie, Mercurie,
Manna, or honnie of the Ayre, and Whaye.
               
                  
And in vſing of exercyſe this muſt diligentlye
be taken heede of,Howe exerciſe is to be vſed. that it be not frequented & vſed,
eyther when ye parties be replete wyth humours
and excrements, after meate, or when their Stomacks
be full. For being in eyther of theſe ſorts
vſed,The head taketh hurt by the diſorder of the in feriour mē
                     bers. it filleth the heade full of fumes & vapours,
(which chiefe Member being diſtempered and
diſeaſed, all the inferiour members lykewyſe ſuffer
griefe and participate diſcraſie wyth it) it bredeth
Rhewmes, Catarrhes and diſtillations, it
maketh heauye, and bryngeth oppilation to the
Lyeuer.Oppilation of the liuer from whēce it cōmeth. For violent motion dryueth the meats
beyng vncōcocted into ye narrow ſtreits of ye veynes,
where they ſtop the paſſage of the Humours,
and make an open way & occaſion vnto putrefaction.
               When any ſuch inconuenience happeneth, our
parts be, forth wyth to ſeeke remedy for the ſame,
by applying thereto ſuch thinges as are of force
to take away and diſpatch all thoſe annoyaunces
that ſticke in the way, and hinder them from hauing
theyr ryght courſes.Tuend. Val. 6. Of which ſort (ſayth
Galene) are, the infuſion of Wormewoode gentle,
ſtieped in Wyne, or Wormewood wyne, called
Abſynthytes, Succorye and Endyue, Doder,
Egrymonie,Wormwod holſome for the liuer. Things puttinge away oppilation. Rhabarbe, the ſeedes of Anyſe and
Fenel, Peache kernelles, bitter Almonds, great
Reyſons wyth the kernelles taken out, Oximell
ſympl. eche of theſe to bee geeuen before meate,
when concoction is perfectly made.
               
                  
The ſame regard and conſideration is alſo to
be obſerued and kepte in doynge the carnal Acte
of Generation:Harmes of Venetie & carnall copulation. for toomuch vſe thereof enfeebleth
the powers, and through inflāmacion aryſing
thereof, engendreth Goute and paine in the
Ioyntes. For there be ſome ſo wylful, that without
reſpect at all of concoction or cruditie, without
any conſyderation and difference of nighte or
day (quight neglecting the oportunity thereto belōging,)
do greedily deſyre, and inordinately haſten
(for this tickling luſte can brooke no delaye)
to ſatiſfye and ſtaunche their fleſhly motions in
this kinde of pleaſure: and in the vſe thereof be
ſo inſaciable and ſo farre paſſe ye boundes of moderacion
and qualification thereof, that they
waſte and deſtroye the pyth and ſynewes of theyr
whole bodyes. For carnall Acte taketh away &
exhauſteth that power of the body which ſerueth
to concoct the meate and to conuert the ſame into
Bloud: which if it be not accordingly accompliſhed
nor ſyncerely wroughte, then falleth it oute,
that very great ſtore and abundance of excrementes
& ſuperfluous humours be engendred, which
breede and cauſe innumerable diſeaſes. Albeit
to many,Commodity of Venery. this v
                     ••
                   of Carnalitie (vnleſſe it be out
of all meaſure) bringeth no hurt at all: for ſeaſonable
and tempeſtiuious coiture riddeth awaye
great ſtore of Phlegme, and ſkowreth awaye other
Humours, which being engēdred wtin a mā,
damnyfye and annoye the body and mynde.
               And this thinge is to be obſerued and marked in

yonge luſtye Damſelles and Virgins, which
remayne long vnmaryed, or which by profeſſiō of
chaſtitye are wayned and debarred from Wedlocke.
For beſyde their vnruly motions of tickeling
luſt,Seede beīg corrupt, is cauſe of much incō
                     
                     
                        •
                     enience. beſyde theyr ſecrete flames and burning
affections they be ill coloured, and nothing pleaſauntly
complexioned, their myndes vnſtedy and
out of quiet frame, by meanes of a naughty vapour
that aſcendeth vpward and diſturbeth their
brayne. And hereuppon it is, that ſometyme in
Imagynation, thinking thēſelues to lye wyth mē
by beholding or touchinge of them, they be troubled
in theyr ſleepe wyth the night Mare, and the
effluxiōs of ſeede, wherwt they pollute thēſelues
in the nighte ſeaſon: Hereuppon commeth trembling
& quaking of the heart, by reaſon of groſſe
fumes, which inuade the pannicle or coffyn of the
heart, called Pericardion, and lye heauelye vppon
the body preſſinge it downe as though they were
night Hegges, or Hobbegobblins.
               Them that be maryed, which lawfullye maye
vſe this carnal knowledge wyth their owne wyues,
and they that diſſolutely leade a leacherous
life, and runne ryot on whorehuntinge, are to bee
aduyſed and counſelled, not to yelde themſelues
too much therunto,Moderatiō of Carnall dealinges. leaſt afterward they bewayle
their lamenes and lacke of ſtrength, when as all
their vitall iuyce ſhalbe cleane gone and exhauſted:
whereof the wyſe Solomon geeueth to euery
man a ryght holeſome exhortation and aduertiſement,
that a man ſhould not geeue ouer or enthrall

his credite and honour to harlottes,Prou. 8. nor to
ſpende and conſume his luſtye yeares in hauntinge
the companie of Whores, who greedilye
gape to defeat and ſpoyle him both of his wealth
and ſtrength, as they, that will neuer bee ſatiſfyed
and glutted, neither with Venus games and
coiture, neyther wyth rewardes and expences,
but remayne ſtill inſaciable,Whores in lecherous luſt neuer ſatiſfyed, nor in rewards. and euer crauinge
more. Let eche man therefore take herein good
heede to himſelfe, leaſſe in the ende when hee is
cleane wyped from all his wealthe and bodelye
ſtrength, hee mourne, and wyth ſyghes bewayle
his former wylfulnes, and the decaye of his forſpent
and weariſh body.
               Therefore to eſcape cleare withoute takings
any harme by immoderatly vſing this venerous
acte,Art. Modic. 86. ſo much ſpace of time (by Galene his preſcription)
oughte to bee vſed betweene, that neyther
anye reſolution bee thereby perceyued and
felt, neither laſſitude: And agayne, that a man
maye feele himſelfe lighter and luſtyer, and hauing
diſourdened and diſbalaſſed himſelfe of his
prouocatiue ſuperſluous Sperme, to fetch his
breath the better. Alſo a conuenient and fitte
time ought to bee taken, to witte, when the bodye
is meanelye conſtituted, neyther too full nor too
emptie: of which matter elſewhere wee are to
ſpeake more at large.
               But if anye Sanguine complexioned perſon,
(the better to ſerue God) be delighted in leading

a ſingle and vnmaryed lyfe, by profeſſion of chaſtytie:
him do I counſayle and aduyſe very cyrcumſpectlye
and precyſely to conſider his owne
ſtate, diſpoſition and nature, whether he be well
able to qualefy and kepe vnder, this diſordered &
vnruly affection or no. For in ſuch a waightye
caſe a man muſt cyrcumſpectly looke about him,
and very aduyſedly forſee, that hee do not inconſyderately
tye himſelfe to any profeſſion wythout
iudgemēt, choyſe, and diſcretion, leaſt his fooliſh
raſhnes brynge him afterwards to repentaunce,
when he ſhall feele himſelfe ſurcharged, and vnhable
to weild the burdē which he hath takē vppon
him to beare.Sperme or Seede. For the Sperme or Seede of
Generation, being a redounding excremente and
ſuperfluous Humour (reſidue and remayninge
of the laſt alimente, and comminge from the veſſells
of y• Teſticles, wher it is exactlye fourmed,
and throughly laboured) is employed to begette
yſſue: yea ye natural power & faculty, is deſyrous
to haue this collection of Humour to be purged,
and by the euacuatinge thereof to be eaſed of a
troubleſome and intollerable caryage, euen as ye
other partes of the body (for theyr partes) deſyre
to bee diſburdened of theyr ſuperfluous excremēts:
to wit, vryne, ordure, ſpettle, ſweat, ſneuel,
ſpattling and Phlegme.
               Right good and holeſome therefore haue Ieuer
deemed that worthy admonition and Counſell
of CHRIST in the Goſpel,Matth. 19 1. Cor. 7. and of the Apoſtle
lykewyſe, that they which can comprehend

this matter, and are able to perfourme and kepe
it, ſhould remayne chaſt, and ioyfully embrace the
ſame as a heauēly gyft: aſſuryng themſelues that
Gods Diuine aſſiſtaunce in ſo godlye a purpoſe,
will not fayle them: wythout which all that man
purpoſeth or taketh in hand is fruſtrate & vayne,
as beſyde S. Paule,
                  Sapient. 8 the wyſe Kyng Salomon witneſſeth.
For it is not to bee doubted but a man
may ſubdue and vanquiſh this ſlyppery affectiō,
(althoughe verye hardly) and by lyuing a continent
lyfe, maye perfourme his determinate reſolution
and vow, ſo it be done and taken in hande,
onely vppon zeale and deuotion, the better thereby
to entend Gods ſeruice,Continency and Chaſtity a ſpeciall gift of God. and geeue himſelfe to
heauenly contēplacions. For they that be wrapped
in many cares, and (ſhakīg away from them
all ſlouth and ydleneſſe) do mortifie themſelues &
ſpend their time in watchinge, hunger, ſparefeeding,
earneſt ſtudy, faſting and prayer, continuall
meditation of holy Scripture, and painful preaching
night and day, (wherby this kinde of Deuils
is caſt out,)Matth. 17 they I ſay) feele not themſelues
greatly moued in deſyre to this thing: For why?
theſe that I meane, do willinglye & voluntarily,
not forcibly & ſuperſtitiouſlye betake themſelues
to this kinde of life: the better thereby to applye
theyr euangelical function, and more freely to intende
the ſacred ſtudy of Diuinity.
            
            
               
               Of a colde and moyſt Complexion: which
ſetteth out and declareth the condition,
ſtate and nature of perſons
Phlegmaticke.
The iij. Chapter.
               NExt after the Hoate & moyſt Conſtitution,
order requyreth to deſcribe and ſet oute the
Cold & moyſt Temperature, wherein reigneth &
aboundeth Phlegme: whereof (after bloude) no
ſmall porcion is diffuſed into euery part of the
body. And this Humour draweth ſomewhat
neere to the nature of Bloude, and is in affinitye
with it, both in reſpecte of eſſence, and ſociety of
their conceptoryes. For it is (as it were) a certayne
Bloud vnconcoct,Phlegm the matter of Bloud. or a rudimente and firſt
beginning of Bloud yet vnperfect, & not exactly
laboured: a reſēblaunce, ſhew, or paterne whereof,
we may well behold in Muſte or new Wyne,
whyle it is yet hoate, and newly taken & wringed
out of the Preſſe.The myxture of the Humours compared to wyne. For (as Galene righte
learnedly noteth) the ſubtyle and ayrte part of the
Wyne (which is ye ſome or ſpurging therof) boyleth
vp to the toppe, and vnderneath, is an vnſauery
Humour, in relyce like to ye nature of ſweetiſhe
water, which being excocte, ſettled, cleanſed
and fyned from the dregges, obteyneth and is
broughte to the nature of pure and good Wyne.

And albeit Phlegme be whytiſhe, and haue no
redneſſe in it at all, yet being excoct, and the coldnes
thereof taken away and ſubdued by the force
and efficacie of heate, it is reduced and broughte
into a ruddie & freſh coloured licour. And euē as
naturall Phlegme (which participateth wt a certaine
ſweetenes) is through heate conuerted and
wrought into Bloud and redde colour: ſo likewyſe
Bloud in the Dugges or Teates,Mylke of Bloud. partly of
the nature of the place where it reſteth, and partly
of the heate of the heart (neere vnto whom the
Pappes are placed) is broughte and turned into
Mylke, whyte and gaye coloured. For this
cauſe, ſome (as ſuperſtitious & Phyloſophicall
as Pythagoras) abſtayned, not onely from eating
of fleſh,The cauſe why Pytha goras Scholers woulde eate no Mylke. but alſo from Egges and Mylk, becauſe
they reckened and accompted the ſame no other
then liquide fleſh, becauſe the on
                     •
                   being a certaine
ſpace couered and kepte warme by the naturall
heate of the Henne ſitting thereuppon, wil wythin
fewe dayes bring forth a Chicken: & the other
(if the colour were chaunged) they accompted
euen very bloud.
               But this ſeemeth to many a thing very ſtraūg
and prodigious,Mylke in the breaſtes of yonge Children. that yonge: Children newlye
borne (yea of the Male kinde) haue Mylke in the
Nypples of theyr Dugges, runninge out eyther
of it owne accord, or eaſely with the fingers 
                     〈◊〉
                  
ſed & preſſed out: which thing I my ſelfe vpon a
certaine time fynding by experience & tryall true,
aduyſed the partyes at certayne times to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
and force it out, leaſt otherwyſe it ſhould clotter,
congele and curd together into an hard ſubſtāce.
For this Mylkie licour in children, is engendred
of the great and abundaunte alimente, which at
thoſe 
                     •
                  ſſues, nypples and ſpoutes, by nature
of the place, and helpe of the Heart (which is the
founteyne and Welſpryng of heate) is conuerted
into Mylke. Now, the Mammiles or dugges
(which be the Receptacles of Mylke) beinge
ſpongie and hollow, and the glandulous or kernellie
fleſh wythin them,Kernellie fleſhe as in the dugges. bloudleſſe and whyte, do
tranſmute and alter yt bloud which they receyue,
into Mylke: for euery part of the body, altereth
and chaungeth his nouriſhment, makynge it in
colour, ſimilare, lyke, and familiar to it ſelfe.
               And thus, the generatiō of Mylk & Sperme
is made of bloud throughlye and exactly concocted:Euery parte of the body hath his ſeueral vertue
and of the nature of thoſe parts wherin they
be laboured, become in colour (as wee ſee) white
and mylkie.
               Thus alſo the Lyeuer being of ſubſtaūce (as
it were) coagulate bloud, engendreth a raddy liquide
ſubſtaunce: the Lunges cauſeth a fomie &
froathie licour: the commiſſures or ſetting together
of the Ioyntes, a glewiſh humour: ye tōgue,
ſpettle: the holow bones produce and bring forth
white marowe, as the Ridge bone of the backe &
the brayne do, where alſ thinges are exactlye laboured.
For in Lambes and other yong cattel,
the marow is not white but bloudy. Euery part
therefore of the body worketh his humour like to

it ſelfe, and tranſmuteth it into the nature, wherof
it ſelfe is.
               No man therfore ought to thincke it abſurdly
ſpoken in ſayinge and affyrminge Phlegme by
the force and facultie of the Lyeuer to be altered
and chaunged into Bloud. And this liquide &
thinne humour in the bodyes of all Creatures is
to purpoſe and vſe, no leſſe profitable then neceſſary.
For being conueighed euery way into the
Veynes,The vſe and effect of Phlegme. it qualefyeth and alayeth the heate of
Bloud & Choler: finally it maketh the Ioyntes
nymble and ſtyrringe, kepinge them from beinge
ſtiffe and lumpiſh through dryneſſe: and laſt of al
it nouriſheth all Phlegmaticke members, and
them continueth in luſty ſtate.
               And although there be commonly no certaine
place aſſigned where Phlegne reſteth,The place where Phlegme, is. yet the
greateſt part is ſtill in the Stomack or ventricle,
wherin the meate is firſt boyled and altered into
a thinne iuyce or liquide ſubſtaunce. For we ſee
men that haue ſurcharged theyr Stomackes, in
vomyting and perbraking, ſometimes to caſt vp
great abundance of loathſome, clammie & tough
Phlegme, or to ſcowre and euacuate the ſame
through the guttes: thoſe I meane that haue exceſſiuelye
and ingluuiouſlye ſurphetted eyther in
eating or drinking. Whoſe heades (conſequently)
being filled wyth moyſtyſh vapours, thoſe fumoſities
ſtrykinge vpwarde as in a Stillatorie,
grow into a thicke, fylthy, and ſneuillie phlegme,
whereby through
                     •
                   coldnes of the brayne, the parties

becommeth ſubiect and open to ſundrye diſeaſes,
as the Poze,Diſeaſes ꝓocedinge of Phlegme. Murre, Hoarſenes, Coughe,
and many others, of which ſort is the Rheume or
diſtillation of humours from the heade, wherewith
in the Lowe Countryes of Belgia both rich
and poore, highe and low, in Wynter ſeaſon are
much troubled & fynde by experience to bee true,
and yet they be people commonly healthy, and as
ſounde as a Bell.
               
                  In perfect Health, and throughly ſound,Hora. lib. 1. Epiſt. 1.
                  
                  But vvhen that Phlegme doth much abound.
               
               Inſomuch that I ſometimes am dryuen into
a wonder, to conſyder how ſuch abundance of filthie
humours ſhoulde reſt in the head, which nature
one whyle at the mouth, an other whyle at ye
Noſe and Throte expelleth and purgeth.
               The head therfore and the Stomacke (namely
and much more then any of the other parts) are
peſtered with the excrement of Phlegme,The he
                        •
                     d & Stomacke, the engendrers & cō
                     ceptacles of Phlegme. ſpecially
if a man vſe to eate ſuch meates as be cold and
moyſt, and diſcontinue exercyſe, whereby it happeneth
that this humour being too crude is very
hardly to be concocted, and brought into an holeſome
iuyce, profitable & auayleable for the body.
               For it is a certayne vliginous moyſtiſhnes and
ſuperfluous excrement, which ought rather to be
ſent out and purged that waye which nature ſpeciallye
alloweth, and whereby moſt conuenientlye

ſhe is wonte to exonerate herſelfe. For as the originall
of this inconuenience beginneth firſt at
the Stomacke and afterward infeſteth the heade
(as we may plainly perceiue & obſerue by Wyne
copiouſlye quaffed and ſwilled, which althoughe
it deſcende downe into the Stomacke, yet doth it
aſſayle and diſtemper the heade) it ſtandeth vs
therfore vpō, carefully to foreſee y• in thoſe parts,
as litle of this Phlegmaticke excrement as may
bee, bee engendred: becauſe the harme and inconuenience
redoundeth to the generall harme and
detrimente of the whole body.
               And as it fareth in a Realme or Kingdome,The harmes of a bodye, and of a Realm firſt beginne at the head.
in a Common wealth, in a Cruile Pollicie or
Corporation, in anye Honourable houſeholde or
worſhipfull Famylie: ſo likewyſe in the Body
of man, that diſeaſe of all others is moſte daungerous
& ill, which taketh his oryginall beginning
at the heade and principall members. For
the harme diffuſeth and ſpreadeth it ſelfe into all
the inferiour partes of the body, and them greatly
damnifyeth. As (for more plainneſſe) let euery
man take an example at any houſe which he
enioyeth & hath in occupation. For euen as thoſe
houſes that wil hold out neither wynde nor weather,
be very vnholeſome to dwell in, and a greate
backfrend to health: or when the Ridges or Roofes
thereof bee ill tymbred and (for wante of
good lookinge too) runneth in ruine, and taketh
water as often as anye rayne falleth: So

lykewyſe, as longe as the heade is diſtempered
and affected wyth this baggage Phlegme, and
diſtilling Humour, both it and the reſt of the body
can neuer be in perfect health. For beinge it
ſelfe of a cold and moyſte nature, it quickly drinketh
vp vapours out of a watriſh ſtomack, & beyng
thereby replete wyth humiditye, moyſteneth
likewyſe,Prou. 19. & 17. thoſe partes that be vnder it: yea this
diſtilling Phlegme is as noyſome and greeuous
to it as a brawling and ſcoulding wyfe is to a
quiet man.A brawling wife is lyke the top of a houſe wher throughe it is euer dropping.
               
               For out of the heade continually do Humours
diſtill and (lyke ſoote oute of a Chymney) fall
downe into the Throate, Eares, Noſe, Eyes,
Breaſt and Lunges: wherupon happen tumors
& ſwelling of the eyes, Bleyreyedneſſe, dryneſſe of
ſight, whyzzing and running in the eares, hardneſſe
of hearing, and ſometime behinde the eares
Impoſtumes,Diſeaſes ꝓceedinge of Rewmes & Catarthes. botches and wexekernelles, beſyde
many ſortes moe: for the Inſtrumentes of
the tongue be affected, the voyce hindered, yea
ſometime ſtopped that a man is not able to vtter
out a plaine worde. The Syn
                     •
                  wes, Pellicles,
Muſcles, Weſantpype, and Veynes of ye throte,
called Iugulares, and the partes that ſerue to
frame y• voyce, beyng ſurcharged wyth toomuch
Humour (as in dronkē perſōsis manifeſtly to be
ſeene) make the tongue vnperfecte, foltering and
ſtammering, and all the members to reele and
ſtaggar, their words double and not intelligible,
inſomuch that at ſometimes they bee not able to

ſpeake one plaine word, nor in ſēſible tearmes to
declare their owne meaning.Drōken mē ſtammer & double in their ſpeach And thereby being
by nature otherwiſe vnreadye and in vtteraunce
ſtaggering, and now alſo throughly whitteled &
ſoaked in Wyne, theyr tongue doubleth, ſlammereth
and foltereth a great deale more: inſomuche
that they bring oute their wordes by ſtoppes and
pauſes, like thē that haue the hicket: & ſuch perſons
cannot ſpeake ſoftly and ſtillie, becauſe their
voyce commonly is ſtopped and kept back, which
maketh them to force out their words ye lowder.
They muſt therefore earneſtlye ſtriue and accuſtome
themſelues roundly and diſtinctly to deliuer
out theyr wordes,Stammere
                        ••
                      cannot ſpeake ſoftly. for otherwyſe their tongue
through defaulte and imbecillitye, and lackynge
ſtableneſſe fayleth them, and furthereth them nothing
in theyr pronunciation: but chatter & babble
ſo obſcurely, that no man can vnderſtand any
thynge of that they ſaye: For we ſee them to be
ſcarce able to vtter euen a few woords wyth one
ſtreynable tenor and treatable vniformitie, but
ſometime ſlowly and dreamingly drawyng them
oute: and ſometime powryng oute by lumpes the
ſame, as faſt as the tongue can rolle.
               The ſelfe ſame thinge which ſuperfluitye and
diſtemperaunce of drincke, bringeth vnto the
haunters thereof, doth the dyſtillation of Humours
and defluxion of Phlegme, bryng to them
that be troubled with ye Catarrhe, which (beſide
theſe) is accōpanyed alſo wyth ſūdry other incō
                  ueniences,
to euery one of ſharpe iudgement wel

knowen and eaſelye perceyued. For who ſo
is diſpoſed exactlye to ſyfte and ſearche oute the
verye markes and tokens of a Cold and moyſte
Complexion,Nature of perſōs Phlegmatike. ſhall finde them (throughe abundaunce
of that Humour and qualitye) to bee
ſleepie, lazye, ſlouthful, drowſie, heauie, lumpiſh
and nothinge quicke at their buſyneſſe: as they
commonlye bee, which mynde nothinge elſe then
gurmandyze and bellycheere, and vſe ſeldome exerciſe.
               Wee ſee alſo amonge Beaſtes, Fowles, and
other Creatures both wyeld & tame,What Beastes, fowles, & fiſhes be holeſomeſt to eate. that ſuch as
vſe litle or no exerciſe, but lurke ſtill in hoales
and Caues, and be pēt vp, and franked cowpes,
are neither ſo holeſome, neyther ſo ſit for man to
eate, as others, that are greatly exercyſed and vſe
much ſtyrryng. Such waxe (in deede) very fat,
and grow bigger bodyed (I cannot deny) but the
nouriſhmente which they geeue to the bodye, is
ſomewhat vnholeſome and excrementall: as amonge
fyſhes, Ecles and other ſlippery fyſhes
that lye ſtil myeringe themſelues in mudde, vſing
no exerciſe, ſtyring or agitation of body.
               And this is the cauſe why Eeeles being deade
(contrary to the nature of all other fyſhes) floate
not aboue water,A dead E
                        •
                     le floateth not aboue water, & why. by reaſon that they feede vppon
muddie and ſtanding water.
               But that euery man maye throughly and perfectly
know the ſtate and cōdition of this Body,
it muſt be painted oute in his righte colours, and

is to be deſcrybed by his owne proper indications,
markes,Notes of a cold and moyſt body and tokens. All they therefore
that are of this habite (if their Conſtitution be
naturall and not accidentallye happeninge) are
groſſe, purſie and fatte bodyed: their ſtature not
ſo tall as bigge ſet, and ſtronglye pitched, their
ſkinne ſoft, white, and vnhayrie, their Muſcles
and Ueynes not appearing but lying inwardlye,
inſomuch that when occaſion ſerueth to bee lette
Bloud, the ſame Ueynes do not apparauntlye
ſhewe oute themſelues. The hayres of theyr
head be eyther whyte or duſkie blacke, or els of
the colour of Barley ſtrawe, which will not fall
of, nor become balde, till after a longe time, 
                     〈◊〉
                   but
they ſoone waxe hoarye for wante of heate, and
imbecillity of the member, which is not of ability
to excoct the nutriment, into the vſe and comelynes
of Hayres.
               For hoaryneſſe is (as it were) a certayne
refuſe vinewed baggage, of Phlegme putrefyed,Whereof hoarie hayres come.
or a fuſtie dank
                     •
                  ſhneſſe vnder the ſkinne, wherof
(throughe w
                     •
                  nte of heate) proceedeth hoaryneſſe
and whyteneſſe of the H
                     •
                  yres. Such a
lyke hoarie Downe, or vinewed mouldyneſſe,
wee ſee to bee in Loaues of Breade and Pyes,
that bee ſomewhat longe kepte vnſpente, and
alſo in Vaultes,Hoaryne
                        ••
                     e in meates. Arche Roofes, Syelynges,
hoales and Cellers vnder the grounde, and other
muſty, fulſome, dark, fylthy, and ſtinking places.
Their Pyſſe and Uryne whyte and verye little

or rather nothinge at all ruddie. Theyr Excrementes;
and Ordure, thinne and liquide: theyr
Sleepe verye ſounde, and longer then health requireth,
not without ſtoare of ſundry Dreames,
whereby (and not vainly or deceitfully) maye bee
neerely coniectured and founde oute,Dreames ſhewe and bewray the diſpoſition, ſtate & Cō
                     plexion of the bodye. of what diſpoſition
the body is, and what Humours therein
chiefely reigne. For the cauſes and original
beginninges of theſe thinges proceede oute of the
body: which althoughe they be referrible to outward
cauſes, or to the actiōs and deuyſes, which
the mynde earneſtly conceyueth, deliberateth and
forecaſteth in the daye time: yet is it eaſye ynoughe
for the learned and ſkilfull Phyſition to
diſcuſſe the meaninges, and expounde the euentes
thereunto incident.
               For, as concerning Dreames by Diuine motion
ſent into the mynde of man,Naturall Dreams interpretable. & not depending
vppon naturall cauſes) none is able to yeld anye
certaine interpretation, wythout a ſpeciall pryuiledge
of Heauenlye inſpyration. Thus,Diuine Dreames. they
that be of Cold and moyſt Complexiō, in Dreames
imagine and thincke themſelues dyuinge ouer
head and eares in Water,Dreames of the Phlegmatick. or to be in Bathes
& Baynes: which ſtrayght wayes argueth great
ſtoare of Phl
                     •
                  gme to fall out of the head, into the
nape of their necke, Iawes, vocall Arterye and
Lunges. Semblably, if they dreame of Hayle,
Snow, Yſe, ſtorme & Rayne, it betokeneth abundance
of Phlegme, ſometime thicke and groſſe,
ſometime thinne and liquide.
               
                  
If a man in his Dreame thincke himſelfe to
be ſtyfeled and ſtrangled, or his voyce ſtopped &
taken from him, it argueth him to be ſubiecte and
like ynough ſhortly to be troubled wyth ye Squī
                  zie,
priuation of ſpeach, murre, or finallye eyther
the Drowſye ſickneſſe, or the Apoplexie.
               
               In this ſort (as Galene wytneſſeth) there was
a certayne man, which dreamed that one of his
Legges was turned into a Stone: which man
within a whyle after, throughe a colde Humoure
that fell downe into it, was taken wyth the Palſey.
               Now, althoughe too ſcrupulous and curious
obſeruation of Dreames bee prohibited, yet is
there no charge geeuen to the contrary, but that
wee maye lawfullye ſearch out the meaninges of
all ſuch as conſiſte wythin the compaſſe and reaſon
of thinges naturall, the Authour and conſeruer
whereof is God himſelfe:Leuit. 19. Deut. 13. ſo that wee do
ye ſame without anye ſuperſtitious vanity of Diuination,
neyther therin fixinge any aſſured hope
and truſt, neyther terrifyed wyth any feare of the
euentes thereof.
               Whenſoeuer therefore naturall Dreames do
happen wherein be neyther mockeryes nor illuſions
of mynde (for all theſe are baniſhed & put
to flight by repoſing a firme and conſtant truſt in
God) they admoniſhe and put euerye man in remembraunce
to looke wel to his health, and to amooue
and decline all ſuch occaſions and inconueniences,
as may eyther empayre and damnifye

health,Wee maye not raſhlye credite all Dreames. or enforce any perturbatiōs of Dreames.
For the Imaginations and phantaſyes which in
Sleepe be offered, and ſeene apparātly in Dreames
by night when a man is at reſt to occurre &
buſye his mynde, are cauſed and ſtyrred by vapours
& fumes proceeding out of the humours &
agitation of the Spyrite Animall: in ſome of
which Dreames and Imaginations, the mynde
renueth the memorie and thinketh vppon ſome
buſyneſſe and actions that fall for the daye, ſome
plainly ſignifye the abundaunce of Humours, or
els ſome earneſt & greedy deſyre to cōpaſſe ſomewhat,
which we would very fayne bring to paſſe.
               Hereupon they that are thyrſtie, glut themſelues
and ſwill vp drincke abundantly, they that be
hungry deuoure meate greedily and inſaciablye.
Thus lykewiſe, they whoſe Genitoryes and priuie
partes be ſwelled with ſtoare of excrementall
Seede and ſpermatike Humour, or in the daye
tyme did earneſtly fixe their eyes and mynde vppon
anye beautifull and fayre yonge Woman,Pollution & effluxion of Seede, howe it hapneth. do
in their Sleepe thinck themſelues to enioy their
deſyred purpoſe, and throughe imaginatiue dealinge
wyth her, defyle themſelues wyth nightlye
pollutions. For the Soule (when the body is
in ſounde Sleepe, and al the outwarde ſenſes at
reſt) wythdrawinge it ſelfe into the innermoſte
partes of the body, perceyueth, vnderſtandeth, &
beholdeth thoſe actiōs which y• body is to do by
day, and loke what things the body deſyreth and
longeth after, the ſame doth the Soule enioye as

preſente by Imagination. Hereupon, I thincke
were theſe Prouerbes firſt deuyſed:Canis panē ſomnians. 
                  The Dogge
dreameth of bread, of raūging in the Fields,
& of hunting. For what things ſoeuer, a man
earneſtly and exceedingly deſyreth, or hath his
mynde ſtill running on, ye ſame (being a Sleepe)
hee thinketh and dreameth vpon in the night.
               Whereunto it is like ynoughe that Eſay the
Prophete alluded, where hee ſheweth that the
counſayles and deuyſes of the wicked ſhall come
to noughte, and vaniſhe awaye like ſmoake & as
Dreames ſeene by nighte:Cap. 29. 
                  Euen as (ſayth hee)
a hungrye man Dreameth that hee is eatinge, and
vvhen hee avvaketh is yet hungrye and emptie:
And as a thriſty man Dreameth that hee is drinkinge,
and vvhen hee avvaketh, is yet faynte and
thirſtie: Euen ſo fareth it vvith them that gape
and ſeeke after innocente Bloude to glutte their
crueltie therevvith,
                  A place of Eſay expo
                        •
                     
                     ded. 
                  for they ſhall miſſe theyr
purpoſe like them that Dreame, and not obteyne
the thinges vvhich they earneſtly deſyre
or thincke themſelues ſure to compaſſe & bring
about.
               
               Nowe,Tokens of a colde and moyſt complexion. to ſatiſfye them that are deſyrous to
knowe the inwarde notes and tokens of a Colde
and moyſte Complexion, and Phlegmaticke
perſons: I wyll heere by the waye ſet downe the
ſame, & declare of what Nature, condition, maners,
conuerſation and order of lyfe they bee:

howe beit, there is no cauſe, whye anye man
ſhould hope to fynde in them of this conſtitution
and plight, any ſtoare of excellēt, ſinguler, & rare
gyftes, ſyth in them appeareth ſmall quicknes of
wit, ſmal worthyneſſe or excellency of mynd, ſmal
ſharpenes of iudgement & learning, ſmall knowledge
or ſkill in atchieuing and compaſſing matters:
for that, the ſame with prudence and wyſedome
cannot conueniently be brought about. For
thoſe that are numbred and referred into the order
of this Complexion, are perſons of no verye
ſharpe and exact iudgement or (as the Prouerbe
by interpretatiō ſoūdeth) Emūctae naris,
                  Reaſon yelded howe theſe Prouerbes, Emū
                     cte naris, & Obeſae naris firſt began. fine witted:
as (cōtrariwyſe) they whoſe noſes be ſtuffed
with Phlegme & ſneuil, are likewyſe by ye Prouerbe
tearmed Obesae naris, groſſe witted, applying
by Tranſlation, the faulte from the bodye
to the mynde. For as both theyr tallage, taſte,
ſmelling, and other obiectes of their Senſes, bee
blunte & groſſe: ſo are they likewyſe in mynde &
witte dol
                     •
                  iſh and dull, ſlouthfull and lumpiſh: finally
neyther by nature neyther by vſe, forecaſteful,
ſharp witted, nor craftie: by reaſon theyr naturall
heate is languiſhyng and feeble, and drowned
in moyſt quality and cold Humour: & therefore
alſo their memory is very fayleable, oblyuious,
and nothing at all (in a manner) retentiue:
Theyr ſpeach (as likewyſe their pulſes & maner
of gate) ſlow and ſoft.
               But this in them ſpecially deſerueth commē
                  dation,
that they be gentle and quiet of nature,

not greatlye addicted to venerous daliaunce,Prayſe of a Phlegmatike perſon. not
fumiſhe, teſty or ſoone angred, being ſuch as (although
they be thereto prouoked) wil not lightly
chafe and fret: & to be ſhort, not geeuen to fraude
and ſubtilty, cogging and foyſting, craft and couſonage,
wrangling and quarelling, as the Cholericke
are. And becauſe commonlye they be aſſayled
with many and ſundry diſeaſes, for that
they be geeuen to ſit ſtill, louing their eaſe and ydlenes,
firſt they are to be enioyned and preſcribed
a Diet that is hoat,Phlegmatik perſōs must vſe exercyſe wherof in the Diſcourſe
of the Cold Complexion and alſo of the Moyſte,
hath beene ſpoken abundantly: and next, they are
to be perſwaded & pricked forward to vſe themſelues
to exerciſe.Lib. 1. For ſluggiſhnes and ſlouth
(as witneſſeth Celſus) dulleth the body, but labour
and exerciſe maketh it firme and luſtye: the
one bringeth Oldage before the time, the other
maketh Adoleſcencie and youth to laſt long. And
therefore ſtronger motions and exercyſes are for
theſe perſons more requiſite, leaſt (otherwyſe)
the humour toomuch encreaſe, and heat quayle &
be enfeebled.
               Let them therfore vſe in ye mornyngs to walke
abroade, and namely vp hilles and ſ
                     ••
                  epe places,
when they be yet faſting & their ſtomacks empty:
yea it ſhall not bee amyſſe to vſe the ſame after
meate, but theſe ſtirrings and bodely agitations
muſt be done with a very ſoft pace: and thoſe ye
be about mydday, ſwyfter and faſter, (which precept

is expediēt for them that be hoate and moyſt
to obſerue) but yet (as Galene ſayth) not ſo faſte
and vehemente as they vſe,Tuend. Val. lib. 5. when by occaſion of
ſome earneſte buſyneſſe they bee dryuen to make
ſpeede and haſt. It ſhall be good alſo for them,
to continue long faſting, and to vſe ſparing ſuppers.
For as all they yt be in perfect health, may
and ought at Supper to feede ſomewhat largely
and (excepte cuſtome be to the contrary) be allowed
to eate more fully and liberally: ſo againe, to
them that be of this Complexion,The Phlegmatik muſt vſe light ſuppers. a ſpareful and
light ſupper is moſt fit and agreeable: becauſe ye
brayne ſhall thereby be the leſſe encumbred & diſquieted
wyth fumes and exhalaciōs, in the night
aſcending and proceedinge out of the Stomacke.
For theſe be they, that engender diſtillations and
Catarrhes, out of whome ſpryngeth ſwarmes of
many diſeaſes. And that the ſame may the better
be auoyded and declyned, I will breefely ſet
downe the differēces of this Phlegmatique Humour,
what effect is thereby wroughte, and what
diſeaſes enſue aud grow thereuppon.
               OF Phlegme there be foure ſorts of differē
                  ces
or kinds:Foure kinds and effectes of Phlegme Sweete, or (if it be crude) vnſauoury,
making mē drowſy and heauy, deſyring
to Sleepe more then nature requyreth: by reaſon
that the Brayne which is a principall member,
and the oryginal of all Senſes, is moyſtned
and made cold.
               
                  
Sower, maketh hungry: For the mouth of the
Ventricle or Stomake,Gal. de. Plenit. endued wyth this Humour,
is ſtyrred vp to an appetite and deſyre of
meate: Saltiſh, maketh thyrſtye and nippeth
the Stomacke. Glaſſie, in toughnes and coldneſſe
paſſinge all the others, bryngeth loathſomnes
and abhorryng of meate.
               The myeldeſt and leaſte hurtfull of all theſe,Sweete Phlegme.
is the Sweete: which (after that concoction is
once diſpatched) is bettered and turned into the
nature of Bloude: which yet (notwithſtandinge)
wanteth not his poyſon and malignaunt nature,
except all the inconuenience thereof be throughly
by heate excocted. For it maketh looſe, ſofte,
and ryſing tumours or blyſters, whyte whythoute
any redneſſe, and other whealie breakinge out of
Phlegme beſyde, in the vtter parte of the ſkinne,
as mattrye, ſkabbes, wheales, puſhes, and pymples
in Women and yonge folkes, which ſometime
breake out and are full of matter and fylthy
corruption: but it cauſeth not great ytch nor heat,
as the ſkabbednes which commeth of ſalte
Phlegme or abundaunce of Choler doth, which
is endued wyth a ſharpe byting & brynyſhe ſaltnes.
               Sower Phlegme (in quality and effect reſembling
& like vnto Melancholyke iuyce in cōtinuāce
of time gathered into ye ſtomack)Sower Phlegme. is leſſe cold
then the Glaſſye, and more cold then the Sweete
Phlegme. This doth pricke and byte the Stomacke,
& wyth mordication annoyeth it: for being

endued with a ſenſe moſt exquiſite, it is offended
wyth that Humour which is of ſharpeſt quality:
For the ſauoure and relyce thereof is ſo tarte, eigre
and bytter, that if it chaunce to be perbraked
and caſte vp by vomite (as in Wynter and Autumne
ſeaſons happeneth) it aſtonneth and bringeth
out of taſt, ye tongue, the roofe of the mouth,
ye Chawes, and ſetteth the teeth on edge, no leſſe
then Veriuyce, or the iuyce of vnrype and ſharpe
grapes, called of the fyner ſort of Phyſitiōs Omphacion,
and of the common ſorte Agreſta: in ſomuch
that the relyce and tallage thereof will remayne
and be hardlye qualefyed, alayed or taken
awaye. This kinde of Phlegme ſettled in the
mouth of the Stomack or ventricle, and impertinge
vnto it, ſome porcion of his ſowrnes and
ſharpenes, engendreth an inſaciable luſtinge to
meate and (as wee ſaye) a doggiſh appetite, incident
commonly to women wyth chyeld,Doggiſhe appetite. about iii.
monthes after their conception, ſpeciallye if they
be with child with a gyrle: who being in heat feeble,
and of ſtrength faint and quaiſie, it chaunceth
that their natures be not wel able to cōcocte thoſe
Phlegmaticke humours: and thereuppon it is,
that they haue ſuch puelinge and ſquemiſhe ſtomacks,
and be ſo much troubled wyth wambling
and belching. For theyr chiefe deſyre and ſpecial
longing, being for ſharpe and ſower things: they
greatly therby annoy their ventricle, & gather together
many ill humours.
               Not women onelye, but men alſo be ſubiecte

hereunto: for whom the beſt way is, to vſe to eate
meates of heating nature, and to drincke wyne of
the pureſt and beſt ſort. For if this Humoure
ſhould chaunce to putrefie within the bodye, it
then engendreth the Ague Epiala (ſo called,Epiala. becauſe
they that haue the ſame, be in body inwardlye
of greate heate and outwardlye ſtiffe with
extreeme Colde:) for this Humour beinge enkindled
and ſette on heate, maye wel bee lykened
to greene flame or as wet woode, which ſendeth
out nothīg but ſtoare of thick moyſt ſmoak,
by reaſon yt moyſtnes letteth & hindereth the heat,
yt it cannot breake out: & they that haue this impediment
for the moſt part haue not onely alteration
and chaunge in their Complexion and coloure,
but annoyaunce and inconueniēce alſo in
their mynds.
               Salte Phlegme (which hath ſome affynitie
with Choler) is engendred of the commixtion of
Choler,Salte Phlegme. or of a ſaltiſhe or Whayie humiditye: or
els of Phlegme putrefyed: the ſharpenes whereof
beinge once enkindled, bryngeth not ſtyffenes
and colde, but a ſhyueringe and ſhakinge to the
whole body. And among all ye kinds of Phlegme
none is worſe nor more hurtful then is this.Harmes of ſalt Phlegm For
in what part of the body ſoeuer it ſettleth, it breedeth
and engendreth great dolours and painfull
gryeues, and through the byting force that is in
it, affecteth the members of the body with vlcerous
laſſitudes, it defourmeth and vglyfyeth the
ſkinne wyth dry, ſkuruye, ſkalie, mangie, and fylthye

eruptions or breaking oute, as Tettars, &
Ringwormes, Leproſie, ſkurfe, ytche, ſkabbednes
&c. But if it be myxed wyth Melancholie
& other naughty Humours, it bryngeth the ſkuruie
Elephantiaſis (which is the Hebrevves Lepry)
ye vlcerous Herpes, rūning Cankers, Frēch
Pockes & manye diſeaſes moe, which pitifully
pearce & eate the fleſh, euen vnto the hard boane.
               Glaſſie Phlegme (ſo called,Glaſſie or clammie Phlegme. for that it reſembbleth
and is like to moltē Glaſſe) is of al others
the coldeſt, wherefore it is very hardly to be concocted
or brought into any holeſom, familier and
domeſticall humour. It occupyeth and beſiegeth
for the moſt part, the Heade, ſtomack, & Entrailes,
payning them with very greeuous and troubleſome
diſcraſyes. For it pricketh, woundeth,
teareth a pieces & tormēteth:What parts of the body be ſubiect to Phlegme And this Phlegme
beynge glewyſhe and clammye like Byrdlyme, or
ſuch as the ſtuffe is, whereof drinkinge Glaſſes
be made, is ſo tough and lymie, that ſkantly will
it be parted aſūder: yea it cleaueth ſo faſt to thoſe
narow conceptacles where it reſteth, that nature
ſtryuing and bickering wyth ſuch a ſtraunge and
vncouth Humour, is dryuen to ſuffer greeuous
payne and tormente, before ſhe can be able cleane
to baniſh away and ridde herſelfe from it. Great
is the inconueniēce, and ſundrye and intollerable
be the diſeaſes & greeues cauſed therby: as namely
ye Cholicke, wrynging of the Guttes, payne &
gryeping of the Bowelles: difficultie and excoriation
in auoyding naturall ordure: great luſt &
deſire often to go to the ſtoole, wythout beinge able

to euacuate or auoyde any thinge at al, vnleſſe
peraduenture a ſmal quātity of glaſſy Phlegme,
and fylthy baggage, and that not without greate
labour and enforcement of nature.
               For remedy and eaſe of which affects and all
other greeues and gryepinge of like ſort, my cuſtome
and vſe is to amende and recure with nothing
better then outwardly wyth fomentes, and
inwardly by inections and Clyſters,Vſe of Clyſters. which ſkowreth
and cleane waſheth away al Phlegme before
engroſſed, clamped and gathered together. Herewyth
are all thoſe diſtemperaunces and annoyaunces
of health in the loweſt partes, withoute
daunger of any Agew, qualifyed and holpen: vnleſſe
the payne be too outragious and vehement:
for that, therein is neither putrefaction nor inflā
                  matiō,
and alſo for the ignobility of the member.
But if this kind of Phlegme ſhould aſſault any
chiefe and pryncipall member, and beſyde putrefaction,
grow into inflammation, it bringeth the
Agues called Lipyrias: and in this caſe the Patiente
feeleth in the innermoſt partes of his Bowelles,
Cold,Heate diſſolueth moyſture, euen as the Sūne doth yſe. & in his vtter parts, Heate. For euen
as ye heat of the Sunne melteth & diſſolueth
yſe, ſnow and hayle, & turneth the ſame into fluible
& liquide water: ſo likewiſe doth the fits of an
Agew cut aſunder and liqueſte groſſe & clottered
Phlegme: & thus it is ſeene, yt in one and ye ſame
body there is both heat & cold felt & perceyued, at
one & the ſelfe ſame time: like as appeareth in thē
yt ſit by a fyer, hauīg wet & moyſt cloths vpō their

backes, or in them that handle ſnowe or yce with
their hands, whoſe members at one ſelfe ſame
time and inſtant, feele both heat and cold.
               But for that,All men in daunger to phlegme. the moſt part of mē be in Wynter,
ſpecially troubled wyth one kynde or other of
Phlegme, it ſtandeth them vppon diligentlye and
by all meanes they can, to accuſtome themſelues
to hoate meates, and of the ſame to make exacte &
perfecte digeſtion. For throughe cruditye and
lacke of perfect concoction in the Stomacke, is
engendred great abūdaunce of naughty baggage
and hurtufll Phlegme,Crudlty engendreth Phlegme. endaungeringe and euidently
damnifying (as much as any thing in the
world els) health and welfare. Therefore all
ſuch thinges as be very Cold and Moyſte, muſt
in any wiſe bee eſchued, as Sothernely wyndes,
plaine and ſmooth fyſhes, Wyeldings, Crabbs:
and of herbs, Lactuce, Purselaine, Cucumbers,
Melons, Gourds, Muſhromes: or if any of theſe
come in place to be eaten, let them be vſed wyth
hoate ſauces and condiments, and conuenient exerciſe,
and ſuch alſo as be of nature able to cutte
and attenuate groſſe and clammie Humours, to
diſpell wyndineſſe, and ſuffer little or no Phlegmaticke
excrementall Humour at all to reſt wtin
the body: for by theſe not onely the bodye,
but the mynde alſo is caryed away, and
by affections shrewdlye
myſſeledde.
            
            
               
               Preſeruatiues and helpes for the Memorie:
with meanes and wayes to remoue and
take away all inconueniences, harmes
and hindraunces
thereof.
The iiij. Chapter.
               FOraſmuch as both ye diſtemperature that is
Cold & Moyſt, and that alſo which is Colde
and Dry, growing into exceſſe and drawinge into
extremitie, oppreſſeth and deadly woundeth the
Memory: I haue thought good into this worke
to inſerte and enterlace ſome ſuch notes as maye
ſerue to the furtheraunce thereof and preſeruatiō
of it from all ſuch myſſehappes, harmes and
diſcōmodities as in any wyſe threaten thereunto
annoyaunce. And howe the ſame is to be done
and brought to paſſe, I purpoſe compendiouſlye
by the way to declare: ſythens not to Studentes
only, but to al ſorts of men in general, it ſhal be a
thing right expedient and profitable. For al the
actions and dealinges either publike or priuate,
which a man taketh in hand, and enterpryſeth: all
his affayres, cogitations, deuyſes, meditations,
cares, purpoſes and ſtudyes, & all labour and induſtry
ye is taken for doing and ſpeaking, wherin
is any exerciſe at all of ye minde,All thinges done by memory. cānot be brought
aboute and accompliſhed withoute the helpe of

Memorie. For in this Treaſure, the ſpecialleſt &
chiefeſt parte of reaſon, vnderſtāding and iudgment
reſteth: and out of it, as out of a moſte rich
and plentifull Storehouſe is fetched and taken a
cōplete furniture of moſt hiddē and farre fetched
matters. Which power and vertue of Memory,
if it further & helpe vs not, as a faythfull maintener
and keeper of the things which wee deuiſe,
ymagine and learne: all (be it neuer ſo precious &
excellent) goeth to wrack and is raked vp in obliuion.
               The proper and peculiar place, aſſigned & allotted
for Memorie, is the Braine, the manſion &
dwelling houſe of wit and all the Senſes: which
being affected or by anye diſtēperature discraſed,Memory reſteth in the Braine.
all the functions and offices of nature are ſemblably
paſſioned: inſomuch that wit, reaſon, vnderſtāding
and iudgement being once empayred,
aud diminiſhed: there ſteppeth in place, Sottage,
forgetfulnes, amazedneſſe, dotage, foliſhnes, lacke
of right wits, doltiſhnes & idiocie. Which affects
& imperfections may happen to mē many wayes,
as by ſome blow or wound in the head, by ſome
rupture or cracking of the Skull, by ſome fall or
cōtuſton, by peſtilent diſeaſes & maladies, which
(of the contagion of Ayre on eche ſyde encloſinge
vs) inſpyreth infection into our bodyes: and beſyde
externall accidentes, which ſometime cannot
well be auoyded, there bee ſome harmes which
through our owne wilfulnes and diſorder, wee
heape vppon our ſelues, incurring thereby much

inconuenience: and theſe be, Surphettes, Drunkennes,
Gluttonie, vnſeaſonable watchinge,Things hurtful to the Memory.
meates colde and Phelgmaticke, immoderate
vſe of Venery, and carnall company wyth Womē,
thereby the quicknes of witte is blunted
and waxeth dull,Carnal knowledge of women is a weakening to the body Reaſon, Vnderſtanding and
Iudgement dymmed, and the ſtrength of nature
in many, ſo weakened and enfeebled, that in three
dayes ſpace or more after, vneth is it able to recouer
ye vigour & luſty plight wherin it was before.
               And not this diſcommodity alone, but certaine
other ſicklie and foule affections inſurge therevpon,
no leſſe pernicious to the mind, then daungerous
to the body, vtterlye ouerthrowinge, oppreſſing
and ruinating the power Memoratyue.
For euen as toomuch drynes of the brayne (gotten
through exceſſiue ſurphet, lacke of expediente
foode,A dry brain hath litle remembraūce and Venerie) is very hurtful to Memory,
becauſe that quality is nothing apte to take anye
impreſſions, or fourmes of thinges (for drynes &
hardnes taketh no printes nor Images) ſo alſo
toomuch moyſture (proceding of ydlenes, ſlouth,
immoderat ſleepe & moyſt meats) quight deſtroy
& drowne Memory Moyſture (in deede) is moreA moyſte braine vnhable to remember.
capable, & wil ſoner take ye print & formes of things,
but by reaſō of ſoftnes, the ſame taryeth not,
but paſſeth away agayne: euen as ſtāpes or Seales,
being affixed and imprinted into ſubſtance or
matter that is toomoyſt, liquide and fluible, maketh
therin no ſtampe, forme or print, but ſuch, as
preſētly fleeteth and immediatly vaniſheth awaye
agayne.
               
                  
Foraſmuch therefore as the vertue and power
Memoratiue, conſiſteth in a ſure, faythful, and
ſtedfaſt keeping and conſeruation of Images, it
foloweth, that the same in Childrē and in as many
others as haue moyſt Braynes, is weak & nothing
retentiue.Old folk, & yonge Children haue ill memories, but the reaſon of the one is contrary to the other. Old folkes alſo haue the ſame
imbecillity and forgetfulnes, and the reaſon is,
becauſe their braynes be ſo cold and dry, that nothinge
is able to enter or fyrmelye to bee imprynted
therein: and for theſe cauſes, both ſortes of
them be obliuious and nothinge Memoratyue.
For of this (as alſo of all the inward ſenſes) the
power and facultie is according to the temperature
of the Brayne. For oute of the groſſe ſubſtance
of that part,Temperature of the braine, the maintenāce of Memory. or whē the Spyrits and Humours
therein be groſſe, thicke and wyth manye
vapours peſtered, proceedeth Obliuion, ſlownes
to vnderſtande, & hardnes to conceyue. Againe,
of a moyſt Brayne, that is too liquide, commeth
forth a dul or blunt ſenſe, and a Memory nothing
retentyue but ſonne forgetting. And a dry Constitutiō
of the Brayne maketh a very weake and
ill memory: by reaſon, that it wil not eaſely admit
anye impreſſion (euen like vnto a piece of Leade,
Yron or Steele, which will not eaſelye ſuffer the
poynte of anye engrauinge Toole to enter and
pearce into it.
               A good ſtedfaſt and fryme Memory therefore
is to be referred vnto the diſpoſition and temperature
of the Brayne: & this power of the minde,
is aſcribed to the benefite of Nature: but yet ſo,

that it may be holpē and maynteyned in his perfect
ſtate by Arte,Memory, the gifte of Nature, and is by Arte holpen and made better. and if perhaps it decay or take
harme, yet through care & induſtry, it may againe
be reſtored. And therfore ſpecial care muſt be employed,
and great diligence taken, that the bodye
may in perfect health and ſound conſtitution be
preſerued: that moderatiō both in life and diet be
vſed: always within the compaſſe of temperaūce
and frugality: that y• meate be exactly concocted:
that the mynde be in peaceable tranquillitye, and
free from troubleſome affections: that no myſſehappe
betyde to diſturbe and dimme the ſame: for
luſtyneſſe of body & mynde, holeſomnes of Ayre,
temperature of the Brayne, perfect Conſtitution
of all ye Sēſes, the Spyrits, both Animal & Vital
(which proceede of y• Humours) being cleare
and ſyncere, bee greate helpers & moſt auayleable
preſeruatyues for the maintenaunce of Memory.
               For by theſe it happeneth that all the faculties
of the Soule (among which Memory is chiefe)
be freſh and perfect, that nothing of al that which
we eyther by view of eye, cogitation, witte, learning
or meditation conceyue, ſlippeth oute of our
remembraunce. Yea, many thinges that were
thought to be cleane forgottē, and cancelled with
obliuion, be reuiued as freſh in Memory & ſeeme
to the eye as plainly, as thinges but newly done:
in ſomuch, that although ſometimes wee forgette
what we did but yeſterday, yet perfectlye can wee
remember thinges done many yeares agoe, when
we were Children. The reaſon whereof I take

to be this,The reaſon why childrē cā remēber things long afore done. for that, tēder age and Childhode, gredily,
attentyuely & wyth great admyration fyxeth
things in mynde, and is apt, readye, willinge and
ful of courage to cōceyue what is put vnto them.
For whyſe the mynd is yet free from carking cares
of the worlde, and not ouercharged or buſyed
with waighty matters and dealings, it retayneth
ſuerer and kepeth faſter in Memory thoſe things
which are inſtilled into it in childiſhe yeares,
their minds beinge yet free from al other cūberſome
diſquietations.
               Now, although Memory and Remembraūce
of things, be conceyued in the forepart of ye head,
where the common witts or Senſes ſpecially reſteth,
yet thoſe thinges y• are by the benefyte therof
attayned, be kept and foſtered in the hynder
part. And therfore they do very wel, which keepe
their Nucha and nape of their necks warme,The Nucha and nape of the necke muſt bee kept warm. and
fenſe themſelues ſafe from the daunger of cold, &
iniurye of wyndes: For theſe partes beinge diſtempered
or affected, bringe a man in daunger of
the fallinge Sickneſſe, the Drowſye euill, Aſtonment,
Palſey, Crampe, and Oblyuion.
               Wherefore it ſhalbe right good and expedient
to remoue and take away all ſuch hindraunce &
diſcommodities as preiudice and hurt Memory.
And becauſ many and ſundry thinges ſettle in
mans mynde and Memory,A mā would bee glad to forget ſome things. euen againſt his wil:
ſuch things (I meane) as he would not gladlye
remember, but rather would be willing to forget
and commit to oblyuion, as ſome lewde and looſe

pranckes, diſhoneſtly aforetyme perpetrated, are:
and agayne, manye good and holeſome thinges,
which are expedient and needefull to be remembred,
ſlyppe out of mynde and be forgotten: a mā
is in theſe poynts to take diligente heede and regard
that he do not (as ye Cōmon ſort vſe) without
anye choyſe and difference eyther neglect, or
retchleſſely forſlowe the due orders of both theſe
things, indifferently. Thoſe things therefore
which a man would gladlye remember, it ſhal be
good for him to thincke vppon, and many times
wyth himſelfe in mynde to meditate and reuolue:
and ſuch as he woulde fayne ſhake of & forget, as
hurtfull and pernicious to his mynde, let him wt 
reaſon and iudgement ſtoutly reſiſt and ſtriue againſt.
For as by the corruption of our nature
(which is fallen away,Mans corrupt nature more, prone to ill thē to good. from his firſt integritye)
we be a great deale readyer and apt to that which
is nought, then to that which is good: and farre
more proclyue to conceyue and learne the ſame,
then thinges of better importaunce and purpoſe:
ſo alſo thoſe that be ill, ſticke faſter in memory, &
not eaſelye to be ſhaken of or abolyſhed, without
greate adoe and difficulty. Which thing cauſed
Themiſtocles to demaunde of one which profeſſed
to teach him the Arte of Memory:Themiſtocles wyſhed to learn the art of forget fulnes. Whether
there were anye Sciēce yt could rather teach
him the Arte of Obliuion: for (ſayd hee) I can
wel ynough remēber what I lust, but I cānot ſo
eaſely forget ſuch thīgs as are ſettled in my mind
vnwillingly and otherwiſe then I would deſyre.
               
                  
For ſome things we would be gladder to forgette
then to remember, for ſomuch as manye
men bee of ſuch nature that they cannot abyde to
haue olde ſoares rypped vp,Olde grudges are to be forgottē. and ſtale grudges
(lōg agone ſtille aud pacifyed) by new rehearſalls
reuyued and brought freſh agayne into queſtion.
To which ende apperteyneth this Prouerbe.
A miſchiefe vvel quieted and brought a
ſlepe, vvould not be ſtirred anevv, nor rubbed vp
a freſhe.
               
               Now, wheras there be many helpes and ſundrye
furtheraunces deuyſed by Rhetoricians to
preſerue & corroborate Memory: I haue thought
it good here not to ſtande tediouſlye in particuler
recytall thereof: and the rather becauſe manye of
them be very curious, and wythout marueylous
precyſe carefulnes ſcarcelye able to be obſerued:
for the ſharpenes of witte and vnderſtandinge wt 
ſuch a rable of preceptes, is ouercloyed, and the
natiue vertue of Memory ouerwhelmed. But among
al other helpes and preſeruatyues of Memory,
this namelye is to be conſidered, that ye body
may in perfect health be maynteyned,Healthe the ſtrengthe of the Memorye. without
being endaungered to Sickneſſes, ſpecially ſuch
as may diſturbe and damnifye the head.
               Sleepe must be moderatelye vſed, not lyinge
vppon the backe, but on the one ſyde: the mynde
quiet and calme, free from all buſynes and troubleſome
garboyles.Crudity and ſurphet the ſpoylers of Memory.
               
               Now, forſomuch as this faculty of the Soule
is brittle, tender & delicate, there is nothing that

woorketh more harme thereunto, then Cruditie,
Ryot, Intemperaunce, Surphet and dronkennes.
               In the meane ſeaſon, for the preſeruinge and
cheeriſhinge of the Memorye, all helpes muſt be
vſed & all furtheraunces, which any way may cō
                  duce
to ye mainteynāce & increaſe of the ſame muſt
be put in vre & practize: among which, is: continuall
vſe and exercyſe of wryting and ſpeaking:
adhibiting therein order, reaſon & meaſure, & not
patteringe the ſame ouer raſhlye, confuſelye or
without aduyſement. There is nothing in the
world more refreſhed, maynteyned and ſtrengthened,
throughe care, ſtudy, induſtry, dilligence, regard
and heede, then Memory: Againe, nothing
in the world through negligence, ſlouth, ſecuritye
and carefulnes, ſo ſoone marred and defaced.
               And euen as it is a meere vanity and fooliſhe
braggrie (as one ſayth) in this Myraculous gift
of Memory,Ad Herē Lib. 3. tit. 7. to boaſt of Arte rather then of Nature:
ſo againe, I deeme him a righte wyſe man,
that beſtoweth care & diligence to make the gifts
of Nature and qualityes of his mynde, flouryſhing,
pregnaunt and fruictful: euen as the good
and thryftie Huſbandman by manuraunce doth
vnto his ground, to make it ranke and fertile.
               And now,Memorye greatly helped and preserued by lighte Suppers. that I may here ſet downe precepts
of Phiſicke, to keepe this fyelde from growing?
barreyne, firſt of all I am to aduyſe ſuch as bee
deſyrous to preſerue and keepe this goodlye and
neceſſary Vertue perfect and ſtedfaſt, to vſe light

Suppers, or if he happē to make full and larger
ſuppers, to walke after it: to be meery and pleaſaūtly
conceipted: to lay aſyde (for the time) earneſt
cares: and not to perplexe his brayne wyth
troubleſome thoughts, nor his mynde with ſcrupuloſities.
And after he hath in this ſort after
Supper, ſpent an houre and a half, let him go to
bedde and take his naturall reſte, lyinge vpon the
right ſyde: and aryſing earely in the morning, let
him exonerate nature by all thoſe officiall members
that ſerue for euacuation and auoydinge of
bodely excrementes: Firſt, let him rubbe his tō
                  gue,
and combe his heade gently with an Yuorye
Combe, let him vſe to haue his heade polled, ſpecially
if the ſeaſon of the yeare, the Countrey and
Cuſtome requyre or permitte it: for to vſe it in
Wynter, or where the weather is extreeme Cold,
it is no leſſe hurtfull and vnholeſome, then fooliſhe
and ridiculous. For they bereeue, take away
and diſapoynte themſelues of thoſe helpes &
defences of Nature, which propulſe colde and other
outwarde iniuryes, & in ſteede thereof keepe
their heads warme wt other deuyſed couertures.
               But when the weather is myelde and calme,
and the Countrey temperate, I myſlike not (as
touchinge healthyneſſe of bodye) ſhauinge of the
crowne of the head. For thereby groſſe vapours
which hurt the Memory, haue more ſcope and liberty
to euaporate and fume oute. And therefore
ſome in my opynion, take a holeſome way for

healthyneſſe (ſo they do it without anye maner of
ſuperſtition otherwyſe) which go pollſhorne and
haue theyr heads ſhauen to the hard ſcalpe.In ſom, ſhauinge of the head is a helpinge to Memory, & in other ſome a hindraunce. For
by this meanes all they that are encombred wyth
Rhewmes, Catarrhes, and headach, fynde much
eaſe, and ſo do all they that haue theyr eyeſighte
(through abundaunce of Humours) dymme, and
theyr hearing thicke, and theyr ſmelling ſtopped:
inſomuch that for the redreſſe of certayne diſeaſes
of the head,Shauinge of the Bearde helpeth Memory. loſſe of right witts, feeblenes of
brayne, dottrye, phrenſie, Bedlem madneſſe, Melancholicke
affections, furie and franticke fitts,
Phiſitions deeme it the beſte waye to haue the
hayre cleane ſhauen of. Which in my iudgemēt is
not to be taken as a vayne or abſurde fable, for
that both experience and reaſon perſwadeth and
enforceth ſome credite thereto: forſomuch as euery
man after his beard hath beene trimmed or
cleane ſhauen of, feeleth himſelfe a greate deale
meryer, and leſſe wayward and ouerthwart then
he was before.
               Furthermore my ordenarye cuſtome is
to aduyſe them that haue defectyue and dymme
eyes, and that be thicke of hearynge, or ſubiecte
to the poze, to haue theyr heades rubbed,
and theyr Beardes ſhauen or ſome ſuch
order and faſhion, as maye moſte commodiouſlye
ſerue for thoſe partes: And accordinglye
as euerye Countrye hath his peculier
guyſe, to vſe the Barbers helpe in trymmynge

and handling ye ſame: for after ye ſame, euery man
looketh both ſmugger and fayrer, and is alſo of
mynde more myeld and tractable, ſo that his outward
courage ſeemeth to reioyce & to be pleaſaūt
and luſtye: his Memory made more perfecte and
cleare: his Spirits (which are they ye moue vs to
do this and that) reuyued and ſtyrred vp: and all
the Senſes (a litle afore dulled and broughte as
it were a ſleepe) ſhewe forth themſelues in theyr
moſt brauery and perfection.
               And if he vſe now & thē to rynſe and waſh his
mouth, Iawes and palate: to rubbe his teeth, to
wype and cleanſe his Noſe, to picke his eares &
mundify them from al baggage & fylthyneſſe, ſtil
to dilate & to open his breaſte wyth Coughinge,
hawking, neeſing and popping or ſmacking with
the mouthe, to exonerate his lower partes, as the
Ventricle, Mylte, Lyuer, Bowelles, Bealie
and Bladder of their ordinary Excrements: not
onelye the Memorye, but alſo all the Organes
of the mynde beſyde, and euery ſeuerall faculty of
the Soule ſhalbe well enhabled throughlye and
wythout ſtoppe or let, to diſcharge and do their
proper functions and offices.
               And becauſe for the moſt parte, the Colde and
Moyſt quality is moſt hurtfull to Memory and
oppreſſeth it, therfore the ſame by his contraries
is to be ſubdued & mayſtered: by ſuch (I meane)
as haue vertue, power, and efficacy, to waſt and
diſpatche ſuperfluous Humours, and to ſtrengthen
and comfort the Brayne: of which ſort are

theſe:Thīgs good for the Memory. Nuttmigges, ſpeciallye thoſe that are not
cleane dry, rotten, and without iuyce, Roſemarye
flowers, and the ſtemmes therof & all confectiōs
made wt the ſame: ſweete Maioram, Baulme,
Stychas of both ſortes, Pionie rootes, and the
yonge bearies thereof, myſtleden, Hyſſope, and
Sauoury,Herbes that ſharpen the witte. which being boyled wyth meates, yeldeth
forth a pleaſaunte ſmell and ſauour, for it
flouriſheth greene in Wynter & wythereth not: &
in the number of theſe, adde Betonie, Cowſlips,
Maron,Reſtoratiues and remedies for the Memory being empayred or decayed throgh coldnes & moyſture. or common Organie or welde Maioram,
Baſil, roots of flower Delyce of both ſorts,
Enula Cāpana, Radiſhe which is a roote vſuallye
echwhere eaten at meales in Sommer to prouoke
an appetite: and among forreyne and outlādiſh
Spices, Zedoaria, Cloues, Macis, which
is the rynde that couereth ye Nutmigge, Gynger,
ſpecially greene & condite in Honie, righte Gladē,
Caſſia, Cynamome, Cubebes, Myrobalanes
condite or preſerued in honie.
               The more parte of all theſe may eyther be reduced
into Syrupes, or ſtamped into powder or
Condiments: or els the decoction or infuſion of
them may be taken, ſpecially of ſuch as dwel in
Cold and Moyſte places, and be of nature verye
Phlegmaticke.To reſtoare a Memorye ſeemig paſt all recouery. For they that be ſtryken in yeares
and their Humours dryed vp and exhauſted,
had neede to haue aſwell their bodyes as
the Inſtrumentes of theyr Senſes moyſtened, &
wyth nouriſhinge alimentes of ſweete and pleaſaunt
quality to be humected, as the Ryndes of

Citron, that is, of Pomegranades condite, Lyquirice,
water Lillie commonlye named Nenuphar,
Bugloſſe, Borage, Reyſons (the ſtones being
taken out) Coraunts and all ſuch as do moderately
calefie and humecte. Of which ſort are
theſe, Honie, Sugar, Wyne that is ſwetiſh, Butter
and new layed Egges, Pyneapplekernelles,
ſweete Almonds that be not fuſtie, vinued nor
old,Onyons ill both for the eyes & Memory. Nutts called Piſtacia, Cheſtnutts meanelye
parched, and fylberds: for Walnutts be hurtful
to the Memory, and ſo are Onyons, becauſe they
annoy the eyes wyth a dazeling dymnes, through
a hoate vapour,Lactuce dimmeth the ſight. Rapes very beneficial & reſtoratiue▪ for the eyes. euen as Lactuce doth with cold,
through a ſomniferous vertue and power in it.
               But Rapes and Turneppes eyther ſodde or
boyled, do wonderfully clarefye the eyes, and are
very beneficiall for the ſight, and they that be diſpoſed
to try, ſhal fynd it by experience very true:
by reaſō of their great ſtoare of hoat & moyſt flatuouſnes,
whereby they alſo encreaſe generatiue
Seede, and ſtirre vp Venus, ſpecially being cō
                  dite
with Gynger.
               As touching what kinds of ſmal Braynes be
beſt for this purpoſe,What ſorts of Braynes be beſte for Memory. this is firſt to be vnderſtā
                  ded,
that there cannot be any thing of more vertue
and ſtrength to comforte Memory and keepe it in
a right ſound perfection, then ye Braynes of Partridges,
next of Sparrowes, and all ſuch Byrds
as be naturally much ſtyrring, & exerciſe themſelues
ſtill in flickering and flying, wherof in an other
place we ſhal ſpeake more at large.
               
                  
Waſhing of ye head, although many greatly miſlyke
not,Waſhing of the head. yet do I counſell none to vſe it. For it
weakeneth the ſkull and Braine panne, and maketh
it at euery ſmall cold and blaſt of wynd, ſubiect
to diſtillations & Catarrhes. But to waſh ye
feete in a decoction of Baye leaues, Roſemary &
Fenel, I greatly diſalow not: for it turneth away
from the head vapours & fumes dimming and ouercaſting
the minde.
               Now the better to repreſſe fumes and propulfe
vapours frō the Brain, it ſhalbe excellēt good after
Supper, to chaw wt the teeth (ye mouth being
ſhut) a few graynes of Coriander firſt ſtieped in
veneiger,Coriander. wherin Maiorā hath bin decocted, & thē
thinnly cruſted or couered ouer wt Sugar. It is
ſcarce credible what a ſpecial cōmodity this brī
                  geth
to ye memory. No leſſe vertuous & ſoueraign
is the cōfection of Quinces called Diacidonion,
                  Conſerue of Quinces.
if a prety quantity thereof be likewiſe takē after
meat. For it diſperſeth fumes, & ſuffreth not vapours
to ſtrike vpward, & ye fame effect alſo haue
certayne graynes of Maſtix ſwalowed.
               Alſo it is right excellent & cōfortable now & then
to ſmell to ſuch things as yelde a ſweete & odoriferous
ſauour,Sweet ſmels cōfortable to the ſpirits. namely ſuch as be of nature pearſing
& calefactiue, as Lignū Aloes, Clofegelofres
Roſemary flowers, Baſil, Nigella, Ambregryce,
Syuet, redde Roſes, Hony ſuckle flowers, Frēch
ſpyknard, and many other y• yelde forth a ſtronge
ſmel, but the ſeme right pleaſaunt, comfortable, &
delightfull. All theſe refreſh the Spirits, & wyth

their ſoote ſauours wonderfullye comforte the
Brayne.
               If a man or woman ſeeme (to outward iudgment)
in a maner paſt recouery,The confectiō of Anacardus good for the Memory. and be broughte
to extreeme obliuion, as they be yt haue y• diſeaſe
called Lethargus or the drowſye euill: it ſhalbe
right good for them to annoynt ye outſyde of their
Nucha and nape of their necks wyth the Oyle of
Caſtor,
                  To reſtoare ſpeach. 
                  Nigella, Euphorbe, Coſtus, Rocket, and
inwardly to take a litle of the confection of Anacardus,
or els therewyth to rubbe the tongue. For
is diſſolueth Phlegme that is extremelye colde,
moyſt, and viſcous: Inſomuch that it reſtoreth
ſpeach to them that be ſtriken wyth ye Apoplexie,
and recureth the ſtaggeringe and ſtayinge of the
tongue, bringinge it againe to his righte vſe:
Which thinge maye alſo be done and broughte to
paſſe wyth Oximel Scillit. and Aqua vite,
wherein a fewe graynes of Rocket haue beene
ſtieped.
               Vnto theſe helpes,To reſtoare the right vſe of the tōgue to them that haue the Apoplexie. in daungerous and deſperate
diſcraſies (when nothing elſe will helpe) we
flee for refuge and ſuccour: but in diſtemperaū
                  ces
and grieues that be myelder, and not of ſuch
extremity, others now rehearſed may ſerue, as
Syrupe de Stichade. Dia Anthos dulcis, Aur
                        •
                     a
Alexandrina,
                  The vertue of Lignum Aloes. 
                  Dia caſtorium, Pliris cum Muſco,
Triacle and Mythridatum.
               By experience and daily proofe it is founde
true, that Agalochus (commonly called Lignum
Aloes) being eyther vſed in perfume, or ſmelled

vnto with the Noſe, hath a marueylous vertue
to corroborate the Brayne & refreſh the Senſes:
inſomuch that beinge ſtamped,A Cocke to crow continnally without ceaſſing. puluerized, and
myngled wyth ſome Cloues and the boane of a
Rauens harte, and then all mixed with Oyle of
Nigella, hath ſuch ſouereigne vertue in ſtrengthening
& comfortinge y• Braine, that if the head
of a Cocke be therewith annoynted, he wil crowe
continually without any ceaſſing.
            
            
               ¶Of the ſtate and dispoſition of a hoate and
dry body: with a Diſcourſe of the nature,
condition, maners, and inclination
of a Cholericke perſon.
The v. Chapter.
               FOrſomuch as among the outward things of
Nature,All thinges ſubiect to chaunge. there is nothing of any longe continuaunce
and ſtability, neither that long keepeth
it ſelfe at any certayne ſtate and vigour, but all
ſubiect to decay, alteration, and caſe worſe and
worſe: truly the ſtate of mankinde doth ſpecially
and more then anye other, ſuffer ſundry alterations,
and is ſubiecte to great chaunge and mutability.
Thus, is a Hoate and Moyſt Complexion,
in proceſſe and tract of time, brought into a
ſtate Hoat and Drye, For, Heate by litle and litle

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
both ſlyly and cloſely waſt and conſume naturall
Humour, and bringeth all the body into dryneſſe:
which quality for prolongation and lengtheninge
of lyfe, is the greateſt ennemy that can bee. For
as the flame in a Torche or Taper feedeth vpon
the combuſtible matter thereof, and is therewith
nouriſhed, which being all waſted and conſumed,
the ſame flame alſo quencheth and no longer burneth:
ſo likewyſe natiue heate by little and little
weareth away, and diminiſheth the iuyce & moyſture,
wherewith it is nouriſhed, and finally bringeth
the cauſe of deſtruction both to it ſelf, and to
the whole body beſide.
               Nowe, that conſtitution of body, which conſiſteth
of a hoate and dry qualitye and thereof hath
his name,A Cholerick man. hauinge warme Humour throughe
theſe qualities encreaſed, maketh and conſtituteth
a Cholericke man, by reaſon of the greate
ſtoare of Choler which is in him:Choler natural and beſyde nature. of which Humour
there be two ſortes and differences: the one
natural, the other beſyde nature. Natural Choler
is the excrement of bloud concoct, bitter in ſauour,
and in colour and effect fyerie. When the
heate of the Lyuer is moderate, then is it yealow
and ſhyninge: but when this viſcoſitye is ouermuch
enkindled, then doth Choler alſo boyle wt
heate, and is of colour darcke, Yelowiſh, like vnto
Pruſe Bier, called in Dutche Iopen Bier, or
like vnto Oyle or melted Butter, when it is burned,
and with much frying becommeth blackiſhe
of colour: whereby it commeth to paſſe that the

colour before Yelowe, chaungeth and is turned
into a ſadde blacke: which ſometime apparauntly
vttereth and ſheweth it ſelfe in the vtter parte
of the ſkinne, whenſoeuer this Cholerique Humour
diffuſeth and diſperſeth it ſelfe into the
ſame ſkinne.
               Choler hath in the body two offices: for parte
of it being mixed wyth the bloud,The office of Choler. paſſeth into the
Veynes, to make the ſame more conuenientlye to
penetrate into euery one of the narow paſſages, &
to bee conueighed to ſuch members as requyre &
haue neede of the nouriſhment of Choler. The
other part, is ſente to the bladder of the Gall, annexed
and tyed to the nether ende of the Lyuer,
wherein the wonderfull prouidence of Gods Almighty
handyworke wel appeareth, in y•, he hath
appointed the ſame Entraile, whereunto he hath
geeuen an admyrable vertue to attract and helpe
digeſtion, to be alſo a receyuer and Receptorye of
ſuperfluous and vnprofitable Humour: to thentent
no harme or inconuenience ſhould thereby in
any wiſe happen to the other members.
               For Choler is of that nature y• yeldeth out a fiery
force, whoſe motion (as it were a fier brande)
ſtirreth vp and incēſeth our minds to haſty moodes
and furious rages.Anger what it is. And for this cauſe Angre
is defined to be a heate and certaine boylinge
of the Bloud aboute the Heart, wherewith the
Braine alſo beinge excyted by Choler, is ſet in a
heate and teſtines, deſyrous of reueng, whenſoeuer
any iniury is offered. And to the lower parts

prouoke and irrite the Guttes and Bowelles to
auoyde ſuperfluous excrementes: For which
purpoſe, Natures prouidence hath deuiſed and
framed ſundry paſſages needeful for y• purginge,
conueighaunce and euacuation of all ſuch ſuperfluous
Humours: to witte, the Kidneyes and the
Vryne Pypes, the empty or faſting Gutte called
Inteſtinum Ieiunum (which through ye ſowrenes
of Choler flowinge into it, continuallye dryueth
out the Excrements,By what partes of the body Choler is purged.) the Bladder, Eares, and
Pores, appointed for the auoydaunce and expulſion
of ſweate. And in the moſt parte of theſe, if
obſtructions ſhoulde happen, all the whole fylthy
maſſe of noyſome Humour, is thereby kept within
the body, and then geeueth violente aſſaulte to
ſome of the principall partes. So when the
bagge or Bladder of the Gall or Receptacle of
Choler, is not able to exonerate it ſelfe of that
baggage, droſſe and ſuperfluity, which it drewe
from the Lyuer: it emptyeth and caſteth it eyther
into the Uentricle, or els into the holowneſſe of
the Lyuer. And thus it commeth to paſſe, that
Choler being diffuſed and ſpred ouer all the body,
imperteth both his qualitye and colour to the
Bloud.
               Hereof commeth the Iaundice (named Morbus
Regius,
                  Iaundice. for y•, it requyreth a moſte exquiſite
dict, and Princelike fare) which maketh all the
body Yelowe as a Kytes foote, and coloured like
Saffron or as Syluer, that is ſtroaked ouer wt
Gold.
               
                  
And if the ſmall and ſlender Gutts be therewith
teinted, it putteth a man to intollerable torment &
payne.Wringynge of the ſmall Gutts. This paſſion is called Iliaca Paſſio, the
wrynginge of the Gutts, and alſo Conuoluulum,
for that, the Guttes do ſeeme to puckar and crū
                  ple
together like the ſtring of an Harpe, or any other
Inſtrument.
               This diſeaſe commeth either of an inflammation,
or of coſtyuenes, when the ordure is drye &
hard parched, and no ſufficiente ſtoare of Cholerique
Humour to expel & scowre awaye the Excrements.
So if the vpper part of the Gutt be
affected, the meate is caſte vp: if the neither, ordure
auoydeth at the mouthe: by reaſon that the
Tuell or foundment is ſo cloſely ſhut, that not ſo
much as a poore fyeſt can paſſe or get out thence.
Manye affects beſyde, doth Choler engender, as
Tertian and burning Agues, when as it putrefyeth
without the Veynes, which becauſe they
be largely and diligently ſet out in ſundry Bookes
of Phiſicke, by many & ſundry learned Phiſitians
publiſhed, I thincke it beſt here to ſurceaſſe
from anye further recitall and declaration
thereof.
               But I purpoſe now briefly by the way to ſhew
the nature and cōditions of a Hoat and dry Cō
                  plexion,
& then of a Cholericke perſon,Notes wherby to know a hoate and dry Cōplexion. & finallye
by what markes and tokens they are to be perceyued,
diſcerned, found out and knowen. And
firſt to ſpeake of the outwarde ſignes: A body of
this Conſtitution is hoat, ſlender, leane muſculous,

of decēt bigneſſe and meane ſtature: and although
ſome be of growth and talnes but ſmal &
litle: yet are they liuely, daper, quicke, 
                     •
                  ymble,
and as litle Bees, euer ſtirrynge and whyſkinge
about, And

                     VVithin that litle Corps of theirs,Virg. li. 4 Georg.
                     
                     right noble Stomackes haue.
                  
               
               Of colour they be browniſh, aburne or ſomewhat
ruddie, ſpecially whē their angry moode is vp, or
their bodyes chaufed and ſet in heate wyth exercyſe:
& ſome be pale or yelowiſh. Their ſkinne
rough: their arteries and Veynes bigge and apparaunt,
& not lying hidden vnder the fleſh: theyr
Vryne redde, ſaffron coloured, or bright yelowe
according to the proportion of Choler and heate:
Their Pulſe quicke and ſwyft, as alſo their gate
and maner of going is. Their tongue rolling at
pleaſure, ready and flowing in vtteraunce: theyr
haire blacke: and in ſome, curled and naturallye
fryzeled: when as the heate and dryneſſe is verye
great and vehement: Neyther will the ſame tyll
after long time waxe hoarie and gray, but yet by
reaſon of dryneſſe ſoone waxe bald. Their Noſe
crooked like a Hawkes bill: and in manye, eſpecially
Germaynes, Polonians, Hungarians and
Dutchmen,Yealow hayre. redde beardes, and bright yealowye
hayre, which commeth of glitteringe cleare ſhynynge
Choler, that is not aduſted wyth feruente
heate.Redde beards. In the Lowe Countryes, thoſe that be

redde hayred (are of the vulgar ſorte) noted, as
men ſubiecte to ſome naughtye diſpoſition and
lewd conditions, ſecretely harboroughing within
their minds.
               For as Themiſtocles his Tutour gaue iudgmente
of no meane thinge,Nature of Themiſtos cles. like to proue & come to
paſſe in his ſayd Scholer, but that hee woulde be
eyther a ſinguler ſtaye and ornamente to hys
Countrye, or els ſome notable plague and detrimente
to the ſame: ſo alſo the Belgiana, by a
common and vſuall by worde among them, ſaye,
that at the hands of ſuch perſons, eyther thinges
moſt excellent, or els moſt villanous, are to bee
expected and hoped for. Furthermore in their
daylye ſpeache they vſe this as a common Prouerbe
amonge them, Rooden baert ſelden goedt
oft van goeden aerdt, Which is as much to ſay,
y• Redde bearded men are ſeldome of anye good
diſpoſition: for that, in the whole courſe of theyr
lyfe, maners, conuerſation, dealinges, byinge, ſelling,
& bartering, they ſeeke to vndermyne and ouereach
others wt ſlye ſhifts and craftye bargaynes,
euidētly arguyng, what cūning dealing lurketh
wtin them to entrappe and deceiue other mē.
               Which diſpoſition and inclination, as I can
not deny but is found true in verye many of that
Conſtitution, for wante of vertuous bringinge
vp,Red beard
                        •
                      argueth not alwayes an ill diſpoſed perſon. and laudable inſtitution: So againe, do
I know many, hauing ſuch coloured Beards,
whoſe commendable qualities, and rare vertues
haue aduaunced them to Honourable

roumes and dignityes. For euen in Princes
Courts, in Aſſēblies of Nobles, Peeres, & Magiſtrats,
amonge honeſt ſubſtantial Trafiquers,
and namely of thoſe that dwell Northernely, wee
ſee very manye of tryed Vertue, & ſinguler wiſedome,
right worthely wyth integritye & vprightnes
admyniſtringe their Publique charges and
functions wherein they be placed.
               Now, whereas ſome haſkerdly Peizaunts, &
raſcall perſons, hauinge ſuch coloured beards,
be pratlers and praters, in keeping counſell, as
cloſe as a Syeue, ſettinge all vppon ſixe and ſeuen,
without any regard or conſideration of anye
thinge, Dingthryftes and Spendalles, the ſame
do I impute to lewde education, which draweth
the procliuity of their Nature to vntoward and
pieuiſh maners. For hereof it cōmeth, that ſuch
perſons be found to be vnconſtant,Wylie Foxes. crafty, deceitfull,
ſuttle, wylie, cogginge, turning the cat in the
panne, full of leigier de mayne, & ſo fickle of word
and deede, that a man may not wel & ſafely deale
wyth them nor truſte them, as perſons in whom
there is no more holde then is of a wet Eele by y•
                  
                     •
                  ayle, and in anye bargayne or dealing be it neuer
ſo intricate and cumberſome, can fynde meanes
to ſlyp the coller and wyende themſelues oute of
daunger. Wherevnto if other imperfections &
defectes of the bodye be added, they argue yet a
worſe Nature & more geeuen to miſchiefe: whervppon
the Poet Martiall very aptly ſayth:

                     
                     Blacke hayrde, ſhort footed, purblynde eke
                     and Beard all ouer redde:Lib. 6.
                     
                     Take ſuch a one in doing good,
                     and ſtrike me of his heede.
                  
               
               Which diſpoſition is rooted in them, partlye
throughe the influence of the Planetes, viz. of the
Sunne and Mercury, & partly (which I rather
take to be the chiefe and ſpeciall cauſe) throughe
thynnes of Cholerique Humour and of vncleane
Spyrits, which being enduedwith a ſubtile heat,
pricketh a ſtyrreth them forwarde to put in practyſe
ſuch kinde of pranckes and Pageauntes.
Furthermore amōg theſe kinde of perſons, there
be ſome diuerſly diſpoſed, and of ſundry conditions,
wranglers, buſye medlers in other mens
matters, yallers, hoat as a toaſt, Choplogicks, &
pratlers, wyth tongue at wil, and are as Iuuenall
fotlie ſayth:

                     Of dapper vvit and deſperate bolde,
                     fyne phraſde vvith galant grace,Sat. 3.
                     
                     More eloquent then Iſaeus,
                     for euery time and cace.
                     Eche perſon can they aptly play,
                     at ech Art can they ame,
                     At Grammer, Rhetricke Geometry,
                     Paynting, and for the game.
                     At ſoothſaying, and cunningly
                     vppon a Roape to daunce,
                     
                        
At Phiſicke, Magicke, rype are they,
                     and free of euery Haunce,
                  
               
               Such commonlye are Dizardes, Geſturers,
Stage players, Iugglers, Tumblers and Rogiſh
pedlers, ydly raunging about the Country,
Iangling pratlers, Fortuile tellers, mynſtreis &
ſuch other lyke buſye bragginge Counterfeictes,
looking bigge vpon the matter, and in theyr maner
of gate, hands, coūtenaunce, eyes and ſpeach,
ful of geſtures, impudently preſumyng to ſhuffle
themſelues into euery companye and place of aſſembly,
hauing an Oare in euery mans Boate,
and entermedling in other mens matters, wherin
they haue nothing to deale. In Sleepe, very
vnquiet, leaping ſometime out of their bedds,
becauſe their Spyrits be very hoat, which incyte
& awake thē vp (euen beyng a ſleepe) to motion &
walking about. For Choler frameth and faſhioneth
the mynds of men many wayes, producing
and cauſynge in them diuers maners, phanſyes,
delightes and inclynations. And hereuppon it
happeneth that whoſoeuer is of a hoate and drye
Conſtitution, & reckened in the number of Cholericke
men, is naturally fierce, arrogante, imperious,
ſtately vntractable and vnruly:

                     Quicke,Horat. in Art. Poet. teſty, not entreatable.
                     of ſtomacke very ſtoute:
                     
                        
Not thinking Lavves vvere for them made,
                     but fight and blade it out.
                     This is my vvill, this is my heſt,
                     thus ſhall it be, I ſay,Iuuen. Sat. 6.
                     
                     Thus I commaunde, my vvill in ſteede
                     of reaſon beareth ſvvay.
                  
               
               But as hee is by Nature verye teſtye and
ſoone angry, ſo is his Cholerique moode ſoone
alayed and pacifyed.
               Nowe, ſythens beſyde yealowe Choler which
onely is called Naturall, there be dyuers other
differences thereof alſo, wee muſte orderlye entreate
as occaſion falleth out, of euery one particulerly.
               Firſt of Yelowe Choler is engendred Pale,Pale or Citrine Choler
or of the colour of a Pomecytron, meane betwene
greene and yelowyſhe. It beareth chiefe ſwaye
at the beginninge of the Sprynge, in yonge men
and bodyes not yet come to their full growth,
when as freſhe Bloude newlye ſprowteth in
theyr Bodyes. Whereuppon, that Age ſpeciallye
at this tyme of the yeare is muche ſubiecte
to Tertian Agewes,Tertian Agues. namelye if this Humoure
throughe obſtruction do putrefye, and beynge
ſcattered withoute the Veynes, happen to bee
enflamed. Muche lyke whereunto is the

Baſtard Tertian: ſo called, for that, it is engendred
not altogether of Yelowe Choler, but hath
ſome part of Phlegme alſo ioyned wyth it.Bur
                        •
                     ing Age
                        •
                     es. For
Burning Agewes do proceede and be enkindled
of redde Choler, putrefyinge and rotting within
the Veynes, which bringe a man into ydle talke,
Phrenſte and rauing. For they that be herewith
affected conceyue in theyr myndes certayne fonde
and abſurde imaginations, thinking themſelues
to ſee ſome tertible apparitiōs and ſights, wherby
in the nights they be greatly troubled in their
ſleepes and ſore affrighted.
               
                  Toſt and turmoylde vvith dreadfull dreames,
                  and gryſly griepes by night,Lucan. lib. 7.
                  
                  Vext vvith vaine terrours in their Sleepe,
                  appearing to their ſight.
               
               They dreame of fyer and burning of houſes &
Townes, and thincke all the worlde to be in an
vprore and hurly burlye,Cholericke folkes haue many dread full and terrible Dreames. killinge and ſleying one
an other: and ſome of theſe phantaſticall imaginations
ſometime happen to a man wythout any
Agewe, when as the fumoſity of Choler ſtryketh
vp into the Brayne. Which if they happen of any
longe continuaunce to diſturbe the bodye and
mynde, it ſhalbe moſt expedient to take an other
order of diet, and foorthwyth to purge Choler by
vomyte, ſweate, and euacuation by Siege, which
may be conueniently done wyth Radix Pontica,
and ſuch things as prouoke Vryne, as theſe

Herbes: Alkakengie, Sperage, Gardeyne Parſlye,
Anyſe ſeede,Howe to purge Choler. and Fenell ſeede: forbearyng all
hoate, fat and ſweete meates, which are very apte
to be turned into Choler, excepting onelye Reyſons
& Liquirice: and onely to eate ſuch thinges
as are of vertue to qualefye and alay the heate of
Bloud.
               And ſpecially Sleepe muſt be prouoked with
Lactuce and other ſalet herbes,Slepe whole ſom & good for Cholericke folke. that do humecte
and refreſh the Brayne and all other parts of the
body. For albeit to hoat and dry complexions,
and all Cholericke perſons many things be both
hurtful and pernicious, yet is nothing more noyſome
and preiudiciall then vnſeaſonable labour,
watch, long forbearing of victuals, fumiſh anger
and teſtyneſſe, Venus and immoderate company
of Women. For euery of theſe doth waſte and
conſume the ſtrength and powers of Nature:
neyther may any thing be conueniently taken frō
them that be drye and leane maye marye, they had
rather neede to be franked and tenderlye fedde wt
delicate fare and deinty cheere, to reſtoare and
mayneteyne them: then eyther to be ſkanted, or to
take that which waſteth nature. For es Cattle
beſt lyketh in rāke paſture wherin is good graſſe
and water ynough: ſo do they of this Complexion
require exquiſite fare. And euen as thoſe
Trees and Sprayes that do not burgen and ramifye,
would not be lopped nor cutte: ſo likewiſe
weariſh weakened bodyes (lacking many things
in reſpect of a firme habite of bodely conſtitutiō)

oughte not in any parte to be weakened, neyther
can well ſpare any thinge to be taken away from
them.
               But there is an other kinde of Choler, ſwaruing
and degenerating from Natural order and
meane,Yolkie Choler. called of Phiſitions Yolkie Choler, borowing
his name of the yolke of an Egge, whoſe
colour and conſiſtencie, it doth neerelye reſemble.
For by meanes of his exceſſiue heate it is
thickiſhe, and of colour f
                     •
                  ery, and verye yelowe:
which if it ſhould happen to putrefye and bee enflamed,
it breedeth Agues moſt ardente and burning.
Therefore forſomuch as this kinde of
Choler is ſhrunke and gone from mediocritye, it
ſhalbe expedient to frame a cleane contrary diet,
and to enſue an other maner of order, for the ſubduing
and dryuing away of this ſtraung quality.
For if a man ſhould ſtill cheeriſh and tender it wt
his like nouriſhmentes, he ſhould do nothing elſe
but exaſperate the diſtemperaunce, & encreaſe the
tyranny therof, and make it more vehement.
               There is alſo an other kinde of Choler, called
Leekiſh,Leekiſh or greeue Choler. ſo named becauſe it is as grene as a
Leeke, which is bred and engendred in the Stomacke,
through naughty and corrupte iuyce, & of
certain groſſe potherbes: of which ſort, are Garlicke,
Leekes, Onyons, Creſſes, Rocket, Colewortes,
Betes, Cheruyle. For when as Nature
is not able to ſubdue and mayſter theſe and ſuche
like nouriſhmēts, they be tourned into a Leekiſh
or greene Choler, which being ſometime parbraked

and caſt vp by vomyte, leaue in the tongue &
Chawes, a certayne bitter relice and ſharpe ſauour,
inſomuch that wt other ſweete licour it is
hard to be gotten away and aboliſhed. Alſo this
noyſome Humour ſometime is engendred in the
Lyuer and Veynes, by meanes of ſome greeuous
ſicknes, whē as yolkie coloured Choler is aduſt
with vehement inflammation of ſtraunge heate,
which to vomyte vp by perbraking,Lib. 2. praedict. ca. 39 
                  Hippocrates
affirmeth to be moſt daungerous.
               Out of this proceedeth yet an other excremēt,
worſe then any of the reſt,Ruſtie or Braſſie Choler. called (of a likenes that
it hath with ruſty braſſe) Ruſty or Braſſie Choler,
which is engēdred of Leekiſh or greene Choler
vehemently aduſt. For when the humidity is
with intenſed heate excocted, it becommeth dry &
reſembleth the ruſt of Braſſe: which thinge wee
may plainly perceiue by hoat glowing things, extremely
burnt in the fyer, whereunto the nature
of Choler maye verye aptly be compared. For
the force and vertue of fier, chaungeth the wood,
firſt into burning coales, then into blacke coales,
and laſt of all, when the fyer hath quite conſumed
all, and heate is ſlaked, into Aſhes. So likewyſe
in the body of mankinde, Choler is firſt of ſaffrō
colour, then (as heat encreaſeth) Leekiſhe, ſomewhat
contrary to nature: next Braſſie or ruſtie, &
laſt of al, blewiſh or ſkie colour, like vnto Wadde
an Herbe that Fullers and Dyers vſe in colouring
and dying their clothes, which laſt of all is
tourned into perfect black Choler or Melācholy.
               
                  
All theſe ſortes of Choler, endued wyth virulent
and poyſonous qualityes, infecte the mynde
wyth lewde conditions, and the body wyth loathſome
diſeaſes, whereof many be of ſuch malignaunt
nature, that hardly wil be cured: as eating
Cankers, corrodinge vlcers, runninge pockes,
loathſome tettars or ryngwormes in the face,
Morphew, the Carbuncle, wyeld fier or S. Antonies
fier, Herpes, the eating & deuouring Vlcer
called Eſtiomenus,
                  The Wolfe 
                        〈◊〉
                     , diſeaſe. and of Courtiers (who
commonly more then others are thereto ſubiect)
named the Wolfe: for it exulcerateth the ſkinne,
and eateth the fleſhe to the very boanes, rottinge
and putrefyinge the ſame, depryuing the member
of lyfe, and from feeling of any paine, beſyde many
other loathſome and cōtagious diſeaſes, proceeding
and ſprynging out of the common ſyncke
and concurrencye of theſe Humours, in ſomuch
that a man in this caſe caryeth about wyth hym
nothing els, but a ſtinkinge rotten and corrupte
Carkaſſe:
And loathſom lymms, replete vvith mattry fylth.Virg. AEneid. 1.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶Of a colde and drye Complexion: wherein
the Nature and condition of a Melancholique
perſon (becauſe hee is of this temperature
& ſubiect to Choler) is at large declared:
wyth remedies how to qualefie
and ſubdue the ſame, fullye
decyphered
The vi. Chapter.
               THoſe bodyes of all others are in worſt caſe &
habite, which conſiſte and be conſtituted of ye
combination and compoſition of Cold and Dry.
For conſidering that the mayntenaunce and conſeruation
of lyfe conſiſteth in Hoat and Moyſte:
who is he that can rightlye commende or allowe
that quality and conſtitutiō of body, which weareth
away & waſteth theſe fomentations or cheeriſhmentes
of lyfe, beyng the chiefe & onely 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of health and welfare? For we ſee in the whole
courſe of Nature, and in all thinges within the
vniuerſall Worlde, Plantes, Herbes, all Creatuers
endued wyth life, Men and all that lyue by
breath, when they be once depryued, or lacke heat
and moyſture, quickly to decay, & growe vnto deſtruction.
               For none other thing is Death, neyther can anye
fitter definition be deuyſed for it, then to ſaye,Death.
that it is an aboliſhment and deſtruction of lyfe &

Nature ſpirable, & an extinctiō of the firſt qualities,
wherof the Humours haue their being and
mayntenaunce.Man ſubiect to many caſualties. Whenſoeuer therfore a man arryueth
& is broughte into theſe qualityes, either
by Sickneſſe, Nature, or by Age and courſe of
yeares, let him make his ful reckning that Death
is not farre of. For as touching vncertayne, haps
and ſodaine caſualties which euery minute of an
houre hauge ouer all our heades generallye, I
thincke not meete hytherto to be referred, nor in
this place to be reckened: for y• they happē violētly
and agaynſt Nature, making an ende of lyfe
ſooner then by courſe of nature elſe ſhould bee.
Which happes and chaunces as they ought not
to terrifye and diſmaye any man, eyther iourneying
or Seafaring (foraſmuch as euery Christiā
oughte to commende and referre the ſucceſſe and
euent of his whole affayres and buſynes, into the
hands of God his Diuine prouidēce & pleaſure,
and vnto him onelye wyth firme Fayth to leane:
So alſo in this plight and diſpoſition of bodye,
(threatned with death and extreeme diſſolution)
there is no cauſe why a mā ſhould quayle in courage,
or retcheleſſely (by all conuenient meanes he
may) neglect to tender and cheeriſh his body: but
ſo longe as anye ſparke of lyfe laſteth, neuer to
ceaſſe to vſe all ſuch helpes and foments, as may
ſerue to the prolongation of his dayes. For God
of his bounteous liberality, hath gratiouſly geeuen
and appoynted manye thinges, whereby the
ſame may well and fully be brought about.
               
                  
For as fruictleſſe trees, by pruning and induſtrie
are made fruictfull: and as barrayne groūd,
(wearyed with long tyllage) wyth dunging and
compoſting, is agayne reſtoared to fertility: ſo
likewyſe bodyes that bee drye, are wyth nouriſhment
fit for the reſtoration of Nature, comforted,
and brought euen vnto the full appoynted & prefixed
terme that by Nature is limitted, as it were
into the Hauen that we longe wiſhed. Which
hope of prolongation and lengtheninge of lyfe, no
man of reaſonable and indifferente iudgement in
conſyderation of Humaine thinges can diſalow,
ſo that, euery man herein (ſubmitting his will &
mynde vnto his Maker and Creatour in whom
all thinges haue their beinge and conſiſtence) referre
his dealings and deſyres,What limitation oure prayers and wyſhes ought to haue. vnto his godlye
diſpenſation and appoyntment, acknowledginge
all things (whatſoeuer they be) to be gouerned &
directed by the decree of his omnipotente pleaſure.
               But becauſe Melancholy is ſubiect vnto a
cold and dry quality, neither can anye plighte or
ſtate of body (proceedinge hence) be worſe then
it, nor more incommodious to health: therefore it
ſeemeth needeful, to make ſome further diſcourſe
of the condition, nature, effect, ſtrength and differences
thereof, and how greatlye it affecteth both
the body and the mynde of man.
               For all mē for the moſt part at the beginning
of the Sprynge and Downefall of the Leafe (at
which ſeaſon of the yeare this Humour doth

moſt ryfely abound) are ſubiect to Melācholicke
affectiōs,No man but is ſubiect to Melācholy. namely thoſe that be Magiſtrates and
Officers in the Commonwealth, or Studentes
which at vnſeaſonable times ſit at their Bookes
& Studies. For through ouermuch agitatiō of ye
mynd,Students muche troubled wyth Melācholy. natural heat is extinguiſhed, & ye Spyrits
aſwell Animall as Vitall, attenuated and vaniſh
away: whereby it cōmeth to paſſe, that after their
vitall iuyce is exhauſted, they fall into a Colde &
Drye conſtitution.
               And of this Melancholike Humour there be
two differences,Two ſorts of Melācholy. the one Naturall, the other beſide
Nature. That Melancholie which is naturall
and familiar to a man, is mylder and leſſe
hurtfull then the other. For being caryed and
conueyghed into the Veynes together wyth the
Bloud, it nouriſheth the members that be of lyke
Nature and cōdition to it ſelfe, & vnto them myniſtreth
nouriſhmente, as the Boanes, Gryſtles,
Ligaments and Synewes.
               For this Humour is not vnlike vnto Beaſts
feete when they be ſoddē and brought into a Iellie,
which in eatinge,Whereto Melācholy is like. cleaue to the fyngers and
lyppes, as tough as Brydlyme: whereby it cauſeth
Bloud to haue a good power retentyue, and
to be thicker: becauſe when it is ioyned with perfect
Bloud, and wyth the ſweetenes thereof tempered
and alayed, as a ſower grape with Hony or
Sugar, it thereuppon becommeth in taſt and relyce
not altogether ſower or bitter, as thoſe thinges
that exaſperate the Iawes and Palate, but

ſomewhat tart and ſowryſh, and as it is commō
                  ly
tearmed,The taſte & relyce of Melācholy. Ponticke: ſuch a relyce I meane, as
is in a grape (out of which new Muſt is preſſed)
being not as yet come to his perfect rypenes and
maturytie, ſuch as in the latter ende of Autumne
is brought out of Germany and Fraūce into the
Lowe Countryes, to ſlaunche and ſill the glutting
deſyre and greedyneſſe of ſome: which beinge
very ſower in taſt, (inſomuch yt it ſeemeth to take
away the vpper ſkinne of the tongue,) theyr vſe is
to condite wyth hony and hony combes: to make
it (for them that haue quayſye ſtomackes) better
relyced, & pleaſaunter in taſte. And as ye dreggs,
mother, or ſettlinges of Oyle, reteyne a tallage of
the Oyle: and as the Lees of Wyne keepe a
certayne taſt, relyce and ſmell of the Nature of
Wyne: Euen ſo Melācholicke iuyce which proceeded
from Bloud, reteyneth the ſpettle and taſt
thereof. Wherefore this Humour maye ſeeme
ſomewhat vnproperly to be called Atra bilis, ſythens
there is in it no aduſtion,De locis affect. lib. 3. cap. 5. but (as Galene
ſayth) a bloud or Melancholike iuyce, which is
nothinge els then the dryer and thicker parte of
bloud, altogether lyke vnto dregges and Lees, yt
ſettleth in the bottom of the veſſel, and conſerueth
the ſtrength & vigour of the Wyne, and ſuffreth
it not to waſt and vaniſh. And as the Lees or
Dregges of Wyne called in Dutch Droeſen or
Moeder, ſerue to good vſe and purpoſe, for the
making of Aqua vite wythall: Euen ſo Melancholicke
iuyce which (it I may ſo plainly terme

it) is y• ſetling and refuſe of Bloud, hath in it an
holeſom vſe and commodity. For one part goeth
into the Veynes, and helpeth bloude: the other
part (much like to the former) is drawen by the
Lyuer into the Splene or Mylt:The vſe and Nature of the Mylt. & hauing thence
afterwards iſſue into the Stomacke, (on the left
ſyde wherof it lyeth) ſtyrreth vp appetite to meat,
throughe the ſharpneſſe and ſowrenes that is in
it. This viſcous ſubſtaunce being ſoft thinne,
fungous, and like vnto a Spūge, is the Chāber
of Melācholie, and a Receptory appoynted by nature,
to draw out vnto it, the dregges of Bloude:
and ſometimes ſo much ſwelled wyth aboundāce
of excrements, as though it would oppreſſe and
kill a mā: according whereunto the Cappadocian
Baude in Plautus bewayleth his owne caſe in
theſe woords:

                     My health decreaſeth day by day,In curcul. Act. 2.
                     
                     My paine encreaſeth on as faſt:
                     My ſvvagging Mylt doth eu'ry vvay,
                     like gyrdle, rounde begyrde my vvaſt.
                     A man vvould iudge that I did beare,
                     vvithin my Beally, Children tvvayne:
                     VVretch that I am, I greatly feare,
                     leaſt burſte I ſhall in middle, plaine.
                  
               
               Which part of ye body becauſe it is a great hinlet
to nymblenes and agilitye,The Mylte hindereth agility and quicknes of body. and a fowle cūberſome
loade to Runners, Poſtes, Currours and
ſpeedy Meſſengers, the ignoraunt commō people
ſometime thoughte and were perſwaded, that the
beſte waye was, cythe: to haue this viſcous ſubſtaunce

quight taken out, or els to be cauteryzed.Mylt cānot be taken away.
But in very deede it is not without great daunger
and hazard of life to be taken oute, no more
then the Teſticles or Stones can from the Caſtor:
which is a kinde of Beaſte that lyueth both
in water and on land: whom hūters (reporting a
flymflam tale of Robinhoode) do abſurdely affyrme,
that wyth their owne teeth they byte away
their owne Stones, and for ſauegarde of their
lyues throwe the ſame at thoſe, which purſue and
chaſe them. Yet notwithſtāding this viſcouſnes,
if it ſwel and bolne ouermuch, may be qualefyed,
kept downe and repreſſed by vſing Roman & cō
                  mō
Wormwood, 
                     •
                  etrach, Polipodie, Sene, Epythyme,
Roſemary, Capers, Doder, Fumitory,
Hartstongue, bitter Almonds, Peach kernels,
Tamarixe & ſwete Broome: For ye more yt it encreaſeth
& waxeth bigger, the more the bodye pyneth
away, & becōmeth leaner:The Splene lykened to a Princes Exchequer or Treaſury ſo yt very aptly did
Traiane the Emperour compare & lyken a Princes
Exchequer to the Splene. For as when a
Princes Coffers be full ſtuffed, & his Treaſuries
enriched, yt common people be wringed, pinched
& empoueriſhed: ſo, whē the Splene waxeth
bigge & encreaſeth, the body is pyned away and
waſted wt leanneſſe. For ſomuch therefore as
God his carefull prouidence hath made and ordeyned
this mēber to purefie y• Lyuer, & to purge
and ſkum awaye the groſſe & feculent part of the
Bloud: it ſtādeth euery mā in hand, by al meanes
poſſible, carefully to forſee, y• it incurre not any inor

take any harme. For if the Splene or Mylte
ſhould ſuffer obſtruction, or fall into imbecillitye
and weakenes: the Melācholike iuyce diſperſeth
it ſelfe into euery part of the body, makinge the
ſkinne to be of a ſootie and dunne colour: and further
diſquieteth the mynde, wyth ſundry ſtraung
apparitions, and phantaſticall imaginations.
               But if it throughlye perfourme the office,The Mylte cauſeth a mā to laugh & be mery. for
which it was ordeyned, & do exactly drincke vp y•
droſſie feculencie of Bloud, it maketh a mā thervppon
wonderfull meerye and iocunde. For
when the Bloud is ſyncerely purefyed, and from
all groſſenes and feculencie purged, the Spyrits
conſequently are made pure, brighte and cleare
ſhyninge: Whoſe purity and clearenes cauſeth ye
mynde to reioyce, and amonge meery companiōs
to laughe and delight in pretie deuyſes, mery cō
                  ceiptes
and wāton phanſies. Which thing likewyſe
commonly happeneth to them, that moyſten
and whittle themſelues well wyth wyne: who
(althoughe otherwyſe in dealinges they be naturallye
ſterne and ſurlie,Wyne cheereth the hartes of them that bee ſeuere & maketh them as merye as a Pye. and outwardlye in countenaunce
and maner of gate, pretendinge a kinde
of ſeuerity:) Yet beinge ſomewhat heated wyth
Wyne, and lighting in the company of amorous
& beautifull Damoſells, they ſet cocke on hoope,
and ſhake away from them al their former grimnes,
and wayward maners, and become as meery
as the meryeſt.
               And thus haue I my ſelfe knowen ſome, and
that of no meane callinge, who (eyther through

inclynation of their Nature or cuſtome of lyfe)
cleane geeuen from all companye, lookinge
wyth face and countenaunce grim
                     ••
                  e and ſeuere,
wyth browes knyt together & frowninge,
wyth eyes ſullen, ſterne, terrible, glauncing aſyde
and eſkāted,What time Melancholike perſons be out of meaſure mery. ynough to make ſuch as meete them
afrayde to loke vppon them: who (notwythſtā
                  ding)
when they haue beene in company wt yonge
pleaſaunte Maydens and meery Gentlewomen,
haue (for the whyle) forgone & layed aſyde their
ſeueritye and Stoycal precyſenes, and in Dauncinge
haue ſhaken their legges, and footed it as
roundly as the beſt: But the meery conuocation
being diſſolued, and the ſolemne myrthe fyniſhed,
haue eftſones retourned to their Olde Nature,
wanted maners, and accuſtomed grauity.
               My aduyſe and counſell to them in this caſe
is,Beſte for grim and ſeuere folkes to vſe mery company. to exhort them to vſe ſuch mery compaignyes:
and often to frequent ſuch pleaſaūt conferences:
thereby to acquainte themſelues wyth curteſye &
familiar humanitye, diſcontinuinge and abandoning
that their former counterfeite and diſguyſed
ſeuerity: and to diſpoſe their minds to the wel lyking
of Nuptiall ſociety.
               To them therefore that be Splenetique and
ſicke of the Mylte, and to as many moe, as are of
Nature, ſorowfull, lumpiſh and ſow
                     ••
                  meaſurable
drynking of Wyne, exercyſe of body, company
& meery felowſhip bryngeth both a ſound health,
and a pleaſaūtnes of lyfe. For by framyng themſelues
this way, naturall heate is ſtrengthened,

and (lyke fier with often ſtyrring and rakinge)
begīneth to ſhyne, glitter & ſparckle: the wearyed
and lāguiſhing ſpyrits (when this ſynke of Melācholie
is once exhauſted & al fuliginouſnes baniſhed)
are reuiued, & wt their ſhyning brightnes
clarifye & illuminate all ye ſenſes, whoſe myniſterie
the minde vſeth, making them ready and apte
throughlye to atchieue and execute their due offices,
actions and charges. And therefore this
old Verſe (althoughe not curiouſlye penned and
fyled) which is common almoſte in euerye mans
mouth, ſeemeth to me not altogether abſurd: neyther
much ſwaruinge from truth.
               
                  Mens ſapit, & Pulmo loquitur, Fel ſuſcitat iras,
                  Spen ridere facit, cogit amare iecut.
               
               In Engliſh thus:

                     VVitte from the Mynde, Speach frō the Lūges,
                     From Gall proceedeth Ire:
                     From Mylte is cauſed Laughter: from
                     The Lyuer, Loues deſire.
                  
               
               From the functions of which Entrailes,The ſouereigntye of the heart. the
Heart which is the founteyne of lyfe and natural
heat, and the oryginall of vitall ſpyrite, is not excluded:
as in whom, reſteth the chiefeſt and moſte
pryncipal power and faculty, in the exployting of
any thinge incident to Nature. Of it, ſuch famous
men as excell, and be renowmed for wyſedome

and experience, are called Cordati: & they
that want,Cordati. and are further of, from the ſame, are
termed by names, taken of the impotencie & imperfection
of the mynde in that behalfe, & of ſuch
affections as differ moſte from Temperaunce
and moderation. Herevppon are they that noſle
themſelues in Slouth, ydleneſſe, negligence, lazyneſſe
& eaſe (neyther addicting themſelues to any
profitable ſtudie, tendinge to the Glorye of God,
neyther to their owne auayle and furtheraunce
in dyrectinge them to anye vertuous lyuinge,Socordes.
are called Socordes. And an other ſort worſe
then theſe (called Vecordes) be they,Vecordes which ymagine
and deuiſe in their mind nothing but fraud,
colluſion, deceipt, murther, treachery, burninge,
treaſon, ſpoyle of their felow cytizens, deſtruction
to their natiue Countrey: and finally in theyr
mindes laye the Platforme and weaue the toyle,
of moſt villanous myſchyeues.
               Which inwarde vyces, and graceleſſe outrages
of the mynde, euidētly and apparaūtly deſcry
and ſhew oute themſelues in the eyes, face,
countenaunce, forehead, eyebrowes, and in all the
outward ſhape and habite of the body beſyde: & if
it ſo happen that they be therein taken tardye,
they frette and fume, they ſlampe and ſtare, they
ſtand mute and ſpeachleſſe, they ſtagger and ſolter,
they cogge and diſſemble, they wrangle & face
out the matter, they flatly denye the deede, or elſe
aunſweare ſo doubtfullye and perplexedlye,

y• a mā cānot tel▪ wher to haue them finally eyther
they will laye the faulte in an other mans necke,
as did Adam:
                  Genes. 3. or els coigne odde ſhyftes to cleare
themſelues. And if we be deſyrous to haue a paterne
of ſuch a one,Catiline. let vs beholde Catiline, a factious
yonker, (as Saluſt reporteth) and armed
wyth the brandes of ſedition againſt his frendes
and Conntrey: whoſe colour (through the conſcience
of his vngratious deedes, & diſquietnes
of mynde) was pale as aſhes, and without anye
bloude, his eyes terrible and grymme, his pace &
gate ſomewhile quicke, and ſomewhyle ſlow, and
in whoſe face and countenaunce a very harebrained
and raging madneſſe appeared.
               Wyth the like furie and outrage was kinge
Saule incenſed, to commit murthers & manye other
deteſtable enormyties.1. Reg. 20 
                  Cayn alſo ſtynged
with the ſame furyes and remorſe of mynde for
killinge his brother, fell into deſperation and vtterly
myſtruſted any forgeeuenes or mercy. For
when as the Lord God examyned him of ye murther
which he had committed,Geneſ. 4. and charged him wt
the haynous cruelty thereof, Cain as thoughe he
had bene guyltleſſe in the matter, flatly aunſweared,
that hee could neither tell what was become
of his brother,Cain a patterne of deſperation. neyther where hee was, nor howe
he fared, nor what he did, but impudētly auerred
himſelf vtterly ignoraūt of al dealings touching
the ſame.
               Of the defectes of the heart and infirmity of ye
minde and reaſonable part, are they termed Excordes,
                  
in whom is reſtaunte ſome parte of Melancholie,
but the ſame brutiſhe: for they be voyd
of reaſon, fooliſh, blockeheaded, doltiſhe, dull and
doating, whom ſome plain wryters cal inſenſate.
S. Paule, reprouing the Galathians of fooliſhnes,Gal. 3.
calleth them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to ſay, groſſewitted,
dullards, blockes, fooles and not of capacity
able to conceiue thinges good and holeſome, but
ſtarters backe from the profeſſion and doctrine
wherein he had inſtructed them.
               And therefore the Brayne or principalitye of
Reaſon,Agreement betwene the Heart and the Braine. conſpyreth and agreeth with the ſtrēgth
and power of the heart, and theſe twaine do mutually
ayde one an other: ſo that they (in whom
reigneth wit, reaſon, iudgemente and vnderſtanding)
are very aptly called Cordati, diſcrete and
wyſe. For by the meanes of thoſe helpes and furtheraunces,
they ſtoutly attempte and couragiouſly
compaſſe great and waightye matters, and
what ſoeuer the mynde conceyueth, they by direction
and guyding of wyſedome, bring to paſſe and
execute.
               The other afore rehearſed Entrailes,The Gall is the foūteina of Anger. haue alſo
their proper force and efficacie, as the Gal miniſtreth
cauſe and occaſion to Anger, brawlinge,
contention,T
                        •
                     e Lyuer cauſeth luſt and carnall deſire. chydinge and quarellinge. The Lyuer
abounding with Bloud, & heated wt Wyne,
incyteth the Reynes to ye deſyre of amorous embracements,
fleſhly concupiſcence, lecherous luſt,
riot and laſciuiouſnes. The heart, by help of the

Lūges, the vocal Artery and tongue (which ſerueth
for vtteraunce of woordes and internall deuiſes)
expreſſeth and vttereth the cogitatiōs and
meanings of the mynde. The Splene or Mylt
(if it be not otherwiſe empeached) maketh a man
exceedingly to delite in ieſtinge,The Mylte beinge in right caſe, cauſe of myrthe and cherefulnes laughter, myrth,
paſtime and wātonnes, mynding no earneſt matters,
but letting the world ſlyde, geeueth himſelfe
to paſſe the time merilye. Contrariwyſe if it bee
ſurcharged and ouerwhelmed with toomuch cō
                  fluxe
of fylthye Humour, and be debarred or diſappoynted
of the ordinarye helpe and ayde of the
Lyuer, either through imbecillity or obſtruction,
then bringeth it manye diſcommodities and annoyaunces,
no leſſe hurtful and preiudicial to the
mynde then to the bodye,The Mylte affected, maketh the mynde heauy and ſad, as Heauyneſſe, ſorowe,
ſadneſſe, feare, and dread of myſſehappe to come,
carefulneſſe, thought, deſperation & diſtruſt, yt
                  ▪ is
to ſay, cleane out of hope of any better Fortune.
Which affections and perplexities caſt a mā into
exceeding griefe,Perturbations of mind torment, vexation and martyrdome,
wearing away his beauty, and waſting his
bodely comelyneſſe, and making him to loke lyke
ſyluer al fuſtyed wyth chimney ſoote, or as bright
and handſome things in a reekie houſe that are
beſmered, duſked and ſmoked.
               For when the dregges & refuſe of Humours
haue recourſe thyther in greater abundaunce
then the heate and naturall power of the member
is able to wield and qualefye, ye greater is the decaye
thereof, and much more daungerouſly is it

oppreſſed. For as a Porter or labouringe man
which caryeth burdens, heauier then his ſtrength
will allowe, cannot but fall downe vnder the
waight, thereby many times hurtinge both himſelfe,
and ſpoyling his cariage: So when greater
ſtoare of Melancholique iuyce is conueighed &
deryued into this viſcous member, then it is eyther
able to beare or by concoctiō to ouercome, it
is thereby ſundry wyſe diſtempered and brought
into many diſeaſes.
               For when the Splene is affected, the Stomacke
conſequently ſuffreth cruditie,Diſeaſes of the Splene. loathing of
meate, and is much infeſted wyth breakinge of
ſower wynde vpwarde: the Hypochondrion or
waſt, and the heart ſtrings inflated and ſwolne, ye
body becommeth ſlender and thinne, the gummes
vlcered with mattry wheales, the teeth wān coloured,
ruſtie, looſe, hoariſh & rotten, theyr mouth
ſtinking, their Chawes rammiſhe,
And throate vpbelching fulſome breathes.Perſ. Sa. 4.
                  
               
               Into the number of theſe ſicklie diſtemperaū
                  ces
and affects of the Mylt, I reckē alſo the diſeaſes,
yt of old writers were named Stomaracce &
Scelotyrbe, in Dutch, namely of the Phryſelanders
(of whom manye in the Sprynge and Autume
be ther wt troubled) vulgarly called Schoirbuick,
& of ſome Barbarous wryters, Scarrificatiō
of ye belly. It cōmeth & is engēdred of much

corrupte baggage, and filthye 
                     •
                  yncke of naughtye
Humours, which ſhyfting out of the Mylte into
the Stomack, beerayeth the teeth and gummes
with a certaine loathſome and contagious infection:
and for that, a parte thereof falleth downe
into the feete, it is preſently ſeene that the Leggs
and Knees ſhrincke together and waxe weake, ye
ioynts lewſe and enfeebled, the colour alonge the
Thighes and Hammes, euen to the ſoale of the
foote, of ſundry hewes, and vglie to beholde.
The nature and curatiō of which diſeaſe, becauſe
it is exactly diſcourſed and learnedly handled already
in a ſeuerall booke by it ſelfe, by D. Guil.
Lemnie, I deeme ſuperfluous & needleſſe here

                     •
                  n this place any further to proſecute.
               But all theſe diſcommodities and inconueniences
of the Mylt might the better be borne wtal,
ſo that the loweſt members and the abiect & ignoble
parts, were onely ſubiecte to the harmes &
annoyaunces thereof, (and yet are theſe no leſſe
neceſſary in a body, then Pryuies and Synks in
a houſe which ſerue to ſcoure and cary out al fylty
Sullage) but when the principall members,
and Organes of witte and Reaſon, chaunce with
ſemblable harme to be attached, and with ſundry
affectiōs be diſtēpered, ye caſe requyreth, greater
diligence and care to be employed, for the packinge
awaye of ſuch backfrendes and ennemyes.
For the fulſome vapours (which as it were out
of a dampiſhe Marſhe or ſtinkinge Camerine,)
ſtryke vpward, do annoy ye Brayne wt greeuous

and odious fumes, and diſtemper the Spirits
Animall wyth a ſtraunge and forreine quality.
Hereof commeth diſquietnes of mynde and alienation
of right witts,Signes of a deſtēpered Brayne. abſurde cogitations, troubleſom
Dreames, gyddineſſe of the head, ringing
of the eares, dazeling of eyes, mournefall ſighes,
trembling and beating of heart, a mynde ſorowfull,
cōfortleſſe, perplexed, penſiue and feareful:
inſomuch that they which be in this ſort affected,
diſtruſt, & be afrayed aſwell of their frends as of
their enemyes, looking about them for feare of
daunger euery mynute of an houre, trembling at
euery ſmal noyſe and wagging of a leafe,Tormentes of an vnquiet mynde. & ready
for feare to runne into a mouſe hoale, althoughe
there be no cauſe of anye ſuch feare at all: and if
they be demaūded y• cauſe why they ſo pine away
themſelues, with needeleſſe care and booteleſſe ſorowe,
eyther they will make no aunſweare at all:
or if they do, very vnwillingly & wyth much ado.
Inſomuch that thereupon they wil deſyre to ſhift
and conueighe themſelues oute of all companye,
not abyding anye felowſhip nor conference with
frends, but peaking in darke corners and ſecrete
ſolitary places,Timon a hater of all men. lyke Timon (syrnamed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
becauſe he hated all men) and Bellerophō,
who (as Homere reporteth) aſſayed to ſhake
of his carefull thoughtes and penſiue dolours by
beſtowing himſelfe in ſome waſte wilderneſſe or
ſolytary corner.
               
                  
                  For he poore ſoule, in queachie vvoods did ſtalk,
                  Abroad in Fields,Iliad. 3. & vvayleſſe ſoyles aloane:
                  No ſight of men, no company, no talke,
                  Could hee abyde: but fret his hart vvith moane.
               
               By many and ſundrye wayes do men fall into
this ill caſe and habiting, who afore were cleare &
free ynough from it.Cauſes of Melācholy affections. Some by the ſtayinge of
their Hemorrhoides, and ſtopping of their naturall
Purgations or Flowers, or by the reſtraynt
of ſome ordinary and accuſtomed iſſue. Some
be brought into it, through long ſorrow and heauyneſſe
for the death of their Parentes, or ſome
greate loſſe of worldly wealth, or finally by myſſing
and beyng diſappointed of ſome great deſyre
and expectation, which they hoped & had, of ſome
thing to come to paſſe.
               Yea there be ſome that haue fallen into this
Melancholike habite by watchinge in the nighte
at their Studye at vnſeaſonable houres, by leading
a peakiſh and ſolitary life, by hunger, penurie
and ſtreict fare, or els by vſing and accuſtoming
ſome kinds of nouriſhments, whereby they
brought themſelues into a cold & drye diſtemperaunce.
Many through the conſcience of their
former myſſedeedes, and remorſe of their wicked
and abhominable lyfe aforetime ledde: haue plū
                  ged
into theſe Melācholike affects, dryuing thē
                  ſelues
many times into ſuch great incōueniēces,Torment of an vnquiet and guiltye conſcience.
that what with blindneſſe, furi
                     •
                  , madneſſe & wāte
of right mynde, they become weary of their liues,

and ſuffer manye horrible and bitter torments.
For as Iuuenal right aptly ſayth:

                     Aye laſting ſorovv, thought, & pyning care,
                     Surpryſeth their diſtreſſed mynds ful ſore:Saty. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                     
                     It ſlaketh not at meales and daily fare,
                     But day by day encreaſeth more & more.
                     In night vvhē Sleepe ſhould vvearyed limms restore
                     And fresh againe to vvonted labours make,
                     Their guilt vvil not permit them reſt to take.
                     Streightvvayes repayres into remēbraunce than
                     Their Sacryledge, and ſinne againſt their God:
                     Ech flaſh of lyghtning makes them pale & vvan:
                     They ſvveat for feare: they loke for vvreckful rod
                     Of Diuine Iuſtice: vvho amyſſe haue trod
                     Their ſteps on earth: one thunder clap vvil make,
                     Their harts like Aſpen leafe, to pant and quake.
                  
               
               Behold here (gētle Reader) the panges, vexations,
feares and torments of a wicked mynde &
of an afflicted Conſcience,Remo
                        •••
                      Conſci
                        ••
                      for wi
                        ••
                      deedes denounced by God to
lighte vppon ſo many as forſake his lawes, and
rebelliouſly contemne his commaūdements: inſo
much y• (as the Prophet ſayth) he ſendeth vppon
them,Eſay 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the Spyrit of dizzeneſſe or gyddyneſſe,
& maketh them to erre in euery good worke, euē
as a Drunken man ſtaggereth in his vomyte,
ſo that by reaſon of their blyndneſſe of Hearte,
& contempte of God, and his Worde, in any diſtreſſe
or calamitye, yea in the horror of Death,

they haue nothing wherewithall to comfort their
weakeneſſe,Deſpyſinge of Gods word, auenged and puniſhed. or to ſalue their troubled conſciences
wtal: but haue al theyr witts, deuyſes & thoughts
perplexed and confuſed: becauſe they leane to a
broken wall, that is, to a thing without ſtrength,
not able to relieue them, but rather ſit to hurte
them:Eſay. 36 Leaning to a broken reede. and as Eſay ſayth, They put their truſt, in
a broken ſtaffe of Reede: Whereby he meaneth,
that they repoſe their hope and confidēce in that,
which is ſo farre from being able to helpe & ſtay
them,4. Reg. 18. that it rather hurteth ſo many as leane vnto
it,Ezech. 29. and (as Ezechel ſayth) bruiſeth and renteth
theyr handes.
               There are beſyde theſe, manye other Examples
whereby God putteth the wicked in feare, and
threateneth plagues to ſuch as deſpyſe & forſake
his word and Commaundement. If thou (ſayth
he) refuſe to harken to the voyce of the Lord thy
God,
                  Deut. 28. 
                  he vvil ſmyte thee vvith madneſſe & blyndneſſe,
& geeue thee an vnquiet hearte, & daſing
eyes & ſorovv of mynd: & thy lyfe ſhall hang in
doubt before thee: and thou ſhalt feare both day
& night, & ſhalt haue no aſſuraūce in thy lyfe. In
the morning thou ſhalt ſay, vvould God it vvere
night: and at night thou ſhalt ſay, vvould God it
vvere Morninge, for feare vvherein thy hearte
ſhalbe, and for thoſe ſightes and viſions vvhich
thyne eyes ſhall ſee. Againe in another place,
he ſheweth what plagues, diſenſes and vexations
he will ſend vpon them. I vvill (ſayth the Lord)
and that quickly,
                  Leuit. 26. 
                  viſite you, vvith cold, hunger, &

extreme heates: you ſhall flee vvhen as no man
follovveth you, and the noyſe of a ſhakinge leafe
ſhall make you afrayde: and vvhen yee flee the
ſvveard, you ſhal fal, no mā folovving vpō you, &
your ſoule ſhall pyne avvay in your vnrighteouſnes,
and myſſedeedes. No whitte better happes
doth Ieremie the Prophet thūder out vpon thē y•
ſhrinke from God and reſiſt his word, ſeeking to
oppreſſe ye worſhippers therof in truth, Saying:
Be thou not terrible vnto mee O Lord,
                  Iere. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  for thou
art my 
                        •
                     ope, in the day of my tribulatiō & affliction:
Let my perſecutours be confounded, but not
mee: Let them be afrayde, and not mee. Bringe
vppon them the time of their plague, and bruyſe
them vvith double contrition. For when a mā is
both tormented in mynde, and afflicted wyth the
loſſe of worldly wealth,Double c
                        ••
                     
                     trition. and alſo diſtempered and
out of good frame in body, that mā is with double
contrition plagued.
               Forſomuch therefore as theſe Melancholike
furyes and perturbations proceede of ſundry and
diuers cauſes, it is expediente firſt of all, to take
away the headſpryng of the whole miſchiefe, & to
pluck vp by the rootes that inconuenience which
diſtēpereth the mynde. The next is, to cheeriſhe
& tēder the body wyth all conuenient & behoouefull
attendaunce: and by al meanes poſſible to aſſay,
ſomewhat to eaſe and mitigate thoſe greate
diſtemperaunces that infeſt aſwell their bodyes,
as theyr myndes. For ſurelye the caſe of theſe
kinde of perſons is to bee pytied, inſomuch that

none (except ſuch as make non accompt of honeſty
and humanity) eyther will or ought to flowte or
mocke at them, but rather will lament & be ſorie
to ſee them brought into ſuch pytiful taking, and
to be ſo lamentably fallen from the iudgement of
right witte and reaſon.
               S. Paule hath a worthye ſaylinge, which alſo
may well ve applyed to theſe perſons. Let him
(ſayth he) that thinketh himſelfe to ſtande,
                  1. Cor. 10. 
                  take
heede leſt he fall: Whereby he aduyſeth and admoniſheth
euery man (in the whole courſe of this
lyfe) not to be too proud of any proſperity & welfare,
neyther (in putting toomuch truſt therin) to
promyſe vnto himſelf ſecurity. For it may com to
paſſe, yt by ſome myſfortune or outward accidente
he may be taken tardie, & fall himſelfe into worſe
diſeaſes both of body and mynde, and greater thē
they, whom a litle afore he ſo much ſkorned and
mocked.
               But becauſe euery one may readily vnderſtād
and knowe the notes & tokens of a cold and drye
Complexion,Notes of a cold & drye Complexiō. I will heere by the way deſcribe &
ſhew aſwel the euidēt marks of the bodely ſhape
outwardlye, as thoſe of ye mynd inwardly, which
in words, deedes and conuerſatiō, ſhew out them
ſelues apparantly: and finally what effecte Melancholy
worketh. And becauſe Melancholike
nature is ſubiect to this Conſtitution, the ſame
ſignes and tokens are alſo hyther to be referred.
For whoſoeuer is diſpoſed to haue ful tryal of a
cold and dry complexioned body, and throughlye

eyeth them that be Melancholicke, ſhall at ye firſt
ſight, plainly perceyue them in al poynts to agree
together. For theſe complexioned perſons are of
body ill fauoured, leane, dry, lank, pylde ſkinned,
and wythout hayre, crokenayled, which throughe
dryneſſe or ſiccitie become and grow crooked, euē
like horne or leather that crumpleth together:
ſpecially when this habite is throughlye by continuaunce
ſettled, and wyth encreaſe of qualities
hath taken deepe rootes, as appeareth in them y•
be worne w
                     •
                  th ſicknes and Oldage.
               And becauſe al the parts of the body do fade,
drowpe,Perſōs Ph
                        ••
                     gmatick 
                        〈◊〉
                      coloured. and be no longer nouriſhed, it happeneth
that the haires waxe thinne, and by little & little
fall of, and the face becommeth pale, yelowyſhe &
ſwarty. For in all them that be Splenetique, ye
colour fadeth and decayeth, the feete ſwel, ye Stomack
is with crudity diſtempered, and by reaſon
of ill humours hauing influence into it, is many
times troubled & ſubiect to belking & ſower vomitting,
y• breaking out wherof, doth greatly eaſe
them. As touching ye notes & markes of their
minds, they are churliſh, whyning, wayward & ill
to pleaſe, ſtubborne, intractable, obſtinate, greedy
of worldly goods, & couetous of money, pinching
and ſparing, whē they haue got it, & not daringe
to ſpēd or beſtow vpon thēſelues ſuch things, as
the neceſſity of mās life for vſe requyreth. A man
may alſo know thē by their kind of gate: for they
vſe a certaine ſlow pace & ſoft nyce gate, holdinge
down their heads, wt coūtenaunce & loke ſo grim

and frowninge, as thoughe they were lately come
out of Trophonius denne,Trophonius Denne. S. Patrickes Purgatory. or oute of ſome Caue
vnder the ground (ſuch as the fabulous yawning
of the earth in Irelande, commonlye tearmed S.
Patrickes denne or Purgatorye) is. To conclude,
the grimme and ſurlye Planet of Saturne,
together wyth Melancholie ſo diſpoſeth them, yt
(as though they were bound by vow to ſylence &
taciturnity) a man ſhall ſcantly get a word out of
their mouthes. Theſe therfore and many other
lyke, are incident vnto that cōplexion and habite,
which is cold and drye: and do ordinarily accompanye
that kinde of naturall Melancholie, which
is ſomewhat is digreſſed from his righte ſtate and
purity.
               But yt, which is in ye body beſide & cōtrary to nature,
is farre worſe and more pernicious:Three ſorts of vnnatural Melācholy. and it
is aptlie tearmed blacke Melancholie, whereof
there bee three ſortes or differences. One is of
Melancholike iuyce, turned eyther by putrefaction
or combuſtion of ſtraunge and forreyne heat
into Aſhes, like Wood, or other combuſtible
ſubſtaunce burnt, & wyth the force of fier brought
into Cinders. That which is putrefyed hath a
ſower, ſharpe and tart quality. That which proceedeth
of heate, doth adure or burne, and wyth
his ſharpe and byting Nature doth much infeſ
                     •
                  e
and diſquiet the body, differing from Melancholike
iuyce as Lees burnt, do frō Lees & feces not
burnt: For theſe feces and Lees which were neuer
aduſted and burnt, are a great deale myelder

then thoſe wherof Aqua vite or Aqua Compoſita
is made. The ſeconde which is worſt of all,
is compact and made of yealowe or yolkie Choler
aduſte, whereby it commeth to paſſe that it is
blacke, like pytch, and ſhyneth like to Ieate, Bitumen,
Colophonia, and as certayne reſynie ſtuffe,
intermyngled and perfuſed wyth a Yelowyſhe &
blacke ſhyning, by reaſon of the fierye conſiſtence
of the parts, in that thicke and compact matter.
It is therefore blacke of coloure when it is not
much aduſte, burned & enflamed like vnto Walworte,
or Elder berryes, Pryuet, Peonie beries,
or the Kernelles of blacke Cheryes and blacke
Grapes: the iuyce whereof dyeth and coloureth
a mans hands, wyth a blacke or bloudy colour.
And if it happen to bee enflamed and ſet in extreme
heate,The col
                        ••
                      of Mela
                        ••
                      choly en
                        •••
                     med. then is it of coloure entermingled
with a purple ſhyning, lyke glowyng hoat Gold,
newly burnt in the fyer. If it be immoderatelye
and toomuch enflamed, it bringeth the mynde into
furious fitts, phrenticke rages, and brainſicke
madneſſe: Contrarylye, when all thinges conſiſte
wythin mediocritye, it cauſeth and bringeth
forth ſharpneſſe of witte, excellency of learning,
ſubtility of inuentiō, eloquence of tongue & right
ſkilful vtteraunce, wt knowledge howe to ſpeake.
The laſt kinde of Melancholy, is engendred of ye
aduſtion o
                     •
                   Phlegme.
               Foraſmuch therfore as there be ſo many ſorts
of Melācholie, and becauſe Melancholique perſons
be of ſo ſundry cōditions, maners, natures,

inclinatiōs, bodely proportions, complexiōs & colours,
therfore euery one muſt be founde out and
knowen by the proper markes and tokens, peculiar,
incident and appertayning to them.Signes of ſuche as bee ſubiecte to Melācholy. For
they that be broughte into this caſe and habite by
Choler or bloud aduſt, haue bigge ſwolne veynes:
for they ſwell wyth wyndynes, their bodyes
tawnie coloured, and very rough withall, thicke
hatred and buſhie, by reaſon of thabundaunce of
heate, ſwelling and bigge lippes, by reaſon of the
concourſe of Humour and flatuous ſpyrite, into
the higher parts, wheruppon it alſo happeneth yt
their eyes ſometime be eminent and bearing out:
Againe, ſometime (whē Humours decreaſe) hollow
and ſtandyng inwarde: ſometime ſwyft mouing
and twynckling, ſometimes ſtaying, vnmoueable
and not at all quiuering: the tōgue (which
is interpreter of all ſecreets of the mynde) ſomewhile
quicke and ready, ſomewhile ſtammering,
foltering & vnable to delyuer out a playne word:
which diſtemperaunce and affecte,Stāmeringe of tongue. may many tymes
happen by occaſion of the time of the yeare,
Age, Countrey, weather foggie and dimme, or
fayre and cleare, and finallye by the quality of
meate and drincke, and hereuppon maye it be endūed
with ſome cold Humour.
               This Humour is manyfolde and of ſundrye
ſorts, wonderfullye framinge in the bodyes and
mynds of men diuers diſpoſitions, and in them
conſtituting ſundry habites, maners and conditions.
For it may after a ſort be reſembled vnto
Yron. Seacoales or Charcoales, which beinge

flered, appeare glowing hoate, ſhyning lyke burniſhed
Golde, and burninge the members of the
touchers: but being quenched, they looke blacke,
cankered & ruſtie. Euen ſo Melancholie, albeit
it be cold and drye, and in colour drawinge ſomewhat
vnto blacknes, yet reteyneth it ſome heat of
the faculty and nature of that,Melancholy hath ſome heate in it. frō whēce it came,
that is to ſaye, Choler or Bloud. For ſo the
Dregges or mother of Oyle, the feees or vineger
of Wyne, Embers and Coales, retayne and haue
a certaine ſmacke or nature of the Brandes whē
they ſmoaked and were on fler. Therefore Melancholie
is not altogether without heate, but reteyneth
ſome deale of that quality in it. For although
it be a long while ere it wyll be enflamed
and throughly heated, like Yron which muſt both
be mollifyed and tempered wyth force of moſte
ardent & bituminous coales, & alſo wt the helpe of
blowing Bellowes, for ye making of ye ſame malleable
& apt to the Forge & Anuile: yet beyng once
throughly heated, hath ſuch an exceſſiue glowing
ardentnes, y• there cānot be any thinge more aduſtiue.
And hereupon, in a maner all at one inſtāt
& wtout any time betwixt, do we ſee them ſodeinly
chaūged frō laughter & myrth, into ſorrow & pē
                  ſtuenes.
For whē this Humor is once heated (becauſe
frō it proceede & come bright & ſyncere Spirits)
theſe Melancholike perſons are exceedingly
ſet vpō their mercy pin, & (paſt al godsforbod)
iocund, & pleaſurably geeuen to ſinging, daūcing
ſkippīg & ſpōrting, & (cōtrary to their accuſtomed

to eueryone curteous, affable, liberal and frendly,
yea altogether pleaſauntlye diſpoſed and not
ſquemiſh to offer a kind kiſſe & embracemēt vnto
any luſty wench: and nothing then ſo much deſyring
as mariage, therby to enioy the hoped fruict
of Children, and to haue their name in remembraunce
to poſterity: very earneſtlye bewaylinge
their loſſe of former time, repenting that they had
not long agone tyed themſelues to the World, &
maryed.Melancholike perſons fickle headed and vnconſtant. But when this great heat is cold, and
the earneſt panges of this newfāgled mynde ſettled,
whē their Bloude waxeth cold, & their ſpyrites
at reſte, they go backe from all former reſolutions,
and are ready to vnſaye al that euer they
ſayde before. They condemne and deteſte yeſterdayes
deedes, and are much aſhamed of their
owne ouerſlight and fooliſhnes.
               Whenſoeuer therefore Melancholie groweth
into much coldnes,Affectes of Melancholie, cold. it taketh away from a man
his ſharpenes of witte and vnderſtandinge, his
aſſured hope and confidence, and all his manlye
ſtrength and courage, ſo that he hardly eyther attempteth
or archieueth any matter of excellency &
worthynes: for ſuch be doltiſh, dull, ſlow, and lū
                  piſhe,
vnapt to atteyne, learne and conceyue anye
good diſciplines or commendable Arts: and this
happeneth in that kinde of Melācholie, which is
mixed wyth greate ſtoare of colde,Doltiſhe or Aſſelike Melancholie. and toughe
Phlegme. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that
ſuch kinde of men (lyke Aſſes or other brute beaſtes)
be blockiſh, vnapt, dull and forgetfull.
               
                  
But they, whoſe Melancholie is wyth moderate
heat qualefyed,The force of Melancholie much encreaſed. and wt Bloud & other ſyncere
Humors humected & alayed, haue excellēte good
witts and ſharpe iudgements, and ſeeme to doe
many thinges ſo notablye as thoughe they were
furthered and inſpyred by ſome Diuine inſtincte
or motion.Probl. ſect. 30. Queſt. 13. And for this cauſe doth Ariſtotle
not vnaptly lyken & compare this Humour vnto
Wyne. For as Wyne produceth and cauſeth
ſundry, & the ſame verye ridiculous faſhions according
to the ſeuerall nature of euery man, and
according to the effect and operation of the Wyne
it ſelfe, (for one force and effecte hath Spaniſhe
wyne, an other French, an other, Malueſye, an other
Corſycke, and an other Rheniſh) ſo Melancholie
cauſeth diuers maners and ſundry conſtitutions.
And hereuppō in the Dutch phraſe of
ſpeach,Sundry cō
                     ditions of Drouken folkes. there are reckened vp certaine conditions
and delightes of Drunken men. Some beinge
cupſhot, are contentious & brawling: Some ſtil,
and neuer a woorde but mumme: Some verye
babblatiue and keeping a foule coyle: ſome weeping,
howling and heauy couraged. Yea ſome of
this beaſtly Crew we ſee to be threatners, cruel,
bitter, fierce, ſpightful, arrogant, ſelfwilled, vainglorious,
proude, wanton, laſciuious, toying, full
of fooliſhe geſture, vnquiet, vnſtable, geeuen to
carnall Luſte, and loues deſire, but as Iuuenall
ſayth:

                     VVhich haue great luſt to Venus game,
                     Yet in the Act,Sat. 10. vveake, faint and lame.
                  
               
               
                  
For drunkards and Melancholike perſons
are very lecherous and deſyrous of womens cō
                  panye,Melancholyke folkes lecherous.
by reaſon that theyr genitall members
ſwell and be wyth inflations diſtended: but all
their courage is ſtreightwayes layed, and al venerous
luſtyneſſe ſoone quayled,Drunkards in the act of generation, very weake and feeble. inſomuch that
their wyues manye tymes, be defeacted of theyr
hope, and thincke themſelues wyth childe, when
they be not ſo in deede, by reaſon that theyr bellyes
be ſwelled and inflated wyth wynde, rather
then wyth Seede.
               Melancholye therefore and Drunkenneſſe, are
in cōdition alike. For Drunkards are ledde with
many affections and phanſtes, gybing and geſturing
as though they were Stage Players. For
as Horace very aptly wryteth:

                     VVhat thing dares not a drōken nolle aduēture?
                     All ſecretes of the heart it doth vnfold:Lib. 1. Epist. 5.
                     
                     It vvarranteth our hopes as by Indenture:
                     A man vnarmde to fight it maketh holde:
                     From penſiue cares and troubles manyfold
                     It ryds the minde: it Arts doth teach vvith grace:
                     VVhō hath not Cups vvel fraught made eloquēt?
                     VVhoſe tōgue hath not thereafter trould apace?
                     This pleaſaunt iuyce to them ſuch force hath lēt.
                     VVhat poore ſo pīcht, that doth not quight forget.
                     His ruful ſtate, vvhē vvyne & he haue met.
                  
               
               Thinges no leſſe ridiculous and fooliſhe are

lykewiſe to bee ſeene in perſons Melancholike:
for many in their daily dealings, ſhew very apiſhe
and fonde faſhions, and (althoughe theyr witts
be nothing at all empayred or alyenated) yet doe
they occupie themſelues in matters lighte, tryflinge,
vayne and friuolous. For they be diſtempered
in theyr right Witte, feedinge theyr owne
phantaſies, and doatinge not earneſtlye and in
deede, but after a pleaſaūt ſort, as perſons dwelling
in a delightful and pleaſurable madneſſe: inſomuch
that there be ſome of them which thinke
themſelues ill apayde, and be right ſory that they
haue recouered the right ſtate of their witts and
come well home againe: ſharpely expoſtulating
wyth their welwilling frends, which frendly
laboured and toke paynes for their recure: and
blaming them as men that had rather done them
harme then good. One of this plighte, a Grecian
borne, & of no baſe houſe & pedagrew, doth
Horace depaint and ſet out vnto vs thus:

                     VVho thought himſelfe braue melody to heare,
                     And galaunt Blouds on Stage their parts to play,Lib. 2. Epiſt. 2.
                     
                     Such pleaſure he conceyued in this geare:
                     That on the Stage vvhich empty vvas all day,
                     He ſate and fed his fancye eu'ry vvay,
                     VVith ſight of that vvhich vvas not ſo in deede,
                     Yet ſeemde to him as true, as vvas his Creede.
                     
                        
At length vvhē he by meanes of vvealthy frends,
                     And diligent attendaunce at any ynch,
                     By drougs & drīcks (vvhich help & ſuccour lēds)
                     Recured vvas from that his greuous pynch,
                     And ryd from that his Melancholie vvrynch:
                     In fayth (
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hee) my frēds, you haue my ſpoyled
                     And kylde me cleane: by you I am thus foyled.
                     Sure, vnto me you haue done great diſpleaſure,
                     To make frō me (perforce) this doating treaſure
                     vvhich fed my mind vvith ioy vvithoutē meaſure.
                  
               
               So ſynce the time that I firſt begā to profeſſe
Phiſick, many haue bin brought vnto me, whoſe
mynds ranne vppon abſurde imaginations and
fonde Phātaſtes.Certaine hiſtoryes of Melancholike perſons There was one which thought
himſelfe to haue a Noſe ſo bigge, and of ſuch a
prodigious length, that he thought hee caryed about
wyth him the Snoute or Muſſell of an Oliphant,
and that the ſame in euery thing that hee
went about, hindered him: inſomuch that ſometime
(as he thoughte) it laye in the diſhe wherein
his meate was. The Phiſition was ſenſe for,
who ſuſpecting (as truth was) ye ſame to be nothing
els then a Melācholike affectio, hādſomly,
cloſely, & cleanly cōueighed a lōg Pudding vnto
his Noſe: that done, he toke hold of a piece of the
very typpe of the fleſhe thereof, and wyth a Barbers
raſure finely cut away ye Noſe which in Imaginatiō
y• party afore thoght himſelf to haue:
and immediatly thervpon bringing his Pacient
a ſleepe wyth a kinde of confected drinck, and preſcribing

vnto him a holeſome diet otherwyſe, baniſhed
and toke quight away frō him, all ye feare
of harme and inconuenience, which afore enconbred
him.
               An other Hypochondriake person, that is to ſay,
one, whoſe Hartſtrynges were embolned and
ſwolne wyth Melancholie Humour and inflammatiōs,
was verily perſwaded, ye hee had frogges
and Toades in his bealie, which gnawed &
eate aſunder his Entrailes: neyther could he by
any man be perſwaded to thincke the contrary:
The Phyſition to make him more obedient and
wylling (for Melancholike folkes will hardly be
diſſwaded or brought from theyr opynions, that
they once lodge wythin their owne cōceipts) ſoothed
his ſayings, and plainlye affyrmed that of
certaynty there were ſuch thinges within him in
deede as hee reported.
               Hereuppon after the partye had taken a Purgation,
and vſed the helpe of a Clyſter, there was
a meane founde to put ſome ſuch crawlynge vermyne
into the baſen of his cloſe Stoole. Now,
when the Purgation had wroughte his nature &
effect, he made many Syeges and the ſame verye
abundantlye: and after viewe of his excrements
taken, and ſeyng therein what kinde of creatures
ſwymmed, he reſted ſatiſfyed in mynde, and diſmiſſed
from him that fooliſh and vayne opynion
before conceyued.
               An other there was which thought his Buttocks
were made of glaſſe, inſomuch that he durſt

not do any thing but ſtanding, for feare leaſt if he
ſhould ſitte, he ſhould breake his rum
                     •
                  e, and the
Glaſſe flye into peeces. Theſe and ſuch like
kinds of Dotage and foolery, which eyther prouoke
others or themſelues to laughter and gladneſſe,
are quieter (as Hippocrates ſayth) and nothinge
fierce and outragious. But thoſe which
proceede of a certayne ſtudie and carefull meditation
are worſe, as they that be accompanyed wt 
a certayne furious temerity and raſhnes, ſodainly
and vnloked for, damnyflyng and preiudycinge
both themſelues and others.
               After this like ſort euen within our Memory,
a certayne Gentleman fell into ſuch an agonie, &
fooles paradiſe, that he thoughte himſelfe dead, &
was in himſelfe perſwaded to bee departed oute
of this life, and hereuppon when his frends and
acquaintaunce with all kinde of fayre ſpeeches,A notable ſtory and reporte of a certaine Melancholike man.
flattering termes and chyding words had aſſayed
to reſtoare him to his former ſtrength and powers
now decayed: he turned the deafe eare to all
that they ſayde, and refuſed all that they to him
offered, affyrminge himſelfe to be deade, and that
a man in his caſe
                     •
                  needed no ſuſtenaunce or nouriſhment.
So long continued he in this fonde
Humour, till he was ready to ſterue for hunger.
When the ſeuenth day was now at hand (longer
then which day,Such as hee ſterued vp with famine elye vpō the ſeuēth day. ſterued & famiſhed perſons cannot
liue) they beganne to deuyſe with themſelues
which way to heale this abſurd paſſion and diſtemperaūce
of their freend. They vſed therfore

this pollicie: They cauſed certayne counterfeit
perſons lapped in their ſhrowdinge ſheetes, and
tyed after ye maner of dead Corſes that be layed
vppon Coffyns, and caryed to buriall, to be
broughte into a darke Parlour: where theſe diſguyſed
perſons ſitting down at the Table, which
was wel furniſhed wyth choyſe of ſundry diſhes,
tell to theyr victualls luſtely. The Paſſioned
partly beholdyng theſe fellowes, demaunded of
them whereabout they went, and what kinde of
people they were: They aunſweared, ye they were
dead men. What? (quoth hee) do dead men eare
and dryncke? Yea (ſayd they) and that ſhalt thou
prooue true, if thou wilt come and ſit wyth vs.
Streightwayes ſkipped this Pacient out of his
Bedde, and with the other counterfect dead men,
fedde very well and largelye: and after Supper
was hee broughtt into a Sleepe by a drincke of
purpoſe made for that intent. For they that bee
diſtraught of their right witts,Slepe eaſeth the ydlenes of the brain or rauing. muſt be handled
artyficially, and by no way ſo ſoone recured and
broughte into order, as by Sleepe. So by
Sybilla as Virgill wryteth, was tamed,

                     That Helliſh Curre, enradge vvith hungry crop,
                     That Cerberus vvith throates vvyde open three,Aneid. 6.
                     
                     VVas luld & brought a ſleepe vvith charmed ſop
                     VVhich vp he ſlapt vvith fangs full meerely,
                     As gub that hurled vvas to him for fee,
                     VVith druggs and hony made full ſvvete to bee.
                  
               
               
                  
It reſteth now, to ſhew by what meanes & order
Melancholike affections many be expugned or at
leaſt mitigated.How to expunge and beat downe Melācholy. Fyrſt we muſt ſearch out howe
and whereupon this diſeaſe toke his beginning,
and in what part if conſiſteth. For ſeyng there
be iii. differences of Melancholie, one principally
affecting the Brayne:Three ſorts of Melācholye. and other, the whole bodye:
the thirde Hypocondriacall or flatuous, which
comming of crudity and ill Humours, diſtempereth
the Brayne by conſente: theſe do requyre to
be by ſundry and ſeueral wayes recured. If the
whole bodye therefore be opplete and filled wyth
Melancholie iuyce, it ſhalbe beſt to beginne the
cure wyth letting the party Bloud:Whē to let Melancholike perſons bloud. in the reſte,
this remedie is thoughte vnprofitable, and to no
purpoſe, except ouermuch abundaūce of Bloud
ſeeme to requyre the ſame. Thus alſo, for the
Stitch, & ſwelling of the Splene, or for a Quartaine
Ague, it is right excellēt and good to be let
bloud in ye Veyne called Splenetica, in the inſide
of the left Arme.
               Furthermore foraſmuch as theſe kinds of mē
be for the most parte coſtyue, it ſhalbe very profitable
and requiſite,Good for Melancholike persons to bee laxatiue & ſoluble. gently to make them ſoluble &
laxatyue wt Aloe, Epithyme & ſmal fearne. For
when the Entrailes be ſlipperye, and that the excrements
may conueniently ſcowre awaye and be
auoyded, leſſe vapours and fumoſyties do aſcend
and ſtryke vp warde: wherefore Hippocrates is
of opynion,Lib. 6. Aph. 48. that it is righte holeſome for perſons
Splenetique and Melancholicke, to be laxatiue:

Finallye yt the Hemerrhoydes, ſwellinge of the
Ueynes wt Melācholyke bloud, ſwellinge of the
tuell, and the Pyles to breede and ſwell in the
Fundemente and neyther partes,Spirits ſhuffle themſelues in, amōg the humors is for theym
that be frantique and out of the righte courſe of
their wits, very good. And although euill Spyrites
dommixe thēſelues wt humours, making y•
ſame a great deale fiercer and vehementer, yet the
chiefeſte cauſe and founteine of all this miſchiefe
and inconuenience is to bee imputed to the outrage
and domination of Humours. For when
noyſom Humours be purged & groſſe fumoſities
diſperſed, the furie is well calmed, and the mind
broughte agayne into his former ſtate and perfection.
               Therefore it ſhalbe moſte for their eaſe & profite,
to procure euacuatiō to ye whole body, namely
by ye part, whereby nature moſt alloweth to be
purged:Melancholy folkes muſt keepe them ſelues ſoluble. and that, leyſurably and by conueniente
order of times: for it is not good to ſtirre ſuch
coales as theſe, wyth any ſtronge medicines and
purgations: then muſt they haue preſcrybed vnto
them, a right good and preciſe diet, and eſchue
all ſuch things as engēder thick bloud: as Beefe
and Bulles fleſh, Bacon, and ſuch as hath beene
long bryned, or hanged in the ſmoke and hardned,
wherūto are to be added Brawn & Beares fleſh,
and Venyſon ofred Deere, whiche cōmonly is
brought in, for a ſeruice at Noble mens tables: &
Hares fleſh, which cōmonly is vſed for a feſtiuall
diſh, to furniſh out the Table, when frends meete

to make meerye. Inſomuch, that I cannot but
meruayle at the vſuall faſhion of Dutchmen and
Netherlanders, amonge whom this fleſhe is. as
highly eſtemed & deſyred as anye: neyther thincke
they any banquet ſumptuous & feſtiuall ynough,Hare geeueth Melā
                     cholike nouriſhment.
vnleſſe one diſh therof be Hare: whereas no fleſh
in y• world is neerer of nature vnto Melacholie
then it. For it is cold & dry, vnleſſe the ſeely beaſt
bee firſte well courſed and hunted,Hare the holeſō
                     
                        •
                     er 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     g
                        •
                     hly hunted for that is the
way to make it ſomewhat more hoat, toothſome,
and holeſome.
               Euery part of this beaſt, is of a drying force &
vertue,Ahore good for manye purpoſes in Phiſicke. & is endued with an aſtringent facultye,
both the hayres, the ſkinne, the bloud, the Mawe
and the fleſh. For the Mawe of a Hare myngled
wyth red Wyne and dronck, ſtoppeth the bloudy
Flixe y• commeth of the excoriation and gnawīg
of the bowelles: it alſo ſtayeth womens termes:
the haires being burnt or chopped ſmal, are a preſent
and right ſouereigne thing to ſtay any great
fluxe of bloude in a wounde. The Brayne waſteth
the ſuperfluous moyſture and dryuelinge of
the mouth, and maketh the teeth to grow: y• Huckle
boane, the commiſſures & ligaments thereof,
are good to breake the ſtone. The fleſh alſo of
an Hare, if it be much eaten and vſed, cureth the
rewine that falleth out of the head, and helpeth y•
Epilepſie or falling Sicknes, which is a diſeaſe
engendered of groſſe and clammie Phlegme: ſo
that ech one of theſe doth ſufficientlye proue, this
Beaſt to be drye, & Melancholike, as the whole

condition and nature thereof, plainly ſheweth:
namely the fleſhe which in colour enclyneth to a
blackneſſe.
               Now, whereas ſome both of old & later time,
haue beene and yet be perſwaded, that the eating
of Hares fleſh, maketh men pleaſaunt and merily
diſpoſed: and not that onely, but alſo in bodelye
ſhape and coūtenance to be faire, galant, & beautiful:
I do not thinke, neither am I of opyniō, ye
any ſuch thing can happen through eating ye fleſh
of ſuch a fearefull and timorous ſeely Creature:
but ye rather hereuppon it had his beginning: becauſe
whē meery Compaignions are diſpoſed to
make good cheere, they commonly vſe to inuite
call into their compaignies ſome beautifull Damoſells,
and pleaſaunt Peates to paſſe away the
time more merily: whereas they that be of ſmall
accoumpt and harde fauoured to the eye, are
neuer requeſted vnto any ſuch pleaſurable aſſembly,
but be ſuffred to ſit ſtill at home, being reputed
in cōpariſon, but as groſſe Stuffe & of the ſecond
ſort, and ſuch as neuer (according to ye prouerbe)
taſted or eate of an Hare. Which thinge ye
Poet Martial in a certayne pleaſaunt Epigrāme
doth intimate vnto his Ladye and Miſtreſſe, in
words to this effect.
               
                  O Gellia, Lady myne, thou ſayeſt,
                  vvhen Hare thou ſendſte to mee:
                  Dayes ſeuen (Marke) thou ſhalt be fayre,
                  and beautifull of glee.
                  
                     
If theſe thy vvords (ſvveete heart) be true,
                  and roue not out of ſquare:
                  Then ſurely, Gellia, thou thy ſelfe
                  not yet haſt eaten Hare.
               
               Which opynion of auncient & long time agone
in many mens heads ſettled,To eate a Hare, a Prouerbe. I ſuppoſe hereuppon
toke his firſt beginning (for hither to of none
hath it beene expounded) that he which had been
at any ſolemne & feſtiual banquet, (ſuch I means
wherein Hare is one ſeruice) appeareth for ye next
ſeuen dayes, curteous, pleaſaunt, iocund and ful
of mery conceipts. For when a man hath bene in
pleaſaunt company and at good cheere, where all
thinges haue but meerilye diſcourſed, & the tyms
ioyouſly paſſed, there appeare for the ſpace of certayne
dayes after in hys face and countenaunce,
forehead, browes, lippes, eyes and beckes (for all
theſe are be wrayers and tellers of the minde inwardly)
great tokens of myrth and alacrytie,Moderate myrthe and bāquetting ſtirreth vp a pleaſaunt colour and reuiueth the Spirits. and
many arguments do outwardly teſtify the chereful
diſpoſitien of the internal Spyrits. For the
body being heated wyth laughing and ioyinge, wt 
kiſſing and dalying, wyth dauncinge, Wyne, and
ſinging, is made freſher and better coloured, for
that the Bloud is diffuſed into the vtter part and
habite of the body. Theſe are therfore the cauſes,
why the eating of an Hare dryueth away and
diſpelleth the Cloudy cares of the mynd, maketh
the countenaunce cleare and delectable, & the face
ruddie, fayre, and wall complexioned,
               
                  
For as they that be angrye, or perplexed wyth
feare,The outvvard countenaunce of a man, bewrayeth the inwarde affections of his mind are commonly ſeene to be of a troubled and
diſquiet mynde, and by manye outward ſignes to
bewray the affections of their afflicted conſciēce:
euen ſo they that haue the world at wyl, and their
hartes farre from all carefull affections & troubleſome
perturbations, ſhewe forth ſure and certayn
tokens therof in the body outwardly: yea the
verye countenaunce, colour, face, forhead, eyes,
mouth and generallye all the other faſhions & geſtures
thereof, do pretend and witneſſe a certain
ſecuritye of mynde that is at peace and quietnes
wythin it ſelfe.
               Now,Diet for Melancholicke perſons. as touching Diet: Let them that bee of
this cold and dry Conſtitution, and they that bee
Melācholike, accuſtome themſelues to ſuch meates
as be of good and laudable iuyce, & to drincke
that wyne which is of the beſt ſort and purest: let
them lye in very ſoft beds and ſleepe wel & longe,
let them eſchue & forbeare all things that be ſalte
and ſower: & aboue all things, let them take heede
of crudity, let thē vſe moderate exerciſe & ſtyrring
of thēſelues. For as maryſhes & ſtanding waters
become dampiſh and ſtynking: ſo likewiſe the body
lacking exerciſe, gathereth fulſoments & peſtilent
ſauours. If violent motion & exerciſe be vnto
them painful and laborious, they may recreat
and exerciſe themſelues wyth pleaſaunt ſinging,
Muſical inſtruments and delectable and walkinges.
               Let them baniſh away all affectiōs of the mind,
heauineſſe, ſorrow, thought, hatred, anger, indignation,

enuye, &c. Neither let them ſuffer any ſuch
to lodge wythin their hearts: let them alſo auoyd
ſolitaryneſſe, long abſtinence, & laſſitude: and let
them vſe at poſſible meanes to reſtore theyr right
powers,Liquide meates do quickly non riſh. firſt wyth meats and nouriſhments that
be liquide (for they do quicklyeſt nouriſh, and encomber
not the Stomacke greatly in concoction)
but when their powers bee encreaſed, let them
acquainte themſelues, and vſe meates that be ſolide
and ſubſtantiall. Let theyr bread be of the
fyneſt wheate,Such as bee ſubiecte to ſicknes and quaiſie, must eate but little bread. and let them eate thereof but meaſurablye
and ſparinglye: for it is hardlye concocted,
and taryeth longe in the ſtomacke: and
therefore to Labourers, Caryers, Maryners,
Carters and ſuch like, it bryngeth ſtrength, & engendreth
fleſh durable & faſt. Now, they that in
time of perfect and ſound health,The cauſe that brīgeth a ſtronge breath. do vſe to eate litle
bread: haue ſtrong breaths and ſtinking mouthes.
This proporciō therfore is requiſite, there
in to be vſed, to eate twyſe aſmuch in bread as in
victuall or other cates.
               As concerning the order that they are to keepe
for Dinner and ſupper, vnleſſe cuſtome be to the
contrary, or that they be troubled wyth diſtillations
of the heade, let their Supper be larger and
more in quantitye then dinner: foreſeene, that immoderate
faciety & ſurphet be alwayes eſchued.
               To be ſhort, & to knit vp this matter wyth an
holeſome aduyſe and counſell: let all ſuch things
as be prejudicial to health,Holeſome exhortatiō. and haſten oldage before

his tyme, be put away and baniſhed. Chiefly
and eſpeciallye maynteining and keeping wything
our ſelues tranquillity and conſtancy of mynde,Quietnes & tranquillity of mynd maketh all in good order and frame.
which gift we are moſt humbly and earneſtly to
craue at his handes, which moſt bountefully beſtoweth
and powreth out his bleſſed giftes & lyberalitye
vppon vs, who is God our heauenlye
Father, and his deare & eternall Sonne Chriſt
our onely Sauiour. For beſyde y• ōutward gifts
and things tranſitorye, which at his bountifull
handes, for oure vſe & cōmodity we moſte abundātly
taſt and enioy, he alſo directeth our mindes
wyth his holye Spyrite, and moueth our cogitations
& wills euery minute, to enſue that is good
and godly. He vrgeth and pricketh vs forwarde
continually, ſo that wee feele the motions of his
mighty power working in our harts, by ſtrēgthning
and confyrming our Fayth, that we thereby
conſtantly leaning to the promyſes of God, maye
reſt in a ſure truſt and vndoubted hope, to be
afterwards made partakers of his Heauenly
ioy in euerlaſting felicity.
Amen.
               
                  Thomas Newtonus, Ceſtreſhyrius.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               
                  ADoleſcencie. 29.
               Aduertiſemente to Studentes. 52
               Affections natural. 35
               Affections hovv and vvhereof they come. 9.
               proceding of ſurphet & dronkēneſſe. 10. & 59.
               Affections of the mynde alter the colour, & cō
                  plexion
of the face and bodye. 90.
               Affections cōmon to al men. 59. harmes thereof.
ibid.
               Ague called Ephemera. 102.
               Ague called Epiala. 107.
               Agues tertian. 132
               Agues burning. ibid.
               Agreement betvvene the harte & the brain. 141
               Anacardus good for the memorie. 126
               Angels good and euill. 22. & 24
               Angels entermingle and ſhuffle in, themſelues
among our humours. 153
               Anger. 58. 128. 141
               Apoplexie. 126
               Ariſtomenes his ſuttle ſhifting 43
               Arteries. 89
               Aſtoniſhment. 94
            
            
               B
               BAldneſſe hovv it commeth. 69
               Banquetting fit for perſons melancolique. 5
               moderately vſed commendable. 76
               Bathes Artificiall. 74
               Bathes naturall. ibid.
               Beard hovv to make it grovv. 42
               
                  
Beard redde, not alvvayes a token of ill nature. 130.
               Beſt thinges and excellent, muſte not vpon diſpayre
be geeuen ouer. 34
               Bloud hath all the other humours mixed in it. 86
87. 89.
               Bloud forbidden by Moyſes lavv to be eaten, &
vvhy. 89.
               Bloud of greate force in framing the diſpoſition
& maners. 96. 99
               Bloud boyleth in young perſons like ſpurginge
of nevv vvyne in the tunne. 98
               Bloud prouoketh to vvilfulnes. 101
               Bloudletting not raſhly to be enterpriſed. 55. 89
               Bloud and ſpirite the treaſure of lyfe. ibid et 86
               Bloud of fiſhes colde. 61
               Blynde byardes. 102
               Body ful of ſickneſſe maketh lyfe vnpleaſaūt. 3
               Body conſiſteth of three thinges. 7
               Body cold and drye hovv it looketh. 27
               Body and mynde, vvhole and ſicke together. 75
               Bolde raſhnes. 44
               Brabanders. 17
               Braggers. 101
               Brayne drye, cauſeth il memory. 69. 120
               Brayne moyſte, nothinge retentiue nor memoratiue.
120
               Brayne temperate, the mayntenaunce of memorye, ibid
               Braynes beſt to be eaten for the helping of memorye.
125
               
                  
Braynes diſtempered, by vvhat ſignes vve may
knovve them. 143
               Bread. 156
               Brothes, and liquid meates, ſooneſt nouriſh and
are quicklieſt digeſted. ibidē.
            
            
               C
               Cayne, a paterne of deſperation. 140
               Caloes. 99
               Canis panem ſomnians, a prouerbe. 114
               Catchpoles. 58
               Carnall act, hurtfull to drye and cold complexions.
74. hurtful in Sommer. 81. vveakeneth
the body. 120. & 133. dulleth the vvit and memory.
ibid. harmes therof. 105. commodities
therof. ibid. moderation. ibid. very hurtfull
to olde men and al dry perſons. 55
               Cauſe of fearefulnes in daungers. 93
               Cauſe vvhy many die in luſtieſt age. 3
               Charles the V. 91
               Chaſte lyuing. 7. 107
               Chaunge in old men daungerous. 51
               Children forgetfull and vvhy. 16. muſte not bee
ſkanted of reaſonable victualles. 27. vvithout
beardes vvhy. 41. ſleepie. 58. ſtirring & quicke
vvhy. 97. remembring thinges done long agoe 121.
               Childehoode. 29
               Choler. 86. of tvvo ſortes. 127. the office and
propertie therof 128
               
                  
Choler by vvhat partes of the body it is purged. 128. 133.
               Choler pale or citrine. 132
               Choler yolkie. 133. Leekiſh or greene. ibid. Ruſtie
or Braſſye. 134
               Cholericke folkes dreame many dreadful dreames.
132
               Cholericke perſons, great flouters. 99
               Chriſt for bodely ſhape, a patcine of perfection.
37. voyde of al ill affections. 38
               Clyſters. 118
               Cocke hovv to make him crovv cōtinually vvith
out ceaſſing. 127
               Cold, the decay of lyfe. 60. vvaſteth colour. 65
               Cold bodies not altogether vvithout heate. 60
               Cold perſons drovvſie and vnvveldie. 65
               Colde thinges ſtirre vp appetite. ibidē.
               Compariſon betvvene a common vvealth and a
body humaine. 11
               Cōpoūd medicines named of ſome of the chiefe
ingredientes. 32
               Compound complexions four. 84
               Complexion moyſt. 78
               Complexion drye. 65
               Complexion cold, 60
               Complexion hoate. 38
               Complexion temperate and perfect. 33
               Complexion hoate and moiſt. 87. ſubiect to putrefaction.
103
               Complexion colde and moyſt. 107
               Complexion hoate and drye, or cholericke, 127
               
                  
Cōplexion cold and dry, or melancholicke. 135.
               Concorde in a Realme. 12
               Concord in mannes body. 84
               Cōtinēcie & chaſtity a ſpeciall gyft of God. 107
               Contempt of God and his vvord puniſhed. 144
               Contrition. 145
               Conuenient exerciſe holſome. 7
               Coriander. 126
               Countenaūce outvvard bevvrayeth the affectiō
of the mynde invvardely. 156
               Countenaunce, the image of the mynde. 36
               Counterfeit gate. 36
               Colour ſhevveth the complexion. 89
               Coūſellours levvdly diſpoſed do much harm to
youth. 98
               Counſel good, profitable to youth. 99
               Coughe. 109
               Creatures moſte cold in touching. 61
               Craſis. 32
               Criſis. 102
               Cruditie hurtfull. 9. 118
               Cuſtome that is il, muſt by little and little be altered.
50
               Curioſitie in ſearching highe myſteries. 77
            
            
               D
               DAuid ſlevve a Lyon, a Beare, & Goliah. 44
               Death vvhat it is. 135. & 28.
               Death eyther violent or naturall. 67
               Death by yll dyet and ſurphet, haſtened before
his tyme. 3
               
                  
Death, of it ſelfe dreadful. 67
               Death to the faythfull not terrible nor dreadful. 30
               Death vvithout any payne. 93
               Dead perſons heauier then liuing, & vvhy. 5
               Degrees of heate in man. 34
               Democritus nature alvvayes laughing. 36
               Deſcription of a body perfectly temperate. 34
               Deuil a crafty and ſlye ſpirite. 22. hovv he learneth
the thoughtes of mā 23. his long experyence
in miſchiefe. ibid. his temptations ibidē.
hovv farre he is able to hurt. ibidem.
               Dyet for colde perſons. 65
               Difference betvveene ſanguine and cholericke
folke. 99
               Dynner. 156
               Diſeaſes proceding of phlegme. 109. of Catarrhes,
and Rheumes. 110
               Diſeaſes of the Splene or Milt. 142
               Diſcorde and diſſention in a country, vvhat miſchiefe
it bringeth. 12
               Diſturbers of publique tranquillitie muſte bee
rooted out. 11
               Diuerſitie in natures. 14
               Diuerſity in opinions 88
               Doggiſh appetite. 116
               Dogdayes. 47
               Doltes. 101
               Dreames after perfect concoction in the night,
happen not in vayne. 37. 95
               
                  
Dreames ſhevv the diſpoſition and complexion
of the bodie. 112
               Dreames naturall are interpretable. ibid
               Dreames diuine. ibid.
               Dreames peculier to phlegmatik perſons, ibid.
               Dreames not raſhly to be credited. 113
               Dronkardes ſleepy, and vvhy. 58
               Dronkardes ſtammer and dovvble in their ſpeache.
111. their ſundry condicions. 149. in the act
of generation, vveake, lumpiſhe and feeble ibidem.
               Dycers. 101
            
            
               E
               EAſterlye people fearful, and timerous. 13
               Education altereth nature. 16. 99
               Eele, beinge dead floateth not aboue the vvater. 111.
               Eyes. 80
               Elementes of mannes bodie. 25. 86
               Elementes fovver. 26
               Emptines. 55
               Engliſhmen. 18. vvel coloured. 48. ſumptuous at
their table. ibid.
               England for cleanlyneſſe & neatnes, praiſed. 47
               Engliſhmē more ſubiect to the Svveate, then other
nacions. 102
               Engliſh Svveat vvhen and vvhere it began. ibid.
               Erick kinge of Svveden. 16
               
                  
Euery mā muſt ſearch out his ovvn inclinatiō 6
               Euery member in the bodie ſerueth to ſome neceſſary
vſe. 12
               Euery part of the body hath his ſeuerall office &
vertue. 108
               Euills muſt be cured by their contraries. 47
               Exerciſe conuenientlye vſed verye holſome. 7.
vvhat profite cōmeth thereof. 51. order therof.
52. ſortes thereof. 53. vvhen to be vſed. 104.
               Exerciſe fitte for crookebacked perſons. 53.
            
            
               F.
               Fayth bringeth foorth good vvorkes. 24
               Faſting perſō, heauier thē one that hath eatē
meate. 5
               Famiſhed perſons dye the ſeuenth day. 151
               Feare of death, vvorſe then death it ſelfe. 93
               Fiſhes hauing vvarme bloud. 61
               Fiſhes liuing long after they be taken out of the
vvater. ibid.
               Fiſh, ill for ſurly and ſolitary perſons. 61
               Flemminges. 17
               Foode holſommeſt to eate. 111
               Forgetfulneſſe of ſome thinges is beſt. 121
               Forme of a common vvealth 11
               Foules hard of digeſtion. 65
               Foure naturall povvers or Vertues. 9
               Frenchmen. 18. prompt and readie vvitted. 19
               French kinge killed at the Tylt. 54
               Friction 73. Sixe ſorts thereof. ibid.
               Fulneſſe of ſtomacke hurtfull. 54
            
            
               
               G.
               Gall, the fountain and vvelſpring of anger. 148
               Garden herbes good for cold bodies. 66
               Generation of milke. 108
               Generation of ſperme. ibid.
               Germaines. 16
               Good dyet. 19
               Good for euery mā throughly to knovv his ovvn
complexion. 1
               Groſſe bloud. 13
            
            
               H.
               HArte, the fountayn of lyfe. 9, 89
               Hare maketh melancholicke nouriſhment,
133. being hunted and chaſed is muche holſō
                  mer.
ibid. good for many purpoſes in phyſicke. ibidem.
               Harme to a Realme and to a body, firſt procedeth
from the head. 110
               Harme of venerye and carnall copulation vvith
vvomen. Vide carnal acte.
               Hayre blacke. 39. & 41. Curled, 39. Yealovve,
41. 129. VVhite, ibid. Red, ibid. Aburne, ibid.
               Hayres hoare. 112
               Head harmed by the diſorder of the lovver mē
                  bers.
104
               Head and ſtomacke engendrers and receptacles
of phlegme. 109
               Heate likened to the Sūne, and moyſture to the

Moone. 78
               Heate cauſeth boldeneſſe. 43 maketh good colour.
64.
               Health vvhat it is. 1. paſſeth gold or treaſure. 2
               Health aſvvell of mynde as of body to be cared
for, becauſe the one cannot vvell be vvithout
the other. 2
               Health ſundry vvayes aſſaulted, cruſhed and altered.
29
               Heraclitus nature alvvayes vveping. 36
               Herbes that are venemous. 62
               Herbes prouoking vrine. 71
               Herbes good for the memorie. 125
               Herbes hoat, good for cold bodies. 66
               Hoate complexion. 38. Tokens thereof. 39
               Hoarineſſe in meates. 112
               Hoarceneſſe. 109
               Hollanders. 16. forgetfull and ſleepie. ibid.
               Holſome aire. 19. as neceſſary for bodyly healthe
as holſome meat and drincke. 26
               Holſome exhortation. 156
               Holy ghoſt, vvhat he vvorketh in vs. 24
               Humours are chaunged one into another. 3
               Humours miniſtre occaſion vnto each ſeuerall
complexion, to enſue ſeuerall vices. 23
               Humours groſſe, as hurtfull to the mind, as dead
vvine to the body. 84
               Humours after a ſort, are the elements of man. 85. 86.
               Humours of more force then the Planets. 10
               
                  
Hungry ſickneſſe. 65
               Huſbandry prayſed. 54
            
            
               I
               IAundiſe. 128
               Idleneſſe. 64. maketh the body fatte & colde ibid.
               Imagination of man, euil from his birthe. 14. & 19.
               Imaginacion of vvomen at the time of their cō
                  ception. 40. 93
               Infancie. 29
               Intemperature vvhat it is. 34
               Influence and force of the Moone. 78
               Inclinacion of nature. 100
               Ihon Baptiſt beheaded. 10
               Italians. 17. their nature. ibid.
               Iugglers. 101
            
            
               K.
               KErnellie fleſhe in the dugges. 108. alterethe
bloud into milke. ibid.
               Knovvledge of the caſe o four ovvn bodies, verie
expedient. 2
            
            
               L
               LEaning to a broken reede. 144
               Learned & aged mē, reuerēced in Englād. 48
               Lettice, ill for the eyeſight. 125
               
                  
Levvd thoughtes. 14
               Lyuer, the Shop of bloud. 89
               Lyuer prouoketh and eggeth to carnall Iuſt. 141
               Lignum Aloes. 126
               Limitation for our prayers and vviſhes. 136
               Lyquide meates ſoneſt & quicklieſt nouriſh. 156
               Long life, hovv it may be orderly procured. 68
               Lupines a kinde of pulſe, the nature & operatiō
thereof. 5
               Lying in bed on the right ſide, beſt. 58
               Lying vpright vpon the backe, daungerous. 58
            
            
               M
               MAgo tamed a Lyon. 4
               Malueſey. 103
               Mainteyners of health. 1
               Many good vvittes by ill education & levvde cō
                  pany
marred. 4
               Mannes age. 30
               Man a VVolfe, 96. An ape. 97. A Lion, A Fox
&c. ibid.
               Mammiles or dugges, the receptacles of Milke. 108
               Manns corrupt nature, more prone to ill then to
good. 122
               Man, daylie ſubiect to caſualties. 135
               Matrimony pleaſaūt and profitable, & the cauſe
vvhy it vvas firſt by God inſtituted. 6
               Meaſurable feeding moſt holſome. 7
               Meates fitt for cold perſons. 65
               
                  
Melancholie. 86
               Melancholie may be altered. 4
               Melancholie incidēt to al mē, eſpecially to Studentes.
136
               Melancholie of tvvo ſortes. ibid. vvherunto it
is like. ibidē.
               Melancholy vvhat reliſh and taſt it hath. 137
               Melancholie vnnatural of 3. ſortes. 146. 152
               Melancholy enflamed, vvhat colour it hath. 147.
               Melancholy hath in it ſome heate. 148
               Melancholy cold, vvhat affectes it cauſeth. 148
               Melancholy, doltiſh or aſſelike. ibid.
               Melancholy vvel tempered bringeth foorth excellent
vvitts, and ſharpe iudgement. 149
               Melancholy hovv it may be qualified and expugned.
152
               Melancholik perſons, ſomtimes out of meaſure
mery. 139
               Melancholick affections hovv they come. 143
               Melancholick perſons, fickle headed and inconſtant. 148
               Melancholick perſons lecherous. 149
               Melancholicke paſſions, and certain hiſtories of
ſundrie perſons of that Complexion. 150
               Melancholick perſon, fully perſvvaded that hee
had Frogs and Toades in his belly. ibid
               Melancholick perſons imagination of a longe
noſe. ibid.
               Melancholick perſon that thought his buttocks

vvere made of glaſſe. 151
               Melancholicke perſon that thought himſelf to
be dead. ibid.
               Melancolick perſons are beſt to be laxatiue and
ſoluble. 152
               Melācholick perſons, vvhē to be let bloud, ibid.
               Melancholick perſons diet. 156
               Members of the body hovv they agree, and be
lincked together. 11.
               Memory good. 69. hovv it may be reſtored. 70
               Memory vvhere it reſteth. 119. vvhat things be
thereto hurtfull. 120. is maintayned & preſerued
in a temperate brayne. ibid. ill in old folks
& children, and vvhy. ibid.
               Memory the gift of nature, but by Arte preſerued
and holpen. 121
               Memory by healthynes ſtrengthned, by crudity
and ſurphet ſpoyled. 122. by light ſuppers preſerued,
and bettered. 123
               Menenius a vviſe oratour, by telling a fine deuiſed
Fable of the members of mannes body, diſſvvaded
the Nobles and Cōmons from ciuile
vprore & diſcord. 12
               Men vviſer then VVomen, vvhy. 81
               Morphevv. 134
               Moyſt nouriſhment fitteſt for children. 49
               Moiſt complexion. 78. not geuen to be malicious,
ſpightfull, fumiſhe and teſty. 80. their diet
82. their ſtint of ſleepe. ibid.
               Moiſtnes. 79
               
                  
Moiſture feedeth and nouriſheth heate. 83
               Murre. 109
               Muſicke cheareth the minde. 53
               Milke 71
               Milke is vvhite bloud. 108. neuer eaten by Pythagoras,
and vvhy. ibid.
               Milke in the breaſtes and dugges of young Infantes,
aſvvel male as female. ibid. vvhere it is
generated and made. ibid.
               Minde in moiſt complections. 91
               Minſtrells. 101
               Milt, and the vſe therof. 137. Hindreth agilitye
of the body. ibid. cannot be taken avvay. 138.
likened to a princes Exchequer. ibidē. prouoketh
laughter. ibid. being vvel & in good caſe,
and plight, cauſeth mirth and chearefulnes. 141
being diſtempered, affected, or out of righte
courſe, cauſeth a heauy minde. ibid.
               Mirth hovv it is cauſed. 5
               Mirth at the table. 76
               Mirth and pleaſaunt company profitable for Melancholicke
perſons. 5. 139.
               Mirth moderately vſed, & banquetting, reuiueth
ye Spirites & maketh a mā freſh coloured. 154
               Mixture of humoures compared to vvine. 107
            
            
               N
               NAturall heate. 8. 60.
               Nature of Spermaticke ſeede, and feminine

Bloud. 26
               Nature of perſons phlegmaticke. 111
               Northren people. 13. 16
               Noſce teipſum. 3
               Notorious villaines procede not from loutiſ he
natures, but from excellent mindes, corrupted
& by levvde education marred. 45
               Notes of a dry complexion. 68
               Notes to knovv a Phlegmatick perſon, and his
nature. 112
               Notes vvherby to knovv a Cholerick complexion.
129
               Notes of a Melancholicke Complexion. 145
               Notes and nature of a Sanguine perſon. 101
               Nucha or the nape of the necke muſt be kepte
vvarme. 121
            
            
               O
               Oldage. 28. hath no certaine nūber of yeares
appointed, hovv long it laſteth, as ech other
age hath. 20.
               Old men forgetful and vvhy. 16. ſometimes as
luſtie as youngmen, and vvhy. 28
               Oldmen by nature drye, but in condicion moyſt
88. much harmed by vſinge carnall copulation
and venerie. 55.
               Olde grudges. 122
               Onyons ill for the eyes, and memory. 125
               
                  
Oppilation of the Liuer, hovv it commeth. 104.
hovv to bee auoided. ibid.
               Oppilation and putrefaction, the original cauſe
of all diſeaſes. 10
            
            
               P
               PAraſites. 101
               Partes of the body ſubiect to Phlegme. 117
               Patrickes purgatory. 146
               Perſons mere ſāguine, cōmōly ſtarke fooles. 96
               Perſons Apoplectique. 129. hovv to reſtore thē
to the right vſe of their tongue. ibid.
               Perturbations of the minde. 59. 141
               Philip king of Spayne. 90
               Phlegme, the matter of bloud. 107. the vſe &
effect therof. 109. vvhat place of the bodie it is
in. ibid. Diſeaſes grovving through it. ibid.
               Phlegme. 86
               Phlegme of 4. ſortes. 115
               Phlegme ſvveete. 116
               Phlegme ſovver. ibid.
               Phlegme ſalt. 117. harmes thereof. ibidē.
               Phlegme glaſſie. ibid.
               Phlegme common to al men. 118
               Phlegmatique perſons il coloured. 146
               Phlegmatique perſons prayſed. 115
               Phlegmatique perſons muſt eate light ſuppers. 115.
               Phlegmatique perſons muſt vſe exerciſe. ibid.
               
                  
Playing vvith the head vvhat it ſignifieth. 98
               Pockes. 134
               Polycletus rule. 33
               Povver attractiue. 9
               Povver retentiue. ibid.
               Povver digeſtiue. ibid.
               Povver expulſiue. ibid.
               Poze. 109
               Proportion of bloud to other humours. 100
               Prouerbes, emunctae naris, & obeſae naris, expoū
                  ded. 114
               Pubertie. 29
               Putrefaction. 10
               Pypers. 101
               Pythagoras. 30. his comparing of th' ages of mans
lyfe, to the four quarters of the yeare. ibid.
            
            
               Q
               QVayſie ſtomackes. 156
               Qualefiers of the heate of bloud. 50
               Qualities. 86
               Quinces conſerued. 126
               Quietnes and tranquillitie of mind. 156
            
            
               R
               RApes good for the eyeſight. 125
               Rebellion in the bodie, 14
               Receiptes laxatiue. 104
               
                  
Recreations diſcommendable. 54. 76
               Remorſe of conſcience for vvicked deedes. 144
               Repletion. 55
               Reſtoratiues for the memorie. 125
               Ringvvormes. 134
               Riot and bellicheare. 10
               Rue prouoketh luſt in vvomen, extinguiſheth
it in men. 81
            
            
               S
               SAmpſon. 43. his great ſtrength. ibid.
               Sangar. 44. vvith a plough ſhare ſlevve. 600.
Philiſtines ibid.
               Sanguine perſons curteous, and milde natured.
Vide Bloud. 99.
               Scottes. 18
               Scoffers. 101
               Secke. 102
               Seede. 85. 105. 106. pollution and effluxiō therof
hovv it hapneth. 113
               Shauing of the beard helpeth memory. 124
               Shauing of the head. ibid.
               Short ſtature. vvherof it commeth. 27
               Sickneſſe vvhat it is. 12
               Signes of ſickneſſe approching. ibid.
               Sickly perſons muſt eate little bread. 156
               Signes of a brain diſtempered. 143
               Signes of ſuche as bee ſubiecte to melancholy. 147.
               
                  
Sinne cauſe of ſickneſſe and death. 67
               Sleepe and the commodities thereof. 57. & 73.
time & ſpace therof. 57. to vvhat vſe it ſerueth.
95. good for Cholerick perſons. 133
               Sleepers ſoundly. 57. Small & vnquiet ſleepers. 58.
               Sleepe by day, ill and vnholſome. 58. good for
rauing or Idleneſſe of the brayne. 152
               Sleeping perſon heauier then a vvatching. 5
               Slouth and eaſe. 52
               Sound Parents beeget ſound children. 85
               Solitarie perſons ſubiect to the Apoplexie. 61
               Snailes life. 62
               Soule. 12
               Sounding. 133
               Soueraigntie of the hart. 109
               Spaniardes. 18
               Spettle. 87
               Speach hovv to be reſtored. 126
               Spirite. 7 vvhat it is 8. requireth great care. ibid.
being in good caſe & tēper cauſeth tranquillitie
of mynde. ibid. being diſtēpered it vvorketh
ſūdry motiōs & bringeth diſquietnes. ibid
vvhat thinges bee thereto moſte hurtfull, and
vvhat moſt comfortable. ibid. 19. & 20. greatly
comforted vvith ſvvete ſmelles. 126
               Spirite animall and theffects thereof. 15
               Spirite vital. ibid
               Spirite of nature. 20
               Stammers, 111. cannot ſpeake ſoftlye. ibidē.

& 147.
               Stitches. 103
               Stinking breath hovv it commeth. 156
               Stomacke and head engendrers and keepers of
Phlegme. 109
               Store of hayre hovv it commeth. 41
               Strong breath and ſtinking mouthes. 156
               Studie by candlelight hurtful. 74
               Studentes exerciſes. 75
               Superſtition. 24
               Supper. 156
               Svveate. 87
            
            
               T
               TAlneſſe of perſonage. 27
               Temperance. 60
               Temperature, vvhat it is. 32. nine differences
thereof. ibid. ſubiect to chaunge. 88
               Teſticles. 85
               Tettars. 134
               Text of Eſay expounded. 114
               Themiſtocles vviſhed to learne the Arte of forgetfulnes.
122. his nature & diſpoſition, vvhile
he vvas young. 130
               Thinges making good digeſtion & ſpirites. 5
               Thinges good for the memory. 125
               Thinges not natural, ſixe. 46
               Thinne bloud. 13
               Three moſt holſome thinges for health. 7
               
                  
Timon, a deadly hater of al men, and al companye.
143
               Time for euery matter. 77
               Tokens of a cold complexion. 64
               Tokens of a moiſt body. 80
               Tokens of the diſpoſitiō of phlegmaticke perſons. 114
               Tokens of ſanguine perſons. 99
               Tormentes of an vnquiet minde, and guilty cō
                  ſcience. 143
               Tranquillitie of minde. 31. 59
               Traunce. 103
               Triall of good horſes. 54
               Trophonius Denne. 146
               True goodes. 2
               Tumblers. 101
               Turpentine. 72
               Turpentine, hovv to prepare it. ibid. to make it
liquide and potable. ibid,
            
            
               V
               VEnerie, Vide Carnall acte.
               Veyne opened, ſhevveth oculerly, ech of the
four humours, 86
               Veines from vvhence they ſpring. 89
               Vertues defaced and marred by vices. 44
               Vitall moiſture. 7
               Vitall ſpirite. 12
               Vlcers. 134
               
                  
Vnholſome meates ſpilleth nature. 27
               Vnablenes in ſome to beget children. 43
               Vomite muſt be ſeeldome prouoked. 55
               vvhen to vomite. ibidē. to vvhat perſons it is
moſt hurtful. 56
               Voyce. 45
            
            
               VV
               WAnne colour. 65
               VVaſshing of the head. 126
               VVatching ouermuch hurtful. 58
               VVavvvard perſons. 12
               VVhores. 106
               VVolfe, a diſeaſe. 134
               VVomen full of hayre on their heads. 42
               VVomen hayrie lecherous. ibid. cauſe of barrennes
in vvomen. 43
               VVormevvood holſome for the Lyuer. 104
               VVringing in the ſmall Guttes. 129
               VVyfe bravvlinge, and ſkoldinge, likened to a
dropping houſe. 110
               VVylie Foxes 130
               VVylie vvinckers. 58
               VVyne, hurtfull to children. 49. maketh the
hart mery. 138.
               VViſemen ſometime fearefull. 94
            
            
               Y.
               Yoūgmen ſomtimes vveake, vveariſh, & feeble,

and vvhy. 28
               Youngman ſodenly gray headed. 91
               Youth. 29
            
            
               Z
               ZEale vvithour knovvledge. 25
               Zelanders. 17
               Zeno. 5
            
            
               T N.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London, in
Fleetſtreete by Thomas
Marſh. 1576.
            Cum Priuilegio.
            
            
         
      
   