
      
         
            
            
            NOVA FRANCIA: Or the DESCRIPTION OF THAT PART OF NEVV FRANCE, which is one continent with VIRGINIA.
            Deſcribed in the three late Voyages and Plantation made by Monſieur de Monts, Monſieur du Pont-Graué, and Monſieur de Poutrincourt, into the countries called by the French men La Cadie, lying to the Southweſt of Cape Breton.
            
            Together with an excellent ſeuerall Treatie of all the commodities of the ſaid countries, and maners of the naturall inhabitants of the ſame.
            Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh by P. E▪
               
            
            LONDINI, Impenſis GEORGII BISHOP.
            1609.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE BRIGHT STARRE OF THE NORTH, HENRY Prince of Great BRITAINE.
            
               
                  MOst excellent Prince:
            
            my Author (knowing that there are ſomeworks ſo naturally great of themſelues, that they challenge the gratious protection of Princes) hath offered this his Hiſtorie to the Royall patronage of the most Christian King, two Queenes, and the Dauphin, to the end it might ſtirre them the more to proſecute the populating of the lands heerein deſcribed, to bring the Naturals thereof (Sauage and miſerable people) to ciuilitie and right knowledge of God, and ſo to the ſaluation of their ſoules. Aſſuming the like preſumption, I haue hoped (notwithſtanding the defects which neceſſarily attend a ſtranger, who can neuer attaine the naturall Idiome of this eloquent language) that it might not be an iniury to your Highneſſe; but an addition of Honor, and ſafetie of tbis worke, if I ſhould dare to inſcribe your Princely name on the forehead thereof Which bouldneſſe, the noble vndertaking of the Engliſh Nation hath nouriſhed, who haue ſo lately begun (by the permiſsion, and vnder the protection of his excellent Maieſtie, your moſt Royall Father) to plant Chriſtianitie in Virginia, being one continent, & next adioining land to theſe.

For who may better ſupport, and manage magnanimous actions, ſuch as be the peopling of lands, planting of Colories, erecting of ciuill Gouernementes, and propagating of the Goſpell of Chriſt, (which are Royall and Princely foundations) then thoſe whom the King of Kings, hath establiſhed as Atlaſſes of kingdoms & Chriſtian common weales? God hath neceſsitated in his Prophecie, Kings and Queenes to be nurſing Fathers and nurſing Mothers of his Church: ſo that he hath not onely committed the gouernment of a ripe and ſtrong body, able to ſubſist, but hath impoſed the care of the tenderneſſe and infancie thereof vpon them. Alexander being yet young, would haue runne in the Olympian games if kings had runne there; now Kings doe run; now Princes doe worke in the Lords harueſt, to ſpread that name which must gather the elect from the vtmost endes of the world, if not in their perſons, yet with their authoritie and meanes. I know your Highneſſe would not be inferiour, but rather excell in ſo noble an action: ſuch an emulation is pleaſing to God; your birth leadeth vnto it; Chriſtian charitie inuiteth you to be chiefe worker in the ſauing of millions of ſoules: The neceſsitie of your Countrie of Great BRITAINE, (ouer populous) doth require it: And laſtly your poore Virginians doe ſeeme to implore your Princely aide, to helpe them to ſhake off the yoke of the diuel, who hath hitherto made them liue worſe then beaſts, that hencefoorth they may be brought into the fould of Christ, and (in time) to liue vnder your Chriſtian gouernmēt: So then hauing thus runne, you ſhall obtaine an euerlaſting Crowne of glory, being as well planter, as defender of the Faith.
            
               Your Highneſſe humbleſt ſeruant,
P. ERONDELLE.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  GEntle Reader:
            
            The whole volume of the Nauigations of the French nation into the Weſt Indies (compriſed in three bookes) was brought to mee, to be tranſlated, by M. Richard Hackluyt, a man, who for his worthy, and profitable labours, is well knowen to moſt men of worth, not onely of this kingdome, but alſo of forrain parts: and by him this part was ſelected and choſen from the whole worke, for the particular vſe of this Nation, to the end, that comparing the goodneſſe of the lands of the Northerly parts heerein mentioned with that of Virginia, which (though in one, and the ſelfe ſame continent and both lands adioyning) muſt be far better, by reaſon it ſtands more Southerly, neerer to the Sunne, greater encouragement may be giuen to proſecute that generous and godly action, in planting and peopling that Country, to the better propagation of the Goſpel of Chriſt, the ſaluation of innumerable ſoules, and generall benefit of this land, too much peſtred with ouer many people. Which tranſlation (as I haue ſaid) is but a part of a greater volume. If therefore you finde that ſome references of things mentioned in the former part of the ſaid volume are not to be found in this tranſlation, do not thinke it ſtrange, in aſmuch as they could not wel be brought in, except the whole volume ſhould be tranſlated, which of purpoſe was left vndone, as well to auoid your farther charges, as becauſe it was thought needleſſe to tranſlate more then concerneth that which adioyneth to Virginia.
               
What good the Engliſh Nation may reape of this worke, by the onely deſcription that is found therein of Nations, Ilands, Harbours, Bayes, Coaſts, Riuers, Rockes, Shoulds, Sands, Bankes, and other dangers, which the Saylers into thoſe parts may now the more eaſily finde, and auoid, by the knowledge that this tranſlation giueth them of it, let the Nauigators iudge therof, who (for want of ſuch knowledge) haue found themſelues in euident perill of death, and many altogether caſt away. If a man that ſheweth foorth effectually the zealous care he ▪hath to the well-fare, and common good of his country, deſerueth praiſes of the ſame, I refer to the iudgement of them that abhor the vice of ingratitude (hatefull aboue all to God, & goodmen) whether the ſaid M. Hackluyt (as well for the firſt procuring of this tranſlation, as for many workes of his, ſet out by him for the good, and euerlaſting fame of the Engliſh Nation) deſerueth not to reape thankes. As for this my labour, if it be cenſured fauorably, and my good affection (in vndertaking the tranſlating of this worke, for the benefit of this land) taken in good part, it will encourage me to endeauour my ſelfe to doe better heereafter.
         
         
            
            The Table of the contents of the Chapters.
            
            
               The firſt Booke.
               WHerein are deſcribed the three late Voiages, Nauigations, and Plantation of New France (otherwiſe called La Cadia) by Monſieur de Monts, Monſieur du Pont-grauè, and Monſieur de Poutrincourt.
               
               
                  
                     CHAP. I. The Patent, and Commiſſion of the French king to Monſieur de Monts for the inhabiting of the Countries of La Cadia, Canada, and other places in New France, from the 40. degree to the 46.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. II. The voiage of Monſieur de Monts into New France: accidents hapned in the ſaid voiage: the cauſes of the Iſie bankes in new found lands: the impoſing of names to certaine Ports: the perplexitie wherein they were by reaſon of the ſtaeie of their other ſhippe.
                  
                     CHAP. III. The leauing of Port du Mouton: the accidents of a man lost in the woods the ſpace of 16. daies: Baie Françoiſe, or the French Baie: Port Royall: the Riuer of l'Equille: a Copper Myne: the miſchiefe of golden Mines: of Diamonds: Turkie ſtones.
                  
                     CHAP. IIII. The deſcription of the riuer Saint Iohn: and of the Iſle Saint Croix: the man loſt in the woods found out 16. daies after: examples of ſome ſtrange abſtinencies: the diſcords of the Sauages deferred to the iudgement of Monſieur de Monts: the fatherly authoritie among the ſaid Sauages: what huſband they chuſe to their daughters.
                  
                     CHAP. V. A farther deſcription of the Iland Saint Croix: the enterpriſe of Monſieur de Monts difficult and generous, yet proſecuted

through enuie: thereturne of Monſieur de Poutrincourt into France: the perils of the voiage.
                  
                     CHAP. VI. The buildings of the Ile Saint Croix: the Frenchmens diſcommodities in the ſaid place: vnknowen ſickneſſes: of their cauſes: of the people that be ſubiect to it: of Diets, badde Waters, Aires, Windes, Lakes, corruption of Woods, ſeaſons, diſpoſition of bodies, of young, of old: the Authors aduiſe touching the gouernment of health, and cure of the ſaid diſeaſes.
                  
                     CHAP. VII. The diſcouery of new lands by Monſieur de Monts: fabulous tales and reports of the riuer and fained towne of Norombega: the refuting of the Authors that haue written therof: fiſh bankes in New found land: Kinibeki: Chouäcoet: Malebarre: Armouchiquois: the death of a French man killed: mortalitie of Engliſhmen in Virginia.
                  
                     CHAP. VIII. The arriuall of Monſieur du Pont to Saint Croix: the habitation transferred into Port Royall: returne of Monſieur de Monts into France: the difficultie of hand Milles, the furniture of the ſaid Monſieur du Pont, for the diſcouery of new lands beyond Malebarre: Shipwracke: Forecaſt for the returne into France: Compariſon of theſe voiages with them of Florida: the blame of thoſe that diſpraiſe the tillage of the land.
                  
                     CHAP. IX. The first motiue and acceptation of the voiage by Monſieur de Poutrincourt, together with the Author into New France: their departure from Paris to goe into Rochell.
                  
                     CHAP. X. The name of our ſhippe called the Ionas: the ſhallow water of Rochell is the cauſe of the hard going out: Rochell a reformed towne: the common people is inſolent: Croquans: the accident of the ſhipwracke of the Ionas new preparation: weake Souldiers are not to be placed vpon frontiers: the Miniſters of Rochell doe pray for the couerſion of the Sauages: the ſmal

zeale of ours: the Eucharist carried in voiages by the ancient Chriſtians: the diligence of Monſieur de Poutrincourt at the very point of ſhipping.
                  
                     CHAP. XI. Their departure from Rochel: Sundry meetings of ſhips and Pirates: ſtormy ſea about the Açores, and whence it proceedes: Why the Weſt-windes are frequent in the West-ſea: From whence the windes doe come: Porpeſes doe prognoſticate ſtormes: Meanes to take them: The deſcribing of them: Of ſtormes: Their effects: Of calmes; What is a Gust of winde: How it is made: The effects thereof: The bouldneſſe of Mariners: how reuerence is giuen to the Kings ſhip: The ſupputation of the voyage: Hot ſea, then coold: The reaſon of it: And of the Banckes of Iſe in New-found-land.
                  
                     CHAP. XII. Of the great Bancke of Morues or Coddes: Of the ſound: Our comming to the ſaid Bancke: The deſcription thereof: The fiſhing of New-land-fiſh: And of birdes: The greedineſſe of the birdes called by French-men: Happe-foyes: Diuers perils: Gods fauours: The cauſes of frequent and long miſtes in the Weſterne-ſea: Land markes: The ſight of it: Maruellous odours: The boording of two Shaloupes: The landing at the Port Du Mouton: The comming to Port Royall: Of two French-men remaining there alone among the Sauages.
                  
                     CHAP. XIII. The happy meeting of Monſieur du Pont: His returne to Port Royall: Reioycing: Deſcription of the confines of the ſaid Port: Coniectures touching the head and ſpring of the great riuer of Canada: Sowing of corne: Monſieur du Ponts return into France: Monſieur de Poutrincourts voyage vnto the country of the Armouchiquois: Faire Rie ſprung foorth without tillage: The exerciſes and maner of liuing in Port Royall: The Medowes of the riuer de l'Equille.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIIII. Their departing from the Ile Saint Croix: The bay of Marchin: Choüakoet: vines and grapes: The liberality of

the Sauages: The land and people of the Armouchiquois: The cure of an Armouchiquois wounded: The ſimplicity and ignorance of that people: Vices of the Armouchiquois: Suſpition: People not caring for clothes: Corneſowed, and Vines planted in the Armouchiquois countrie: Quantity of grapes: Abundance of people: dangerous ſea.
                  
                     CHAP. XV. Dangers: vnknowen language: The making of aforge and of an ouen: Croſſes ſet vp: Plenty: A conſpiracy: Diſobedience: Murther: The flight of three hundred againſt ten: The agility of the Armouchiquois: Bad company dangerous: The accident of a musket that did burſt: The Sauages inſolency: Their timoroſity, impiety, and flight: The fortunate Port: A bad ſea: reuenge: The counſell and reſolution for the returne: New perils: Gods fauours: Monſieur de Poutrincourts arriuall at Port Royall: How he was receiued.
                  
                     CHAP. XVI. The Condition of the corne which they ſowed: The inſtitution of the order of bon-temps: The Sauages behauiour among the French-men: The ſtate of Winter: Why raines and fogges be rare in this ſeaſon: Why raine is frequent betweene the Tropiques: Snow profitable to the ground: the ſtate of Ianuarie: Conformity of weather in the ancient and New France: Why the ſpring is ſlow: The tilling of gardens: Their crop: A water mill: A Manna of Herrings: Preparation for the returne: Monſieur de Poutrincourts inuention: The Sauages admiration: Newes from France.
                  
                     CHAP. XVII. The arriuall of the French: Monſieur de Monts his ſociety is broken, and why: The Couetouſneſſe of them that rob the dead: Bonfires for the Natiuity of the Duke of Orleans: The departing of the Sauages to goe to wars: Sagamos Membertou: Voyages vpon the Coaſt of the French Bay: Baſe traficke: The towne of Ouïgoudi: How the Sauages doe make great voyages: Their bad intention: A ſteele Mine: Sea woules (or ſeales) voyces: The ſtate of the Ile Saint Croix:

The Sauages loue towards their children: the returne into Port Royall.
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII. The Port de Campſeau: our departure from Port Royall: Fogges of eight daies continuance: A Raine-bow appearing in the water: The Port of Saualet: Tillage an honourable exerciſe: The griefe of the Sauages at Monſieur De Poutrincourt his going away: Returne into France: Voyage into Mount S. Michell: The fruites of New France preſented to the King: A voyage into New France after the returne of the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt into France.
               
            
            
               The ſecond Booke.
               COntaining the cuſtomes and maners of life of the West Indians of New France, compared to them of the ancient people of theſe parts; and ſpecially to them that bee in one and the ſelfe ſame parallele and degree.
               
                  
                     CHAP. I. Of the Natiuitie: cuſtome of the Hebrewes, Cimbres, Frenchmen and Sauages.
                  
                     CHAP. II. Of the impoſing of names: the abuſes of them that giue the names of Chriſtians to Infidels: Names haue not beene giuen without occaſion.
                  
                     CHAP. III. Of the bringing vp of children: of the Women of our time: of the ancient Germain Women.
                  
                     CHAP. IIII. Of the loue towards Children: the Sauage Women loue their children more then the Women of theſe parts vſe to do: and the cauſe why: wherein New France is profitable to the ancient France: Poſſeſſion of the land.
                  
                     CHAP. V. Of Religion: the origine of Idolatrie: he which worſhipeth nothing is more capable of Chriſtian Religion than an idolater:

the Canadians Religion: People eaſie to be conuerted: the Aſtorgie and impietie of the Chriſtians of this day: the giuing of foode and teaching of Arts is the meanes to conuert Sauage people: of the name of God: of certaine Sauages already Chriſtians in minde: the Religion of the Sauages in Virginia: fabulous tales concerning the Reſurrection: the Simulachers of gods: the Floridians religion: the error of Belle-foreſt the Coſmographer: the worſhipping of the Sunne: the kiſſing of hands: the Braſilians vexed by the diuell: they haue ſome obſcure knowledge of the generall floud: and of ſome Christian which anciently hath beene among them.
                  
                     CHAP. VI. Of the Soothſàiers, and Aoutmoins: of Prieſthood: the Idols of the Mexicans: the Indian Prieſts are Phiſicions withall: pretence of Religion: the Aoutmoins ſubtilties: how they call vpon diuels: ſongs to the praiſes of the diuell: the Sabbath of the Sauages: Bonefiers vpon Saint Iohns daies: Vrim and Thummim: the office of Prieſthood ſucceſſiue: of the Caraibes, deceiuers like to the ſacrificers of the Idoll Bell.
                  
                     CHAP. VII. Of the Language: the Indians be all diuided in languages: time bringeth an alteration in the toungs: the conformity of them the cauſes of the change of tongues: ſince when the trade of Beuers hath beene: the Sauages pronunciation: of the ancient Hebrewes, Greeks, Latines, and of the Pariſians: the Sauages haue particular tongues, not vnderſtood by New found land men: the Sauages maner of reckoning.
                  
                     CHAP. VIII. Of learning: the inuention of letters is admirable: the ancient Germains were without letters: the letters and Sciences were among the Gaullois, before that either the Greeks or Latins had them: the Sarronides were in the old times Diuines and Philoſophers among the Gaullois: the Bardes were Poets: thereuerence that was vſed towards them: the reuerence of Mars towards the Muſes: the king his eldest daughter: the Baſilicke fastned in the temple of Apollo.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IX. Of Clothes and of Haires: to what end Garments were made: the nakedneſſe of the ancient Picts: of the moderne Aethiopians: of the Braſilians: the Sauages of New France more honest: their Cloakes of skins: the ancient Hercules his garment, of the ancient Germains, of the Gothes: the Shooing and Hoſeing of the Sauages: the couering of the head: the Haires of the Hebrewes, Gaullois, Gothes: the Ordinance for the Prieſts to weare Hats: Shauen men.
                  
                     CHAP. X. Of the ſhape and dexterity of the Sauages: Mans forme is the moſt perfit: the violence done to Nature; the Braſilians be ſhort noſed: The reſt of the Sauages be handſome men: halfe dwarfes: the Patagons be Gyants: The fauour of the Sauages: the deſcription of the Weſterly flies: Why the Americans are not blacke: From whence proceedes the heat of Affrica: And the cooleneſſe of America being in the ſelfeſame degree: Of the colour of the haires and of the beard: When the Romans began to weare beardes: ihe Sauages are not hairy: Hairy women: The ancient Gaullois and Germans had their haires yellow like gold: Their lookes, voices, eies: The women ſhrew: The eies of the men of Taprobane, of the Sauages, and Scythians: Of the lips: Monſtruous bodies: The agility of the body: What the Naires of Malebaris doe for to be nimble: What people haue agility: The Indians skilfulneſſe in ſwimming: A ſharpe ſight: The Sauages ſenſe of ſmelling: Their hatred againſt the Spaniards.
                  
                     CHAP. XI. Of the ornaments of the body: Of the painting of the Hebrewes, Romans, Affricans &c. ancient Engliſhmen, Picts, Gothes &c. Weſt-Indians: Of the markes, razings, and inciſions on their fleſh: Of the markes of the ancient Hebrewe, Tyrons and Chriſtians: The reproouing of the painting of the face, and other paintings of the body.
                  
                     CHAP. XII. Of the outward ornaments: The two Tyrants of our life:

The ſuperfluity of the ancient Rome: The exceſſe of Ladies, of their wiers and periwigges: Colouring of haires: Eare-rings: Bracelets, garters, buskins and ſhooes: What pearles are, Matachiaz, Vignols, Eſurgni: Carkanets of iron, and of gold.
                  
                     CHAP. XIII. Of mariage: The Iewes cuſtome: The widdowes do blacken their faces: the proſtituting of Maidens: the continency of the Souriquois women: the maner to make ſute to a maid for mariage: the proſtituting of maidens in Braſill: of the Pox: the cure thereof: the chaſtitie of the ancient German women: reaſon for the Sauages continency: the Floridians doe loue women: Ithyphalles: Degrees of conſanguinity: The Gaulloiſe women fruitfull: Poligamy without Iealouſie: Diuorce: What a man ought to doe hauing a bad wife: Abſtinency of the widowes: The Infidels haue whoredome in abomination.
                  
                     CHAP. XIIII. Of the Sauages Tabagie, or banquet: The manner of liuing of the Sauages of the hether lands: How the Armouchiquois vſe and ſerue themſelues with their Corne: the ancient Italians did the like: the aſſembly of the Sauages, making their Tabagy: the women eat by themſelues: the honour giuen to women amongst the ancient Gaullois and Germans: the bad condition of them among the Romans: What they haue beene that haue eſtabliſhed the Roman Empire: the manner of liuing of the ancient Romans, Tartarians, Moſchouites, Getulians, Germans, Aethiopians, of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, of Aemilian, Traian, Adrian: and of the Sauages: Salt not altogether neceſſary: the Sauages doe ſometimes ſuffer want: their ſuperſtition: Of their gluttony and of Hercules: the Braſilians food: Anthropophagy: Strange proſtituting of maidens: communalty of life: the Sauages Hoſpitality, of the Gaullois and Germans: Of drinking, the ſirſt Romans had no vines: the Beere of the ancient Gaullois, and Aegyptians: the ancient Germans did hate wine: How wine is neceſſary: Tabacco: the drinking one to another: the drinke of the Floridians and Braſilians: Hidromel.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV. Of dances and ſonges: The origine of dances in the honour of God: dances and ſonges in the honour of Apollo, Neptune, Mars, of the Sonne, of the Salians: Praeſul: Socrates dance: The dances turned into bad vſe: How much dangerous: All Sauages doe vſe dancing: To what end: Orpheus his fooliſh ſong: Why we ſing to God: The ſonges of the Souriquois: Of holy people: Of the Gaullois Bardes: Sonnets made by the commandement of Charolus Magnus: The ſong of the Lacedemonians: The dances and ſonges of the Sauages: The orations of their Captaines.
                  
                     CHAP. XVI. Of the diſpoſition of the body: Phthiſie: The ſweatinges of the Sauages: the Phiſitions and Chirurgions of the Floridians, Braſilians and Souriquois: Cures made by Charmes: A maruellous report of the deſpiſing of griefe: Triall of conſtancy: Suffering of torments for the honour of Diana and of the Sun: the long liues of the Sauages: the cauſes thereof, and of the ſhortning of our daies.
                  
                     CHAP XVII. The mens exercices: of Bowes and arrowes, Maces, Bucklers, fiſhing lines, Rackets: the Sauages Canowes, or boates, and their faſhion: Canowes made of willowes, of paper, of leather, of hollowed trees: the originall of the fables of the Syrens, or Mermaidens; long trauels through the woods; pottery of Earth; the tillage of the ground; the ancient Germans had no lands proper or peculiar to them; the Sauages are not laborious; how they manure the land; double ſowing, and double Harueſt; How they liue in Winter; the Sauages townes▪ of the originall of townes; the firſt builders in the Gaulles; of the word Magus: Philoſophy hath beene firſt found out by the Barbarians; the plaies and games of the Sauages.
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII. The womens exercices; the woman is called pierced or hollowed; the women are ſaued in bringing foorth of Children; of purification; the hard condition of the women among the Sauages;

ges; of mattes, currying and dreſſing of leather; their making of Baskets, Purſes, Dies, Diſhes, Matachiaz, Canowes; the loue of the Sauage women towards their huſbands; their chaſtity; A faire obſeruation vpon the Hebrew names of the man, and of the woman.
                  
                     CHAP. XIX. Of Ciuilitie; the first Ciuilitie, is the obedience to God and to the parents; the Sauages be Slouenly at their Banquets, for want of linnen; the repaſt of the ancient Gaullois and Germains; of the arriuing of the Sauages into any place; their Greetings; likewiſe of the Greekes, Romans, and Hebrewes; of the ſaluting in Sneezing; Item in the beginning of Letters; of the Farewell; the Sauages reuerence to their Fathers and Mothers; Curſe to him which honoreth not his Father and his mother.
                  
                     CHAP. XX. Of the Vertues and Vices of the Sauages; the Principles of Vertue are invs, euen from our birth; of force, and greatneſſe of courage; the ancient Gaullois were without feare; the Sauages are reuengefull; wherin temperance conſiſteth; whether the Sauages are indued therewith; wherein Liberalitie conſisteth; the Sauages Liberality; they diſdaine the couetous pelting Merchants; their Magnificence, Hoſpitality, Piety towards their Fathers and Mothers; of their Iuſtice; the execution of Iuſtice; the incredible euaſion of two Sauages, priſoners, wherein the Sauages be diligent and ſlothfull.
                  
                     CHAP. XXI. Of Hunting; the originall thereof; to whom it belongeth; to what end Kings are choſen; hunting the image of War; the firſt end thereof; the interpretation of one verſe of the 32. Pſalme; all Sauages doe hunt; when and how; the diſcription of the hunting of the Ellan or Stagge; the Sauages hounds; the Sauages haue Rackets at theirfeet when they hunt; their continuance in hunting; faire inuention of them for the Kitching; their womens duty after the hunting; the fiſhing or hunting of the Beuer; the diſcription of the ſame; her admirable

building; how ſhe is taken; from whence anciently the Beuers did come; Of Beares; Leopards; the diſcription of the beaſt called Nibachés; Wolues; Conies &c. the Cattell of France do profit well in New France; Maruellous multiplicatin of Beaſts; of the beaſts of Florida, and of Braſill; the Sauages are truely noble.
                  
                     CHAP. XXII. Of Hauking; the Muſes doe delight in hunting; hawking is a noble exerciſe How the Sauages take their fowle; Ilands ſwarming with birds; the foules of Port Royall; Of a bird called Niridau: of gliſtering flies; Turky or Indian Cocks; the foules of Florida, and of Braſill.
                  
                     CHAP. XXIII. Of Fiſhing; a compariſon betweene Hunting, Hauking and Fiſhing; an Emperour delighting himſelfe in Fiſhing; Plato his abſurdity; Fiſhing permitted to Churchmen; the feeding vpon fiſh is the beſt and wholeſomeſt food: euery Fiſh dreads the Winter, and withdraweth himſelfe, they returne in the Spring time; a manna of Smelts, Heerings, Pilchers, Sturgeons and Salmons; the maner of taking of them by the Sauages; the abuſe & ſuperstition of Pythagoras; the Sanctorum of New found land fiſhermen; of the ſhell Fiſh of Port Royall; the fiſhing of the Codde; whether Cods doe ſleepe; the cauſe why fiſhes ſleepe not; fiſhes hauing ſtones in their heads (as the Codde) doe feare Winter; Oile (or traine) of fiſh; the fiſhing of the Whale; wherein the hardineſſe and bouldneſſe of the Sauages is to be admired; Hippopotames: the infinite multitude of Mackerels; the Idleneſſe of the people of this day.
                  
                     CHAP. XXIIII. Of the Land: which is the good ground: Terra Sigillata, is in New France: the fructifying of Monſieur de Poutrincourts Sowings: which is the good Dung: of Turkie (or Indian) Wheat, called Mahis: how the Sauages doe mend their grounds: how they Sowe; the temperature of the Aire doth ſerue to production; Barnes vnder ground: the cauſe of the

ſlothfulueſſe of the Sauages of the hither lands neere vnto vs; Hempe; of Vines; when they were first planted in Galia; of Trees, Tabacco, and the maner and vſe of it; the fooliſh greedineſſe after Tabacco; the Vertues thereof; the error of Belle-foreſt: of the rootes called Afrodiles, or ground Nuts; a conſideration vpon the miſerie of many people: the tilling of the ground is a moſt innocent exerciſe; Gloria adorea: of the Fruit trees, and others of Port Royall, of Florida, and of Braſill; the deſpiſing of Mines; Fruits to be hoped in new France.
                  
                     CHAP. XXV. Of the war: to what end the Sauages doe make war: The Orations of the Sauages Captaines: their ſurpriſes: the maner to foretell the euent of the war; the ſucceſſion of Captaines; the Sauages armes; of excellent Archers; from whence comes the word Militia: the cauſe of the Sauages feare: their maner of marching in War: a warlike dance; how the Sauages doe vſe the victory; of the Victime, ſacrifice; Puniſhment; the Sauages will not fall into their enemies hands: the trophies of their enemies heads: of the ancient Gaullois; of the moderne Hungarians.
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI. Of Funerals; the lamenting for the dead; the burying of them is a worke of humanity; the cuſtome of the Sauages in this reſpect; of the preſeruing of the dead bodies; of the mourning of the Perſians, Aegyptians, Romans, Gaſcons, Braſilians, Floridians, Souriquois, Hebrewes, Queenes of France, Thracians, Locrians, ancient Chriſtians; the burning of the moueable goods of the deceaſſed, a faire leſſon to the Couetous; the cuſtomes of the Phrigians, Latins, Hebrewes, Gaullois, Germains, and Sauages for this reſpect; the burying of the dead; What people doe bury them: who burne them, and who preſerue them; Of the funerall gifts ſhut vp in the ſepulchers of the dead; the ſame reprooued; the couetouſneſſe of the Infringers of Sepulchers.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Noua Francia.
            
               The three late voyages and plan
                  tation of Monſieur De MONTS, of Monſieur Du Pont grauè, and of Monſieur De Poutrincourt, into the Countries called by the Frenchmen La Cadia, lying to the Southweſt of Cap Breton; together with an excellent ſeuerall Treatie of all the commodities of the ſaid Countries: and maners of the naturall inhabitants of the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  The Patent of the French King to Monſieur DE MONTS, for the inhabiting of the Countries of La Cadia, Canada, and other places in new France.
               
               
                  HENRY by the grace of God King of France and Naturre. To our deare and welbeloued the Lord of Monts, one of the ordinarie Gentlemen of our Chamber, greeting. As our greateſt care and labour is, and hath alwaies beene, ſince our comming to this crowne, to maintaine and conſerue it in the ancient dignitie, greatneſſe and ſplendor thereof, to extend and amplifie, as much as lawfully may be done, the bounds

and limits of the ſame. We being, of a long time, informed of the ſituation and condition of the lands and territories of La Cadia, mooued aboue all things, with a ſingular zeale, and deuout and conſtant reſolution, which we haue taken, with the helpe and aſſiſtance of God, author, diſtributor, and protector of all kingdomes and eſtates, to cauſe the people, which doe inhabite the Countrie, men (at this preſent time) barbarous, Atheiſts, without faith or religion, to be conuerted to Chriſtianitie, and to the beleefe and profeſſion of our faith and religion: and to draw them from the ignorance and vnbeleefe wherein they are. Hauing alſo of a long time knowen by the relation of the ſea Captaines, Pilots, Marchants and others, who of long time haue haunted, frequented and trafficked with the people that are found in the ſaid places, how fruitfull, commodious and profitable may bee vnto vs, to our eſtates and ſubiects, the dwelling, poſſeſſion, and habitation of thoſe countries, for the great and apparent profit which may be drawen by the greater frequentation & habitude which may be had with the people that are found there, & the trafficke and commerce which may be, by that means ſafely treated and negotiated. Wee then for theſe cauſes fully truſting on your great wiſedome, and in the knowledge and experience that you haue of the qualitie, condition and ſituation of the ſaid countrie of La Cadia: for the diuers and ſundry nauigations, voiages and frequentations that you haue made into thoſe parts, and others neere and bordering vpon it: Aſſuring our ſelues that this our reſolution and intention, being committed vnto you, you will attentiuely, diligently, and no leſſe couragiouſly and valourouſly execute and bring to ſuch perfection as we deſire: Haue expreſly appointed and eſtabliſhed you, and by theſe Preſents, ſigned with our owne hands, doe commit, ordaine, make, conſtitute and eſtabliſh you, our Lieutenant generall, for to repreſent our perſon, in the countries, territories, coaſts and confines of La Cadia. To

begin from the 40 degree vnto the 46. And in the ſame diſtance, or part of it, as farre as may be done, to eſtabliſh, extend and make to be knowne our name, might and authoritie. And vnder the ſame to ſubiect, ſubmit and bring to obedience all the people of the ſaid land and the borderers thereof: And by the meanes thereof, and all lawfull waies, to call, make, inſtruct, prouoke and incite them to the knowledge of God, and to the light of the faith and Chriſtian Religion, to eſtabliſh it there: And in the exerciſe and profeſſion of the ſame, keepe and conſerue the ſaid people, and all other inhabitants in the ſaid places, and there to command in peace, reſt and tranquillitie, as well by ſea as by land: to ordaine, decide, and cauſe to be executed all that which you ſhall iudge fit and neceſſarie to be done, for to maintaine, keepe and conſerue the ſaid places vnder our power and authoritie, by the formes, waies and meanes preſcribed by our lawes. And for to haue there a care of the ſame with you, to appoint eſtabliſh, and conſtitute all officers, as well in the affaires of warre, as for Iuſtice and policie, for the firſt time, and from thence forward to name and preſent them vnto vs: for to be diſpoſed by vs, and to giue letters, titles, and ſuch prouiſoes as ſhall be neceſſarie. And according to the occurrences of affaires, yourſelfe with the aduice of wiſe and capable men, to preſcribe vnder our good pleaſure, lawes, ſtatutes and ordinances conformable, as much as may be poſſible, vnto ours, ſpecially in things and matters that are not prouided by them: To treat and contract to the ſame effect, peace, alliance and confederacy, good amitie, correſpondencie and cōmunication with the ſaid people & their Princes, or others, hauing power or command ouer them: To entertaine, keepe, and carefully to obſerue, the treatiſes and alliances wherein you ſhall couenant with them: vpon condition that they themſelues performe the ſame of their part. And for want thereof to make open warres againſt them, to conſtraine and bring them to ſuch

reaſon, as you ſhall thinke needfull, for the honour, obedience and ſeruice of God, and the eſtabliſhment, maintenance and conſeruation of our ſaid authoritie amongſt them: at leaſt to haunt and frequent by you, and all our ſubiects with them, in all aſſurance, libertie, frequentation and communication, there to negociate and trafficke louingly and peaceably. To giue and grant vnto them fauors and priuiledges, charges and honors. Which intire power aboueſaid, we will likewiſe and ordaine, that you haue ouerall our ſaid ſubiects that will goe in that voiage with you and inhabite there, trafficke, negociate and remaine in the ſaid places, to retaine, take, reſerue and appropriate vnto you, what you will and ſhall ſee to be moſt commodious for you, and proper to your charge, qualitie and vſe of the ſaid lands, to diſtribute ſuch parts and portions thereof, to giue and attribute vnto them ſuch titles, honors, rights, powers and faculties as you ſhall ſee neceſſarie, according to the qualities, conditions and merits of the perſons of the ſame countrie or others. Chiefely to populate, to manure, and to make the ſaid lands to be inhabited, as ſpeedily, carefully & skilfully, as time, places & commodities may permit. To make thereof, or cauſe to be made to that end, diſcouerie and view along the maritime coaſtes and other countries of the maine land, which you ſhall order & preſcribe in the foreſaid ſpace of the 40 degree, to the 46 degree, or otherwiſe as much and as farre as may be, along the ſaid coaſt, and in the firme land. To make carefully to be ſought and marked all ſorts of mines of gold and of ſiluer, copper, and other mettals and minerals, to make them to be digged, drawne from the earth, purified and refined, for to be conuerted into vſe, to diſpoſe according as we haue preſcribed by Edicts and orders, which we haue made in this realme of the profit and benefit of them, by you or them whom you ſhall eſtabliſh to that effect, reſeruing vnto vs onely the tenth penie, of that which ſhall iſſue from them of gold, ſiluer, and copper,

leauing vnto you that which we might take of the other ſaid mettals and minerals, for to aide and eaſe you in the great expenſes that the foreſaid charge may bring vnto you. Willing in the meane while, that as well for your ſecuritie and commoditie, as for the ſecuritie and commoditie of all our ſubiects, who will goe, inhabite, and trafficke in the ſaid lands: as generally of all others that will accommodate themſelues there vnder our power and authoritie; you may cauſe to bee built and frame one or many forts, places, Townes, and all other houſes, dwellings and habitations, Ports, Hauens, retiring places and lodgings, as you ſhall know to be fit, profitable and neceſſarie for the performing of the ſaid enterpriſe. To eſtabliſh garriſons and ſouldiers for the keeping of them. To aide and ſerue you for the effects aboue ſaid with the vagrant, idle perſons and maſterleſſe, as Idle and baniſhed men imploied in this buſineſſe.well out of townes as of the countrie: and with them that be condemned to perpetuall baniſhment, or for three yeeres at the leaſt out of our Realme: Prouided alwaies that it be done by the aduice, conſent, and authoritie of our officers. Ouer and beſides that which is aboue mentioned (and that which is moreouer preſcribed, commanded and ordained vnto you by the commiſſions and powers, which our moſt deare coſen the Lord of Ampuille Admirall of France hath giuen vnto you, for that which concerneth the affaires and the charge of the Admiraltie, in the exploit, expedition, and executing of the things aboue ſaid) to doe generally whatſoeuer may make for the conqueſt, peopling, inhabiting and preſeruation of the ſaid land of La Cadia, and of the coaſtes, territories adioining, and of their appurtenances and dependencies, vnder our name and authoritie, whatſoeuer our ſelues would & might doe, if we were there preſent in perſon, although that the caſe ſhould require a more ſpeciall order, then we preſcribe vnto you by theſe Preſents: To the contents whereof wee command, ordaine, and moſt expreſlie

doe enioine all our Iuſticers, officers and ſubiects, to conforme themſelues: And to obey and giue attention vnto you, in all and euery the things aboueſaid, their circumſtances and dependencies. Alſo to giue vnto you in the executing of them, all ſuch aid and comfort, helpe and aſſiſtance, as you ſhall haue need of, and whereof they ſhall be by you required; and this vpon paine of diſobedience and rebellion. And to the end no body may pretend cauſe of ignorance of this our intention, and to buſie himſelfe in all, or in part of the charge, dignitie and authoritie which we giue vnto you by theſe preſents: Wee haue of our certaine knowledge, full power and regall authoritie, reuoked, ſuppreſſed and declared voide, and of none effect heereafter, and from this preſent time, al other powers and commiſſions, letters and expeditions giuen and deliuered to any perſon ſoeuer, for to diſcouer, people and inhabite in the foreſaid extention of the ſaid lands, ſituated from the ſaid 40 degree, to the 46, whatſoeuer they be. And furthermore we command and ordaine all our ſaid officers, of what qualitie & condition ſoeuer they be, that after theſe Preſents, or the duplicate of them ſhall be duely examined by one of our beloued and truſty Counſellers, Notaries and Secretaries, or other Notarie Royall, they doe vpon your requeſt, demand and ſute, or vpon the ſute of any our Atturneis, cauſe the ſame to be read, publiſhed, and recorded in the records of their Iuriſdictions, powers and precincts, ſeeking, as much as ſhall appertaine vnto them, to quiet and appeaſe all troubles and hinderances which may contradict the ſame. For ſuch is our pleaſure. Giuen at Fountain-Bleau the 8 day of Nouember: in the yeere ofour Lord 1603: And of our reigne the 15. Signed HENRY: and vnderneath, by the King, Potier; And ſealed vpon ſingle labell with yellow waxe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The voyage of Monſieur De Monts into New France: what accidents hapned in the ſaid voyage: The cauſes of the Icie banks in New found land: The impoſing of names to certaine Ports: The perplexitie wherein they were by reaſon of the ſtay of the other ſhip.
               
               MOnſieur De Monts hauing made the Commiſſions and Prohibitions before ſaid, to be proclaimed thorow the Realme of France, and eſpecially thorow the Ports and maritime townes thereof, cauſed two ſhips to be rigged and furniſhed, the one vnder the conduct of captaine Timothy of New-hauen, the other of captaine Morell of Honfleur. In the firſt, he ſhipped himſelfe, with good number of men of account, as well Gentlemen as others. And foraſmuch as Monſieur De Poutrincourt was, and had beene of a long time, deſirous to ſee thoſe countries of New France, and there to finde out and chuſe ſome fit place to retire himſelfe into, with his familie, wife and children, not meaning to be the laſt that ſhould follow and participate in the glory of ſo faire and generous an enterpriſe, would needs goe thither, and ſhipped himſelfe with the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, carrying with him ſome quantitie of armours and munitions of The ſetting foorth out of New-hauen.warre; and ſo weighed anckers from New-hauen the ſeuenth day of March, 1604. But being departed ſomewhat too ſoone, before the Winter had yet left off her frozen weed, they found ſtore of Icie banks, againſt the which they were in danger to ſtrike, and ſo to be caſt away: But Danger.God, which hitherto hath proſpered the nauigation of theſe voiages, preſerued them.
               One might wonder, and not without cauſe, why, in the ſame parallel, there is more Ice in this ſea than in that

of France. Whereunto I anſwer, that the Ices that be found in thoſe ſeas are not originary frō the ſame climate, but rather come from the Northerly parts, driuen without any let thorow the vaſt of this great ſea by the waues, ſtormes, and boiſterous flouds, which the Eaſterly and Northerly windes doe cauſe in Winter and Spring time, and driue them towards the South and Weſt: But the French ſeas are ſheltered by Scotland, England and Ireland: which is the cauſe that the Ices cannot fall into it. An other reaſon alſo might be alleaged, and that is the motion of the ſea, which beareth more towards thoſe parts, becauſe of the larger courſe that it maketh towards America A perillous ſtorme.than towards the lands of theſe our parts. The perill of this voyage was, not onely in the meeting of the ſaid bankes of Ice, but alſo in the ſtormes that vexed them: One of them they had that brake the galleries of the ſhip: And in theſe turmoiles, a Ioyner was caried away by a ſea or flaſh of water to the next doore of death, ouerboord, but he held himſelfe faſt at a tackling, which by chance hung out of the ſaid ſhippe.
               The voyage was long by reaſon of contrarie windes, Winde commonly good in March for the New found lands. The Ile of Sablon or Sand.which ſeldome hapneth to them that ſet out in March for the New found lands, which are ordinarilie caried with an Eaſt or Northren winde, fit to goe to thoſe lands. And hauing taken their courſe to the South of the Ile of Sand or Sablon, or Sand, for to ſhunne the ſaid Ices, they almoſt fell from Caribdis into Scylla, going to ſtrike towards the ſaid Ile, during the thicke miſts that are frequent in that ſea.
               In the end, the ſixt of May they came to a certain Port, where they found captaine Roſſignol of New-hauen, who did trucke for skins with the Sauages, contrarie to the Kings inhibitions, which was the cauſe that his ſhip was Port du Roſſignol.confiſcated. This Port was called Le Port du Roſſignol, hauing (in this his hard fortune) this onely good, that a good and fit Harborough or Port, in thoſe coaſts beareth his name.
               
                  
From thence coaſting and diſcouering the lands, they arriued at another Porte, very faire, which they named Le Port du Moutton, by reaſon that a Mutton or Wether Le Port da Moutton.hauing leaped ouerboord and drowned himſelfe came aboord againe, and was taken and eaten as good prize. By ſuch accidents many names haue anciently beene giuen on the ſudden, and without any great deliberation. So the Capitol.Capitol of Rome had his name, becauſe that in digging there, a dead mans head was found. So the citie of Milan Milan.hath beene called Mediolanum, that is to ſay, halfe wooll, for that the Gaules, caſting the foundation thereof, found a Sowe halfe couered with wooll: and ſo of ſundry others.
               Being at the Port du Moutton, they cabaned and lodged themſelues after the ſauage faſhion, expecting newes of the other ſhip, wherein was the victuals and other neceſſarie prouiſion for the foode and entertainment of them About 100. Planters.that were to Winter there, being about an hundred men in number. In this Port they tarried a moneth in great perplexitie, for feare they had that ſome ſiniſter accident had hapned to the ſaid other ſhippe, who ſet out the tenth of March, wherein was Monſieur Du Pont of Honfleur, and the ſaid Captaine Morel. And this was ſo much the more important, for that of the comming of the ſaid ſhip depended Deliberation vpon the returne into France.the whole ſucceſſe of the buſineſſe. For euen vpon this long tarying, it was in queſtion whether they ſhould returne into France or no. Monſieur De Pourtrincourt was of aduice that it were better to die there; whereto the ſaid Monſieur De Monts conformed himſelfe. In the meane while many went a hunting, others to fiſhing, for to ſtore the kitchin. Neere the ſaid Moutton Porte there is a place Store of Conies.ſo repleniſhed with Rabbets and Conies, that they almoſt did eat nothing elſe. During that time Monſieur Champlein was ſent with a ſhalloup to ſeeke farther off a fitter place to retire themſelues, at which exploit he tarried ſo long, that deliberating vpon the returne, they thought to leaue him behind: for there was no more victuals: and

they ſerued themſelues with that, that was found in the ſaid Roſſignols ſhippe, without which they had been forced to returne into France, and ſo to breake a faire enterprize at the very birth and beginning thereof; or to ſtarue, hauing ended the hunting of Conies, which could not ſtill continue. Now the cauſes of the ſtaie of the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont, and Captaine Morel, were two; the one, that wanting a Cocke-boate, they imploied their time in the building of one, in the land where they arriued firſt, which The Engliſh Porte. Campſeau Port.
                  was the Engliſh Port: The other, that being come at Campſeau Port, they found there foure ſhips of Baskes, or men of Saint Iohn de Luz, that did trucke with the Sauages, contrarie to the ſaid Inhibitions, from whom they tooke their goods, and brought the Maſters to the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, who vſed them very gently.
               Three weekes being expired, and the ſaid Monſieur De Monts hauing no newes of the ſhippe he looked for, he deliberated to ſend along the coaſt to ſeeke for them, and Note heere the good nature and diligence of the Sauages.for that purpoſe diſpatched ſome Sauages, to whom hee gaue a French man for companie with letters. The ſaid Sauages promiſed to returne at the time prefixed, being eight daies, whereof they failed not. But as the ſocietie of man and wife, agreeing well together, is a powerful thing; ſo theſe Sauages before their departure, had a care of their wiues and children, and required victuals for them; which was granted. And hauing hoiſed vp ſailes, within few daies after they found thoſe that they ſought for, at a place La Baye des Iles.called La Baye des Iles, who were themſelues in no leſſe feare or griefe for the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, than he of them, becauſe they found not, during their voiage, thoſe markes and ſignes that were agreed vpon betweene them, which is, that Monſieur De Monts ſhould haue left at The Ice cō
                     meth farther to the South than Campſeau.
                  
                  Campſeau, ſome croſſe on a tree, or letter there fixed, which he did not, hauing farre ouer-ſhot the ſaid Campſeau, by reaſon that for the ſaid Iced bankes, he tooke his way ſomewhat farre on the South, as we haue ſaid. So

hauing read the letters, the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont, and 
                     Monſieur Du Pont goeth to Canada, to trade for Furres.Captaine Morel gaue vp the victuals and prouiſion that they had brought for them that ſhould Winter there, and ſo returned backe towards the great riuer of Canada, for the trade of skinnes or furres.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The leauing of Port du Moutton: the accident of a man loſt in the woods the ſpace of ſixteen daies: Baye Françoiſe, or French Baye: Port Royal: The riuer of L'Equille, a Copper mine: The miſchiefe of golden mines: of Diamonds: Turky ſtones.
               
               AL New France in the end being conteined in two ſhips, they waighed ankers from Porte Du Moutton, for to imploy their time, and to diſcouer lands as much as might before Winter. We came to Cape de Sable, 
                  
                     Cap De Sable, or the Sandie Cape. Saint Maries Baye. Faire place to inhabite. Mines of Iron and Siluer.or the Sandie Cape; and from thence we ſailed to the Baie of Saint Marie, where our men lay at anker fifteene daies, whileſt the lands and paſſages as well by ſea as by riuer might be deſcried and knowen. This Baye is a very faire place to inhabite, becauſe that one is readily carried thither without doubling. There are mines of Iron & Siluer; but in no great abundance, according to the triall made thereof in France. Hauing ſoiorned there ſome 12 or 13 daies, a ſtrange accident hapned, ſuch as I will tell you. There was a certaine Churchman of a good familie in Paris, that had a deſire to performe the voyage with Monſieur De Monts, and that againſt the liking of his friends, who ſent expreſly to Honfleur to diuert him therof, and to bring him backe to Paris. The ſhips lying at anker in the ſaid Baye of Saint Marie, he put himſelfe in An accident of a man loſt in the woods the ſpace of 16. daies.companie with ſome that went to ſport themſelues in the woods. It came to paſſe, that hauing ſtaied to drinke at a brooke, hee forgat there his ſword, and followed on his way with his companie: which when he perceiued hee

returned backe to ſeeke it: but hauing found it, forgetfull from what part he came, and not conſidering whether he ſhould goe Eaſt or Weſt, or otherwiſe (for there was no path) he tooke his way quite contrarie, turning his backe from his companie, and ſo long trauelled that hee ſound himſelfe at the ſea ſhoare, where no ſhips were to be ſeen, (for they were at the other ſide of a nooke of land farre reaching into the ſea) he imagined that he was forſaken, and began to bewaile his fortune vpon a rocke. The night being come, euery one being retired, he is found wanting: hee was asked for of thoſe that had beene in the woods, they report in what maner he departed from them, and that ſince they had no newes of him. Whereupon a Proteſtant was charged to haue killed him, becauſe they quarrelled ſometimes for matters of Religion. Finally, they ſounded a trumpet thorow the foreſt, they ſhot off the Canon diuers times, but in vaine: for the roaring of the Sea, ſtronger than all that, did expell backe the ſound of the ſaid Canons and trumpets. Two, three and foure daies paſſe, he appeareth not. In the meane while the time haſtens to depart, ſo hauing taried ſo long that hee was then held for dead, they weighed ankers to goe further, and to La Baye Françoiſe.ſee the depth of a Baye that hath ſome 40 leagues length, and 14 (yea 18) of bredth, which was named La Baye Francoiſe, or the French Baye.
               In this Bay is the paſſage to come into a Port, whereinto our men entred, & made ſome abode, during the which they had the pleaſure to hunt an Ellan, or Stagge, that croſſed a great lake of the Sea, which maketh this Port, and did ſwimme but eaſily. This Port is enuironed with mountaines on the North ſide: Towards the South be ſmall hils, which (with the ſaid mountaines) doe powre out a thouſand brookes, which make that place pleaſanter than any other place in the world: there are very faire falls of waters, fit to make Mils of all ſorts. At the Eaſt is a riuer betweene the ſaid mountaines and hils, in the which

Ships may ſaile fifteene Leagues and more, and in all this diſtance is nothing of both ſides the Riuer but faire medowes, which riuer was named L' Equille, becauſe that the The riuer of L' Equille.
                  firſt fiſh taken therein was an Equille. But the ſaid Port, for the beauty thereof was called Port Royall. Monſieur 
                  Port Royal.
                  De Poutrincourt hauing found this place to be to his liking demanded it, with the Lands thereunto adioyning, of Monſieur De Monts, to whom the King had by commiſſion, before inſerted, granted the diſtribution of the lands of New France from the 40. degree to the 46. Which place was granted to the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, who ſince hath had letters of confirmation for the ſame of his Maieſtie, intending to retire himſelfe thither with his familie, and there to eſtabliſh the Chriſtian and French name, aſmuch as his power ſhall ſtretch, and God grant him the meanes to accompliſh it. The ſaid Porte containeth eight leagues of circuit, beſides the riuer of L' Equille. There is within it two Iles very faire and pleaſant: the one at the mouth of the ſaid riuer, which I deeme to be of the greatneſſe of the Citie of Beauuais: The other at the ſide of the mouth of an other riuer, as broad as the riuer of Oiſe, or Marne, entring within the ſaid Porte: The ſaid Ile being almoſt of the greatneſſe of the other: and they both are wooddy. In this Porte, and right ouer againſt the former Ile, we dwelt three yeares after this voyage. We will ſpeake thereof more at large heereafter.
               
                  A Copper Mine. In the 28. and 29 chap. of the ſecond booke of the whole volume vntranſlated. From Port Royall they ſailed to the Copper mine▪ wherof we haue ſpoken before elſe where. It is a high rocke betweene two Bayes of the Sea, wherein the Copper is conioyned with the ſtone, very fa
                     •
                  re and very pure, ſuch as is that which is called Rozette Copper. Many Goldſmithes haue ſeene of it in France, which doe ſay that vnder the Copper Mine there might be a golden Mine: whch is very probable. For if thoſe excrements that nature expelleth foorth be ſo pure, namely, ſmall peeces that are found vpon the grauell at the foote of the Rocke, when

it is low water, there is no doubt that the mettall which is Things firſt to be prouided in new Plantation.in the bowels of the earth is much more perfect, but this is a worke that requireth time. The firſt mining and working is to haue bread, wine and cattell, as we haue ſaid elſe where. Our felicitie conſiſteth not in Mines, ſpecially of gold & ſiluer, the which ſerue for nothing in the tillage of the ground, nor to handicrafts vſe. Contrariwiſe, the abundance of them is but a charge and burthen, that keepeth man in perpetuall vnquiet, and the more he hath thereof, the leſſe reſt enioyeth he, and his life leſſer aſſured vnto him.
               
                  Nota. Before the voyages of Peron great riches might haue beene ſet vp in a ſmal place, in ſtead that in this our age by the abundance of gold and ſiluer the ſame is come at no value nor eſteem: One hath need of huge cheſts and coffers to put in that, which a ſmall budget might haue cōtained. One might haue trauelled with a purſe in ones ſleeue, & now a Cloake-bag and a horſe muſt expreſly be had for that purpoſe. We may iuſtly curſe the houre that greedie auarice did carry the Spaniard into the Weſt, for the wofull euents that haue enſued thereof. For when I conſider that by his greedineſſe he hath kindled & maintained the warre thorow all Chriſtendome, and his onely ſtudie hath beene how to deſtroy his neighbors (and not the Turke) I cannot thinke that any other but the diuell hath beene the author of their voyages. And let not the pretence of religion be alleaged vnto mee: for (as we haue ſaid elſewhere) they haue killed all the ofspring of the Countrie with the moſt inhumaine torments that the diuell hath beene able to excogitate. And by their cruelties haue rendred the name of God odious, & a name of offence to thoſe poore people, and haue continually and daily blaſphemed Eſaiah 52. verſ. 5.him in the midſt of the Gentils, as the Prophet reprocheth to the people of Iſrael. Witneſſe him that had rather be damned, then to goe to the Paradiſe of the Spaniardes.
               
               
                  
The Romaines (whoſe couetouſneſſe hath beene vnſatiable) haue made cruell wars to the nations of the Earth, but the Spaniſh cruelties are not to be found out in their hiſtories. They haue contented themſelues to ranſacke the nations which they haue ouercommed, and not to depriue them of their liues. An ancient heatheniſh author, Patronius Arbiter.making triall of his poeticall humor, findeth no greater crime in them, but that if they found out or diſcouered ſome people that had gold, they tooke them for their enemies. The verſes of this Authour haue ſo good a grace that I muſt needs inſert them heere, though I intend not to alledge much Latine.
               
                  Orbem iam totum Romanus victor habebat,
                  Quàmare, quàterra, quà ſidus currit vtrumque,
                  Nec ſatiatus erat. grauidis freta pulſa carinis
                  I am peragrabantur: ſiquis ſinus abditus vltra,
                  Si quaforet tellus quae fulvum mitteret aurum,
                  Hoſtis erat: fatiſque in triſtia bella paratis
                  Quaerebantur opes.—
               
               But the doctrine of the wiſe Sonne of Sirach teacheth vs a contrary thing. For knowing that the riches which Eccleſiaſt. 31. ver. 8. 9. 10.are digged vp, euen from as deepe as Plutoes dennes, are that which ſome one hath ſaid, irritament a malorum, hee declared That man to be happy that hath not runne after gold, and hath not put his hope in ſiluer and treaſures; adding, that he ought to be eſteemed to haue done wonderfull things among all his people, and to be the example of glory, which hath beene tempted by gold, and remained perfect. And ſo by a contrary ſenſe the ſame to be vnhappy that doth otherwiſe.
               Now to returne to our Mines. Among theſe Copper rockes there is found ſometimes ſmall rockes couered with Diamons fixed to them. I will not aſſure them for fine, but Diamonds.that is very pleaſing to the ſight. There are alſo certaine ſhining blew ſtones, which are of no leſſe value or woorth than Turkie ſtones. Monſieur De Champdorè our guide Turky ſtones.for the nauigations in thoſe countries, hauing cut within a

rocke one of thoſe ſtones, at his returne from New France he brake it in two, and gaue one part of it to Monſieur De Monts, the other to Monſieur De Poutrincourt, which they made to be put in gold, and were found woorthy to be preſented the one to the King by the ſaid Poutrincourt, the other to the Queene by the ſaid De Monts, and were very well accepted. I remember that a Gold-ſmith did offer fifteene crownes to Monſieur De Poutrincourt for that he preſented to his Maieſtie. There be many other ſecrets, rare and faire things within the ground of thoſe Countries, which are yet vnknowen vnto vs, and will come to the knowledge and euidence by inhabiting the prouince.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The deſcription of the riuer Saint Iohn: and of the Ile Saint Croix: The man lost in the woods found out 16. daies after: Examples of ſome ſtrange abſtinences: The diſcord of the Sauages deferred to the iudgement of Monſieur De Monts: The fatherly authoritie amongst the ſaid Sauages: What husbands they chuſe to their Daughters.
               
               HAuing viewed the ſaid Mine, the companie paſſed to the other ſide of the French Baye, and went Saint Iohns Riuer.towards the bottome of the ſame: Then turning backe came to the riuer of Saint Iohn, ſo called (as I thinke) becauſe they arriued thither the ſoure & twentieth of Iune, Dangerous comming in.which is S. Iohn Baptiſts day. There is a faire Port, but the entrie or mouth is dangerous to them that know not the beſt waies, becauſe that before the comming in there is a long banke of rockes, which are not ſeene nor diſcouered, The fall of a Riuer.but onely at low water, which doe ſerue as for defence to this Port, within which, when one hath gone about a league, there is found a violent fall of the ſaid riuer, which falleth downe from the rockes, when that the ſea doth ebbe, with a maruellous noiſe: for being ſometimes at an

ker at ſea, we haue heard it from aboue twelue leagues off. But at full ſea one may paſſe it with great ſhips. This riuer is one of the faireſt that may be ſeene, hauing ſtore of Ilands, and ſwarming with fiſhes. This laſt yeere 1608. 1608.the ſaid Monſieur de Champdorè, with one of the ſaid Monſieur De Monts his men, hath beene ſome 50 leagues vp the ſaid riuer: and do witneſſe that there is great quantitie Vines.of Vines along the ſhore, but the grapes are not ſo bigge as they bee in the country of the Armouchiquois: There are alſo Onions, & many other ſorts of good hearbs. As for the trees they are the fayreſt that may be ſeene. Great grapes among the Armouchiquois. Abundance of fiſhes. The Commoditie of voyaging by the riuer.When we were there we ſaw great number of Cedar trees. Concerning fiſhes the ſaid Champdorè hath related vnto vs, that putting the kettle ouer the fire, they had taken fiſh ſufficient for their diner before that the water was hot. Moreouer this riuer, ſtretching it ſelfe farre within the lands of the Sauages doth maruellouſly ſhorten the long trauels by meanes thereof. For in ſix daies they goe to Gaſhepè coming to the bay or gulfe of Chaleur, or heate, when they are at the end of it, in carying their Canowes ſome few leagues. And by the ſame riuer in eight daies they goe to Tadouſſac by a branch of the ſame which commeth from the North-Weſt. In ſuch ſort that in Port Royall one may haue within 15. or 18. daies newes from the Frenchmen dwelling in the great riuer of Canada, by theſe waies: which could not be done in one moneth by ſea, nor without danger.
               
                  The Ile of S. Croix, 20. leagues from S Iohns riuer. Leauing Saint Iohns riuer, they came following the coaſt 20. leagues from that place, to a great riuer (which is properlie ſea) where they fortified themſelues in a little Iland ſeated in the middeſt of this riuer, which the ſaid Champlein had beene to diſcouer and view. And ſeeing it ſtrong by nature, and of eaſie defence and keeping, beſides that the ſeaſon began to ſlide away, and therefore it was behouefull to prouide of lodging, without running any farther, they reſolued to make their abode there. I will

                  He that will poſſeſſe a land ought to place himſelfe in the maine or firme land. not ſift out curiouſly the reaſons of all parts vpon the reſolution of this their dwelling; but I will alwaies be of opinion, that whoſoeuer goes into a countrie to poſſeſſe it, muſt not ſtay in the Iles, there to be a priſoner. For, before all things, the culter and tillage of the ground muſt be regarded. And I would faine know how one ſhall till and manure it, if it behoueth at euery houre in the morning, at noone and the euening, to croſſe a great paſſage of water, to goe for things requiſite from the firme land. And if one feareth the enemy, how ſhall he that husbandeth the land, or otherwiſe buſie in neceſſarie affaires, ſaue himſelfe if he be purſued? for one findeth not alwaies a boat in hand, in time of neede, nor two men to conduct it. Beſides, out life requiring many commodities, an Iland is not fit for to begin the eſtabliſhment and ſeat of a Colony, vnleſſe there be Currents and ſtreames of ſweet water for to drinke, and to ſupplie other neceſſaries in houſhold, which is not in ſmall Ilands. There needeth wood for fuell, which alſo is not there. But aboue all, there muſt be ſhelters from the hurtfull winds and colde: which is hardly found in a ſmall continent, inuironed with water of all ſides. Neuertheleſſe the Companie ſoiorned there in the mideſt of a broad riuer, where the North wind and North-Weſt bloweth at will. And becauſe, that two leagues higher there be brooks that come croſſe-wiſe to fall within this large branch of ſea, the Ile of the Frenchmens retreat was called Saint Croix, 25. leagues diſtant from Port Royal. Whileſt that they begin to cut downe Cedars and other trees of the ſaid Ile to make neceſſary buildings, let vs returne to ſeeke out Maſter Nicolas Aubri, loſt in the woods, which long time ſince is holden for dead.
               As they began to viſit and ſearch the Iland, Monſieur de Champdorè (of whom we ſhal henceforth make mentiō, by reaſon he dwelt foure yeeres in thoſe parts, conducting the voyages made there) was ſent backe to the Bay of Saint Mary, with a Mine-finder, that had beene caried

thither for to get ſome Mines of ſiluer & Iron, which they did. And as they had croſſed the French Baie, they entred Returne to the Baie of Saint Marie, where the loſt man was found again. The long Ile.into the ſaid Baie of Saint Marie, by a narrow ſtrait or paſſage, which is betweene the land of Port Royal, and an Iland called the Long Ile: where after ſome abode they going afiſhing, the ſaid Aubri perceaued them, and began with a feeble voice to call as loud as he could; and for to helpe his voice he aduiſed himſelfe to doe as Ariadne did heeretofore to Theſeus,
                  
                     Candidaque impoſui longae velamina virgae,
                     Scilicet oblitos admonitura mei.
                  
               
               For he put his handkercher, and his hat on a ſtaues end, which made him better to be knowen. For as one of them heard the voice, and asked the reſt of the companie, if it might be the ſaid Monſieur Aubri, they mocked & laughed at it. But after they had ipied the mouing of the handkercher and of the hat, then they began to thinke that it might be hee. And comming neere, they knew perfectly it was himſelfe, and tooke him in their Barke with great ioy and contentment the ſixteenth day after he had loſt himſelfe. Diuers in this later age haue ſtuffed their books and hiſtories with many miracles, wherein is not to bee found ſo great cauſe of admiration as in this. For during theſe ſixteen daies hee fedde himſelfe but by (I know not Cheries.what) ſmall fruits, like vnto Cheries, without kernel, (yet not ſo delicate) which are ſcarſly found in thoſe woods. And indeed in theſe laſt voyages a ſpeciall grace and fauor of God hath beene euident in many occurrences, which we will marke as occaſion ſhall be offered. The poore Aubri (I call him ſo by reaſon of his affliction) was, as one may eaſily thinke, maruellouſly weakened. They gaue him food by meaſure, and brought him backe againe to the companie at the Iland of Saint Croix, wherof euerie one receaued an incredible ioy and conſolation, and eſpecially Monſieur De Monts, whom it concerned more than any other. Doe not alleage vnto me the Hiſtories of the

Maide of Confolans, in the Countrie of Poictou: which was two yeares without eating, ſome ſix yeares agoe, nor of an other neere Berne in Swiſſer-land, which loſt (not yet full ten yeares ago) the deſire and appetite of eating, during all Plin. lib. 7. Cap. 2.
                  her life time, and other like examples: for they bee accidents hapned by the diſordering of nature. And concerning that which Pliny reciteth, that in the remoteſt parts of the Indies, in the inferiour parts of the fountaine and ſpring of the riuer Ganges, there is a nation of Aſtoms, that is to ſay, Mouthleſſe people, that liue but with the onely odour and exhalation of certaine rootes, flowers and fruits which they aſſume through their noſes: I would hardly beleeue it, but would thinke rather that in ſmelling they might bite very well of the ſaid rootes and fruits: As alſo thoſe that Iames Quartier mentioneth to haue no mouths, and to eat nothing, by the report of the Sauage Donnacona, whom he brought into France to make recitall thereof to the King, with other things as voide of common ſenſe and credit as that. But imagine it were true, ſuch people haue their nature diſpoſed to this maner of liuing, and this caſe is not alike. For the ſaid Aubri wanted no ſtomacke nor appetite, and hath liued ſixteene daies, partlie nouriſhed by ſome nutritiue force, which is in the aire of that countrie, and partly by thoſe ſmall fruits before ſpoken: God hauing giuen him ſtrength to endure this long want Iohn Wier in the treatie De ieiuniis comment.of food, preſeruing him from the ſtep of death. Which I finde ſtrange, and is ſo indeed. But in the Hiſtories of our time there be found things of greater maruell. Among other things of one Henry de Haſſeld, merchant trafficking from the Low Countries to Berg in Norwege: who hauing heard a belly-god Preacher ſpeaking ill of the miraculous faſts, as though it were not in Gods power to doe that which he hath done in times paſt, prouoked by it, did aſſay to faſt, and abſtained himſelfe three daies from eating: At the end whereof, being pinched with hunger, tooke a morſell of bread, meaning to ſwallow it downe

with a glaſſe of Beere: but all that ſtucke ſo in his throate, that he remained forty daies and forty nights without either eating or drinking. That time being ended, he vomited out by the mouth that which he had eaten and drunke, which all that while remained in his throat. So long an abſtinence weakned him in ſuch ſort, that it was needfull to ſuſtaine and reſtore him with milke. The Gouernour of the countrey hauing vnderſtood this woonder, called him before him, and inquired of the truth of the matter: whereof being incredulous, would make new triall of it, and hauing made him carefully to bee kept in a chamber, found the thing to be true. This man is praiſed for great pietie, ſpecially towards the poore. Sometime after being come for his priuate affaires to Bruxelles in Brabant, a Creditor of his, to bereaue him of his due, accuſed him of hereſie, and ſo cauſed him to be burned in the yeere 1545.
               
                  Ibidem. And ſince one of the Chanons of the citie of Liege, making triall of his ſtrength in faſting, hauing continued the ſame euen to the ſeuenteenth day, felt himſelf ſo weakned, that vnleſſe he had beene ſuddenly ſuccoured by a good reſtoratiue, he had quite periſhed.
               
                  Ibidem. A yongue Maid of Buchold, in the territorie of Munſter in Weſtphalia, afflicted with griefe of minde, and vnwilling to ſtirre or goe abroad from home, was beaten by her mother for the ſame, which redoubled her dolour, in ſuch ſort, that hauing loſt her naturall reſt, was foure moneths without either drinking or eating, ſauing that ſometimes ſhe did chaw ſome roſted apple, and waſhed her mouth with a little Ptiſane.
               
               
                  
                     Euagrius lib. 1. of the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie. cap. 3. Baronius vpon the Martyrol. Rom. 9. Ian
                           •
                        .
                   The Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, among a great number of faſters, make mention of three holy Hermites, all named Simeon, which did liue in ſtrange auſteritie and long faſts, as of eight daies, and fifteene daies continuance, yea longer, not hauing for all their dwelling but a Columne or Hermitage where they dwelt and ledde their liues: by reaſon whereof they were named Stelites, that is to ſaie,

                  Columnaries, as dwelling in Columnes.
               But all theſe before alleaged, had partly reſolued themſelues to ſuch faſts, and partly had by little and little accuſtomed themſelues to it, ſo that it was not very ſtrange for them to faſt ſo long: which was not in him of whom we ſpeake. And therefore his faſt is the more to be admired, by ſo much as that he had not in any wiſe diſpoſed himſelfe thereto, and had not vſed theſe long auſterities.
               After he had beene cheriſhed, and they ſoiourned yet ſometime, to order the buſineſſe, and to view the lands round about the Ile Saint Croix, motion was made to ſend backe the ſhippes into France before Winter, and ſo they that went not thither to Winter, prepared themſelues for the returne. The meane while the Sauages from about all their confines came to ſee the maners of the Frenchmen: The Sauage ſubmit themſelues to the cenſure of Monſieur De Monts in in their variances.& lodged themſelues willingly neere them: alſo in certaine variances hapned amongſt themſelues, they did make Monſieur De Monts Iudge of their debates; which is a beginning of voluntarie ſubiection, from whence a hope may be conceaued, that theſe people wil ſoone conforme themſelues to our maner of liuing.
               Amongſt other things hapned before the departing of the ſaid ſhips, it chanced one day, that a Sauage called Bituani, 
                  The fathers authoritie in mariage.finding good reliſh in the kitchin of the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, ſetled himſelfe therein, doing there ſome ſeruice: And yet did make loue to a Maide, by way of marriage; the which not being able to haue with the good liking and conſent of her father, he rauiſhed her and tooke her to wife. Thereupon a great quarrell enſueth. And in The cauſe the of Sauagespleaded before Monſieur De Monts.
                  the end the Maid was taken away from him, and returned to her fathers. A very great debate was like to follow, were it not that Bituani complaining to the ſaid Monſieur De Monts for this iniury, the others came to defend their cauſe ſaying, (to wit▪ the father aſſiſted with his friends) that he would not giue his daughter to a man, vnleſſe he had ſome meanes by his induſtrie to nouriſh and maintaine both her

and the children that ſhould proceed of the mariage: As for him he ſaw not any thing that he could doe: That he loitered about the kitchin of the ſaid Monſieur de Monts, not exerciſing himſelfe ahunting. Finallie, that he ſhould not haue the maide, and ought to content himſelfe with that which was paſſed. The ſaid Monſieur De Monts hauing heard both parties, told them, that he detained him not, and that the ſaid Bituani was a diligent fellow and ſhould goe ahunting to make proofe of what he could do. But yet for all that they did not reſtore the maide vnto him, vntill he had ſhewed effectually that which the ſaid Monſieur De Monts had promiſed of him. Finally, he goeth Store of Salmons. Beuers. Matachias be laces, beades, bracelets, or ſuch trincketsafiſhing, taketh great ſtore of Salmons, the maide is redeliuered him, and the next day following he came, clothed with a faire new gowne of Beuers well ſet on with Matachias, to the fort which was then a building for the Frenchmen, bringing his wife with him, as triumphing for the victory, hauing gotten her, as it were by dint of ſword: whom he hath euer ſince loued dearely, contrarie to the cuſtome of the other Sauages: giuing vs to vnderſtand, that the thing which is gotten with paine, ought to be much cheriſhed.
               By this action we ſee the two moſt conſiderable points in matter of mariage to bee obſerued among theſe people, guided onely by the law of nature: That is to ſay, the fatherly authority, and the husbands induſtrie: A thing which I haue much admired, ſeeing, that in our Chriſtian Church, by I know not what abuſe, men haue liued many ages, during which the fatherly authority hath beene diſpiſed and ſet at naught, vntill that the Eccleſiaſticall conuentions haue opened their eies, and knowen that the ſame was euen againſt nature it ſelfe: And that our Kings by lawes and Edicts haue reeſtabliſhed in his force this fatherlie authority: which notwithſtanding in ſpirituall mariages and vowes of religion hath not yet recouered his ancient glorie: And hath (in this reſpect) his proppe but vpon

the Courts of Parlaments orders, the which oftentime
                     •
                   haue conſtrained the detainers of Children, to reſtore them to their parents.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  The deſcription of the Iland of Saint Croix: The enterpriſe of Monſieur De Monts difficult and generous, yet perſecuted through enuie: The returne of Monſieur De Poutrincourt into France: the perils of the voiage.
               
               BEfore we ſpeake of the Ships returne into France, it The deſcription of the Ile of Saint Croix.
                  is meete to tell you how hard the Ile of Saint Croix is to be found out, to them that were neuer there. For there are ſo many Iles and great Baies to goe by, before one be at it, that I wonder how euer one might pierce ſo far for to finde it. There are three or foure mountains, imminent aboue the others, on the ſides: But on the North ſide, from whence the riuer runneth downe, there is but a ſharpe pointed one, aboue two leagues diſtant. The woods of the maine land are faire and admirable high and well growen, as in like maner is the graſſe. There is right ouer againſt the Iland freſh water brookes, very pleaſant and agreeable, The fruitfulneſſe of the Soile.where diuers of Monſieur De Monts his men did their buſineſſe, and builded there certaine Cabanes. As for the nature of the ground it is moſt excellent and moſt abundantly fruitfull. For the ſaid Monſieur De Monts hauing cauſed there ſome peece of ground to be tilled▪ and the ſame ſowed with Rie (for I haue ſeene there no wheat) he
                     •
                   was not able to tarry for the maturitie thereof to reape it: and notwithſtanding, the graine, fallen, hath growen and increaſed ſo wonderfully that two yeeres after wee reaped and did gather of it as faire, bigge and waightie, as any in The Iland halfe a league in compaſſe.France, which the ſoile had brought foorth without any tillage: and yet at this preſent it doth continue ſtill to mulltiply every yeere. The ſaid Iland containeth ſome halfe a

league of circuit, and at the end of it on the ſea ſide, there is a Mount or ſmall hill, which is (as it were) a little Ile ſevered from the other, where Monſieur de Monts his Canon was placed: There is alſo a little Chapell built after the ſauage faſhion. At the foot of which Chapell there is ſuch ſtore Store of Muſſels.of muſſels as is wonderfull, which may be gathered at low water, but they are ſmall: I beleeue that Monſieur De Monts people did not forget to chuſe and take the biggeſt, and left there but the ſmall ones to grow and increaſe. As for the exerciſe and occupation of our Frenchmen, during the time of their abode there, we will mention it briefely, hauing firſt conducted backe our ſhips into France.
               The Sea and maritime charges in ſuch enterpriſes as that of Monſieur De Monts, be ſo great, that he who hath not a good ſtocke and foundation ſhall eaſilie ſinke vnder ſuch a burthen, and for to ſupplie, in ſome ſort, thoſe expences, one is forced to ſuffer and beare infinite diſcommodities, and put himſelfe in danger to bee diſcredited among vnknowen people, and which is worſe, in a land which is vnmanured, and all ouer growen with foreſts. Wherein this action is the more generous, by ſo much as the perill is more euidently dangerous; and notwithſtanding all this, fortune is not left vnattempted, and to treade downe ſo many thornes that ſtop the way. Monſieur De Monts his ſhipes returning into France, he remaineth in a deſolate place, with one barke and one boate onely. And though he is promiſed to be ſent for home at the end of the yeere, who may aſſure himſelfe of Aeolus and Neptunes fidelitie, two euill, furious, vnconſtant and vnmercifull Maſters? Behold the eſtate whereunto the ſaid Monſieur De Monts reduced himſelfe, hauing had no helpe of the King, as haue had al thoſe voiages that haue beene heeretofore deſcribed (except the late Lord Marquis de la Roche) and yet it is he that hath done more than all the reſt, not hauing yet loſt his hold. But in the end I feare he ſhall be conſtrained to giue ouer and forſake all, to the great ſhame and reproch

of the French name, which by this meanes is made ridiculous and a by word to other nations. For (as though one would of ſet purpoſe oppoſe himſelfe to the conuerſion Enuy vpon the priuiledge granted to Monſieur De Monts vpon Beuers.of theſe poore Weſterly people, and to the ſetting forward of the glorie of God and the Kings) there be men ſtart vp, full of Auarice and Enuie: men which would not giue a ſtroke, or draw their ſwords for the Kings ſeruice (as Monſieur De Poutrincourt ſhewed one daie to his Maieſty) men which would not indure the leaſt labour in the world for the honour of God, which doe hinder that any profit be drawen from the very prouince it ſelfe, to furniſh to that which is neceſſarie to the eſtabliſhment of ſuch a worke, hauing rather that Engliſhmen and Hollanders reape the profit thereof than Frenchmen, and ſeeking to make the name of God vnknowen in thoſe parts of the world. And ſuch men, which haue no feare of God (for if they had any they would be zealous of his name) are heard, are beleeued, and carry things away at their pleaſure.
               Now let vs prepare and hoiſe vp ſailes. Monſieur De Poutrincourt made the voyage into theſe parts with ſome men of good ſort, not to winter there, but as it were to ſeeke out his ſeat, and finde out a land that might like him. Which he hauing done, had no neede to ſoiorne there any The returne of Monſieur De Poutrincourt into France.longer. So then the Ships being readie for the returne, he ſhipped himſelfe, and thoſe of his company, in one of them. The meane while the fame was from all ſides in theſe parts, of the wonders made in Oſtend, then beſieged by their Highneſſe of Flanders, alreadie three yeares paſſed. The voyage was not without ſtormes and great perils: for amongſt others, I will recite two or three which might be placed among miracles, were it not that the Sea-accidents are frequent enough, not that I will, for all that, darken the ſpeciall fauour that God hath alwaies ſhewed in The firſt perill.theſe voyages.
               The firſt is of a guſt of winde, which in the middeſt of

their nauigation came by night inſtantlie to ſtrike in the ſailes, with ſuch a violent boiſtrouſneſſe that it ouerturned the ſhip in ſuch maner, that of the one part the keele was on the face of the water, and the ſaile ſwimming vpon it, without any meanes or time to right it, or to looſe the tackles. On the ſudden the ſea is all afire, and the Mariners themſelues, all wet, did ſeeme to bee all compaſſed with flames, ſo furious was the Sea (the Sailers call this fire Saint Goudrans fire) and by ill fortune, in this ſudden ſurpriſe, there was not a knife to be found for to cut the cables or the ſaile. The poore ſhip, during this caſualtie, remained ouerturned, caried continually, one while vpon Mountaines of waters, then another while ſuncken downe euen to hell. Briefely, euery one did prepare to drinke, more than his belly full, to all his friends, when a new blaſt of winde came, which rent the ſaile in a thouſand peeces, euer after vnprofitable to any vſe. Happy ſaile! hauing by his ruine ſaued all this people; for if it had beene a new one they had beene caſt away, and neuer newes had beene heard of them. But God doth often trie his people, and bringeth them euen to deaths doore, to the end they may know his powerfull might, and feare him. So the ſhip began to ſtur and riſe againe by little and little: And well was it for them that ſhe was deepe keeled, for if it had beene a fliboate with a flat bottome and broade belly, it had beene quite ouerturned vp ſide downe, but the ballaſt, which remained beneath, did helpe to ſtirre her vpright.
               
                  The ſecond danger. The ſecond was at Caſquet (an Ile or rocke in the forme of a Caske, betweene France and England, on which there is no dwelling) being come within three leagues of the ſame, there was ſome iealouſie betweene the Maſters of the ſhip (an euill which oftentimes deſtroieth both men and faire enterpriſes) the one ſaying that they might double well enough the ſaid Casket, an other that they could not, and that it behooued to caſt a little from the right courſe for to paſſe vnder the Iland. In this caſe the worſt

was that one knew not the houre of the day, becauſe it was darke by reaſon of miſtes, and by conſequent they knew not if it did ebbe or flow. For if it had beene floud they had eaſily doubled it: but it chanced that it was turning water, and by that meanes the ebbe did hinder it. So that approching the ſaid rocke they ſaw no hope to ſaue themſelues, and that neceſſarily they muſt go ſtrike againſt Neceſſitie maketh vs ſeeke to God. The diuelliſhneſſe of reuengefull deſire.it. Then euery one began to pray to God, to craue pardon one of another, and (for their laſt comfort) to bewaile one another. Heereupon Captaine Roſſignol (whoſe Ship was taken in New France, as we haue ſaid before) drew out a great knife, to kill therewith Captaine Timothie, Gouernor of this preſent voyage, ſaying to him, Doeſt thou not content thy ſelfe to haue vndone me, but wilt thou needs yet caſt me heere away? but he was held and kept from doing of that he was about to doe. And in very truth it was in him great folly, yea rather madneſſe, to goe about to kill a man that was going to die, and he (that went to giue the blow) in the ſame perill. In the end as they went to ſtrike vpon the rocke Monſieur De Poutrincort, who had alreadie yeelded his ſoule and recommended his family to God, asked of him that was at the top if there were any hope; who told him there was none: Then he bad ſome to helpe him to change the ſailes, which two or three onely did, and already was there no more water but to turne the Ship, when the mercy and fauor of God came to helpe them, & turned the ſhip from the perils wherein they ſaw themſelues. Some had put off their doublets for to ſeeke to ſaue themſelues by climbing vpon the rocke, but the The third danger.feare was all the harme they had for that time: ſauing that ſome few houres after, being arriued neere to a rocke called Le nid a L'aigle, the Eagles neſt, they thought to goe bord it, thinking, in the darkneſſe of the miſt, it had been a Ship, from whence being againe eſcaped they arriued at New Their return at New hauen.hauen, the place from whence they firſt ſet out. The ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt hauing left his armours and prouiſions

of war in the Ile of Saint Croix, in the keeping of the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, as a gage and token of the good will he had to returne thither.
               
                  The fourth perill. But I may yet well ſet downe heere a maruellous danger, from which the ſame veſſell was preſerued, a little after the departing from Saint Croix, and this by a bad accident, which God turned to good. For a certaine tipling fellow, being by night ſtealingly come downe to the bottome of the ſhip, for to drinke his belly full, and to fill his bottle with wine, hee found that there was but too much to drinke, and that the ſaid ſhip was alreadie halfe full of water: in ſuch ſort, that the perill was imminent, and they had infinite paines to ſtanch her by pomping. In the end being come about they found a great leake, by the keele, which they ſtopped with all diligence.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  The buildings of the Ile Saint Croix: The French-mens diſcommodities in the ſaid place: Vnknowen Sickneſſes: of their cauſes: of the people that be ſubiect to it: of diets, bad waters, aire, windes, lakes, corruption of woods, ſeaſons, diſpoſition of bodies, of yongue, and old: the Authors aduice vpon the gouernment of health, and cure of the ſaid diſeaſes.
               
               
                  The building at the Ile of S. Croix.
                   DVring the foreſaid Nauigation, Monſieur De Monts his people did worke about the Fort; which hee ſeated at the end of the Iland, oppoſite to the place where he had lodged his Canon. Which was wiſely conſidered, to the end to command the riuer vp & down. But there was an inconuenience, the ſaid Fort did lie towards the North, and without any ſhelter, but of the trees that were on the Ile ſhore, which all about hee commanded to be kept, and not cut downe. And out of the ſame Fort was the Switzers lodging, great and large, and other ſmall lodgings, repreſenting (as it were) a Suburbe. Some

had houſed themſelues on the firme land, neere the brook. But within the Fort was Monſieur De Monts his lodging, made with very faire & artificiall Carpentrie worke, with the Banner of France vpon the ſame. At another part was the ſtore-houſe, wherin conſiſted the ſafety & life of euerie one, likewiſe made with faire Carpentry worke, and couered with reedes. Right ouer againſt the ſaid ſtore-houſe, were the lodgings and houſes of theſe Gentlemen, Monſieur D'oruille, Monſieur Champlein, Monſieur Champdorè, and other men of reckoning. Oppoſite to Monſieur De Monts his ſaid lodging, there was a gallerie couered for to exerciſe themſelues, either in play, or for the workmen in time of raine. And betweene the ſaid Fort and the Platforme, where lay the Canon, all was full of gardens, wherunto euerie one exerciſed himſelfe willingly. All Autumne quarter was paſſed on theſe works, and it was well for them to haue lodged themſelues, and to manure the ground of the Iland, before Winter; whileſt that in theſe parts pamphlets were ſet out vnder the name of Maistre Guillaume, ſtuffed with all ſorts of newes: By the which, amongſt other things, this Prognosticator did ſay, that Monſieur De Monts did pull out thornes in Canada: and all well conſidered, it may well be termed the pulling out of thornes, to take in hand ſuch enterpriſes, full of toiles and continuall perils, with cares, vexations, and diſcommodities. But vertue and courage that ouer commeth all theſe things, makes thoſe thornes to be but Gilliflowers and Roſes, to them that reſoule themſelues in theſe heroicall actions, to make themſelues praiſe-worthy and famous in the memorie of men, deſpiſing the vaine pleaſures of delicate and effeminated men, good for nothing but to coffer themſelues in a chamber.
               
                  Three diſcō
                     modities in wintering at S. Croix.
                   The moſt vrgent things being done, and hoarie ſnowie father being come, that is to ſay, Winter, then they were forced to keepe within doores, and to liue euery one at his owne home: during which time, our men had three ſpeciall

diſcommodities in this Hand, videlicet, want of wood, (for that which was in the ſaid Ile, was ſpent in buildings) lacke of freſh water, and the continuall watch, made by night, fearing ſome ſurpriſe from the Sauages, that had lodged themſelues at the foot of the ſaid Iland, or ſome Wickedneſſe of manie Chriſtians.other enemie. For the malediction and rage of many Chriſtians is ſuch, that one muſt take heed of them much more than of Infidels. A thing which grieueth me to ſpeak: would to God I were a liar in this reſpect, and that I had no cauſe to ſpeake it! When they had need of water or wood, they were conſtrained to croſſe ouer the riuer, which is thrice as broad of euery ſide, as the riuer of Seine. 
                  The riuer of Roan.It was a thing painfull and tedious, in ſuch ſort that it was needfull to keepe the boat a whole day, before one might get thoſe neceſſaries. In the meane while the cold and ſnowes came vpon them, and the Ice ſo ſtrong, that the Sider was frozen in the veſſels, and euery one his meaſure was giuen him out by waight. As for wine it was diſtributed but at certaine daies of the weeke. Many idle ſluggiſh companions dranke ſnow-water, not willing to take the paines to croſſe the riuer. Briefly, the vnknowen Vnknowen Sickneſſes▪
                  ſickneſſes like to thoſe deſcribed vnto vs by Iames Quartier, in his relation, aſſailed vs. For remedies there was none to be found. In the meane while the poore ſicke creatures did languiſh, pining away by little and little, for want of ſweet meats, as milke or ſpoon-meat for to ſuſtain their ſtomacks, which could not receaue the hard meats, by reaſon of let, proceeding from a rotten fleſh, which grew and ouer-abounded within their mouths: And when one thought to root it out, it did grow againe in one nights ſpace more abundantly than before. As for the tree called Annedda, mentioned by the ſaid Quartier, the Sauages of theſe lands know it not. So that it was moſt pitifull to behold euery one, very few excepted, in this miſerie, and the miſerable ſicke folkes to die, as it were full of life, without any poſſibilitie to be ſuccoured. There died

                  The number of the dead and ſicke. Dangerous moneths. of this ſickneſſe 36, and 36 or 40 more, that were ſtricken with it, recouered themſelues by the helpe of the Spring, aſſoone as the comfortable ſeaſon appeared. But the deadly ſeaſon for that ſickneſſe is in the end of Ianuarie, the moneths of February and March, wherein moſt commonly the ſicke doe die, euery one at his turne, according to the time they haue begun to be ſicke: in ſuch ſort, that hee which began to bee ill in Februarie and March, may eſcape, but hee that ſhall ouer-haſte himſelfe, and betake him to his bed in December and Ianuarie, hee is in danger to die in Februarie, March, or the beginning of Aprill, which time being paſſed, he is in good hope, and as it were aſſured of his ſafetie. Notwithſtanding ſome haue felt ſome touch thereof, hauing beene ſharply handled with it.
               
                  Monſieur De monts being returned into France, did conſult with our Doctors of Phyſicke vpon the ſickneſſe, which (in my opinion) they found very new & vnknown, for I doe not ſee, that when we went away, our Pothecarie was charged with any order for the cure thereof: and notwithſtanding Hippocrates.it ſeemeth that Hippocrates hath had knowledge of it, or at leaſt of ſome that was very like to it. For in the Booke De internis affect. he ſpeaketh of a certaine maladie, where the belly, and afterward the ſpleene doe ſwell and harden it ſelfe, and feele grieuous and ſharpe gripes; the skinne becommeth blacke and pale, drawing towards the colour of a greene Pomgranet: the eares and gums doe render and yeeld a bad ſent, the ſaid gums diſioining themſelues from the teeth: the legs full of bliſters: Northerly people ſubiect to the land diſeaſe of New France.the limbes are weakned, &c.
               
                  But ſpecially the Northerly people, are more ſubiect to it than other more Southerly nations. Witneſſe the Hollanders, Frizeland men, and other thereabout, amongſt whom the ſaid Hollanders doe write in their nauigations, that going to the Eaſt Indies, many of them were taken with the ſame diſeaſe, being vpon the coaſt of Guinie: a
                  
                  dangerous coaſt, bearing a peſtiferous aire a hundred leagues farre in the ſea. And the ſame (I meane the Hollanders) being, in the yeere 1606, gone vpon the coaſt of Spaine, to keepe the ſame coaſt, and to annoy the Spaniſh Nauie, were conſtrained to with-draw themſelues, by reaſon of this diſeaſe, hauing caſt into the ſea two and twentie of their dead. And if one will heare the witneſſe of Olaus magnus, writing of the Northerly 
                  Olaus magnus, Lib. 16. cap. 5
                        •
                     .
                  Nations, of which part himſelfe was, let him hearken to his report, which is this: There is (ſaith he) yet an other martiall ſickneſſe (that is, a ſickneſſe that afflicteth them which follow the warres) which tormenteth and afflicteth them that are beſieged, ſuch whoſe limbes thickned by a certaine fleſhy heauineſſe, and by a corrupted bloud, which is betweene the fleſh and the skinne, dilating it ſelfe like wax: they ſinke with the leaſt impreſſion made on them with the finger; and diſioineth the teeth as ready to fall out: changeth the white colour of the skinne into blew: and cauſeth a benumming, with a diſtaſte to take Phyſicke, and that diſeaſe is called in the vulgar tongue of the countrey Sorbut, in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , per aduenture becauſe of this putrifying ſoftneſſe, which is vnder Euill diſpoſition of the body corrupteth the meates.the skinne, which ſeemeth to proceede of indigeſting and ſalt meats, and to be continued by the cold exhalation of the walles. But it ſhall not haue ſo much force where the houſes are inward wainſcotted with boords. If it continue longer, it muſt be driuen out by taking euery day wormwood, as one expelleth A medicine for the ſtone.out the roote of the ſtone, by a decoction of ſtale Beere drunke with butter. The ſame Author doth yet ſay in an other place, a thing much to be noted: In the beginning It is in the 9. booke, ca. 38▪
                  
                  (ſaith he) they ſustaine the ſiege with force, but in the end, the Souldier being by continuance weakned, they take away the prouiſions from the inuaders, by artificiall meanes, ſubtilties This is to be noted.and ambuſhments, ſpecially the ſheepe, which they carry away, and make them to graſe in graſſie places of their houſes, for feare that through want of freſh meats they fall into the lothſomeſt ſickneſſe of all ſickneſſes, called in the country language,

                  Sorbut, or Scoruie. Sorbut, that is to ſay, a wounded ſtomacke, dried by cruell torments, and long anguiſhes: for the cold and indigesting meats, greedily taken, ſeeme to be the true cauſe of this ſickneſſe.
               I haue delighted my ſelfe to recite heere the very words of this Author, becauſe he ſpeaketh thereof as being skilfull, and ſetteth foorth ſufficiently enough the land diſeaſe of New France, ſauing that he maketh no mention of the ſtiffening of the hammes, nor of a ſuperfluous fleſh which groweth and aboundeth within the mouth, and that if one thinke to take it away, it increaſeth ſtill; but well ſpeaketh The opening of a dead bodie.he of the bad ſtomacke. For Monſieur De Poutrincourt made a Negroe to be opened, that died of that ſickneſſe in our voyage, who was found to haue the inward parts very ſound, except the ſtomacke, that had wrinckles, as though they were vlcered.
               
                  Cauſes of the ſaid diſeaſe. And as for the cauſe proceeding from ſalt meats, it is verie true, there are many other cauſes concurring, which feed and entertaine this ſickneſſe: Amongſt which I will place in generall the bad food, comprehending with it the drinks; then the vice of the aire of the countrey, and after the euill diſpoſition of the bodie: leauing the Phyſicians In the beginning of the book De aere, aquu, & loc.
                  to ſift it out more curiouſly. Whereunto Hippocrates ſaith, that the Phyſicion ought alſo carefully to take heed, in conſidering the ſeaſons, the windes, the aſpects of the Sunne, the waters, the land it ſelfe, the nature and ſituation of it, the nature of men, their maner of liuing and exerciſe.
               
                  What foode cauſeth the land diſeaſe. As for the food, this ſickneſſe is cauſed by cold meats, without iuice, groſſe and corrupted. One muſt then take heed of ſalt meats, ſmokie, muſtie, raw, and of an euill ſent, likewiſe of dried fiſhes, as New-found land fiſh, and ſtinking Raies: Briefly, from all melancholy meates, which are of hard digeſting, are eaſily corrupted, and breed a groſſe and melancholie bloud. I would not (for all that) be ſo ſcrupulous as the Phyſicians, which do put in the number of groſſe and melancholie meates, Beeuesfleſh,

Beares, wilde Bores and Hogges fleſh (they might as well adde vnto them Beuers fleſh, which notwithſtanding we haue found very good) as they do amongſt fiſhes the Tons, Dolphins, & all thoſe that carie lard: among the birds, the Hernes, Duckes, and all other water birds: for in being an ouer curious obſeruator of theſe things, one might fall into the danger of ſtaruing, and to die for hunger. They place yet among the meats that are to be ſhunned, bisket, beanes and pulſe, the often vſing of mi
                     •
                  ke, cheeſe: the groſſe and harſh wine, and that which is too ſmall, white wine, and the vſe of vineger: Beere which is not well ſodden, nor well ſcummed, and that hath not hoppes enow. Alſo waters that runne thorow rotten Bad waters.wood, and thoſe of lakes and bogges, ſtill and corrupted waters, ſuch as is much in Holland and Frizeland, where is obſerued that they of Amſterdam are more ſubiect to paulfies and ſtifning of ſinewes, than they of Roterdam, for the aboueſaid cauſe of ſtill and ſleepie waters: which beſides doe ingender dropfies, dyſenteries, fluxes, quarten agues, and burning feuers, ſwellings, vlcers of the lights, ſhortneſſe of breath, ruptures in children, ſwelling in the veines, ſores in the legges: finally, they wholly belong to the diſeaſe whereof we ſpeake, being drawen by the ſpleene, where they leaue all their corruption.
               Sometimes this ſickneſſe doth alſo come by a vice, which is euen in waters of running fountaines, as if they be among, or neere bogges, or if they iſſue from a muddie ground, or from a place that hath not the Suns aſpect. So Pliny reciteth that in the voiage which the prince 
                     Plin. li. 25. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  Caeſar Germanicus made into Germany, hauing giuen order to his armie to paſſe the riuer of Rhine, to the end to get ſtill forward in the countrie, he did ſet his campe on the ſea ſhore, vpon the coaſt of Frizeland, in a place where was but one onely fountaine of freſh water to be found, which notwithſtanding was ſo pernicious, that all they that dranke of it loſt their teeth in leſſe than two yeeres

ſpace, and had their knees ſo weake and diſiointed, that they could not beare themſelues. Which is verily the ſickneſſe whereof we ſpeake, which the Phyſicians doe call Stomaccacè. Scelotyrbè.
                  Stomaccacè, that is to ſay, mouthes ſore, and Scelotyrbè, which is as much to ſay, as the ſhaking of thighs and legs. And it was not poſſible to finde any remedie, but by the 
                     Britannica, an herbe.meanes of an hearbe called Britannica, or Scuruie-graſſe, which beſides is very good for the ſinewes, againſt the ſores and accidents in the mouth: againſt the Squinancie, and againſt the biting of ſerpents. It hath long leaues, drawing in colour to a dark greene, and produceth a black roote, from which liquor is drawen, as well as from the leaf. Strabo ſaith, that the like caſe hapned to the army that Strabo. Monſieur d
                        •
                      Ioinuille. The Gouitres of Sauoye.
                  
                  Aelius Gallus brought into Arabia, by the commiſſion of Auguſtus the Emperor. And the like alſo chanced to king S. Lewes his armie in Egypt, as the Lord de Ioinuille reporteth. Other effects of bad waters are ſeene neere vnto vs, to wit, in Sauoy, where the women (more than men, becauſe they are of a colder conſtitution) haue commonly ſwellings in their throats, as bigge as bottels.
               
                  What aire is againſt health. Next to waters, the aire is alſo one of the fathers and ingenderes of this ſicknes, in boggy and watriſh places, and oppoſit to the South, which is moſt often rainy. But there is yet in New France another bad quality of the aire, by reaſon of lakes that be thicke there, and of the great rottennes in the woods, whoſe odour the bodies hauing drawen vp, during the raines of Autumne and winter, eaſily are ingendred the corruptions of the mouth, and ſwelling in the legges before ſpoken, and a cold entreth vnſenſibly into it, which benummeth the limbes, ſtifneth the ſinewes, conſtraineth to creepe with cruches, and in the end to keepe the bed.
               
                  Windes. And for as much as the windes doe participate with the aire, yea are an aire running with a more vehement force than ordinary, and in this quality haue great power ouer the health and ſickneſſes of men, we will ſpeake ſome

thing of it, not (for all that) ſtraying ourſelues from the ſequell of our hiſtorie. What windes be healthfull and vnhealthfull.
               
               The Eaſterly winde, called by the Latins Subſolanus, is held for the healthfulleſt of all, and for that cauſe, wiſe builders giue aduice to ſet their buildings towards the aſpect of the Eaſt. The oppoſit to it, is the winde called Fauorinus, or Zephirus, which our Sea-men doe name Weſt, which in theſe parts is milde & fructifying. The Southern winde (called Auster by the Latines) is in Affrica hot and drie: But in croſſing the Mediterranian ſea, it gathereth a great moiſtnes, which maketh it ſtormy and putrifying in Prouence and Languedoc, The oppoſite to it is the Northern winde, otherwiſe called Boreas, Bize, Tramontane, which is colde and drie, chaſeth the cloudes and ſweepeth The windes haue not one and the ſelfe ſame qualitie in all places.the airie region. It is taken for the holſommeſt next to the Eaſt winde. But theſe qualities of the winde, found and noted in theſe parts, make not one generall rule thorow ouer all the earth. For the North-winde beyond the Equinoctiall line is not colde as in theſe parts, nor the South-winde hot, becauſe that by a long croſſing, they borrow the qualities of the regions thorow which they paſſe: beſides that the South-winde at his firſt iſſue is cooling, according to the report of thoſe that haue trauelled in Affrica. In like maner there be regions in Perou (as in Lima and the plaines) where the North-winde is vnholſome and noyſome. And thorow all that coaſt, which is aboue 500. leagues in length, they take the South-winde for a ſound and freſh cooling winde, and which more is, moſt milde and pleaſant: yea alſo that it doth neuer raine by it (according to that which Ioſeph Acoſta writeth of it) cleane contrary to that we ſee in this our part of Europe. And in Spaine the Eaſt-winde, which we haue ſaid to be ſound, 
                     Lib. 3 cap. 3.the ſame Acoſta ſaith, that it is noiſome and vnſound. The winde called Circius, which is the North-weſt, is ſo ſtormie and boiſtrous in the Weſterly ſhores of Norwege, that if there be any which vndertaketh any voyage that way,

when that winde bloweth, he muſt make account to be loſt and caſt away: And this winde is ſo colde in that region, that it ſuffereth not any tree, ſmall or great to grow Olam magnus Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
                  there: So that for want of wood they muſt ſerue thēſelues with the bones of great fiſhes, to ſeeth or roſt their meats, which diſcommodity is not in theſe parts. In like ſort we haue had experience in New France that the North-winds are not for health: And the North-eaſt (which are the Sicke folkes and beaſts doe feele the winde and weather a
                     
                        •
                     omming.colde, ſtrong, ſharpe and ſtormy Aquilons) yet worſe: which our ſicke folkes, and they that had wintred there the former yeare, did greatly feare, becauſe that likely, ſome of them drooped away, when that winde blew, for indeed they had ſome ſenſible feeling of this winde: As we ſee thoſe that bee ſubiect to ruptures endure great pangs when that the South-winde doth blow: And as we ſee the very beaſts to prognoſticate by ſome ſignes the change of weather. This noiſome qualitie of winde proceedeth (in my iudgement) from the nature of the countrie thorow which it paſſeth, which (as we haue ſaid) is full of lakes, and thoſe very great, which be (as it were) ſtanding and ſtill waters. Whereto I adde the exhalation of the rottenneſſe of woods, that this winde bringeth, and that in ſo much greater quantitie, as the North-weſt part is great, large and ſpacious.
               
                  Seaſons. The ſeaſons are alſo to be marked in this diſeaſe, which I haue not ſeene nor heard of, that it beginnes to work, neither in the ſpring time, Summer nor Autumne, vnleſſe it be at the end of it, but in Winter. And the cauſe thereof is, that as the growing heat of the Spring, maketh the humours cloſed vp in the winter to diſperſe themſelues to the extremities of the body, and ſo cleareth it from melancholy, and from the noiſome humors that haue beene gathered in Winter: ſo the Autumne, as the Winter approcheth, draweth them inward, and doth nouriſh this melancholie and blacke humor, which doth abound ſpecially in this ſeaſon, and the Winter being come ſheweth foorth his effects

at the coſts and griefe of the poore patients. Galen 
                  Galen. Com. 35. lib. 1. de nat. hum.yeldeth a reaſon for the ſame, ſaying that the humors of the bodie, hauing beene parched by the burning of the Summer, that which may reſt of it, after the heat is expulſed, becommeth foorthwith colde and drie: That is to ſay, colde by the priuation of the heat, and drie in as much as in the drying of theſe humors, all the moiſtneſſe that was therein hath been conſumed. And thereby it commeth that ſickeneſſes are bred in this ſeaſon, and the farther one goeth, the weaker nature is, and the vntemperate coldneſſe of the aire being entred into a bodie alreadie thereto diſpoſed, doth handle it (as it were) at a becke and at will, without pitie.
               I would adde willingly to all the foreſaid cauſes the bad Bad foode and diſcommodities of the Sea.foode of the ſea, which in a long voiage brings much corruption in mans bodie. For one muſt of neceſſity, after foure or fiue daies, liue of ſalt meate, or to bring ſheepe aliue, and ſtore of poultry; but this is but for Maſters and Commanders in ſhips: and we had none in our voyage but for to reſerue and multiplie in the land whither we did go. The mariners then and paſſengers doe ſuffer diſcommoditie as well in the bread, as in meat and drinke, the biskit becommeth dampiſh and rotten, the fiſhes that are giuen them alike, and the waters ſtincking; they which carie ſweet meates, be it fleſh or fruits, and that vſe good bread, good wine and good brothes, do eaſily auoide thoſe ſickneſſes; and I durſt (in ſome ſort) be anſwerable vnto them for their healthes, vnleſſe they be very vnhealthfull by nature. And when I conſider that this diſeaſe is as well taken in Holland, Frizeland, in Spaine and in Guinie, as in Canada, I am brought to beleeue that the chiefe cauſe thereof is in that which I haue ſaid, and not peculiar nor particular to New France.
               
                  Diſpoſition of bodie. After all theſe cauſes and conſiderations, it is good in euery place to haue a wel diſpoſed body, for to be in health and liue long. For thoſe which naturally gather colde and

groſſe humors, and haue the maſſe of their bodie pory. Item they that be ſubiect to the oppilations of the ſpleene, and they that vſe not a ſturring life, but ſitting and without frequent motion, are more apt and ſubiect to theſe ſickneſſes. Therefore a Phyſitian might ſay that a ſtudent is not fit for that Countrie, that is to ſay, he ſhall not liue there in health: nor thoſe which ouertoile in labors, nor melancholy people, men which haue drowſie dreaming ſpirits, nor thoſe that be often viſited with agues, and ſuch other ſort of people. Which I might eaſily beleeue, becauſe that theſe things doe heape much melancholy, cold and ſuperfluous humors. Notwithſtanding I haue tried the contrarie, both by my ſelfe and by others, againſt the opinion Sagamos is a Sauage word which Signifieth a Lord, a ruler, or a Captaine.of ſome of ours, yea of Sagamos Membertou himſelfe, which plaieth the Soothſaier among the Sauages, who (arriuing in that countrie) ſaid that I ſhould neuer returne into France, nor Monſieur Boullet (ſometimes captaine of Monſieur De Poutrincourt his regiment) who for the moſt part of the time hath had agues there (but he did farewel.) And they themſelues did aduiſe our labourers to take but ſmall labour in their worke (which counſell they could The author his exerciſe in New France.very well obſerue). For I may ſay (and that truely) that I neuer made ſo much bodily worke, for the pleaſure that I did take in dreſſing and tilling my gardens, to incloſe and hedge them, againſt the gluttony of the hogges, to make knots, to draw out allies, to build arbours, to ſowe wheat, rie, barly, oates, beanes, peaſe, garden hearbs, and to water them; ſo much deſire had I to know the goodneſſe of The labour of the minde.the ground by my owne experience. So that Summers daies were vnto mee too ſhort, and very often did I worke by Moonelight. Concerning the labour of the minde, I tooke a reaſonable part of it; for at night, euery one being retired, among the pratings, noiſes, and hurliburlies, I was ſhut vp in my ſtudie, reading or writing of ſomething. Yea I will not be aſhamed to ſpeake, that being requeſted by Monſieur De Poutrincourt, our Commander, to beſtow

ſome houres of my induſtrie, in giuing Chriſtian inſtructions The pietie of the Author of this Hiſtorie.to our ſmall company, for not to liue like beaſts, and for to giue to the Sauages an example of our maner of life, I haue done it, according to the neceſſitie, and being thereof requeſted, euery Sunday, and ſometimes extraordinarilie, almoſt during all the time we haue beene there; And well was it for me that I had brought my Bible, and ſome bookes vnawares: for otherwiſe it had beene very difficult for me, and had beene cauſe to excuſe me of that worke. It hath not beene without fruit, many witneſſing vnto me that they had neuer heard ſo much good talke of God, not knowing before, any principle of that which belongeth to Chriſtian doctrine: And ſuch is the ſtate wherin liue the moſt part of Chriſtendome. And if there were any edifying of one part, there was backbiting on the other, by reaſon, that vſing a French liberty, I willingly ſpake the truth. Whereupon I remember the ſaying of the Prophet Amos, They haue hated (ſaith he) him that reproued them 
                  Amos. 5. verſe. 10.
                  in the gate, and haue had in abomination him that ſpake in integrity. But in the end we became all good friends; And amongſt theſe things God gaue me alwaies a ſound and a perfect health, alwaies a good taſte, alwaies mery and nimble, ſauing that hauing once laien in the woods, neere to a brooke in ſnowey weather, I was touched with a Crampe or Sciatika in my thigh a fortnights ſpace, not looſing my appetite nor ſtomacke for the ſame; for indeed I tooke delight in that which I did, deſiring to confine there my life, if it would pleaſe God to bleſſe the voyages.
               
                  Of Children. I ſhould be ouer tedious, if I would ſet downe heere the diſpoſition of all perſons, and to ſpeake concerning children that they are more ſubiect to this ſickneſſe then others, for that they haue very often vlcers in the mouth and gummes, becauſe of the thin ſubſtance that abound in their bodies: and alſo that they gather many crude humours by their diſorder of liuing, and by the quantity of

fruits they eate, being neuer filled with it, by which m eans they gather great quantity of wateriſh bloud, and the ſpleene being ſtopped cannot ſoake vp thoſe moiſturs. Of aged folkes.And as for old folkes that haue their heat weakened, and cannot reſiſt the ſicknes, being filled with crudities, and with a cold and moiſt temperature, which is the qualitie proper to ſtirre vp and nouriſh it: I will not take the Phyſitians office in hand, fearing the cenſuring rod: and notwithſtanding (with their leaue) not touching with their orders and receits of Agaric, aloes, rubarbe, and other ingrediens, I will write heere that which I thinke more ready at hand for the poore people, which haue not the abilitie and meanes to ſend to Alexandria, as well for the preſeruation of their health, as for the remedie of this ſickneſſe.
               
                  Aduice for the ſickneſſes of New France. It is a certaine axiome that a contrary muſt be healed by his contrarie. This ſickneſſe proceeding from an indigeſtion of rude, groſſe, cold and melancholie meates, which offend the ſtomacke, I thinke it good (ſubmitting my ſelfe to better Iudgement and aduice) to accompany them with good ſawces, be it of butter, oyle, or fat, all well ſpiced, to correct as well the quality of the meate, as of the bodie inwardly waxen colde. Let this be ſaid for rude and groſſe meates, as beanes, peaſe, and fiſh: for he that ſhall eat good capons, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •••••
                  idges, good duckes and good rabets, he may be 
                     ••
                  ſured of his health, or elſe his body is of a very bad conſtitution. We haue had ſome ſicke that haue (as it were) raiſed vp from death to life: for hauing Good Wine.eaten twice or thrice of a coolice made of a cocke, good wine taken according to the neceſſity of nature, is a ſoueraigne preſeruatiue for all ſickneſſes, and particularily for this. Maſter Macquin and Maſter Georges, worſhipfull Marchants of Rochel, as aſſociates to Monſieur De Monts, did furniſh vs with 45. toones of wine, which did vs very much good. And our ſicke folkes themſelues, hauing their mouthes ſpoiled, and not being able to eat, haue neuer loſt the taſt of wine, which they tooke with a pipe. The ſame

hath preſerued many of them from death. The yong buds of hearbs in the Spring time be alſo very ſoueraigne. And beſides that reaſon requireth to beleeue it, I haue tried it, Hearbs in the ſpring time.being my ſelfe gone many times to gather ſome for our ſicke people, before that thoſe of our garden might be vſed, which reſtored them to their taſte againe, and comforted their weake ſtomacks.
               And as for that which concerneth the exterior parts of the body, we haue found great good in wearing woodden pantaphles, or patins with our ſhooes, for to avoide the moiſtneſſe. The houſes neede no opening, nor windowes on the Northweſt ſide, being a winde very dangerous: but rather on the Eaſt ſide, or the South. It is very good to haue good bedding (& it was good for me to haue caried things neceſſary to this purpoſe) and aboue all to keepe himſelfe Stooues.neat. I would like well the vſe of Stooues, ſuch as they haue in Germany, by meanes whereof they feele no Winter, being at home, but as much as they pleaſe. Yea they Stooues in gardens.haue of them, in many places, in their gardens, which doe ſo temper the coldneſſe of winter, that in this rough and ſharpe ſeaſon, there one may ſee Orenge-trees, Limon-trees, Figge-trees, Pomgranet-trees, and all ſuch ſorts of trees, bring foorth fruit as good as in Prouence. Which is ſo much the more eaſie to doe in this new land, for that it is all couered ouer with woods, (except when one comes in the Armonchiquois countrie, a hundred leagues further of The countrie of the Armouchiquois 100. leagues diſtant from Port Royall.then Port Royall) And in making of winter a ſommer one ſhall diſcouer the land: Which not hauing any more thoſe great obſtacles, that hinder the Sunne to court her, and from warming it with his heat, without doubt it will become very temperate, and yeeld a moſt milde aire: and well agreeing with our humour, not hauing there, euen at this time, neither colde nor heat that is exceſſiue.
               The Sauages that know not Germany, nor the cuſtomes thereof, doe teach vs the ſame leſſon, which being ſubiect to thoſe ſickneſſe (as we haue ſeene in the voiage of Iames
                  
                  Quartier) vſe ſweatings often, as it were euery moneth, The Sweatings of the Sauages.and by this meanes they preſerue themſelues, driuing out by ſweate all the colde and euell humors they might haue gathered. But one ſingular preſeruatiue againſt this perfidious ſickneſſe, which commeth ſo ſtealingly, and which hauing once lodged it ſelfe within vs, will not be put out, is to follow the counſell of him that is wiſe amonſt the wiſe, who hauing conſidered all the afflictions that man giue to himſelfe during his life, hath found nothing better Eccleſi. 3. verſe. 12. and 22.then to reioice himſelfe, and doe good, and to take pleaſure in his owne workes. They that haue done ſo, in our company, haue found themſelues well by it: contrawiſe ſome alwaies grudging, repining, neuer content, idle, haue beene Meanes of mirth.found out by the ſame diſeaſe. True it is, that for to inioy mirth it is good to haue the ſweetneſſe of freſh meates, fleſhes, fiſhes, milke, butter, oyles, fruits, and ſuch like, which we had not at will (I meane the common ſort: for alwaies ſome one, or other of the company did furniſh Monſieur De Poutrincourt his table with wilde foule, veniſon or freſh fiſh) And if we had had halfe a doſen kyne, I beleeue that no body had died there.
               It reſteth a preſeruatiue, neceſſarie for the accompliſhment Neceſſitie of hauing women into the country.of mirth, and to the end one may take pleaſure on the worke of his hands, is euery one to haue the honeſt company of his lawfull wife: for without that, the cheare is neuer perfect; ones minde is alwaies vpon that which one loues and deſireth; there is ſtill ſome ſorrow, the bodie becomes full of ill humours, and ſo the ſickneſſe doth breede.
               And for the laſt and ſoueraigne remedie, I ſend backe the Tree of life.patient to the tree of life (for ſo one may well qualifie it) which Iames Quartier doth call Anneda, yet vnknowen in Saſafras.the coaſt of Port Royall, vnleſſe it bee, peraduenture the Saſafras, whereof there is quantitie in certaine places. And it is an aſſured thing, that the ſaid tree is very excellent. But Monſieur Champlain, who is now in the great riuer

of Canada, paſſing his winter, in the ſame part where the ſaid Quartier did winter, hath charge to finde it out, 
                     Monſieur Champlein is now this preſent yeare 1609. in Canada.
                  and to make prouiſion thereof.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The diſcouery of new Lands by Monſieur De Monts: fabulous tales and reports of the riuer and fained towne of Norombega: The refuting of the authors that haue written thereof: Fiſh bankes in New found land: Kinibeki: Chouacoet: Mallebarre: Armouchiquois: The death of a French man killed: Mortality of Engliſhmen in Virginia.
               
               THe rough ſeaſon being paſſed, Monſieur De Monts wearied with his badde dwelling at Saint Croix, determined to ſeeke out another Port in a warrner countrie, and more to the South: And to that end made a Pinneſſe to be armed and furniſhed with victuals, to follow the coaſt, and diſcouering new countries, to ſeeke out ſome happier Port in a more temperate aire. And becauſe 
                     Monſieur De Monts his voiage for the diſcouery of new Lands.that in ſeeking, one cannot ſet forward ſo much as when in full ſailes one goeth in open ſea, and that finding out baies and gulfes, lying betweene two lands, one muſt put in, becauſe that there one may aſſoone finde that which is ſought for, as elſe where, he made in this voyage but about ſix ſcore leagues, as wee will tell you now. From Saint Croix to 60. leagues forward, the coaſt lieth Eaſt and Weſt; at the end of which 60. leagues, is the riuer called by the Sauages Kinibeki. From which place to 
                     Malebarre 
                     
                        Kinibeki 60. legues from Saint Croix,
                     it lieth North and South, and there is yet from one to the other 60. leagues, in right line, not following the baies. So farre ſtretcheth Monſieur De Monts his voyage, wherein he had for Pilot in his veſſell, Monſieur De Champdore. In all this coaſt ſo farre as Kinibeki there is many places where ſhippes may be harbored amongſt the

Ilands, but the people there is not ſo frequent as is beyond that: And there is no remarkable thing (at leaſt that may be ſeene in the outſide of the lands) but a riuer, whereof many haue▪ written fables one after another, like to thoſe that they (who grounding themſelues vpon Hannos 
                  Plin▪. lib. 3. cap. 1.
                  his Commentaries, a Carthaginian captain) haue fained of Townes built by him in great number vpon the coaſts of Africa, which is watered with the Ocean ſea, for that hee plaied an heroycall part in ſailing ſo farre as the Iles of Cap Vert, where long time ſince no body hath beene, the Nauigation not being ſo ſecure then, vpon that great ſea, as it is at this day by the benefit of the Compaſſe.
               Therefore without alleaging that, which the firſt writers (Spaniards and Portingals) haue ſaid, I will recite that which is in the laſt booke, intituled, The vniuerſall Historie of the West Indies, Printed at Douay the laſt yeere 1607. in the place where he ſpeaketh of Norombega: For in reporting this, I ſhall haue alſo ſaid that which the firſt haue written, from whom they haue had it.
               
                  
                     Fabulous tales of the riuer Norombega. Moreouer, towards the North (ſaith the Author, after he had ſpoken of Virginia) is Norombega, which is known well enough by reaſon of a faire towne, and a great riuer, though it is not found from whence it hath his name: for the Barbarians doe call it Agguncia: At the mouth of this riuer there is an Iland very fit for fiſhing. The region that goeth along the ſea, doth abound in fiſh, and towards New France there is great number of wilde beaſts, and is verie commodious for hunting; the Inhabitants doe liue in the ſame maner as they of New France. If this beautifull Towne hath euer beene in nature, I would faine know who hath pulled it downe: For there is but Cabanes here and there made with pearkes, and couered with barkes of trees, or with skinnes, and both the riuer and the place Pemtegoet.inhabited, is called Pemtegoet, and not Agguncia. The riuer (ſauing the tide) is ſcarce as the riuer of Oyſe. And there can be no great riuer on that coaſt, becauſe there are

not lands ſufficient to produce them, by reaſon of the great riuer of Canada, which runneth like this coaſt, and is not foure-ſcore leagues diſtant from that place in croſſing the lands, which from elſe-where receiued manie riuers falling from thoſe parts which are towards Norombega: At the entrie whereof, it is ſo farre from hauing but one Iland, that rather the number thereof is almoſt infinite, for as much as this riuer enlarging it ſelfe like the Greeke Lambda Λ, the mouth whereof is all full of Iles, whereof there is one of them lying very farre off (and the formoſt) in the ſea, which is high and markable aboue the others.
               But ſome will ſay that I aequiuocate in the ſituation of Norombega, and that it is not placed where I take it. To Oiection. Anſwer▪
                  this I anſwer, that the author, whoſe words I haue a little before alleaged, is in this my ſufficient warrant, who in his Geographicall Mappe, hath placed in the mouth of this riuer in the 44. degree, and his ſuppoſed towne in the 45. wherein we differ but in one degree, which is a ſmal matter. For the riuer that I meane is in the 45. degree, and as for any towne, there is none. Now of neceſſitie it muſt be this riuer, becauſe that the ſame being paſſed, and that of Kinibeki, (which is in the ſame height) there is no other riuer forward, whereof account ſhould be made, tell one come to Virginia. I ſay furthermore, that ſeeing the Barbarians of Norombega doe liue as they of New France, and haue abundance of hunting, it muſt be, that their prouince be ſeated in our New France: For fiftie leagues farther to the Southweſt there is no great game, becauſe the woods are thinner there, and the inhabitants ſetled, and in greater number then in Norombega.
                  
               
               True it is that a ſea Captaine, named Iohn Alfonſe, of Xaintonge, in the relation of his aduenturous voiages, hath An other Fabulous report of the Riuer of Norombega.written, that, hauing paſſed Saint Iohns Iland (which I take for the ſame that I haue called heeretofore the Ile of Bacaillos) the coaſt turneth to the Weſt, and Weſt Southweſt,

                     
                     Note this well. as far as the riuer of Norombergue, newly diſcouered (ſaith he) by the Portugais and Spaniards, which is in 30. degrees: adding that this riuer hath, at the entire thereof many Iles, bankes, and rockes, and that fifteene or twenty leagues within it, is built a great towne, where the people be ſmall and blackiſh, like them of the Indies, and are clothed with skinnes, whereof they haue abundance of all ſorts. Item, that the bank of New found land endeth there: and that that riuer being paſſed, the coaſt turneth to the Weſt, and Weſt Northweſt, aboue 250. leagues towards a countrie where there is both townes and caſtels. But I ſee very little or no truth at all, in all the diſcourſes of this man: and well may he call his voiages aduenturous, not for him, who was neuer in the hundreth part of the places he deſcribeth (at leaſt it is eaſie ſo to thinke) but for thoſe that will follow the waies which he willeth mariners to follow. For if the ſaid riuer of Norombega be in thirtie degrees, it muſt needs be in Florida, which is the contrarie to all them that euer haue written of it, and to the verie truth it ſelfe.
               Concerning that which hee ſaith of the banke of Newfound The great Bancke of Newfoundland. Banquereau. banc Iacquet.
                   land, it endeth (by the report of mariners, about the Ile of Sablon, or Sande) about Cap Breton. True it is, that there is ſome other bankes, that be called Le banquereau, and Le banc Iacquet, but they are but fiue or ſix, or ten leagues, and are diuided from the great banke of New found land. And touching the men in the land of Norombega, they are of faire and high ſtature. And to ſay, that this riuer being paſſed, the coaſt lieth Weſt, and Weſt Northweſt, that hath no likelihood. For from Cap Breton, ſo farre as the point of Florida, that lieth ouer againſt the Ile De Cuba, there is not any coaſt ſtanding Weſt Northweſt, onely there is in the parts ioyning vpon the true riuer called Norombega, ſome fiftie leagues coaſt, that ſtandeth Eaſt and Weſt. Finally, of all that which the ſaid Iohn Alfonſe doth report, I receaue but that which he ſaith that

this riuer, whereof wee ſpeake, hath at the comming in many Ilands, banks and rocks.
               
                  Kinibeks. The riuer of Norombega being paſſed, Monſieur De 
                  
                     Monts went ſtill coaſting, vntill hee came to Kinibeki, where a riuer is, that may ſhorten the way to goe to the great riuer of Canada.
                   There is a number of Sauages Cabaned there, and the land beginneth there to be better peopled. From Kinibeki going farther, one findeth the baie of Marchin, named by the Captaine his name that The bay of Marchin. 1607. Chouakoet. The ground manured.commandeth therein. This Marchin was killed the yeere that we parted from New France 1607. Farther is an other baie called Chouakoet, where (in regard of the former countries) is a great number of people: For there they till the ground, and the region beginneth to be more temperate, and for proofe of this, there is in this land ſtore of Vines. Yea euen there be Ilands full of it, (which be more Vines.ſubiect to the iniuries of the winde & cold) as we ſhall ſaie Malebarre.heereafter. There is betweene Chouakoet and Malebarre many baies and Iles, and the coaſt is ſandie, with ſhallow ground, drawing neere to the ſaid Malebarre, ſo that ſcarce one may land there with barkes.
               The people that befrom Saint Iohns riuer to Kinibeki (wherein are compriſed the riuers of Saint Croix and Norombega) are called Etechemins: And from Kinibeki as far as Malebarre, and farther, they are called Armouchiquois. 
                  The Armouchiquois traitours and theefes.They be traitours and theefes, and one had neede to take heed of them. Monſieur De Monts, hauing made ſome ſtay at Malebarre, victuals began to be ſcarſe with him, and it was needfull to thinke vpon the returne, ſpecially ſeeing all the coaſt ſo troubleſome that one could paſſe no further Shoulds ſtretching farre into the ſea. Violent death of a Frenchman of Saint Mallos.
                  without perill, for ſholds that ſtretch farre into the ſea, in ſuch wiſe that the farther one goeth from the land, leſſer depth there is. But before departing, a Carpenter of Saint Mallos died caſually, who going to fetch water with ſome kettles, an Armouchiquois ſeeing fit opportunity to ſteale one of thoſe kettles, when that the Frenchman tooke no

heede, tooke it, and ran away ſpeedily with his bootie. The Malouin running after, was killed by this wicked people: And although the ſame had not happened, it was in The ſwiftnes of the Armouchiquois.
                  vaine to purſue after this theefe: for all theſe Armouchiquois are as ſwift in running as Gray-houndes: as we will yet further ſay in ſpeaking of the voiage that Monſieur De Poutrincourt made in the ſame Country, in the yeere 1606.1606. It greeued ſore Monſieur De Monts to ſee ſuch a thing, and his men were earneſt for reuenge (which they might doe, for the other Barbarians were not ſo far from the Frenchmen but that a musket ſhot might haue skared them, which they had already on, reſt to leuell euery one at his man) but the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, vpon ſome conſiderations, which many other of his place and dignitie, might haue miſſed to conſider, made euery one to put downe their musket cockes, and left them alone, not hauing hitherto found a fit place to make a ſetled dwelling. And ſo the ſaid Monſieur De Monts cauſed all things to be in a readineſſe for the returne to Saint Croix, where he had left a good number of his men, yet weake by the winter ſickneſſe, of whoſe health he was carefull.
               
                  
                     Monſieur DeMonts difficultie in his enterpriſe. Many that know not what belongeth to the ſea, doe thinke that the ſetting of an habitation in an vnknowen land is eaſie; but by the diſcourſe of this voiage, and others that follow, they ſhall find that it is far eaſier to ſay than to doe, and that Monſieur de Monts hath exploited many things this firſt yeare, in viewing all the coaſt of this land euen to Malebarre, which is 400. leagues, following the ſame coaſt, and ſearching to the bottome of the Baies: beſides the labour hee was forced to, in cauſing houſes to be made at Saint Croix, the care he had of thoſe which he had brought thither, and of their returne into France, if any perill or ſhip-wracke ſhould come to thoſe that had promiſed him to fetch him at the end of the yeere. But one may runne and take paine to ſeeke Ports and Hauens where fortune fauoureth: yet ſhe is alwaies like to

herſelf. It is good for one to lodge himſelf in a ſweet milde Climat, when one may chuſe, notwithſtanding death follows vs euery where. I haue heard of a Pilot of New Hauen The mortalitie of the Engliſh in Virginia, like that of the Frenſh in New France. Virginia is in 36. 37. 38. degrees of latitude. Praiſe of the temper of Virginia. Bad fare the chiefe cauſe of the ſicknes. Things needfull.that was with the Engliſhmen in Virginia 24. yeares agoe, that being come thither, there died 36. of them in three moneths. Neuertheles Virginia is taken to be in the 36. 37. and 38. degrees of latitude, which is a good temperate country. Which conſidering, I yet beleeue (as I haue already ſaid before) that ſuch mortality commeth by the bad fare. And it is altogether needfull to haue in ſuch a countrie, at the very beginning, houſhold, and tame cattell of all ſorts, and to cary ſtore of fruit trees and grafts, for to haue there quickly recreation neceſſarie to the health of them that deſire to people the land. That if the Sauages themſelues be ſubiect to the ſickneſſe, wherof we haue ſpoken, I attribute that, to the ſame cauſe of euill fare. For they haue nothing that may correct the viſe of the meates which they take: and are alwaies naked amongſt the moiſtures of the ground, which is the very meanes to gather quantitie of corrupted humours, which cauſe thoſe ſickneſſes vnto them, as well as to the ſtrangers that goe thither, although they be borne to that kinde of life.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  
                     The ſecond voyage made by Monſieur Du Pont-Grauè.
                      The arriuall of Monſieur Du Pont to Saint Croix: The habitation transferred in Port Royall: returne of Monſieur De Monts into France: the difficultie of hand Milles: The furniture of the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont for the diſcouery of new lands beyond Malebarre: ſhippe-wracke: forecaſt for the returne into France: Compariſon of theſe voyages with them of Florida: the blame of thoſe that diſpraiſe the tillage of the lande.
               
               THe Spring time ſeaſon being paſſed in the voyage of the Armouchiquois, Monſieur De Monts did temporiſe at Saint Croix for the time that he had agreed

vpon, in the which if he had no newes from France, hee might depart and come to ſeeke ſome ſhippe of them that come to New found land for the drying of fiſh, to the end to repaſſe in France within the ſame, he and his companie, if it were poſſible. This time was alreadie expired, and they were readie to ſet ſailes, not expecting more any ſuccour The arriuall of Monſieur Du Pont. 1605.nor refreſhing, When Monſieur Du Point, ſurnamed Grauè, dwelling at Honfleur, did arriue with a company of ſome fortie men, for to eaſe the ſaid Monſieur De Monts and his troupe, which was to the great ioy of all, as one may well imagine: and canon ſhots were free and plentiful at the comming, according to cuſtome, and the ſound of trumpets. The ſaid Monſieur Du Pont, not knowing yet the ſtate of our French men, did thinke to finde there an aſſured dwelling, and his lodgings readie: but conſidering the accidents of the ſtrange ſickneſſe whereof we haue ſpoken, he tooke aduice to change place. Monſieur De Monts was very deſirous that the new habitation had beene about 40. degrees, that is to ſay, 4. degrees farther then Saint Croix: but hauing viewed the coaſt as farre as Malebarre, and with much paine, not finding what hee deſired, it was deliberated to goe and make their dwelling in Port Royal, vntill meanes were had to make an ampler Tranſmigration from S. Croix to Port Royal.
                  diſcouery. So euery one began to packe vp his things: That which was built with infinite labour was pulled downe, except the Store-houſe, which was too great and painefull to be tranſported, and in executing of this, many voyages are made. All being come to Port Royal they found out new labours: the abiding place is choſen right New buildings.ouer againſt the Iland, that is at the comming in of the riuer L' Equille, in a place where all is couered ouer and full of woods, as thicke as poſſible may be. The Moneth of September did already begin to come, and care was to be taken for the vnlading of Monſieur Du Pont his ſhip, to make roome for them that ſhould returne backe into France. Finally there is worke enough for all. When the

ſhip was in a readineſſe to put to ſailes, Monſieur De Monts hauing ſeene the beginning of the new habitation, ſhipped himſelfe for his returne with them that would follow him. Notwithſtanding many of good courage (forgetting the griefes and labours paſſed) did tary behinde, amongſt whom were Monſieur Champlain and Monſieur Champdorè, the one for Geographie, and the other for the conducting and guiding of the voyages that ſhould be neceſſary to be made by ſea. Then the ſaid Monſieur De 
                  The returne of Monſieur de Monts into France.
                  Monts hoiſed vp ſailes, and leaueth the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont as his Lieutenant and deputie in theſe parts, who wanting no diligence (according to his nature) in making perfect that which was needfull for to lodge both himſelfe and his people, which was all that might be done for that yeare in that country. For to goe farre from home in the Winter, and after ſo long a toile, there was no reaſon. And as for the tillage of the ground, I beleeue they had no fit time to doe it: For the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont was not a man to be long in reſt, nor to leaue his men idle, if there had beene any meanes for it.
               
                  Traffike with the Sauages. The Winter being come, the Sauages of the country did aſſemble themſelues, from farre to Port Royal, for to truck with the Frenchmen, for ſuch things they had, ſome bringing Beauers skinnes, and Otters (which are thoſe whereof Beuers, Otters, and Stagges.moſt account may be made in that place) and alſo Ellans or Stagges, whereof good buffe may be made: Others bringing fleſh newly killed, wherewith they made many good Tabagies or feaſts, liuing merily as long as they had 
                     Tabaguia is a Sauage tearme, ſignifying banket.wherewithall. They neuer wanted any bread, but wine did not continue with them till the ſeaſon was ended. For when we came thither the yeare following, they had been aboue three Moneths without any wine, and were very glad of our comming, for that made them to take againe the taſte of it.
               
                  Hand Mils. The greateſt paine they had, was to grinde the corne to haue bread, which is very painfull with hand-mils, whereall

the ſtrength of the bodie is requiſite: And therefore it is not without cauſe that in old time, bad people were threatned to be ſent to the Mill, as to the painefulleſt thing that is: to which occupation poore ſlaues were ſet to, before the vſe of water and winde-mils was found out, as the Prophane hiſtories make mention: and the ſame of the Exod. 11. ver. 4. 5.comming of the people of Iſrael out of the land of Aegypt, where, for the laſt ſcourge that God will ſend to Pharao, he declareth by the mouth of Moiſes, that about midnight he will paſſe thorow Aegypt, and euery firſt borne ſhall die there, from the firſt borne of Pharao, that ſhould ſit vpon his throne, to the firſt borne of the maide Seruant which grindeth at the Mill. And this labor is ſo great, that the Sauages (although they be very poore) cannot beare it, and had rather to be without bread, then to take ſo much pains as it hath beene tried, offering them halfe of the grinding they ſhould doe, but they chuſed rather to haue no corne. And I might well beleeue that the ſame, with other things, hath beene great meanes to breed the ſickneſſe ſpoken of, in The number of the dead.ſome of Monſieur Du Pont his men: for there died ſome halfe a doſen of them that winter. True it is, that I finde a defect in the buildings of our Frenchmen, which is, they Fault in their buildings.had no ditches about them, whereby the waters of the ground next to them did runne vnder their lower-moſt roomes, which was a great hindrance to their health. I adde beſides the bad waters which they vſed, that did not runne from a quicke ſpring, but from the neereſt brooke.
               
                  The furniture of Monſieur Du Pont to go to the diſcouery of new lands. The winter being paſſed, & the ſea nauigable, Monſieur Du Pont would needes atchieue the enterpriſe begun the yeere before by Monſieur De Monts, and to goe ſeeke out a Port more Southerly, where the aire might be more temperate, according as he had in charge of the ſaid Monſieur De Monts. He furniſhed then the barke which remained with him to that effect. But being ſet out of the port, and full readie, hoiſted vp failes for Malebarre, he was forced

by contrarie winde twice to put backe againe, and at the third time the ſaid Barke ſtrake againſt the rockes at the The wracke of their Bark.entire of the ſaid Port. In this diſgrace of Neptune, the men were ſaued with the better part of prouiſion and merchandiſe; but as for the Barke it was rent in peeces. And by this miſhap the voyage was broken, and that which was ſo deſired intermitted. For the habitation of Port Royall was not iudged good. And notwithſtanding Cauſes of delay in eſtabliſhing the dwelling place of the French men.it is, on the North and North-weſt ſides, well ſheltered with mountaines, diſtant ſome one league, ſome halfe a league from the Port and the riuer L'Equille. So we ſee how that enterpriſes take not effect according to the deſires of men, and are accompanied with many perils. So that one muſt not woonder if the time be long in eſtabliſhing of Colonies, ſpecially in lands ſo remote, whoſe nature, and temperature of aire is not knowen, and where one muſt fell and cut downe forreſts, and be conſtrained to take heed, not from the people that we call Sauages, but from them that terme themſelues Chriſtians, and yet haue but the name of it, curſed and abhominable people, woorſe then woolues, enemies to God and humane nature.
               This attempt then being broken, Monſieur Du Pont knew not what to doe, but to attend the ſuccour and ſupplie that Monſieur De Monts promiſed, parting from Port Royall at his returne into France, to ſend him the yeere following. Yet for all euents he built an other Barke and a Shaloup for to ſeeke French ſhippes in the places where they vſe to dry fiſh, ſuch as Campſeau Port, Engliſh Port, Miſamichis Port: the Baie of Chaleur (or heat,) the Baie of Morues or Coddes, and others in great number, according as Monſieur De Monts had done the former yeere, to the end to ſhip himſelfe in them, and to returne into France, in caſe that no ſhippe ſhould come to ſuccour him. Wherein he did wiſely, for he was in danger to heare no newes from vs, that were appointed to ſucceed him, as it ſhall appeare by the diſcourſe following.
               
                  
                  The comparing of theſe later voiages. But in the meane while wee muſt conſider that they, which in theſe voyages haue tranſported themſelues in theſe parts, haue had an aduantage ouer thoſe that would plant in Florida, which is in hauing that refuge beforeſaid, of French ſhippes that frequent the New found lands for fiſhing, not being forced to build great ſhippes, nor to abide extreme famines, as they haue done in Florida, whoſe voyages haue beene lamentable for that reſpect, and theſe by reaſon of the ſickneſſes that haue perſecuted them, but they of Florida haue had a bleſſing for that they were in a milde and fertill countrey, and more friendly to mans health then New France, ſpoken of elſe where. If they haue ſuffered famines, there was great fault in them, for not hauing tilled the ground, which they found plaine and champion: Which before all other thing is to be done, of them that will lodge themſelues ſo farre The blame of them who at this day deſpiſe the manuring of the ground.from ordinarie ſuccour. But the Frenchmen, and almoſt all nations at this day (I meane of thoſe that be not borne and brought vp to the manuring of the ground) haue this badde nature, that they thinke to derogate much from their dignitie in addicting themſelues to the tillage of the ground, which notwithſtanding is almoſt, the onely vocation where innocencie remaineth. And thereby commeth that euerie one ſhunning this noble labour, our firſt Parents and ancient Kings exerciſe, as alſo of the greateſt Captaines of the World, ſeeking to make himſelfe a Gentleman at others coſtes, or elſe willing onely to learne the Gods puniſhments.trade to deceaue men, or to claw himſelfe in the Sunne, God taketh away his bleſſing from vs, and beateth vs at this day, and hath done a long time with an iron rodde, ſo that in all parts the people languiſheth miſerably, and we ſee the Realme of France ſwarming with beggers and vagabonds of all kindes, beſides an infinite number, groaning in their poore cottages, not daring, or aſhamed to ſhewfoorth their pouertie and miſerie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The firſt motiue and acceptation of the voyage by Monſieur De Poutrincourt, together with the Author, into New France: their departure from Paris to goe into Rochel.
               
               
                  The third voiage made by Monſieur de Poutrincourt.
                   ABout the time of the before mentioned ſhipwracke, Monſieur De Monts being in France, did thinke carefully vpon the meanes how to prepare a new ſupplie for new France. Which ſeemed hard and difficult to him, as well for the great charges that that action required, as becauſe that Prouince had beene ſo diſcredited at his returne, that the continuing of theſe voyages any longer did ſeeme vaine and vnfruitfull. Beſides, there was ſome reaſon to beleeue that no bodie would aduenture himſelfe thither. Notwithſtanding, knowing Monſieur De Poutrincourt his deſire (to whom before he had giuen part of the land, according to the power which the King had giuen him) which was to inhabite in thoſe parts, and there to ſettle his family and his fortune, together with the name of God, he wrote vnto him, and ſent a man of purpoſe to giue him notice of the voyage that was in hand. Which the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt accepted 
                     Monſieur De Poutrincourt accepteth the voiage of New France.of, leauing all other affaires, to attend on this action, though he had ſutes in law of great weight; to the proſecuting and defence whereof, his preſence was very requiſite: And that at his firſt voyage he had tried the malice of ſome, which during his abſence proſecuted againſt him with rigour, and at his returne gaue ouer and became dombe. He was no ſooner come to Paris, but that he was forced to depart, not hauing ſcarſe time to prouide for things neceſſarie. And I hauing had that good happe to be acquainted with him ſome yeeres before, asked mee if I would take part in that buſineſſe? whereunto I demanded a daies reſpit to anſwer him. Hauing well conſulted with

my ſelfe, not ſo much deſirous to ſee the countrie (for I The cauſes of the Authors voiage.knew well that there was woods, lakes and riuers, and that one muſt goe ouer ſeas (which I had before done in the Straights) as to bee able to giue an eie iudgement of the land, whereto my minde was before inclined: and to auoid a corrupted world I engaged my word vnto him, being induced thereto ſpecially for the vniuſtice done to me a little before, by ſome Preſidiall Iudges, in fauour of a Parſonage of eminent qualitie, whom I haue alwaies honored and reuerenced: Which ſentence at my returne hath beene recalled, by order and ſentence of the Court of Parliament, for which I am particularly obliged to Monſieur Seruin, the King his Aduocate Generall, to whom doth belong properly this Eloge, attributed according to the letter, to the moſt wiſe and moſt magnificent of all Kings. Pſal. 5. 4.
                  Thou haſt loued Iuſtice and hated iniquitie.
               
               So it is that God awakeneth vs ſometimes, to ſtirre vs vp to generous actions, ſuch as be theſe voiages, which (as the world doth varie) ſome will blame, other ſome will approoue. But without anſwering any body in this reſpect, I care not what diſcourſes idle men, or thoſe that cannot, or will not helpe mee, may make, enioying contentment in my ſelfe, and being readie to render all ſeruice to God and to the King in thoſe remote lands, that beare the name of France, if either my fortune or condition call me thither, for there to liue in quiet and reſt, by an acceptable pleaſing labour, and to ſhun the hard and miſerable life, whereto I ſee reduced the moſt part of men in this part of the World.
               To returne then to Monſieur De Poutrincourt, as he had diſpatched ſome buſineſſes, he inquired in ſome Churches if ſome learned Prieſt might be found out, that would goe with him, to relieue and eaſe him, whom Monſieur De Monts had left there at his voiage, whom we thought to be yet liuing. But becauſe it was the Holy weeke, in which time they are imployed, and waite on confeſſions and

ſhriuings, there was none to bee found; ſome excuſing themſelues vpon the troubles and diſcommodities of the ſea, and the length of the voyage, other deferring it till after Eaſter. Which was cauſe that none could be had out of Paris, by reaſon the ſeaſon haſted on, time and tyde tarry for no man, ſo then we were forced to depart.
               There reſted to finde out fit and neceſſary workemen for the voyage of New France, whereunto was ſpeedilie prouided, price agreed vpon for their wages, and mony giuen before hand in part thereof, to beare their charges to Rochell, where the rendes vous was, at the dwelling houſes of Maſter Macquin, and Maſter Georges, worſhipfull Marchants of the ſaid Towne, the aſſociates of Monſieur De Monts, which did prouide our furniture and prouiſion.
               
                  The parting from Paris. Our meaner people being gone, three or fower daies after we tooke our way to Orleans, vpon Good Friday, for there to ſolemniſe and paſſe our Eaſter, where euery one accompliſhed the dutie vſuall to all good Chriſtians, in taking the ſpiritual food, that is to ſay, the holy Communion, ſeeing we did vndertake, and were going on a voyage. From thence we came downe the riuer Loyre to Saumur, with our cariage: and from Sawmur we went by Touars and Maran to Rochell, by hackney horſes.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The name of our Ship called the Ionas: The ſhallow water at Rochell is the cauſe of the hard going out: Rochell a reformed Towne: the common people is inſolent: Croquans: the accident of ſhip-wracke of the Ionas: new preparation: weake ſouldiers are not to be placed vpon the frontiers: The Ministers of Rochell doe pray for the conuerſion of the Sauages: the ſmalzeale of ours: the Euchariſt caried in voiages by the ancient Chriſtian: the diligence of Monſieur De Poutrincourt at the very point of Shipping.
               
               
                  
BEing come to Rochell, we found there Monſieur De Monts, and Monſieur De Poutrincourt, that were come in Poſt, and our ſhip called the Ionas, of the burthen of 150. tonnes, readie to paſſe out of the chaines of the Towne, to tary for winde and tyde. The tyde I ſay, becauſe that a great ſhip laden, cannot come to ſea from Rochell, but in ſpring tydes, vpon the new and full moone, by reaſon that in the towne roade there is no ſufficient depth. In the meane while we made good cheare, yea ſo good, that we did long to be at ſea to make diet: which we did but too ſoone, being once come thither: for during two whole monethes we ſaw not a whit of land, as we will farther tell anone. But the workemen, thorow their good cheare (for they had euery one two ſhillings a daies hire) The praiſes of Rochell.did play maruellous pranckes in Saint Nicholas quarter, where they were lodged, which was found ſtrange in a towne ſo reformed as Rochell is, in the which no notorious riots nor diſſolutions be made; and indeed one muſt behaue himſelfe orderly there, vnleſſe he will incurre the danger either of the cenſure of the Maior, or of the Miniſters of the Towne. Some of thoſe diſordered men were put in priſon, which were kept in the Towne-houſe till the time of going, and had beene further puniſhed, had it not beene vpon conſideration of the voyage, where they knew they ſhould not haue all their eaſes, but ſhould afterwards pay deere enough their madde bargen, in putting the ſaid Maſter Macquin and Maſter Georges to ſo much trouble, to keepe them in order. I will not, for all that, put in the number of this diſordred people, al the reſt, for there were ſome 
                     Croquans (Signifying hookes) why ſo called.very ciuill and reſpectiue. But I will ſay that the common people is a dangerous beaſt. And this maketh me remember the Croquans war, amongſt whom I was once in my life, being in Querci. It was the ſtrangeſt thing in the world to ſee the confuſion of thoſe woodden ſhooed fellowes, from whence they tooke the name of Croquans (that is to ſay

                  Hookers) becauſe that their woodden ſhooes, nayled before and behinde, did hooke or ſticke faſt at euery ſteppe. This confuſed people had neither rime nor reaſon among them; euery one was Maſter there; ſome armed with an hedge-hooke at a ſtafes end, others with ſome ruſty ſword, and ſo accordingly.
               
                  Negligence in the keeping of the Ionas.
                   Our Ionas hauing her full loade, was in the end rowed out of the Towne into the roade, and we thought to ſet out the 8. or 9. of Aprill. Captaine Foulques had taken the charge for the conducting of the voyage. But as commonmonly there is negligence in mens buſineſſes, it hapned that this Captaine (who notwithſtanding I haue knowen very diligent and watchfull at ſea) hauing left the ſhip ill manned, not being in her himſelfe, nor the Pilot, but only 6. or 7. mariners good and bad, a great South-eaſt winde aroſe in the night, which brake the Ionas cable, faſtend with one onely ancker, and driueth her againſt a forewall which is out of the towne, backing and proping the Tower of the chaine, againſt which ſhe ſtrake ſo many times, that ſhe brake and ſunke downe; and it chanced well that it was then ebbing, for if this miſhap had come in flowing time, the ſhip was in danger to be ouerwhelmed with a farre greater loſſe then we had, but ſhe ſtood vp, and ſo there was means to mend her, which was done with ſpeed. Our workemen were warned to come and helpe in this neceſſity, Hyred workmen negligent.either to draw at the pompe, at the Capeſtane, or to any other thing; but few there were that endeuoured themſelues to doe any thing, the moſt part of them going away, and moſt of them made a mocke of it. Some hauing gone ſo far as to the oare, went backe complaining that one had caſt water vpon them, being of that ſide that the water came out of the pompe, which the winde did ſcatter vpon them. I came thither with Monſieur De Poutrincourt, and ſome other willing men, where wee were not vnprofitable. Almoſt all the inhabitants of Rochell were beholding this ſpectacle vpon the rampiers. The ſea was

yet ſtormy, and we thought our ſhip would haue daſhed oftentimes againſt the great Towers of the towne. In the end, we came in with leſſe loſſe then wee thought of. The ſhip was all vnladen, being forced to tackle and furniſh her anew. The loſſe thereby was great, and the voyages almoſt broken off for euer: for I beleeue, that after ſo many trials, none would haue ventured to goe plant Colonies in thoſe parts; that Country being ſo ill ſpoken of, that euery one did pittie vs, conſidering the accidents happened to The courage of Monſieur De Monts and his aſſociates.them that had beene there before. Notwithſtanding Monſieur De Monts and his aſſociates, did beare manfully this loſſe. And I muſt needs be ſo bold as to tel in this occurrāce that if euer that country be inhabited with Chriſtians and ciuill people, the firſt praiſe thereof muſt of right be due to the Authors of this voyage.
               This great trouble hindered vs aboue a moneth, which was emploied in the vnlading, and lading againe of our ſhip. During that time, we did walke ſometimes vnto the places neere about the towne, and chiefly vnto the Convent of the Cordeliers, which is but halfe a league off from The frontiers ought to be furniſhed with good Souldiers.the towne: where being one Sunday, I did maruell how in thoſe places of frontier, there is no better garriſon, having ſo ſtrong enemies neere them. And ſeeing I take in hand to relate an hiſtory of things, according to the true maner of them: I ſay that it is a ſhamefull thing for vs, that the Miniſters of Rochell, pray to God euery day in their Congregations The Miniſters doe pray for the conuerſion of the Sauages.for the conuerſion of the poore Sauage people, and alſo for our ſafe conducting, and that our Church-men doe not the like. In very truth we neuer required neither the one nor the other to doe it, but therin is knowen the zeale of both ſides. In the end, a little before our departing, it came to my minde to aske of the Parſon or Vicar of Rochell if there might be found any of his fraternity that would come with vs, which I hoped might eaſily be done, becauſe there was a reaſonable good number of them: and beſides, that being in a maritime towne, I thought

they tooke delight to haunt the ſeas: but I could obtaine nothing: and for all excuſes, it was tolde me, that none would goe▪ to ſuch voyages, vnleſſe they were mooued with an extraordinary zeale and pietie: And that it would bee the beſt way to ſeeke to the fathers▪ Ieſuites for the ſame. Which we could not then doe, our ſhip hauing almoſt her full lading. Whereupon I remember to haue heard oftentimes of Monſieur De Poutrincourt, that after his firſt voiage, being at the Court, an Eccleſiaſticall perſon, eſteemed very zealous in the Chriſtian religion, demanded of him what might be hoped for in the conuerſion of the people of New France, and whether there were any great number of them. Whereunto he anſwered▪ that a hundred thouſand ſoules might be gotten to Ieſus Christ, (naming a number certaine for an vncertaine.) This Clergie man making ſmall account of ſuch a number, ſaid therupon by admiration, is that all! as if that number did not deſerue the labour of a Church-man. Truly though there were but the hundreth part of that, yea yet leſſe, one muſt not ſuffer it to bee loſt. The good Sheepheard hauing among Math. 18. verſ. 12. 132.an hundred ſheepe one aſtray, left the 99. for to go and ſeeke out the one that was loſt. We are taught &) I beleeue it ſo) that though there were but one man to be ſaued, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt had not diſdained to come, as well for him, as he hath done for all the world. In like maner, one muſt not make ſo ſmal account of the ſaluation of theſe poore people, though they ſwarme not in number as within Paris or Conſtantinople.
               
                  Cuſtome of the ancient Chriſtians, carying the Euchariſt in their voyages. Seeing it auailed me nothing in demanding for a Churchman, to adminiſter the Sacrament vnto vs, be it during our nauigation, or vpon the land: The ancient cuſtome of the Chriſtians came into my minde, which going in voyage did carry with them the holy bread of the Eucharist, and this did they, becauſe they found not, in all places, Prieſts to adminiſter this Sacrament vnto them, the world being then yet full, either of Heathens or Heretickes. So that it

was not vnproperly called Viatic, which they carried with them trauelling on the way: yet notwithſtanding I am of opinion that it hath a ſpirituall meaning. And conſidering that we might be brought to that neceſſity, not hauing in New France but one Prieſt onely, (of whoſe death wee heard when we came thither) I demanded if they would doe vnto vs, as to the ancient Chriſtians, who were as wiſe as we. I was anſwered that the ſame was done in that time for conſiderations which are not now at this daie. I Saint Ambroſe in his funerall oration for his brother.replied that Satirus Saint Ambroſes brother, going on a voyage vpon the ſea, ſerued himſelfe with this ſpirituall Phyſicke (as we read in his funerall oration made by his ſaid brother Saint Ambroſe) which he did carry in Orario, which I take to be a lynnen cloth, or taffita: and well did it happen vnto him by it. For hauing made ſhip-wracke, he ſaued himſelfe vpon a bord, left of his veſſels wracke. But I was as well refuſed in this as of the reſt. Which gaue mee cauſe of wondring: ſeeming to me a very rigorous thing to be in worſe condition then the firſt Chriſtians. For the Eucharist is no other thing at this day then it was then: And if they held it precious, we doe not demand it to make leſſer account thereof.
               Let vs returne to our Ionas. Now ſhee was laden and brought out of the towne into the roade: there reſteth nothing more than fit weather & tide: which was the hardeſt Hardneſſe to come foorth from a Port.of the matter. For in places where is no great depth, as in Rochell, one muſt tarry for the high tydes of the full and new Moones, and then paraduenture the winde will not be fit, and ſo one muſt deferre, till a fortnights time. In the meane while the ſeaſon goeth away: as it was almoſt with vs. For we ſaw the houre that after ſo many labours and charges, we were indanger to tary for lacke of winde, becauſe the Moone was in the waine, and conſequently the Bad ſuſpition of Captaine Foulques.
                  tyde. Captaine Foulques did not ſeeme to affect his charge, making no ordinary ſtay in the ſhip: and it was reported that other Merchants, not being of Monſieur De Monts
                  
his ſocietie, did ſecretly ſolicite him to breake off the voyage. And indeed it hath beene thought that he cauſed vs to make wrong courſes: which kept vs two monethes and a halfe at ſea, as heereafter we ſhall ſee. Which thing the The diligence and care of Monſs-De Poutrincourts.
                  ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt perceiuing, himſelfe tooke vpon him the charge of Captaine of the ſhip, and went to lie in her, the ſpace of fiue or ſix daies, for to get out with the firſt winde, and not to looſe the opportunity. In the end, with much a doe the eleuenth day of May 1606. by the fauour of a ſmall Eaſterly winde, he went to ſea, and made our Ionas to be brought to the Paliſſe, and the next * A place ſo called neere Rochell.
                  day being the 12. of the ſame moneth, came againe to Chef de bois (which be the places where ſhips put themſelues for ſhelter from windes) where the hope of New France was aſſembled. I ſay the hope, becauſe that of this voyage, did depend the continuance or totall breach of the enterpriſe.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Their departure from Rochell: Sundry meetings of ſhips, and Pirats: Stormy Sea about the Açores, and whence it proceeds: Why the West windes are frequent in the Weſt ſea: From whence the winds doe come: Porpeſes doe prognoſticate ſtormes: meanes to take them: the deſcribing of them: of ſtormes: their effects: of Calmes: what is a guſt of Winde: how it is made: the effects thereof: the boldneſſe of mariners: how reuerence is giuen to the Kings ſhip: the ſupputation of the voyage: hot ſea: then cold▪ the reaſon of it: and of the banckes of Ice in New-found Land.
               
               
                  13. of May. 1606. THe Saturday, Whitſoneue 13. of May, we weighed our anckers, and ſailed in open ſea, ſo that by little and little wee loſt the ſight of the great towers and town of Rochell, then of the Iles of Rez & Oleron, bidding

France farewell. It was a thing fearefull for them that were not vſed to ſuch a dance, to ſee them caried vpon ſo moueable an ellement, and to be at euery moment (as it were) within two fingers bredth to death. We had not long ſailed, but that many did their endeuour to yeeld vp the tribute Meetings of ſhips.to Neptune. In the meane while we went ſtill forward, for there was no more going backe, the plancke being once taken vp. The 16. of May we met with 13. Holanders, going for Spaine, which did inquire of our voyage, and ſo held their courſe. Since that time we were a whole moneth, ſeeing nothing elſe out of our floting towne, but Skie and Meeting of a Pirate or outlawed.water, one ſhip excepted, neere about the Açors, well filled with Engliſh and Dutchmen. They bare vp with vs, and came very neere vs. And according to the maner of the ſea, we asked them whence their ſhip was. They told vs they were New-found-land men, that is to ſay going a fiſhing for New-found-land-fiſh. And they asked vs if we would accept of their companie: we thanked them: therupon they dranke to vs, and we to them, and they tooke another courſe. But hauing conſidered their veſſell all ſet with greene moſſe on the belly and ſides, we iudged them to be Pirates, & that they had of a long time beaten the ſea, in hope to make ſome priſe. It was then that we began to Neptunes ſheepe.ſee, more than before, Neptunes ſheepe to skip vp (ſo doe they call the frothy waues, when the ſea beginneth to ſturand to feele the hard blowes of his Trident. For commonly Why is the ſea ſtormie about the Açores.in that place before named the ſea is ſtormy. If one aske me the cauſe why: I wil anſwer, that I thinke it to proceed of a certaine conflict between the Eaſt & weſterly windes, which doe encounter in that part of the ſea, and eſpecially in Summer, when the Weſt windes doe riſe vp, and with a great force pierce and paſſe thorow a great diſtance of ſea, vntill they finde the windes of theſe parts, which doe reſiſt them; Then it is dangerous for a ſhip to be at theſe windy encounters. This reaſon ſeemeth the more probable vnto me, in this, that vntill we came neere the Açores we had the

winde fit enough, and afterward, we had almoſt alwaies either South-weſt or Norweaſt, little North and South, which were not good for vs, but to ſaile with the bowline: For Eaſterly windes we had none at all, but once or twice, Weſterly windes ordinary in the Weſterne Sea.which continued nothing with vs (to ſpeake of.) Sure it is that the Weſterly windes doe raigne much a long that ſea, Whether it be by a certaine repercuſſion of the Eaſt winde which is ſtiffe and ſwift vnder the Equinoctiall line, wherof we haue ſpoken elſe-where, or becauſe that this Weſtern land, being large and great, alſo the winde that iſſueth from thence doth abound the more. Which commeth eſpecially in Summer, when the ſunne hath force to draw vp the from whence the windes doe come.vapors of the earth, for the windes come from thence, iſſuing from the dennes and Caues of the ſame. And therefore the Poets doe faine that Aeolus holdeth them in priſons, from whence hee draweth them, and giueth them liberty when it pleaſeth him. But the ſpirit of God doth confirm it vnto vs yet better, when he ſaith by the mouth of the Prophet, that Almighty God, among other his maruels, draweth Pſal. 135.the windes out of his treaſures, which be the Caues whereof I ſpeake. For the word treaſure fignifieth in Hebrew, ſecret and hidden place.
               
                  He bringeth foorth the cloudes from the earthes furtheſt parts,
                  the lightnings with the raines he makes, and them impartes,
                  on ſome in his anger, on others for pleaſures:
                  The windes he draweth foorth out of his deepe treaſures.
               
               And vpon this conſideration, Chriſtopher Columbus, a Genwaie, firſt nauigator of theſe laſt ages vnto the Ilands of Amerika, did iudge that there was ſome great land in the Weſt, hauing obſerued, ſailing on the ſea, that continuall windes came from that part.
               Continuing then our courſe, we had ſome other ſtormes & hindrances procured by windes, which we almoſt had alwaies contrary, by reaſon we ſet out too late: but they that ſet out in March haue commonly good windes, becauſe

that then the Eaſt, Noreaſt, and Northern windes doe raigne, which are fit and proſperous for theſe voiages. Porpeſes doe prognoſticate ſtorms.Theſe tempeſts were very often foretold vs by Porpeſes, which did haunt about our ſhip by thouſands, ſporting themſelues after a very pleaſant maner. Some of them did The way to take them.pay for their ſo neer eapproaching. For ſome men waited for them at the beke head (which is the forepart of the ſhip) with harping Irons in their hands, which met with them ſometimes, and drew them in abord with the helpe of the other ſailers, which, with iron hookes (which they call Gaffes) tied at the end of a long powle, pulled them vp. We haue taken many of them in that ſort, both in going and comming, which haue done vs no harme. There bee The deſcription of the Porpeſe.
                  two ſorts of them, ſome which haue a blunt and bigge noſe, others which haue it ſharpe; we tooke none but of theſe laſt, but yet I remember to haue ſeene in the water ſome of the ſhort-noſed ones. This fiſh hath two fingers The Porpeſes hot bloud doth comfort the ſinewes.bredth of fat, at the leaſt, on the backe When it was cut in two, we did waſh our hands in his hot blood, which, they ſay, comforteth the ſinewes. He hath a maruelous quantity of teeth along his Iawes, and I thinke that he holdeth faſt that which he once catcheth. Moreouer the inward parts haue altogether the taſte of hoggs fleſh, and the bones not in forme of fiſh bones, but like a foure footed creature. The moſt delicate meat of it, is the finne which he hath vpon the backe, and the taile, which are neither fiſh nor fleſh, but better then that, ſuch as alſo is in ſubſtance of taile, that of the Beuers, which ſeemeth to be ſcailed. A Beauers taile is dainty meate.Theſe Porpeſes be the onely fiſhes we tooke, before we came to the great bancke of Morues or Codfiſh. But far off we ſaw other great fiſhes, which did ſhew, out of the water, aboue halfe an akers length of their backes, and did thruſt out in the aire aboue a ſpeares height of great pipes of water, thorow the holes they had vpon their heads.
               
                  Stormes, and their effects. But to returne to our purpoſe of ſtormes: during our voiage, we had ſome which made vs ſtrike downe ſaile,

and to ſtand our armes a croſſe, caried at the pleaſure of the waues, and toſſed vp and downe after a ſtrange maner. If any coffer or cheſt was not well made faſt, it was heard to rowle from ſide to ſide, makeing a foule noiſe. Sometimes the kettle was ouerturned; and in dyning or ſupping, our diſhes and platters flew from one ende of the table to the other, vnleſſe they were holden very faſt. As for the drinke, one muſt cary his mouth and the glaſſe, according to the motion of the ſhip. Briefely it was a ſport, but ſomewhat rude, to them that cannot beare this iogging eaſily. For all that, the moſt of vs did laugh at it: for there was no danger in it, at leaſt euident, being in a good ſhip, and ſtrong to withſtand the waues. We had alſo ſometimes Calmes weariſome.calmes, very tedious and weariſome, during which, we waſhed our ſelues in the ſea, we danced vpon the decke, we climbed vp the maine top, we ſang in muficke. Then Whirlewinde, what it is, how it is made: the effects thereof.when a little ſmall cloude was percerued to iſſue from vnder the Horizon, we were forced to giue ouer thoſe exerciſes, for to take heed of a guſt of winde, which was wrapped in the ſame cloud, which diſſoluing it ſelfe, grumbling, ſnorting, whiſtling, roaring, ſtorming, and buzing, was able to ouer turne our ſhip vp-ſide downe, vnleſſe men had beene ready to execute that which the Maſter of the ſhip (which was Captaine Foulques, a man very vigilant) commanded them. There is no harme in ſhewing how theſe guſts of winde, otherwiſe called ſtormes, are formed, and from whence they proceed. Plinie ſpeaketh of them in his Plin. lib. 2. cap. 48.
                  naturall hiſtory, and ſaith, that they be exhalations & light vapours raiſed from the earth to the colde region of the aire: and not being able to paſſe further, but rather forced to returne backe, they ſometimes meet ſulphury and firy exhalations, which compaſſe them about, and binde ſo hard, that there come, thereby a great combat, motions and agitation, between the ſulphury heat, and the airy moiſtneſſe, which being conſtrained by the ſtronger enemy to run away, it openeth it ſelfe, maketh it ſelfe, waie, whiſtleth,

roareth and ſtormeth, briefely becometh a winde, which is great or leſſer according that the ſulphury exalation which wrappeth it, breaketh it ſelfe and giueth it way, ſometimes all at once, as we haue ſhewed before, and ſometimes with longer time, according to the quantity of the matter wherof it is made, and according as, either more or leſſe, it is moued by his contrary qualities.
               
                  The maruellous aſſurance of the good Mariners, in their ſea-labours. But I cannot leaue vnmentioned the wonderful courage and aſſurance that good ſailers haue in theſe windie conflicts, ſtormes and tempeſts, when as a ſhip being caried and mounted vpon mountaines of waters, and from thence let downe, as it were, into the profound depthes of the world, they clime among the tacklings and cordes, not only to the maine top, and to the very height of the maine maſt, but alſo, without ladder ſteps, to the top of another maſt, faſtened to the firſt, held onely with the force of their armes and feet, winding about the higheſt tacklings. Yea much more, that if, in this great toſſing and rowling, it chanceth that the maine ſaile (which they call Paphil or Papefust) be vntied at the higher ends, he, who is firſt commanded, will put himſelfe ſtradling vpon the maine yard (that is the tree which croſſed the maine maſt) and, with a hammer at his girdle, and halfe a doſen nailes in his mouth, will tie againe and make faſt, that which was vntied, to the The boldnes of a Switzer, at Laon.
                  perill of a thouſand liues. I haue ſometimes heard great account made of a Switzers bouldneſſe, who (after the ſiege of Laon, and the citie being rendered to the Kings obedience) climbed and ſtood ſtradling vpon the thwart branch of the croſſe of our Ladies church ſteeple of the ſaid towne, and ſtood there forked wiſe, his feet vpward: But that, in my iudgement, is nothing in regard of this, the ſaid Switzer being vpon a firme and ſolide body, and without motion, and this contrariwiſe hanging ouer an vnconſtant ſea, toſſed with boiſtrous windes, as we haue ſometimes ſeene.
               After we had left theſe Pirats ſpoken of before, we were

vntill the 18. of Iune, toſſed with diuers, and almoſt contrary The 18. of Iune.windes, without any diſcouery, but of one ſhip far off from vs, which we did not boord, and yet notwithſtanding A ſhip.the very ſight thereof did comfort vs. And the ſame An other ſhip.day we met a ſhip of Honfleur, wherein Captaine La Roche did command, going for New-found-landes, who had no better fortune vpon the ſea then we. The cuſtome is at The vailing of Marchands ſhips to a ſhip Royall.ſea, that when ſome particular ſhip meeteth with the King his ſhip (as ours was) to come vnder the lee, and to preſent herſelfe, not ſide by ſide, but bias wiſe: Alſo to pull down her flagge, as this Captain La Roche did, except the flagge, for ſhee had non, no more had we, being not needfull in ſo great a voyage, but in approaching the land, or when one muſt fight. Our ſailers did caſt then their computation, Computatiof the voyage.on the courſe that we had made. For in euery ſhip, the Maſter, the Pilot, and Maſters Mate doe write downe euery day of their courſes, and windes that they haue followed, for how many houres, and the eſtimation of leagues. The ſaid La Roche did account that they were then in the Fourty fiue degrees, and within a hundred leagues of the Bancke. Our Pilot, called Maſter Oliuer Fleuriot, of Saint Maloe, by his computation ſaid that we were within 60. leagues of it: And Captaine Foulques within 120. leagues. I beleeue he gaue the beſt iudgement. We receiued much contentment by the meeting of this ſhip, and did greatly encourage vs, ſeeing wee did begin to meete with ſhips, ſeeming vnto vs that wee did enter in a place of acquaintance.
               
                  Sea water milke warme, then colde. But by the way a thing muſt be noted, which I haue found admirable, and which giueth vs occaſion to play the Philoſophers. For about the ſame 18. day of Iune, wee found the ſea-water, during three daies ſpace, very warme, and by the ſame warmth, our wine alſo was warme in the bottome of our ſhip, yet the aire was not hotter then before. And the 21. of the ſaid moneth, quite contrarie we were 2. Great cold.or 3. daies ſo much compaſſed with miſtes and coldes, that

we thought our ſelues to be in the moneth of Ianuary, and the water of the ſea was extreame colde. Which continued with vs vntill we came vpon the ſaid Bancke, by reaſon of the ſaid miſtes, which outwardly did procure this colde The reaſon of this Antiperiſtaſe, and the cauſe of the Ices of New-found-lande.vnto vs. When I ſeeke out the cauſe of this Antiperiſtaſe, I attribute it to the Ices of the North, which come floating downe vpon the coaſt and ſea adioyning to New-found-land, and Labrador, which wee haue ſaid elſe-where is brought thither with the ſea, by her naturall motion, which is greater there, then elſe-where, becauſe of the great ſpace it hath to runne, as in a gulfe, in the depth of America, where the nature and ſituation of the vniuerſall earth doth beare it eaſily. Now theſe Ices (which ſometimes are ſeene in banckes of tenne leagues length, and as high as Mountaines and hils, and thrice as deepe in the waters) holding, as it were, an Empire in this ſea, driue out farre from them, that which is contrary to their coldneſſe, and conſequently doe binde and cloſe on this ſide, that ſmall quantity of milde temperature that the Summer may bring to that part, where they come to ſeat and place themſelues. Yet for all that, I will not deny but this region in one and the ſelfe-ſame paralell is ſomewhat colder then thoſe of our part of Europe, for the reaſons that we will aleage heereafter, when we ſhall ſpeake of the fowlneſſe of In the 16. chapter. Second experience.ſeaſons. Such is my opinion: being ready to heare another mans reaſon. And being mindefull heereof, I did, of purpoſe, take heed of the ſame, at my returne from New France, and found the ſame warmeneſſe of water (or very neere) though it was in the Moneth of September, within fiue or ſix daies ſailing on this ſide of the ſaid bancke, whereof we will now intreate.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  Of the great Bancke of Morues or Coddes: of the Sound: our comming to the ſaid Bancke: the deſcription thereof: the fiſhing of New-found-land-fiſh: and of birds: the greedineſſe of birds, called by Frenchmen Hap-foyes, that is to ſay, liuer-catchers: diuers perils: the fauours of God: the cauſes of frequent and long mistes in the Western ſea: Land-markes: the ſight of it: maruellous odours: the boording of two Shaloupes, the landing at the Port du Moutton: the comming into Port Royall: of two Frenchmen remaining there alone amongst the Sauages.
               
               BEfore wee come to the Bancke, ſpoken of before, which is the great Bancke where the fiſhing of greene Cod-fiſhes is made (ſo are they called when they are not dry, for one muſt goe alande for the drying of them) the ſea-faring-men, beſides the computation they make of their courſe, haue warnings when they come neere to it, by Warnings neere the great Bancke. Birds called by Frenchmen, Godes, Fouquets, Happefoies.
                  birds, which are knowen: euen as one doth them of theſe our parts, returning backe into France, when one is within 100. or 120. leagues neere it. The moſt frequent of theſe birds, towards the ſaid Bancke, be Godes, Fouquets, and other called Happe-foyes, for a reaſon that we will declare anone. When theſe birds then were ſeene, which were not like to them that we had ſeene in the middeſt of the great ſea, we began to thinke our ſelues not to be farre from the ſaid Bancke. Which made vs to ſound with our lead vpon a Thurſday the 22. of Iune, but then we found no bottom. What the ſound is, and how it is caſt.The ſame day in the euening, we caſt againe with better ſucceſſe: for we found bottome at 36. fadams. The ſaid ſound is a peece of lead of ſeuen or eight pound waight, made piramidall wiſe, faſtened at one or diuers lines: and

at the biggeſt end, which is flat, one putteth ſome greaſe to it, mingled with butter: then all the ſailes are ſtricken downe, and the ſound caſt: and when that the bottome is felt, and the lead draweth no more line, they leaue off leting downe of it. So our ſound being drawen vp, brought with it ſome ſmall ſtones, with a white one, and a peece of ſhell, hauing moreouer a pit in the greaſe, whereby they iudged The arriuall to the fiſh Bancke.that the bottome was a rocke. I cannot expreſſe the Ioy that we had, ſeeing vs there, where we had ſo much deſired to be. There was not any one of vs more ſicke, euery one did leape for Ioy, and did ſeeme vnto vs to be in our owne country, though we were come but to the halſe of our voyage, at leaſt for the time, that paſſed before we came to Port Royall, whther we were bound.
               
                  Of the word Bancke: and deſcription of the fiſhing Bancke. Heere I will, before I proceed any further, decipher vnto you, what meaneth this word (Bancke) which paraduenture putteth ſome in paine to know what it is. They ſomtimes call Banckes a ſandy bottome which is very ſhallow, or which is a drie at low water. Such places be mortall for ſhips that meete with them. But the Bancke whereof we ſpeake, are mountaines grounded in the depth of the waters, which are raiſed vp to 30. 36. and 40. fadams, neere to the vpper face of the ſea. This Bancke is holden to be of 200. leagues in lenght: and 18. 20. and 24. leagues broad, which being paſſed there is no more bottome found out, then in theſe parts, vntill one come to the land. The ſhips being there arriued, the ſailes are rowled vp, and there, fiſhing is made of the greene fiſh, as I haue ſaid, whereof we ſhall ſpeake in the booke following. For the ſatisfying of my reader, I haue drawen it in my Geography call Map of New-found-land, with prickes, which is all may be done to repreſent it. There is, farther off, other banckes, as I haue marked in the ſaid Map, vpon the which good fiſhing may be made: and many goe thither that know the places. When that we parted from Rochel, there was (as it were) a forreſt of ſhips lying at Chef de Bois,
                  
(whereof that place hath taken his name) which went all in a company to that country, preuenting vs (in their going) but onely of two daies.
               Hauing ſeene and noted the Bancke, wee hoiſted vp ſailes and bare all night, keeping ſtill our courſe to the Weſt. But the dawne of day being come, which was Saint The fiſhing of Cod.Iohn Baptiſts Eue, in Gods name we pulled downe ſailes, paſſing that day a fiſhing of Cod-fiſh, with a thouſand mirthes and contentments, by reaſon of freſh meates, whereof we had aſmuch as we would, hauing long before wiſhed for them. Monſieur De Poutrincourt, and a yong man of Retel named Le Feure, who, by reaſon of the ſeaſickneſſe were not come out from their beds nor cabanes, from the beginning of the Nauigation, came vpon the hatches that day, and had the pleaſure, not onely of fiſhing of Cod, but alſo of thoſe birds, that bee called by French mariners, Happe-foyes, that is to ſay Liuer-catchers, becauſe 
                     Happe-foyes Why ſo called.of their greedineſſe to deuour the liuers of the Cod-fiſhes that are caſt into the ſea, after their bellies bee opened, whereof they are ſo couetous, that though they ſee a great powle ouer their heads, ready to ſtrike them downe, yet they aduenture themſelues to come neere to the ſhip, to catch ſome of them, at what price ſoeuer. And they which were not occupied in fiſhing did paſſe their time in that ſport. And ſo did they, by their diligence that wee tooke ſome thirty of them. But in this action one of our ſhipwrights fell downe in the ſea. And it was good for him that the ſhip went but ſlow, which gaue him meanes to ſaue himſelfe by taking hold of the rudder, from which he was pulled in a boord, but for his paines was well beaten by Captaine Foulques.
               
               
                  Sea-dogges skinnes. In this fiſhing we ſometimes did take ſea-dogges, whoſe skinnes our Ioyners did keepe carefully to ſmooth their worke withall. Item, fiſhes called by Frenchmen Merlus, which be better then Cod, and ſometimes another kinde of fiſh called Bars: which diuerſity did augment our

delight. They which were not buſie in taking neither fiſhes nor birdes, did paſſe their time in gathering the hearts, guts, and other inward parts (moſt delicate) of the Cod-fiſh, which they did mince with lard and ſpices, and Excellent ſawſiges made with the inwards of Codd.with thoſe things did make as good Bolonia ſauſiges, as any can be made in Paris, and we did eat of them with a very good ſtomacke.
               On the euening we made ready to continue our courſe, hauing firſt made our Canons to roare, as well becauſe of Saint Iohn his holy day, as for Monſieur De Poutrincourts ſake, which beareth the name of that Saint. The next day ſome of our men tolde vs they had ſeene a Bancke of Ice. And thereupon was recited vnto vs, how that the yeare before, Men ſaued vpon a banck of Ice.a ſhip of Olone was caſt away, by approaching too neere to it, and that two men hauing ſaued themſelues vpon the Ice, had this good fortune, that another ſhip, paſſing by, the men tooke them in aboord them.
               
                  The weather in thoſe ſeas contrary, then in ours. It is to be noted that from the 18. of Iune vntill wee did arriue at Port Royall, we haue found the weather quite otherwiſe to that we had before. For (as we haue already ſaid) we had colde miſtes or fogges, before our comming to the Bancke (where we came in faire ſunſhine) but the next day, we fell to the fogges againe, which (a far off) we The cauſes of miſts on the Weſt ſea.might perceiue to come and wrappe vs about, holding vs continually priſoners three whole daies, for two daies of faire weather that they permitted vs: which was alwaies accompanied with colde, by reaſon of the Summers abſence. Yea euen diuers times wee haue ſeene our ſelues a whole ſennight, continually in thicke fogges, twice without any ſhew of Sunne, but very little, as I will recite heereafter. And I will bring foorth a reaſon for ſuch effects which ſeemeth vnto me probable. As wee ſee the fire to draw the moiſtneſſe of a wet cloath, oppoſite vnto it, likewiſe the ſunne draweth moiſtneſſe and vapours both from the ſea and from the land. But for the diſſoluing of them, there is heere one vertue, and beyond thoſe parts another,

according to the accidents and circumſtances that are found. In theſe our countries it raiſeth vp vapours onely from the ground, and from our riuers: which earthly vapours, groſſe and waighty, and participating leſſe of the moiſt ellement, doe cauſe vs a hot aire, and the earth diſcharged of thoſe vapours, becomes thereby more hot and parching. From thence it commeth, that the ſaid vapors, hauing the earth of the one part, and the Sunne on the other, which heateth them, they are eaſily diſſolued, not remaining long in the aire, vnleſſe it be in winter, when the earth is waxen colde, and the Sunne beyond the Equinoctiall line, farre off from vs. From the ſame reaſon proceedeth the cauſe, why miſtes and fogges be not ſo frequent, nor ſo long in the French ſeas, as in New-found-land, becauſe that the Sunne, paſſing from his riſing, aboue the grounds, this ſea, at the comming thereof, receiueth almoſt but earthly vapours, and by a long ſpace retaineth this vertue to diſſolue very ſoone the exhalations it draweth to it ſelfe. But when it commeth to the middeſt of the Ocean, and to the ſaid new found land, hauing eleuated and aſſumed in ſo long a courſe a great abundance of vapours, from this moiſt wide Ocean, it doth not ſo eaſily diſſolue them, as well, becauſe thoſe vapours be colde of themſelues, and of their nature, as becauſe the Element which is neereſt vnder them, doth ſimpathize with them, and preſerueth them, & the Sunne beames being not holpen in the diſſoluing of them, as they are vpon the earth. Which is euen ſeene in the land of that countrie, which (although it hath but ſmall heat, by reaſon of the abundance of woods) notwithſtanding it helpeth to diſperſe the miſtes and fogges, which be ordinarily there, in the morning, during ſummer, but not as at Sea, for about eight aclocke in the morning they begin to vaniſh away, and ſerue as a dew to the ground.
               
                  A ſmall bancke, I hope the reader will not diſlike theſe ſmall digreſſions, ſeeing they ſerue to our purpoſe. The 28. day of Iune, we

found our ſelues vpon a little ſmall bancke (other then the great Bancke whereof we haue ſpoken) at forty fadams: and the day following, one of our Sailers fell by night into the ſea, which had beene loſt if he had not met with a cable, A Mariner fallen by night in the ſea. Land markes.hanging in the water. From that time forward, we began to deſcrie land▪markes (it was New-found-land) by hearbes, moſſes, flowers, and peeces of wood, that we alwaies met, abounding the more, by ſo much we drew neere to it. The 4. day of Iuly, our ſaylers, which were appointed The diſcouery of S. Peters Ilands. Plain diſcovery of the Land.for the laſt quarter watch, deſcried in the morning, very early, euery one being yet a-bed, the Iles of Saint Peter. And the Friday the ſeuenth of the ſaid Moneth, we diſcouered, on the Lar-boord, a Coaſt of land, high raiſed vp, appearing vnto vs, as long as ones ſight could ſtretch out, which gaue vs greater cauſe of Ioy, then yet we had had, wherein God did greatly ſhew his mercifull fauour vnto vs, making this diſcouery in faire calme weather. Being yet farre from it, the bouldeſt of the company went vp to the maine top, to the end to ſee it better, ſo much were all of vs deſirous to ſee this land, true and moſt delightfull habitation of Man. Monſieur De Poutrincourt went vp thither, and my ſelfe alſo, which we had not yet done. Euen our dogges did thruſt their noſes out of the ſhip, better to draw and ſmell the ſweet aire of the land, not being able to containe themſelues from witneſſing, by their geſtures, the ioy they had of it. We drew within a league neere vnto it, and (the ſailes being let downe) we fell a fiſhing of Codde, the fiſhing of the Bancke beginning to faile. They which had before vs, made voyages in thoſe parts, did iudge vs Cap. Breton. The Bay of Campſeau. Eight daies.to be at Cap-Breton. The night drawing on, we ſtood off to the ſea-ward: the next day following, being the eight of the ſaid moneth of Iulj, as we drew neere to the Bay of Campſeau, came, about the euening, miſts, which did continue eight whole daies, during the which we kept vs at ſea, hulling ſtill, not being able to goe forward, being reſiſted by Weſt and South-Weſt windes. During theſe

eight daies, which were from one Saturday to another, God (who hath alwaies guided theſe voyages, in the which not one man hath beene loſt by ſea) ſhewed vs his ſpeciall fauour, in ſending vnto vs, among the thicke fogs, Gods fauour in danger.a clearing of the Sunne, which continued but halfe an houre: And then had we ſight of the firme land, and knew that we were ready to be caſt away vpon the rockes, if we had not ſpeedily ſtood off to ſea-ward. A man doth ſometimes ſeeke the land, as one doth his beloued, which ſometimes repulſeth her ſweet heart very rudely. Finally, vpon Saturday the 15. of Iulj, about two aclocke in the after noone, the ſky began to ſalute vs, as it were, with Cannon ſhots, ſhedding teares, as being ſory to haue kept vs ſo long in paine. So that faire weather being come again, Calme weather.we ſaw comming ſtraight to vs (we being fower leagues off from the land) two Shaloupes with open ſailes, in a ſea yet wrathed. This thing gave vs much content. But whilſt Maruellous odours cumming from the land.we followed on our courſe, there came from the land odors vncomparable for ſweetneſſe, brought with a warm wind, ſo abundantly, that all the Orient parts could not procure greater abundance. We did ſtretch out our hands, at it were to take them, ſo palpable were they, which I haue admired a thouſand times ſince. Then the two ſhaloups did approach, The boording of two ſhalopes.the one manned with Sauages, who had a Stagge painted at their ſailes, the other with Frenchmen of Saint Maloes, which made their fiſhing at the Port of Camſeau, but the Sauages were more diligent, for they ariued firſt. Hauing neuer ſeene any before, I did admire, at the firſt The Sauages goodly men.ſight, their faire ſhape, and forme of viſage. One of them did excuſe himſelfe, for that he had not brought his faire beuer gowne, becauſe the weather had beene foule. He had but one red peece of frize vpon his backe, and Matachiaz 
                  
                     Matachiaz be carkanets, necklaces, bracelets, and wrought girdles.about his necke, at his wriſtes, aboue the elbow, and at his girdle. We made them to eat and drinke. During that time they tolde vs all that had paſſed, a yeere before, at Port Royall (whither we were bound. In the meane

while, them of Saint Maloe came, and tolde vs as much as the Sauages had. Adding that the wenſday, when that we did ſhunne the rockes, they had ſeene vs, and would haue corne to vs with the ſaid Sauages, but that they left off, During the miſts at ſea, it is faire wether on land▪ A diſcommoditie brings a commodity.by reaſon we put to the ſea: and moreouer that it had beene alwaies faire weather on the land: which made vs much to maruell: but the cauſe thereof hath beene ſhewed before. Of this diſcommodity may be drawne heereafter a great good, that theſe miſts will ſerue as a rampier to the country, and one ſhall know with ſpeed what is paſſed at ſea. They tolde vs alſo that they had beene aduertiſed, ſome daies before, by other Sauages, that a ſhip was ſeene at Cap Breton. Theſe French men of S. Maloe were men that did deale for the aſſociates of Monſieur De Monts, and did complaine that the Baskes, or men of Saint Iohn De Lus (againſt the King his Inhibitions) had trucked with the Sauages, and caried away aboue ſix thouſand Beauers The care of the ſauages for their wiues.skinnes. They gaue vs ſundrie ſorts of their fiſhes, as Bars, Marlus and great Fletans. As for the Sauages, before to depart, they asked bread of vs, to carry to their wiues, which was granted and giuen them, for they deſerued it well, being come ſo willingly to ſhew vs in what part wee were. For ſince that time we ſailed ſtill in aſſurance, and without doubt.
               
                  The departing of ſome of our company going aland. At the parting, ſome number of ours went aland at the Port of Campſeau, as well to fetch vs ſome wood and freſh water, whereof we had neede, as for to follow the Coaſt from that place to Port Royal in a ſhaloup, for we did feare leſt Monſieur De Pont ſhould be at our comming thither already gone from thence. The Sauages made offer to goe to him thorow the woods, with promiſe to be there within ſix dayes, to aduertiſe him of our comming, to the end The Sauages doe trauell much way in ſmall time.to cauſe his ſtay, for as much as word was left with him to depart, vnleſſe he were ſuccoured within the 16. day of that moneth, which he failed not to doe: notwithſtanding our men deſirous to ſee the land neerer, did hinder the ſame

which promiſed vs to bring vnto vs the next day the ſaid wood and water, if we would approch neere the land, which we did not, but followed on our courſe.
               
                  Miſtes. Calmes. The Tueſday, 17. of Iuly, we were, according to our accuſtomed maner, ſurpriſed with miſtes and contrary wind. But the Thurſday we had calme weather, ſo that whether it were miſt or faire weather we went nothing forward. During this calme, about the euening, a Shipwright, The perill of many Mariners.waſhing himſelfe in the ſea, hauing before drunke too much Aqua-vitae, found himſelfe ouertaken, the cold of the ſea water ſtriuing againſt the heat of this ſpirit of wine. Some Mariners, ſeeing their fellow in danger, caſt themſelues Drunkenneſſe cauſeth diuers perils.into the water to ſuccour him, but his wits being troubled, he mocked them, and they not able to rule him. Which cauſed yet other Mariners to goe to helpe; and they ſo hindred one another, that they were all in danger. In the end there was one of them, which, among this confuſion, heard the voice of Monſieur De Poutrincourt, who did ſay to him, Iohn Hay looke towards me, and with a rope that was giuen him, he was pulled vp, and the reſt withall were ſaued. But the Author of the trouble fell into a ſickneſſe, that almoſt killed him.
               
                  
                     Port du Roſſignoll. After this calme we had two daies of fogges. The Sunday 23. of the ſaid moneth, we had knowledge of the Port Du Roſſignoll, and the ſame day in the afternoone, the 
                     Port au Mouton.Sunne ſhining faire, we caſt anker at the mouth of Port Du Mouton, and we were in danger to fall vpon a ſhold, being come to two fathams and a halfe depth. We went aland ſeuenteene of vs in number, to fetch the wood and water, whereof we had need. There we found the Cabins and lodgings, yet whole and vnbroken, that Monſieur De Monts made two yeeres before, who had ſoiourned there by the ſpace of one moneth, as we haue ſaid in his place. What growes in the land at Port au Monton.
                  We ſaw there, being a ſandy land, ſtore of Oakes, bearing acornes, Cypreſſe-trees, Firre-trees, Bay-trees, Muske-roſes, Gooſe-beries, Purſlen, Raſpies, Fernes, Lyſimachia
                  
(a kinde of Sammonee) Calamus odoratus, Angelica, and other ſimples, in the ſpace of two houres that we taried there. We brought backe in our ſhip wilde peaze, which we found good. We had not the leaſure to hunt after rabets that be there in great number, not far from the Port, but we returned aboord as ſoone as we had laden our ſelues with water and wood: and ſo hoiſed vp ſailes.
               
                  
                     Le Cap de Sable. Long Iland. The Bay S. Mary. The arriuing to Port Royall. Tueſday the 25. day we were about the Cap De Sable, in faire weather, and made a good iourny, for about the euening we came to ſight of Long Ile, and the Bay of Saint Marie, but becauſe of the night we put backe to the ſeaward. And the next day we caſt anker at the mouth of Port Royall, where we could not enter by reaſon it was ebbing water, but we gaue two Cannon ſhot from our ſhip to ſalute the ſaid Port, and to aduertiſe the Frenchmen that we were there.
               
                  Difficulties in comming in. Thurſday the 27. of Iuly we came in with the floud, which was not without much difficultie, for that we had the winde contrary, and guſts of winde from the mountaines, which made vs almoſt to ſtrike vpon the rockes. And in theſe troubles our ſhip bare ſtill contrary, the Poupe before, and ſometimes turned round, not being able to doe The beauty of the Port.any other thing elſe. Finally, being in the Port, it was vnto vs a thing maruellous to ſee the faire diſtance and largeneſſe of it, and the mountaines and hils that inuironed it, & I wondered how ſo faire a place did remaine deſert, being all filled with woods, ſeeing that ſo many pine away in the world, which might make good of this land, if onely they had a chiefe gouernor to conduct them thither. By little and little we drew neere to the Iland, which is right ouer againſt the fort where we haue dwelt ſince: An Iland I ſay, the moſt agreeable thing to be ſeene in her kinde, that is poſſible to bee deſired, wiſhing in our ſelues to haue brought thither ſome of thoſe faire buildings that are vnprofitable in theſe our parts, that ſerue for nothing, but to retire wildefowle in, and other birds. We knew not yet, if

                  Monſieur Du Pont was gone or no, and therefore we did expect that he ſhould ſend ſome men to meet vs; but it was in vaine: for he was gone from thence 12. daies before. And whileſt we did hull in the middeſt of the Port, Membertou, the greateſt Sagamos of the Souriquois (ſo are the 
                     Sagamos ſignifieth Captain.people called with whom we were) came to the Frenchfort, to them that were left there, being only two, crying as a madde-man, ſaying in his language; What! You ſtand heere a dining (for it was about noone) and doe not ſee a great ſhip that commeth heere, and we know not what men they are: Suddenly theſe two men ran vpon the bulwarke, and with diligence made ready the Canons, which they furniſhed with pellets & touch powder. Membertou, without delay, came in a Conow made of barkes of trees, with a daughter of his, to view vs: And hauing found but friendſhip, and knowing vs to be Frenchmen, made no alarme. Notwithſtanding one of the two Frenchmen left there, called La Taille, came to the ſhore of the Port, his match on the cocke, to know what we were (though he knew it well enough, for we had the white Banner diſplaied at the toppe of the maſt) and on the ſudden foure volly of canons were ſhot off, which made innumerable echoes: And from our part, the fort was ſaluted with three Canon ſhots, and many musket ſhots, at which time our Trumpeter was not ſlacke of his dutie. Then we landed, viewed the houſe, and we paſſed that day in giuing God thankes, in Praiſes of the two Frenchmen left alone in the fort of Port-Royall.ſeeing the Sauages cabins, and walking thorow the medowes. But I cannot but praiſe the gentle courage of theſe two men, one of them I haue already named, the other is called Miquelet: which deſerue well to bee mentioned heere, for hauing ſo freely expoſed their liues in the conſeruation of the welfare of New France. For Monſieur Du Pont hauing but one barke and a ſhaloupe, to ſeeke out towards New-found-land, for french ſhips, could not charge himſelfe with ſo much furniture, corne, meat and marchandiſes as were there; which he had beene forced to caſt

into the ſea (and which had been greatly to our preiudice, and we did feare it very much) if theſe two men had not aduentured themſelues to tary there, for the preſeruing of thoſe things, which they did with a willing and ioyfull minde.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The happy meeting of Monſieur Du Pont: his returne vnto Port Royall: reioycing: deſcription of the confines of the ſaid Port: coniecture touching the head and ſpring of the great Riuer of Canada: ſowing of Corne: the returne of Monſieur Du Pont into France: the voyage of Monſieur De Poutrincourt vnto the countrie of the Armouchiquois: faire Rie ſprung vp without tillage: the exerciſes and maner of liuing in Port Royall: the Medowes of the riuer De L'Equille.
               
               
                  The tilling of the ground. THe Friday, next day after our arriuall, Monſieur De Poutrincourt affected to this enterpriſe, as for himſelfe, put part of his people to worke in the tillage and manuring of the ground, whileſt the others were emploied in making cleane of the chambers, and euery one to make ready that which belonged to his trade. In the meane time thoſe people of ours that had left vs at Campſeau, to come along the coaſt, met (as it were miraculouſly) The meeting with Monſieur Du Pont.
                  with Monſieur Du Pont, among Ilands, that be in great number in thoſe parts. To declare how great was the ioy of each ſide, is a thing not to be expreſſed. The ſaid Monſieur Du Pont, at this happy and fortunate meeting, returned backe to ſee vs in Port Royall, and to ſhip himſelfe in the Ionas, to returne into France. As this chance was beneficiall vnto him, ſo was it vnto vs, by the meanes of his ſhips that he left with vs For without that, we had been in ſuch extremity that we had not been able to goe nor come any where, our ſhip being once returned into France. He

arriued there, on Mondy the laſt of Iuly, and tarried yet in Port Royall vntill the 28. of Auguſt. All this moneth we made merry. Monſieur De Poutrincourt did ſet vp and opened a Hogſhed of wine, one of them that was giuen him for his owne drinking, giuing leaue to all commers to drinke as long as it ſhould hold, ſo that ſome of them drunke vntill their caps turned round.
               At the very beginning, we were deſirous to ſee the country vp the riuer, where we found medowes, almoſt continually aboue twelue leagues of ground, among which, brookes doe run without number, which come from the hils and mountaines adioyning. The woods very thicke on the water ſhoares, and ſo thicke, that ſometimes, one cannot goe thorow them. Yet for all that, I would not make them ſuch as Ioſeph Acoſta reciteth thoſe of Peru to be, Ioſeph Acoſta lib. 4. ca. 30.
                  when he ſaith: One of our brethren, a man of credit, told vs, that being gone aſtray, and loſt in the Mountaines, not knowing what part, nor which way he ſhould goe, found himſelfe among buſhes ſo thicke, that he was conſtrained to trauell vpon them, without putting his feet on the ground, a whole fortnights ſpace. I refer the beleeuing of that to any one that will; but this beleefe cannot reach ſo farre, as to haue place with me.
               
                  Land like to that which God promiſed to his people. Deut 8. verſ. 7. 8. Now in the land whereof we ſpeake, the woods are thinner farre off from the ſhoares and watriſh places: And the felicity thereof is ſo much the more to be hoped for, in that it is like the land, which God did promiſe to his people, by the mouth of Moyſes, ſaying: The Lord thy God doth bring thee into a good land, of riuers of waters, with fountaines and depthes, which doe ſpring in fields, &c. A land where thou ſhalt eat thy bread without ſcarſitie, wherein nothing ſhall faile thee, a land whoſe ſtones are of Iron, and from whoſe Mountaines thou ſhalt digge braſſe. And further in another place, confirming the promiſes for the goodneſſe and ſtate of the land that he would giue them. The country (ſaith he) wherin 
                  Deuter. 11. verſ. 10.
                  you are going for to poſſeſſe it, is not as the land of Aegypt,
                  
                  from whence you are come foorth, where thou diddest ſow thy ſeed, and wateredſt it with the labour of they feet, as a garden of hearbes. But the country thorow which you are going to paſſe, for to poſſeſſe it, is a land of mountaines and fields, and is watred 
                  Heereupon the 3. chap.
                  with waters that raineth from heauen. Now according to the deſcription that heeretofore we haue made of Port Royall, and the confines thereof, in deſcribing the firſt voiage of Monſieur De Monts, and as yet we doe mention it heere, brookes doe there abound at will, and (for this reſpect) A bundance of brookes.this land is no leſſe happy than the country of the Gaules (now called France) to whom King Agrippa (making an oration to the Iewes recited by Ioſephus in his warre of the Iewes) attributed a particular felicity, becauſe Iron ſtones. Mountaines of Braſſe.they had ſtore of domeſticall fountaines: And alſo that a part of thoſe countries is called Aquitaine, for the ſame conſideration. As for the ſtones which our God promiſeth that ſhould be of iron, and the mountaines of Braſſe, that ſignifieth nothing elſe, but the Mines of Copper, of Iron, and of ſteele, whereof we haue already heeretofore ſpoken, and will ſpeake yet heereafter. And as for the fields (wherof we haue not yet ſpoken) there be ſome on the Weſt ſide Lakes and brooks vpon the mountaines.of the ſaid Port Royall. And aboue the Mountaines there be ſome faire ones, where I haue ſeene lakes and brookes, euen as in the vallies. Yea euen in the paſſage to come foorth from the ſame fort, for to go to ſea, there is a brooke, which falleth from the high rockes downe, and in falling diſperſeth it ſelf into a ſmall raine, which is very delightfull in Summer, becauſe that at the foote of the rocke, there are caues, wherin one is couered, whileſt that this raine falleth ſo pleaſantly: And in the caue (wherein the raine of this brooke falleth) is made (as it were) a Raine-bow, when the Sunne ſhineth: which hath giuen me great cauſe The forme of a Raine bow, vnder a caue. They trauell three leagues in the woods.of admiration. Once we went from our fort as farre as the ſea thorow the woods, the ſpace of three leagues, but in our returne we were pleaſantly deceiued, for at the end of our iourny, thinking to be in a plaine champion country,

we found our ſelues on the top of a high Mountaine, and were forced to come downe with paine enough, by reaſon of ſnowes. But Mountaines be not perpetual in a country. Within 15. leagues of our dwelling, the country, thorow which the Riuer L' Equille paſſeth, is all plaine and euen. I haue ſeene in thoſe parts many countries, where the land is all euen, and the faireſt of the world. But the perfection Country well watered.thereof is, that it is well watered. And for witneſſe whereof, not onely in Port Royall, but alſo in all New France, the great riuer of Canada is proofe thereof, which at the end of 400. leagues is as broade as the greateſt riuers of the world, repleniſhed with Iles and rockes innumerable: taking Coniecture vpon the ſpring of the great Riuer of Canada.
                  her beginning from one of the lakes which doe meet at the ſtreame of her courſe (and ſo I thinke) ſo that it hath two courſes, the one from the Eaſt towards France: the other from the Weſt towards the South ſea: which is admirable, but not without the like example found in our Europe. For the riuer which commeth downe to Trent and to Verone proceedeth from a lake which produceth another riuer, whoſe courſe is bent oppoſite to the riuer of Lins, which falleth into the riuer Danube. So the Nile iſſueth from a lake that bringeth foorth other riuers, which diſcharge themſelues into the great Ocean.
               
               
                  Which is the firſt mine. Let vs returne to our tillage: for to that muſt we apply our ſelues: it is the firſt mine that muſt be ſought for, which is more worth than the treaſures of Atabalipa: And he that hath corne, wine, cattell, wollen and linnen, leather, iron, and afterward Codde-fiſh, he needeth no other treaſures, for the neceſſaries of life. Now all this is (or may be) in the land by vs deſcribed: vpon the which Monſieur De Poutrincourt 
                  Sowing of corne.hauing cauſed a ſecond tillage to be made, in fifteene daies after his arriuall thither, he ſowed it with our French corne, as well wheat and rie, as with hempe, flax, turnep ſeed, rediſh, cabidges & other ſeeds: And the eight day following, hee ſaw that his labour had not beene in vaine, but rather a faire hope, by the production that the

ground had already made of the ſeedes which ſhe had receaued. Which being ſhewed to Monſieur Du Pont, was vnto him a faire ſubiect to make his relation in France, as a thing altogether new there.
               
                  20 Of Auguſt. The 20. day of Auguſt was already come, when theſe faire ſhewes were made, and the time did admoniſh them, that were to goe in the voyage, to make r
                     ••
                  dy. Whereunto they began to giue order, ſo that the 25▪ day of the ſame moneth, after many peales of ordinance, they waighed anker to come to the mouth of the Port, which is commonly the firſt daies iourny.
               
                  Cauſe of the voyage made into the country of the Armou. thiquois.
                   
                  Monſieur De Monts being deſirous to reach as farre into the South as he could, and ſeeke out a place very fit to inhabite, beyond Malebarre, had requeſted Monſieur De Poutrincourt to paſſe farther than yet he had done, and to ſeeke a conuenient Port in good temperature of aire, making no greater account of Port Royall than of S. Croix, in that which concerneth health. Whereunto the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt being willing to condeſcend, would not tarry for the ſpring time, knowing he ſhould haue other employments to exerciſe himſelfe withall. But ſeeing his ſo wings ended, and his field greene, reſolued himſelfe to make this voyage and diſcouery before winter. So then he diſpoſed all things to that end, and with his Barke ankered neere to the Ionas, to the end to get out in A whale in Port Royall.company. Whileſt they lay there for a proſperous winde the ſpace of three daies, there was a Whale of meane bigneſſe (which the Sauages doe call Maria) who came euery day into the Port, with the morning floud, playing there within at her pleaſure, and went away backe againe with the ebbe. And then, taking ſome leaſure, I made, in French verſes, a farewell to the ſaid Monſieur Du Pont and his company, which I haue placed among the Muſes of New France.
               
                  Parting from Port Royall. The 28. day of the ſaid moneth each of vs tooke his courſe, one one way, and the other another, diuerſly to

Gods keeping. As for Monſieur Du Pont he purpoſed by the way to ſet vpon a Merchant of Rone, named Boyer, who (contrary to the Kings inhibitions) was in thoſe parts to trucke with the Sanages, notwithſtanding he had beene deliuered out of priſon in Rochell, by the conſent of Monſieur De Poutrincourt, vnder promiſe he ſhould not go thither; but the ſaid Boyer was already gone. And as for Monſieur De Poutrincourt, he tooke his courſe for the Ile of S. Croix, the Frenchmens firſt abode, hauing Monſieur De Champdore for maſter and guide of his Barke: But being hindered by the winde, and becauſe his barke did leake, he was forced twice to put backe againe. In the end hee quite paſſed the Bay Françoiſe, and viewed the ſaid Ile, Faire Rie found at S. Croix.
                  where he found ripe Corne, of that which two yeares before was ſowed by Monſieur De Monts, which was faire, big, waighty, and well filled. He ſent vnto vs ſome of that Corne to Port Royall, where I was requeſted to ſtay, to looke to the houſe, and to keepe the reſt of the company there, in concord. Whereunto I did agree (though it was referred to my will) for the aſſurance that we had among our ſelues, that the yeare following we ſhould make our habitation in a warmer country beyond Malebarre, and Their meaning is to plant beyond Malebarre to the Southward. A ditch profitably made.that we ſhould all goe in company, with them that ſhould be ſent to vs out of France. In the meane while I employed my ſelfe in dreſſing the ground, to make incloſures and partitions of Gardens, for to ſow Corne and kitchin hearbes. We cauſed alſo a ditch to be made all about the fort, which was very needfull to receaue the waters and moiſtneſſe, that before did run vnderneath among the rootes of trees, What ſtore of workemen and labourers in New France.that had beene fallen downe: which paraduenture did make the place vnhealthfull. I will not ſtand in deſcribing heere, what each of our other workmen and labourers did particularly make. It ſufficeth that we had ſtore of Ioyners, Carpenters, Maſons, Stone-caruers, Locke-ſmithes, Taylers, Their exerciſe and maner of life.Boord-ſawyers, Mariners, &c. who did exerciſe their trades, which (in doing their duties) were very kindly

vſed, for they were at their owne liberty for three houres Muſſels, Lapſters, Crabs.laboura day. The ouerplus of the time they beſtowed it, in going to gather muſſels, which are at low water in great quantity before the fort, or Lapſters, or Crabs, which are in Port Royall vnder the Rockes in great abundance, or Cockles, which are in euery part in the Oaſe, about the ſhores of the ſaid Port: All that kinde of fiſh is taken without net or boate. Some there were that ſometimes tooke Good prouiſion of wilde-fowle.wilde-fowle, but not being skilfull, they ſpoiled the game. And as for vs, our table was furniſhed by one of Monſieur De Monts men, who prouided for vs in ſuch ſort that we wanted no fowle, bringing vnto vs, ſometimes halfe a doſen of birdes, called by French men, Outards (a kinde of wilde geeſe) ſometimes as many mallardes, or wilde geeſe, white and gray, very often two or three doſen What quantity of bread and wine.of larkes, and other kindes of birds. As for bread, no body felt want thereof, and euery one had three quarts of pure and good wine a day. Which hath continued with vs as long as we haue beene there, ſauing that, when they, who came to fetch vs, in ſtead of bringing commodities vnto vs, helped vs to ſpend our owne (as we ſhall haue occaſion heereafter to deelare) we were forced to reduce that portion to a pinte; and notwithſtanding there was very often ſome thing more of extrordinary. This voyage (for this reſpect) hath beene the beſt voyage of all, whereof we are to giue much praiſes to the ſaid Monſieur De Monts, and his aſſociates Monſieur Macquin and Monſieur Georges 
                  Preſeruatiue againſt the ſickneſſe of New France.of Rochel, in prouiding ſo abundantly for vs. For truely I finde that this Septembrall liquor (I meane wine) is, among other things, a ſoueraigne preſeruatiue againſt the ſickneſſe of that country: And the ſpiceries, to correct the A cleare and pure aire.vice that might be in the aire of that region, which neuertheles I haue alwaies found very cleere and pure, notwithſtanding the reaſons that I may haue alleaged for the ſame, Allowance.ſpeaking heeretofore of the ſame ſickneſſe. For our allowance, we had Peaſe, Beanes, Rice, Prunes, Raiſons, dry

Codde, and ſalt fleſh, beſides Oyle and Butter. But whenſoeuer the Sauages, dwelling neere vs, had taken any quantity of Sturgions, Salmons, or ſmall fiſhes; Item, any Beuers, A kinde of ſtagge or red Deere. The liberall na
                        •
                     ure of the Sauages.
                  Ellans, C
                        ••…
                     abous, (or fallow Deere) or other beaſts, mentioned in my farwell to New France, they brought vnto vs halfe of it: and that which remained they expoſed it ſometimes to ſale publikely, and they that would haue any thereof did trucke bread for it. This was partly our maner of life in thoſe parts. But although euery one of our workemen had his particular trade or occupation, yet for all that it was neceſſary to imploy himſelfe to all vſes, as many did. Some Maſons and Stone-caruers applied themſelues to baking, which made vs as good bread as is made in Paris. Alſo one of our Sawyers, diuers times made Ch
                        •
                     rcoale made in New France.vs Coales in great quantitie.
               Wherein is to be noted a thing that now I remember. It is, that being neceſſary to cut turffes to couer the piles of wood, heaped to make the ſaid coales, there was found in What earth is in the medowes.the medowes three foot deepe of earth, not earth, but graſſe or hearbes mingled with mudde, which haue heaped themſelues yeerely one vpon another from the beginning of the world, not hauing beene mooued. Neuertheleſſe the greene thereof ſerueth for paſture to the Ellans, which we 
                     Ellans in the Medowes.haue many times ſeene in our medowes of thoſe parts, in heards of three or foure, great and ſmall, ſuffering themſelues ſometimes to bee approched, then they ran to the woods: But I may ſay moreouer, that I haue ſeene, in croſſing two leagues of our ſaid medowes, the ſame to be al troden with trackes of Ellans, for I know not there any other clouen footed beaſts. There was killed one of thoſe beaſts, not farre off from our fort, at a place where Monſieur De Monts hauing cauſed the graſſe to be mowed two yeares before, it was growen againe the faireſt of the world. Some might maruell how thoſe medowes are made, ſeeing that all the ground in thoſe places is couered with woods. For ſatisfaction whereof, let the curious reader know, that in

high ſpring tides, ſpecially in March and September, the floud couereth thoſe ſhores, which hindereth the trees there to take root. But euery where, where the water ouerfloweth not, if there be any ground, there are woods.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Their departing fromthe Ile of S. Croix: the baye of Marchin: Choüakoet: vines and grapes: the liberality of the Sauages: the land and people of the Armouchiquois: the cure of an Armouchiquois wounded: the ſimplicitie and ignorance of the people: vices of the Armouchiquois: ſuſpicion: people not caring for clothes: corneſowed, andvines planted in the country of the Armouchiquois: quantitie of grapes: abundance of people: dangerous Sea.
               
               LEt vs returne to Monſieur de Poutrincourt, whom we haue left in the Ile Saint Croix. Hauing made there a reuiew, and cheriſhed the Sauages that were there, he Pemptegoet.went in the ſpace of foure daies to Pemtegoet, which is that place ſo famous vnder the name of Norombega. There needeth not ſo long a time in comming thither, but he taried on the way to mend his barke: for to that end he had brought with him a Smith and a Carpenter, and quantity of boordes. He croſſed the Iles, which be at the Kinibeki.mouth of the riuer, and came to Kinibeki, where his barke was in danger, by reaſon of the great ſtreames that the nature of the place procureth there. This was the cauſe why he made there no ſtay, but paſſed further to the Baie of The bay of Marchin.
                  
                  Marchin, which is the name of a Captaine of the Sauages, who at the arriuall of the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, began to crie out aloud Hé Hé: whereunto the like anſwer was made vnto him. He replied, asking in his language, What are ye? They anſwered him, Friends: And thereupon Monſieur De Poutrincourt approching, treated amity with him, and preſented him with kniues, hatchets, and Matachiaz, that is to ſay, ſcarfes, karkenets and

bracelets made of beades, or quils made of white and blew glaſſe; whereof he was very glad, as alſo for the confederacy Confederacy.that the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt made with him, knowing very well that the ſame would be a great aide and ſupport vnto him. He diſtributed to ſome men that were about him, among a great number of people, the preſents that the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt gaue him, to whom he brought ſtore of Orignac, or Ellans fleſh (for the Baskes doe call a Stagge, or Ellan, Orignac) to refreſh the company with victuals. That done, they ſet ſailes towards Choüakoet, where the riuer of Captaine Olmechin 
                  The riuer of Olmechin. Port De Choüakoet.
                  is, and where the yeare following was made the war of the Souriquois and Etechemius, vnder the conduct of the Sagamos Membertou, which I haue deſcribed in verſes, which verſes I haue inſerted among the Muſes of New-France. At the entry of the Bay of the ſaid place of Choüakoet 
                  An Iland of vines.there is a great Iland, about halfe a league compaſſe, wherein our men did firſt diſcouer any vines (for, although there be ſome in the lands neerer to Port Royall, notwithſtanding there was yet no knowledge had of them) which they found in great quantity, hauing the truncke three and foure foot high, and as bigge as ones fiſt in the lower part, the grapes faire and great, and ſome as bigge as plummes, other leſſer: but as blacke, that they left a ſtaine where their liquor was ſpilled: Thoſe grapes, I ſay, lying ouer buſhes and brambles that grow in the ſame Iland, where the trees are not ſo thicke as in other where, but are ſix or ſeuen rods diſtant a ſunder, which cauſeth the grapes to be ripe the ſooner; hauing beſides a ground very fit for the ſame, grauelly and ſandy. They taried there but two houres: but they noted, that there were no vines on the North-ſide, euen as in the Ile Saint Croix are no Cedar-trees, but on the Weſtſide.
               
                  The riuer of Olmechin.
                   From this Iland they went to the riuer of Olmechin, a Port of Chauakoet, where Marchin and the ſaid Olmechin brought to Monſieur De Poutrincourt a priſoner of the

                  Souriqouis (and therefore their enemy) which they gaue vnto him freely. Two houres after there arriued two Sauages, The galantneſſe of the Sauages. Port de la Heve.
                  the one an Eteſhemin, named Chkoudun, Captaine of the riuer Saint Iohn, called by the Sauages Oigoudi: The other a Souriquois, named Meſſamoet, Captaine or Sagamos of the riuer of the Port De La Heve, where this priſoner was taken. They had great ſtore of Merchandiſes trucked with Frenchmen, which they were comming to vtter, that is to ſay, great, meane, and ſmall kettles, hatchets, kniues, gownes, ſhort cloakes, red waſt coates, bisket, and other things: whereupon there arriued twelue or fifteene boats, The Sauages doe paint their faces.full of Sauages of Olmechins ſubiection, being in very good order, all their faces painted, according to their wonted cuſtome, when they will ſeeme faire, hauing their bow The Oration of Meſſamoet
                  and arrow in hand, and the quiuer, which they laid downe a boord. At that houre Meſſamoet began his Oration before the Sauages: Shewing them, how that in times paſt, they often had friendſhip together: and that they might eaſily ouercome their enemies, if they would haue intelligence and ſerue themſelues with the amitie of the Frenchmen, whom they ſaw there preſent to know their Country, to the end to bring commodities vnto them heereafter, and to ſuccour them with their forces, which forces he knew, and he was the better able to make a demonſtration thereof vnto them, by ſo much that hee which ſpake, had before time beene in France, and dwelt therewith Monſieur De Grandmont, Gouernour of Bayonne. Finally, his ſpeech continued almoſt an houre with 
                     Meſſamoets affection to the French men. The largeſſe and liberality of Meſſamoets.
                  much vehemency and affection, with a geſture of body and armes, as is requiſite in a good Oratour. And in the end he did caſt all his merchandiſes (which were worth aboue 300. crownes, brought into that country) into Olmechin his boat, as making him a preſent of that, in aſſurance of the loue he would witnes vnto him. That done the night haſted on, and euery one retired himſelfe. But Meſſamoet was not pleaſed, for that Olmechin made not the like oration

vnto him, nor requited his preſent: For the Sauages haue The Sauages be liberall.that noble quality, that they giue liberally, caſting at the feet of him whom they wil honor, the preſent that they giue him: But it is with hope to receiue ſome reciprocall kindneſſe, which is a kinde of contract, which we call, without name, I giue thee, to the end thou ſhouldeſt giue me. And that is done thorow all the world. Therefore Meſſamoet from that day had in minde to make war to Olmechin. Notwithſtanding A Corne▪country, beanes, pumpions and grapes.the next day in the morning, he and his people did returne with a boate laden with that which they had, to wit, Corne, Tabacco, Beanes and Pumpions, which they diſtributed heere and there. Thoſe two Captaines Olmechin and Marchin haue ſince beene killed in the wars. In whoſe ſtead was choſen by the Sauages one named Beſſabes, 
                  
                     Beſſabes▪
                      Engliſhmen.which ſince our returne hath beene killed by Engliſhmen: And in ſtead of him they haue made a Captaine to come from within the lands, named Asticou, a graue man, valiant Aſticou.and redoubted, which, in the twinkling of an eye, will gather vp 1000. Sauages together, which thing Olmechin and Marchin might alſo doe. For our Barkes being there, preſently the Sea was ſeene all couered ouer with their boates, laden with nimble and luſty men, holding themſelues vp ſtraight in them: which we cannot doe without danger, thoſe boates being nothing elſe but trees hollowed after the faſhion that we will ſhew you in the booke following. From thence Monſieur De Poutrincourt following on his courſe, found a certaine Port very delightfull, which A very good Port.had not beene ſeene by Monſieur De Monts: And during the voyage they ſaw ſtore of ſmoke, and people on the ſhore, which inuited vs to come aland: And ſeeing that no account was made of it, they followed the barke along The agility of the Armouchiquois. Happy people if they had the knowledge of God.the ſand, yea moſt often they did outgoe her, ſo ſwift are they, hauing their bowes in hand, and their quiuers vpon their backes, alwaies ſinging and dauncing, not taking care with what they ſhould liue by the way. Happy people! Yea, a thouſand times more happy than they which in

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
theſe parts make themſelues to be worſhipped; if they had the knowledge of God and of their ſaluation.
               
                  Fifes. 
                  Monſieur De Poutrincourt hauing landed in this Port, behold among a multitude of Sauages a good number of fifes, which did play with certaine long pipes, made as it were with canes of reedes, painted ouer, but not with ſuch an harmony as our Shepheards might doe: And to ſhew the excellency of their art, they whiſled with their noſes in gambolling, according to their faſhion.
               
                  A Sauage wounded. And as this people did runne headlong, to come to the Barke, there was a Sauage which hurt himſelfe greeuouſly in the heele againſt the edge of a rocke, whereby hee was inforced to remaine in the place. Monſieur De Poutrincourt his Chirurgion, at that inſtant would apply to this hurt that which was of his art, but they would not permit it, vntill they had firſt made their mouthes and mops about Their mouthes and mops about him that was hurt.the wounded man. They then laide him downe on the ground, one of them holding his head on his lap, and made many baulings and ſingings, whereunto the wounded man anſwered but with a Ho, with a complaining voice, which hauing done they yeelded him to the cure of the ſaid Chirurgion, and went their way, and the patient alſo after he had beene dreſſed: but two houres after hee came againe, the moſt iocund in the world, hauing put about his head, the binding cloth, wherewith his heele was wrapped, for to ſeeme the more gallant.
               The day following, our people entred farther into the The preſents of a Sauage woman. Hempe very faire. Beanes. Quantity of grapes.Port, where being gone to ſee the Cabins of the Sauages, an old woman of an hundred or ſix ſcore yeares of age, came to caſt at the feet of Monſieur De Poutrincour, a loafe of bread, made with the wheat called Mahis, or Mais, and in theſe our parts, Turky or Saracin wheat, then very faire hempe of a long growth; Item beanes, and grapes newly gathered, becauſe they had ſeene French men eat of them at Chauakoet. Which the other Sauages ſeeing, that knew it not, they brought more of them than one would, emulating

one another▪ and for recompence of this their kindneſſe, The ſimplicity and ignorance of people.there was ſet on their foreheads a filler, or band, of paper, wet with ſpittle, of which they were very proud. It was ſhewed them, in preſſing the grape into a glaſſe, that of that we did make the wine which we did drinke. Wee would haue made them to eat of the grape, but hauing taken it into their mouthes, they ſpitted it out, ſo ignorant is this people of the beſt thing that God hath giuen to man, next to bread. Yet notwithſtanding they haue no want of wit, and might be brought to doe ſome good things, if they were ciuilized, and had the vſe of handy craftes. But they are ſubtill, theeuiſh, and traiterous, and though they be naked, yet one cannot take heed of their fingers; for if one turne neuer ſo little his eies aſide, and that they ſpie the opportunity to ſteale any knife, hatchet, or any thing elſe, they will not miſſe nor faile of it; and will put the theft between their buttockes, or will hide it within the ſand with their foot ſo cunningly, that one ſhall not perceiue it. Indeed I The bad nature of the Armouchiquois.
                  doe not wonder if a people poore and naked bee theeuiſh; but when the heart is malicious, it is vnexcuſable. This people is ſuch that they muſt be handled with terrour: for Note how the Armouchiquois muſt be dealt withall.if through loue and gentleneſſe, one giue them too free acceſſe, they will practiſe ſome ſurpriſe, as it hath beene knowen in diuers occaſions heeretofore, and will yet heereafter beſeene. And without deferring any longer, the ſecond day after our comming thither, as they ſaw our people buſie awiſhing linnen, they came ſome fifty, one following another, with bowes, arrowes and quiuers, intending to play ſome bad part, as it was coniectured vpon their maner of proceeding; but they were preuented; ſome of our men going to meet them, with their muskets and matches at the cocke, which made ſome of them run away, and the others being compaſſed in, hauing put downe their weapons, came to a Peninſule, or ſmall head of an Iland, where our men were, and making a friendly ſhew, demanded to trucke the Tabacco they had for our merchandiſes.
               
                  
The next day the Captaine of the ſaid place and Port, came into Monſieur De Poutrincourts barke to ſee him: we Suſpition for the comming of Olmechin.
                  did maruell to ſee him accompanied with Olmechin, ſeeing the way was maruellous long to come thither by land, and much ſhorter by ſea. That gaue cauſe of bad ſuſpition, albeit he had promiſed his loue to the Frenchmen. Notwithſtanding they were gently receiued. And Monſieur De Poutrincourt gaue to the ſaid Olmechin a complet garment, wherewith being clothed, he viewed himſelfe in a glaſſe, and did laugh to ſee himſelfe in that order. But a The trouble of garments.little while after, feeling that the ſame hindred him, although it was in October, when he was returned vnto his Cabins, he diſtributed it to ſundry of his men, to the end that one alone ſhould not be ouerpeſtered with it. This ought to be a ſufficient leſſon to ſo many finnical, both men and women, of theſe parts, who cauſe their garments and breſt-plates to be made as hard and ſtiffe as wood, wherein their bodies are ſo miſerably tormented, that they are in their clothes vnable to all good actions. And if the weather be too hot they ſuffer in their great bummes with a thouſand folds, vnſupportable heats, that are more vntolerable, than the torments which felons and criminall men are ſometimes made to feele.
               Now during the time that the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt was there, being in doubt whether Monſieur De Monts would come to make an habitation on that coaſt, as Corne ſowed, and vines planted.he wiſhed it, he made there a peece of ground to be tilled, for to ſow corne and to plant vines, which they did, with the helpe of our Apothecary Maſter Lewes Hebert, a man, who, beſides his experience in his art, taketh great delight in the tilling of the ground. And the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt may be heere compared to good father Noah, who after he had made the tillage moſt neceſſarie for the ſowing of corne, he began to plant the vine, whoſe effects he felt afterwards.
               As they were a deliberating to paſſe farther, Olmechin
                  
came to the Barke to ſee Monſieur De Poutrincourt, where hauing taried certaine houres, either in talking or eating, he ſaid that the next day 100. boates ſhould come, containing 100. boates of Sauages.euery one ſix men: but the comming of ſuch a number of men, being but troubleſome, Monſieur De Poutrincourt would not tarry for them; but went away the ſame 
                     Malebarre. Perill of ſholdes.day to Malebarre, not without much difficultie, by reaſon of the great ſtreames and ſholds that are there. So that the Barke hauing touched at three foot of water onely, we thought to be caſt away, and we began to vnlade her, and put the victuals into the Shaloup, which was behinde, for to ſaue vs on land: but being no full ſea, the barke came aflote within an houre. All this Sea is a land ouerflowed, as that of Mount Saint Michels, a ſandy ground, in which, all that reſteth is a plaine flat country as far as the Mountaines, which are ſeene 15. leagues off from that place. And I am of opinion, that as far as Virginia, it is all Note. Great quantity of grapes.alike. Moreouer, there is heere great quantity of grapes, as before, and a country very full of people. Monſieur De Monts being come to Malebarre in an other ſeaſon of the yeare, gathered onely greene grapes; which he made to be preſerued, and brought ſome to the King. But it was our good hap to come thither in October, for to ſee the Heereupon chap. 7.maturity thereof. I haue heere before ſhewed the difficulty that is found in entering into Malebarre. This is the cauſe why Monſieur De Poutrincourt came not in with his Barke, but went thither with a ſhaloup onely, which thirty or forty Sauages did helpe to draw in: and when it was full tide (but the tide doth not Two fadames tide onely.mount heere but two fadames high, which is ſeldome ſeene) he went out, and retired himſelfe into his ſaid barke, to paſſe further in the morning, as ſoone as hee ſhould ordaine it.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  Dangers: vnknowen languages: the making of a forge, and of an ouen: Croſſes ſet vp: plenty: a conſpiracy: diſobedience: murther: the flight of three hundred againſt tenne: the agility of the Armouchiquois: bad company dangerous: the accident of a Musket that did burſt: the inſolency of the Sauages: their timoroſity, impiety, and flight: the fortunate Port: a bad ſea: reuenge: the counſell and reſolution for the returne: new perils: Gods fauours: the arriuall of Monſieur De Poutrincourt at Port Royall: and how he was receiued.
               
               THe night beginning to giue place to the dawning of the day, the ſailes are hoiſed vp, but it was but a very perilous nauigation. For with this ſmall veſſell Danger.they were forced to coaſt the land, where they found no depth: going backe to ſea it was yet woorſe: in ſuch wiſe that they did ſtrike twice or thrice, being raiſed vp againe onely by the waues, and the rudder was broken, which was a dreadfull thing. In this extremity they were conſtrained to caſt anker in the ſea, at two fadams deepe, and three leagues off from the land. Which being done, Daniel Hay (a man which taketh pleaſure in ſhewing foorth his vertue in the perils of the ſea) was ſent towards the Coaſt to view it, and ſee if there were any Port. And as he was neere land he ſaw a Sauage, which did daunce, ſinging yo, yo, yo, he called him to come neerer, and by 
                     Oigoudi, or S. Iohns riuer. Sauages of ſundry nations, vnderſtand not one another.ſignes asked him if there were any place to retire ſhips in, and where any freſh water was. The Sauage hauing made ſigne there was, he tooke him into his ſhaloup, and brought him to the Barke, wherein was Chkoudun Captaine of the riuer of Oigoudi, otherwiſe Saint Iohns riuer; who being brought before this Sauage, he vnderſtood him no more

than did our owne people: true it is, that by ſignes he comprehended better than they what he would ſay. This Sauage ſhewed the places, where no depth was, and where was any, and did ſo well indenting and winding heere and there, alway the led in hand, that in the end they came to the Port ſhewed by him, where ſmall depth is: wherein the barke being arriued, diligence was vſed to make a forge A forge and an ouen made.for to mend her with her rudder, and an ouen to bake bread, becauſe there was no more bisket left.
               Fifteene daies were imployed in this worke, during the which Monſieur De Poutrincourt, according to the laudable A creſſe ſet vp.cuſtome of Chriſtians, made a Croſſe to be framed and ſet vp, vpon a greene bancke, as Monſieur De Monts had done two yeeres before at Kinibeki and Malebarre. Now among theſe painefull exerciſes they gaue not ouer makeing good cheere, with that which both the ſea and the land might furniſh in that part. For in this Port is plentie of fowle, in taking of which many of our men applied themſelues: ſpecially the ſea larkes are there in ſo great flights that Monſieur De Poutrincourt killed 28. of them with one Abundance of larkes and fiſhes.Caliuer ſhot. As for fiſhes, there be ſuch abundance of Porpeſes, and another kinde of fiſh, called by Frenchmen Soufleurs, that is to ſay, Blowers, that the ſea ſeemes to be all couered ouer with them. But they had not the things neceſſary for this kinde of fiſhing, they contented themſelues then with ſhell-fiſh, as of Oyſters, Skalops, periwincles, Shell-fiſh.whereof there was enough to be ſatisfied. The Sauages of the other ſide did bring fiſh, and grapes within Grapes. Ruſh-baskets.baskets made of ruſhes, for to exchange with ſome of our wares. The ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt ſeeing the grapes there, maruellouſly faire, commanded him that waited on his chamber, to lay vp in the Barke a burthen of the vines from whence the ſaid grapes were taken. Our Apothecary M. Lewes Hebert, deſirous to inhabit in thoſe countries, had pulled out a good quantity of them, to the end to plant them in Port Royall, where none o
                     •
                   them are, although

the ſoyle be there very fit for vines. Which neuertheleſſe (by a dull forgetfulneſſe) was not done, to the great diſcontent of the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt and of vs all.
               After certaine daies, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, ſeeing there great aſſembly of Sauages, came aſhore, and to giue them ſome terrour, made to march before him one The triall of French weapons before the Sauages.of his men, flouriſhing with two naked ſwords. Whereat they much wondred, but yet much more when they ſaw that our Muskets did pierce thicke peeces of wood, where their arrowes could not ſo much as ſcratch. And therefore they neuer aſſailed our men, as long as they kept watch. And it had beene good to ſound the Trumpet at euery Good inſtruction.houres end, as Captaine Iames Quartier did. For (as Monſieur De Poutrincourt doth often ſay) One muſt neuer laie bait for theeues, meaning that one muſt neuer giue cauſe to an enemy to thinke that he may ſurpriſe you: But one muſt alwaies ſhew that he is miſtruſted, and that you are not aſleepe, chiefely when one hath to doe with Sauages, which will neuer ſet vpon him that reſolutely expects them; which was not performed in this place by them that bought the bargain of their negligence very deare, as we will now tell you.
               
                  See in the next booke. Fifteene daies being expired, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt ſeeing his barke mended, and nothing remaining Signes of conſpiracy.to be done, but a batch of bread, he went ſome 3. leagues diſtant within the land, to ſee if he might diſcouer any ſingularity: But in his returne he and his men perceaued the Sauages running away thorow the woods in diuers troupes of 20. 30. and more; ſome bowing themſelues as men that would not be ſeene: others hiding themſelues in the graſſe not to be perceiued: others carrying away their ſtuffe, and Canowes full of corne, for to betake them to their heeles: Beſides the women tranſporting their children, and ſuch ſtuffe as they could with them. Thoſe actions gaue cauſe to Monſieur De Poutrincourt to thinke that this people did

plot ſome bad enterpriſe. Therefore being arriued he commanded his people, which were a making of bread, to retire themſelues into their Barke. But as yong people doe Yong men diſobedient.often forget their duty, theſe hauing ſome cake, or ſuch like thing, to make, had rather follow their likeriſh appetite, than to doe that which was commanded them, taried till night without retiring themſelues. About midnight Monſieur De Poutrincourts care.
                  
                  Monſieur De Poutrincourt thinking vpon that which had paſſed the day before, did aske whether they were in the barke; and hearing they were not, he ſent the ſhaloupe vnto them, to command and bring them aboord, whereto Diſobedience.they diſobaied, except his Chamberlain, who feared his maſter. They were fiue, armed with muskets and ſwords, which were warned to ſtand ſtill vpon their guard, and yet (being negligent) made not any watch, ſo much were they addicted to their owne wils. The report was, that they had before ſhot off two muskets vpon the Sauages, bicauſe that ſome one of them had ſtolne a hatchet. Finally, thoſe Sauages, either prouoked by that, or by their bad nature, came at the breake of day without any noiſe (which was very eaſie to them, hauing neither horſes, waggons nor woodden-ſhooes) euen to the place where they were aſleepe: And ſeeing a fit opportunity to play a bad part, Murther done by the Sauages.they ſet vpon them with ſhots of arrowes, and clubs, and killed two of them. The reſt being hurt began to crie out, running towards the ſea ſhoare. Then hee which kept watch within the barke, cried out all affrighted, O Lord! our men are killed, our men are killed. At this voice and cry, euery one roſe vp, and haſtily, not taking leaſure to fit on their cloathes, nor to ſet fire to their matches, ten of Succour▪
                  them went into the ſhaloup, whoſe names I do not remember, but of Monſieur Champlein, Robert Grauè (Monſieur Du Pont his ſonne) Daniel Hay, the Chirurgion, the Apothecary, and the Trumpeter: All which (following the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, who had his ſonne with him) came aland vnarmed. But the Sauages ran away as

faſt as euer they could, though they were aboue three hundred, beſides them that were hidden in the graſſe (according to their cuſtome) which appeared not. Wherein is to be noted how God fixeth, I know not what terror in the face of the faithfull, againſt infidels and miſcreants, according to his ſacred word, when he ſaith to his choſen people: 
                     Deutero. 11. verſ. 25.
                  None ſhal be able to ſtand before you. The Lord your God ſhall put a terrour and feare of you ouer all the earth, vpon which you ſhall march. So we ſee that 135000. Madianites, 
                  
                     Iudges 7. 8.able fighting men, ran away and killed one another before Gedeon, which had but 300. men. Now to thinke to follow after theſe Sauages, it had beene but labour loſt, for they 
                     Armouchiquois be ſwift.are too ſwift in running: But if one had Horſes there, they might pay them home very ſoundly, for they haue a number of ſmall paths, leading from one place to another (which is not in Port Royall) and their woods are not ſo thicke, and haue beſides ſtore of open land.
               Whileſt that Monſieur De Poutrincourt was comming aſhore, there was ſhot from the Barke ſome ſmall caſt peeces vpon ſome Sauages, that were vpon a little hill, and ſome of them were ſeene fall downe, but they be ſo nimble in ſauing their dead men, that one knew not what iudgement The burying of the dead.to make of it. The ſaid Monſieur de Poutrincourt, ſeeing he could get nothing by purſuing of them, cauſed pits to be made to bury them that were dead, which I haue ſaid to be two, but there was one that died at the waters ſide, thinking to ſaue himſelfe, and a fourth man which was ſo ſorely wounded with arrow ſhots, that hee died being brought to Port Royall; the fifth man had an arrow ſticking in his breſt, yet did ſcape death for that time: But it had beene better he had died there: for one hath lately tolde vs that he was hanged in the habitation that Monſieur De Monts maintaineth at Kebeck in the great riuer of Conſpiracy.Canada, hauing beene the author of a conſpiracy made againſt his Captaine Monſieur Champlein, which is now there. And as for this miſchiefe it hath beene procured by

the folly and diſobedience of one, whom I will not name, becauſe he died there, who plaied the cocke and ringleader Leaud companie caſteth yoong men away.among the yong men that did too lightly beleeue him, which otherwiſe were of a reaſonable good nature; and becauſe one would not make him drunke, he ſware (according to his cuſtome) that hee would not returne into the Barke, which alſo came to paſſe. For the ſelfeſame was Raſh oathes take ſometimes effect to the coſts of the ſwearers. Accident by a Musket burſt.found dead, his face on the ground, hauing a little dogge vpon his backe, both of them ſhot together, and pierced thorow with one and the ſelfeſame arrow.
               In this bad occurrence, Monſieur Du Ponts Sonne, aboue named, had three of his fingers cut off, with a ſplint of a musket, which being ouer charged did burſt, which troubled the company very much, that was afflicted enough by other occaſions: Neuertheleſſe the laſt dutie towards the dead was not neglected, which were buried at the foot of the Croſſe that had beene there planted▪ as is before ſaid. The inſolencie of the Sauages.But the inſolencie of this Barbarous people was great, after the murthers by them committed; for that as our men did ſing ouer our dead men, the funerall ſeruice and praiers accuſtomed in the church, theſe raskals, I ſay, did dance and howled a far off, reioycing for their traiterous trecherie, and therefore, though they were a great number, they The timorouſneſſe of the Sauages.aduentured not themſelues to come and aſſaile our people, who, hauing at their leaſure done what we haue ſaid before, becauſe the ſea waxed very low, retired themſelues vnto the Barke, wherein remained Monſieur Champdorè, for the gard thereof. But being low water, and hauing no The impiety of the Sauages.meanes to come aland, this wicked generation came againe to the place where they had committed the murther, pulled vp the Croſſe, digged out and vnburied one of the dead corps, tooke away his ſhirt, and put it on them, ſhewing their ſpoiles that they had carried away: And beſides all this, turning their backes towards the Barke, did caſt ſand with their two hands betwixt their buttockes in deriſion, howling like woolues: which did maruellouſly vex our

people, which ſpared no caſt peeces ſhots at them; but the diſtance was very great, and they had already that ſubtilty as to caſt themſelues on the ground when they ſaw the fire put at it, in ſuch ſort that one knew not whether they had beene hurt or no, ſo that our men were forced, nill or will, to drinke that bitter potion, attending for the tide, which being come, and ſufficient to carry them aland, as ſoone as they ſaw our men enter into the ſhaloup, they ran away The Sauages ſlight. The courage of the Sagamos Schkoudun.
                  as ſwift as gray-hounds, truſting themſelues on their agilitie. There was with our men a Sagamos named Schkoudun, ſpoken of before, who much diſliked their prankes, and would alone goe and fight againſt all this multitude, but they would not permit him, ſo they ſet vp the Croſſe againe with reuerence, and the body which they had digged vp was buried againe, and they named this Port, Port Fortunè.
                  Port Fortunè.
               
               The next day they hoiſed vp ſailes, to paſſe further and diſcouer new lands, but the contrary winde conſtrained them to put backe, and to come againe into the ſaid Port. The other next day after, they attempted againe to goe farther, but in vaine, and they were yet forced to put backe vntill the winde ſhould be fit. During theſe attempts, the Sauages (thinking, I beleeue, that that which had paſſed betweene vs was but a ieſt and a play) would needs come againe familiarly vnto vs, and offered to truck, diſſembling that they were not them that had done thoſe villanies, but others, which, they ſaid, were gone away. But they were not aware of the fable, how the Storke being taken among the Cranes, which were found doing ſome dammage, was puniſhed as the others, notwithſtanding ſhe pleaded that ſhe was ſo far from doing any harme, that contrariwiſe ſhe did purge the ground from Serpents, which ſhe did eat. Monſieur De Poutrincourt then ſuffered The ſhelles of mother of pearles.them to approch, and made as though he would accept of their wares, which were Tabacco, Carkenets and bracelets made with the ſhels of a fiſh called Vignaux (and Eſurgni
                  
by Iames Quartier in the diſcouery of his ſecond voyage) of great eſteeme among them: Item of their Corne, beanes, bowes, arrowes, quiuers, and other ſmall traſh. And as the ſociety was renued the ſaid Poutrincourt commanded Stratagem.to nine or ten that were with him, to make the matches of their Muskets round, like to a round ſnare, and that when he ſhould giue a ſigne, euery one ſhould caſt his ſtring vpon the Sauages head that ſhould be neere him, and ſhould catch him, euen as the hangman doth with him that he hath in hand: And for the effecting of this, that halfe of his people ſhould goe aland, whileſt the Sauages were buſie a trucking in the ſhaloup: which was done; but the execution was not altogether according to his deſire. For he intended to ſerue himſelfe with them that ſhould be taken, as of ſlaues to grind at the hand-mill and to cut wood; wherein they failed by ouer much haſte. Neuertheleſſe ſix Reuenge.or ſeuen of them were cut in peeces, which could not ſo well run in the water as on the land, and were watched at the paſſage, by thoſe of our men that were aland.
               That done, the next day they indeuored to goe farther, although the winde was not good, but they went but a little forward, and ſaw onely an Iland ſix or ſeuen leagues off, to which there was no meanes to come, and it was called L'ile douteuſe, the doubtfull Ile, which being conſidered, L'ile douteuſe.and that of one ſide the want of victuals was to be feared, and of the other that the winter might hinder their courſe, and beſides they had two ſicke men, of whom there was no hope of recouery; counſell being taken it was reſolued Reſolution for the returne.to returne into Port Royall: Monſieur De Poutrincourt beſides all this, being yet in care for them whom he had left there, ſo they came againe for the third time into Port Fortunè, where no Sauage was ſeene.
               Vpon the firſt winde, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt weighed anker for the returne, and being mindfull of the Their returne. Perill.dangers paſſed he ſailed in open ſea: which ſhortned his courſe, but not without a great miſchiefe of the rudder,

which was againe broken: in ſuch ſort that being at the mercy of the waues, they arriued in the end, as well as they could among the Ilands of Norombega where they mended it. And after their departure from the ſaid Ilands they came Menane.to Menane, an Iland about ſix leagues in length, betweene S. Croix and Port Royall, where they taried for the winde, which being come ſomewhat fauourable, parting from Perill.thence new miſchances happened. For the ſhaloup being tied at the Barke, was ſtricken with a ſea ſo roughly, that with her noſe, ſhee brake all the hinder part of the ſaid barke, wherein Monſieur De Poutrincourt and others were. And moreouer not being able to get to the paſſage of the A very ſwift current.ſaid Port Royall, the tide (which runneth ſwiftly in that place) carried them towards the bottom of Bay Françoiſe, from whence they came not foorth eaſily, and they were in as great danger as euer they were before, for as much as ſeeking to returne from whence they came, they ſaw themſelues Perill.carried with the winde and tide towards the Coaſt, which is high rockes and downe fales, where, vnleſſe they had doubled a certaine point that threatned them of wrake they had beene caſt away. But God will, in high enterpriſes, trie the conſtancy of them that fight for his name, and ſee if they will wauer: He bringeth them to the doore of death, and yet holdeth them by the hand, to the end they Deut. 32. ver. 39.fall not into the pit, as it is written: It is I, it is I, and there is none other God with me. I kill, and make a liue: I wound, and I heale: and there is no body that may deliuer any out of my hand. So we haue ſaid heeretofore, and ſeene by effect, that although in thoſe Nauigations a thouſand dangers haue preſented themſelues, notwithſtanding not one man hath beene loſt by the ſea, although that of them, which doe onely go for fiſhing, and to trade for skins, many there be that periſh there: witneſſe foure fiſher men of S. Maloe, that were ſwallowed vp in the waters, being gone afiſhing, Good conſiderations.when as we were vpon our returne into France: God being willing that we ſhould acknowledge to hold this benefit

of him, and to manifeſt by that meanes his glory, to the end that ſenſibly men may ſee that it is he, which is the author of theſe holy enterpriſes, which are not made of couetonſnes, nor by vniuſt effuſion of blood, but of a zeale to eſtabliſh his name and his greatneſſe among nations that haue no knowledge of him. Now after ſo many heauenly fauours, it is the part of them that haue receiued them, to ſay as the Kingly Pſalmiſt, well beloued of God:
               
                  
                     Pſal. 73. verſ. 23. 24. Yet neuertheleſſe by thy right hand thou holdſt me euer faſt:
                  And with thy counſell doſt me guide to glory at the laſt.
                  What thing is there that I can wiſh but thee in Heauen aboue?
                  And in the Earth there is nothing like thee that I can loue.
               
               After many perils (which I will not compare to them of 
                     Ʋlyſſes, nor of Aeneas, fearing to defile our holy voyages The arriuall of Monſieur De Poutrincourt.
                  with prophane impurity) Monſieur De Poutrincourt arriued in Port Royall the 14. day of Nouember, where we receiued him ioyfully, and with a ſolemnity altogether new in that part. For about the time that we expected his returne (with great deſire, and that ſo much the more, that if any harme had happened him, we had beene in danger to haue confuſion among our ſelues) I aduiſed my ſelfe to ſhew ſome iollity going to meet him, as we did. And for as much as it was in French verſes made in haſte, I haue placed them with the Muſes of Noua Francia by the title of Neptunes Theater, whereunto I refer the Reader. Moreouer to giue greater honour to the returne, and to our action, we did place ouer the gate of our Fort, the Armes of France, enuironed with Laurell Crownes (whereof there is great ſtore along the woods ſides) with the Kings poeſie, Duo protegit vnus. And vnder, the Armes of Monſieur De Monts, with this inſcription, Dabit Deus his quoque finem: And thoſe of Monſieur De Poutrincourt, with this other inſcription, Inuia virtuti nulla est via, both of them alſo enuironed with garlands of Bayes.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  The condition of the corne which they ſowed: the inſtitution of the order of Bon temps: the behauiour of the Sauages among the Frenchmen: the ſtate of winter: why raines and fogges be rare in this ſeaſon: why raine is frequent betweene the tropicks: ſnow profitable to the ground: the ſtate of Ianuary: conformity of weather in the ancient and New France: Why the ſpring is ſlow: the tilling of gardens: their Crop: a water Mill: a Manna of Herrings: preparation for the returne: Monſieur De Poutrincourts inuention: the Sauages admiration: Newes from France.
               
               THe publike reioycing being finiſhed, Monſieur De Poutrincourt had a care to ſee his corne, the greateſt part whereof he had ſowed two leagues off from our Fort, vp the riuer L' Equille: and the other part about our The ſtate of Corne.ſaid Fort: and found that which was firſt ſowen very forward, but not the laſt, that had beene ſowed the ſixth and ten daies of Nouember, which notwithſtanding did grow vnder the ſnow, during Winter, as I haue noted it in my ſowings. It would be a tedious thing to particulariſe all that was done amongſt vs during Winter: as to tell how the Coales. The vſe of the compaſſe in land voiages.ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt cauſed many times coales to be made, the forge-coale being ſpent: That he cauſed waies to be made thorow the woods: That we went thorow the Foreſts by the guide of the Compaſſe, and other things of ſuch nature. But I will relate that, for to keepe vs merry and cleanly, concerning victuals, there was an order The inſtitution of the order of Bon temps.
                  eſtabliſhed at the table of the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, which was named L' ordre de bon temps, the order of good time (or the order of mirth) at firſt inuented by Monſieur Champlein, wherein they (who were of the ſame

table) were euery one at his turne and day (which was in fifteene daies once) Steward and Cater. Now his care was that we ſhould haue good and worſhipfull fare, which was ſo well obſerued, that (although the Belly-Gods of theſe parts doe often reproch vnto vs that we had not La Rue 
                  
                     La Rue aux Ours, or Beare ſtreet, is, as Pie-corner, or ſuch a Cooke place in London.
                  aux Ours of Paris with vs) we haue ordinarily had there, as good cheare as we could haue at La Rue aux Ours, and at farre leſſer charges. For there was none, but (two daies before his turne came) was carefull to goe ahunting or fiſhing, and brought ſome dainty thing, beſides that which was of our ordinary allowance. So well, that at breakfaſt we neuer wanted ſome modicum or other, of fiſh or fleſh: and at the repaſt of dinners and ſuppers, yet leſſe; for it was the great banquet, where the Gouernour of the feaſt, or Steward (whom the Sauages doe call Atoctegi) hauing made the Cooke to make all things ready, did march with his napkin on his ſhoulder, and his ſtaffe of office in his hand, with the colar of the order about his necke, which was worth aboue foure crownes, and all them of the order following of him, bearing euery one a diſh. The like alſo was at the bringing in of the fruit, but not with ſo great a traine. And at night after grace was ſaid, he reſigned the Colar of the order, with a cup of wine, to his ſucceſſor in that charge, and they dranke one to another. I haue heeretofore ſaid that we had abundance of fowle, as Mallards, Outards, Geeſe, gray and whit, Partriges and other birds: Item, of Ellans (or ſtagge fleſh) of Caribous (or Deere) Beuers, Otters, Beares, Rabbets, Wilde-cats (or Leopards) Nibachès and ſuch like, which the Sauages did take, wherwith we made as good diſhes of meat, as in the Cookes ſhops that be in La rue aux Ours (Beare ſtreet) and greater ſtore: for of all meates none is ſo tender as Ellans fleſh (whereof we made good paſties) nor ſo delicate as the Beuerstaile. Yea we haue had ſometimes halfe a doſen Sturgions Store of Sturgions.at one clap, which the Sauages did bring to vs, part whereof we did take, paying for it, and the reſt was permitted

them to ſell publikely, and to truck it for bread, Before in chap. 13.whereof our people had abundantly. And as for the ordinarie meat brought out of France, that was diſtributed equally, as much to the leaſt as to the biggeſt. And the like with wine, as we haue ſaid. In ſuch actions we had alwaies 20. or 30. Sauages, men, women, girles and boies, The vſage of the Sauages.who beheld vs doing our offices. Bread was giuen them gratis, as we doe heere to the poore. But as for the Sagamos Membertou and other Sagamos (when any came to vs) they ſat at table eating and drinking as we did: and we tooke pleaſure in ſeeing them, as contrariwiſe their abſence was irkeſome vnto vs: as it came to paſſe three or foure times that all went away to the places where they knew that game and Veniſon was, and brought one of our men with them, who liued ſome ſix weekes as they did without ſalt, without bread and without wine, lying on the ground The Sauages haue care of the Frenchmen.vpon skinnes, and that in ſnowy weather. Moreouer they had greater care of him (as alſo of others that haue often gone with them) than of themſelues, ſaying, that if they ſhould chance to die, it would be laid to their charges to haue killed them: And heereby it may be knowen that we were not (as it were) pent vp in an Iland as Monſieur De Villegagnon was in Brafill. For this people loue Frenchmen, and would all, at a neede, arme themſelues for to maintaine them.
               But, to vſe no digreſſion, ſuch gouernment as we haue ſpoken of, did ſerue vs for preſeruatiues againſt the country Mortality.diſeaſe. And yet foure of ours died in February and March, of them who were of a fretful conditiō, or ſluggiſh. Bad winde.And I remember I obſerued that all had their lodgings on the Weſt ſide, and looking towards the wide open Port, which is almoſt foure leagues long, ſhaped ouale-wiſe, beſides they had, all of them, ill bedding. For the former ſickneſſes, and the going away of Monſieur Du Pont, in that maner as we haue ſaid, cauſed the quilt beds to be caſt away, for they were rotten. And they that went with the

ſaid Monſieur Du Pont carried away the ſheetes and blankets, challenging them as theirs. So that ſome of our people had ſore mouthes, and ſwollen legges, like to the Phthiſiques: 
                  
                     Phthiſies. Numbers. 11. verſ. 33. and Pſalm. 106. verſ. 
                        •
                     5.which is the ſickneſſe that God ſent to his people in the deſert, in puniſhment for that they would fill themſelues with fleſh, not contenting themſelues with that whereof the deſert furniſhed them by the diuine prouidence.
               
                  The ſtate of Winter weather. Why raines and miſts be ſcarſe in winter. We had faire weather almoſt during all the Winter. For neither raines nor fogges are ſo frequent there as heere, whether it be at ſea or on the land: The reaſon is, becauſe the Sunne beames, by the long diſtance, haue not the force to raiſe vp vapours from the ground heere, chiefely in a country all woody. But in Summer it doth, both from the ſea and the land, when as their force is augmented, and thoſe vapours are diſſolued ſuddenly or ſlowly, according as one approcheth to the Equinoctial line. For we ſee that Why it raineth between the Tropiques.
                  betweene the two Tropiques it raineth in more abundance both at ſea and on the land, ſpecially in Peru and Mexico, than in Africa, becauſe the Sunne by ſo long ſpace of ſea, hauing drawen vp much moiſtnes from the maine Ocean, hee diſſolueth them in a moment by the great force of his heat; where contrariwiſe towards the New found lands they maintaine themſelues along time in the aire, before they be turned into raine or be diſperſed: which is done in Summer (as we haue ſaid) and not in winter: and at ſea more than on the land. For on the land the morning miſts ſerue for a dew, and fall about eight a clocke: and at ſea they dure two, three, and eight daies, as oftentimes wee haue tried.
               Seeing then wee are ſpeaking of Winter, wee ſay that raines being in thoſe parts rare, in that ſeaſon, the Sunne likewiſe ſhineth there very faire, after the fall of ſnowes, which we haue had ſeuen or eight times, but it is eaſily melted in open places, and the longeſt abiding haue beene Snow is profitable.in February. How ſo euer it be, the ſnow is very profitable

for the fruits of the earth, to preſerue them againſt the froſt, and to ſerue them as a fur-gowne. Which is done by the admirable prouidence of God for the preſeruation of men, and as the Pſalme ſaith,
               
                  
                     Pſal. 147. verſ. 16. He giueth Snow like wooll, hore froſt
                  Like aſhes he doth ſpread,
                  Like morſels caſts his Ice.
               
               And as the skie is ſeldome couered with clouds towards New found landes in Winter time, ſo are there morning Froſts when they are.froſtes, which doe increaſe in the end of Ianuary, Februarie and in the beginning of March, for vntill the very time of Ianuarie, we kept vs ſtill in our dublets: And I remember The ſtate of Ianuary.that on a Sunday, the 14. day of that Moneth, in the afternoone, we ſported our ſelues ſinging in muſike vpon the riuer L' Equille, and in the ſame moneth we went to ſee the Corne two leagues off from our fort, and did dine merily in the Sunn-ſhine: I would not for all that ſay, that all other Conformity of weather in Eaſt and Weſt France.yeares were like vnto this. For as that winter was as milde in theſe parts, theſe laſt Winters of the yeares 1607. 1608. haue beene the hardeſt that euer was ſeene; it hath alſo been a like in thoſe countries, in ſuch ſort that many Sauages died through the rigor of the weather, as in theſe our parts many poore people & trauellers haue been killed through the ſame hardneſſe of Winter weather. But I will ſay, that the yeare before we were in New France, the Winter had not beene ſo hard, as they which dwelt there before vs haue teſtified vnto me.
               Let this ſuffice for that which concerneth the winter ſeaſon. But I am not yet fully ſatisfied in ſearching the cauſe, why in one and the ſelfeſame parallell the ſeaſon is in thoſe Wherefore is the ſeaſon late.parts of New France more ſlow by a moneth than in theſe parts, and the leaues appeare not vpon the trees but towards the end of the Moneth of May: vnleſſe we ſay that the thickneſſe of the woods and greatneſſe of Forreſts doe hinder the Sunne from warming of the ground: Item, that the country where we were is ioyning to the ſea, and therby

more ſubiect to cold, as participating of Peru, a country likewiſe cold, in regard of Africa: And beſides that, this land hauing neuer beene tilled is the more dampiſh, the trees and plants not being able eaſily to draw ſap from their mother the earth. In recompence whereof the Winter there is alſo more ſlow, as wee haue heererofore ſpoken.
               
                  Dreſſing of gardens. The cold being paſſed, about the end of March the beſt diſpoſed amongſt vs ſtriued who ſhould beſt till the ground, and make gardens, to ſow in them, and gather fruits thereof. Which was to very good purpoſe, for we found great diſcommodity in the Winter for want of garden hearbes. When euery one had done his ſowing, it was Good crop from the ground.a maruellous pleaſure in ſeeing them daily grow and ſpring vp, and yet greater contentment to vſe thereof ſo abundantly as we did: ſo that this beginning of good hope made vs almoſt to forget our natiue country, and eſpecially when the fiſh began to haunt freſh-water, and came abundantly Abundance of fiſhes.into our brookes, in ſuch innumerable quantity that we knew not what to doe with it. Which thing when I conſider, I cannot wonder enough how it is poſſible that they which haue beene in Florida haue ſuffered ſo great famins, conſidering the temperature of the aire, which is there, almoſt, without Winter, and that their famine began in the moneths of April, May and Iune, wherein they could want for no fiſh.
               
                  The care of Monſieur De Poutrincourt in prouiding for them that ſhould come after him. The building of a water-Mill. Whileſt ſome laboured on the ground, Monſieur De Poutrincourt made ſome buildings to be prepared, for to lodge them which he hoped ſhould ſucceed vs. And conſidering how troubleſome the hand mill was, he cauſed a water-mill to be made, which cauſed the Sauages to admire much at it. For indeed it is an inuention which came not into the ſpirit of men from the firſt ages After that, our workmen had much reſt, for the moſt part of them did almoſt nothing. But I may ſay that this Mill, by the diligence of our Millers, did furniſh vs with three times more Herrings

                  Abundance o
                        •
                      Herrings. Pilchers. then was needfull vnto vs for our ſuſtenance. Monſieur De Poutrincourt made two Hogſheads full of them to bee ſalted, and one hogſhead of Sardines, or Pilchers to bring into France for a ſhew, which were left in our returne at S. Maloes, to ſome Merchants.
               Among all theſe things the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt did not neglect to thinke on his returne. Which was the part of a wiſeman, for one muſt neuer put ſo much truſt in mens promiſes, but one muſt conſider that very often many diſaſters doe happen to them in a ſmall moment Preparation for the returne.of time. And therefore, euen in the Moneth of Aprill, he made two Barkes to be prepared, a great one and a ſmall one, to come to ſeeke out French-ſhips towards Campſeau, or New-found-land, if it ſhould happen that no ſupply ſhould come vnto vs. But the Carpentry-worke being finiſhed, one onely inconuenience might hinder vs, that is, Great ouerſight. Monſieur De Poutrincourt his inuention.we had no pitch to calke our veſſels. This (which was the chiefeſt thing) was forgotten at our departure from Rochel. In this important neceſſity, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt aduiſed himſelfe to gather in the woods quantity of the gumme iſſuing from Firre-trees. Which he did with much labour, going thither himſelfe, moſt often with a boy or two: ſo that in the end he got ſome hundred pounds weight of it. Now after theſe labours, it was not yet all, for it was needfull to melt and purifie the ſame, which was a neceſſary point and vnknowen to our ſhip-Maſter Monſieur De Champ-dorè, and to his Mariners, for as much as, that the pitch we haue, commeth from Norwege, Suedland, 
                  Bricke made in New France.and Danzick. Neuertheleſſe the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt found the meanes to draw out the quinteſſence of theſe gummes and Firre-tree barkes: and cauſed quantity of brickes to be made, with the which he made an open furnance, wherein he put a limbecke made with many kettles, ioyned one in the other, which he filled with thoſe gums and barkes: Then being well couered, fire was put round about it, by whoſe violence the gum encloſed within

the ſaid lembeckemelted, and dropped downe into a baſon; but it was needfull to be very watchfull at it, by reaſon that if the fire had taken hold of the gum, all had beene loſt. That was admirable, eſpecially in a man that neuer ſaw any made. Whereof the Sauages being aſtonied did ſay, in words borrowed from the Baſques, Endia chauè 
                  Why the Sauages call all French men Normands.
                  Normandia, that is to ſay, that the Normands know many things. Now they call all Frenchmen Normands, except the Baſques, becauſe the moſt part of fiſhermen that goe afiſhing there, be of that nation. This remedy came very fitly vnto vs, for thoſe which came to ſeeke vs were fallen into the ſame want that we were.
               Now, as he which is in expectation hath neither contentment nor reſt vntill he hath that which he deſireth; likewiſe our men, in this ſeaſon had often their eies vpon the great compaſſe of Port Royall, to ſee if they might diſcouer any ſhip a comming; wherein they were oftentimes deceiued, imagining ſometimes they had heard a Canonſhot, other while to perceiue a ſaile: and very often taking the Sauages boates, that came to ſee vs, for French ſhaloups. For at that time great number of Sauages aſſembled themſelues at the paſſage of the ſaid Port to goe to the wars againſt the Armouchiquois, as we Newes out of France.will declare in the booke following. Finally, that which was ſo much expected and wiſhed for, came at length, and we had newes out of France, on the Aſcenſion day in the forenoone.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  The arriuall of the French: Monſieur De Monts his ſociety is broken, and why: the couetouſneſſe of them that doe rob the dead: bonfires for the natiuity of the Duke of Orleans: the departing of the Sauages to goe to warres: Sagamos Membertou: voyages vpon the coaſt: Bay Françoiſe: baſe trafficke: the towne of Ouigoudi: how the Sauages doe make great voyages: their bad intention: a ſteele Mine: The voyces of Sea woolues or Seales: the ſtate of the Ile S. Croix: the loue of the Sauages towards their children: the returne into Port Royall.
               
               THe Sunne did but begin to cheere the earth, and to behold his Miſtres with an amorous aſpect, when the Sagamos Membertou (after our praiers ſolemnely made to God, and the break-faſt diſtributed to the people, according to the cuſtom) came to giue vs aduertiſment that he had ſeene a ſaile vpon the lake, which came towards our The old Sauages haue good ſight.Fort. At this ioyfull newes euery one went out to ſee, but yet none was found that had ſo good a ſight as he, though he be aboue 100. yeeres old; neuertheleſſe we ſpied very ſoone what it was. Monſieur De Poutrincourt, cauſed in all diligence the ſmall Barke to be made ready for to goe to view further. Monſieur De Champ-dorè and Daniel Hay went in her, and by the ſigne that had beene told them, being certaine that they were friends, they made preſently to Salutations by Canonſhots.be charged foure Canons & 12. fawkonnets, to ſalute them that came ſo far to ſee vs. They on their part did not faile in beginning the ioy, & to diſcharge their peeces, to whom they rendered the like with vſury. It was onely a ſmall barke vnder the charge of a yong man of Saint Maloes, named Cheualier, who being arriued at the Fort, deliuered his letters to Monſieur De Poutrincourt, which were read

publikely. They did write vnto him, that for to helpe to The cōtents of the letters written to Monſieur De Poutrincourt.
                      ſaue the charges of the voyage, the ſhip (being yet the Ionas) ſhould ſtay at Campſeau Port, there to fiſh for Coddes, by reaſon that the Merchants aſſociate with Monſieur De Monts, knew not that there was any fiſhing farther than that place: Notwithſtanding if it were neceſſary he ſhould cauſe the ſhip to come to Port Royall. Moreouer, that the The Society of Monſieur De Monts broken, and why.ſociety was broken, becauſe that contrary to the King his Edict, the Hollanders, conducted by a traiterous Frenchman, called La Ieuneſſe, had the yeare before taken vp the Beuers and other Furres, of the great riuer of Canada; a thing which did turne to the great dammage of the Societie, which for that cauſe could no longer furniſh the charges of the vnhabiting in theſe parts, as it had done in times paſt. And therefore did ſend no body for to remaine there, after vs. As we receaued ioy to ſee our aſſured ſuccour, we felt alſo great griefe to ſee ſo faire and ſo holy an enterpriſe broken: That ſo many labours and perils paſt ſhould ſerue to no effect: and that the hope of planting the name of Monſieur De Poutrincourt. his reſolution.
                  God and the Catholike faith ſhould vaniſh away. Notwithſtanding, after that Monſieur De Poutrincourt, had a long while muſed heereupon, he ſaid, that although he ſhould haue no body to come with him, but onely his family, he would not forſake the enterpriſe.
               It was great griefe vnto vs to abandon (without hope of returne) a land that had produced vnto vs ſo faire Corne, The Engliſh nation going to Virginia with a zealous intent to plant true religion and ſo to 
                        〈…〉
                     ſe Chriſts bleſſed flocke, no doubt he will be their leader.and ſo many faire adorned gardens. All that could be done vntill that time, was to finde out a place, fit to make a ſetled dwelling, and a land of good fertility. And that being done, it was great want of courage to giue ouer the enterpriſe, for another yeare being paſſed, the neceſſity of maintaining an habitation there, ſhould be taken away, for the land was ſufficient to yeeld things neceſſary for life. This was the cauſe of that griefe which pierced the hearts of them which were deſirous to ſee the Chriſtian Religion eſtabliſhed in that country. But on the contrary, Monſieur De Monts,
                  
and his aſſociates, reaping no benefit, but loſſe, and hauing no helpe from the King, it was a thing which they could not doe, but with much difficulty to maintaine an habitation in thoſe parts.
               
                  Monſieur De Monts is enuied.
                   Now this enuy for the trade of Beuers with the Sauages, found not onely place in the Hollanders hearts, but alſo in French Merchants, in ſuch ſort that the priuiledge which had beene giuen to the ſaid Monſieur De Monts for ten yeares, was reuoked. The vnſatiable auarice of men is a ſtrange thing, which haue no regard to that which is honeſt, ſo that they may rifle and catch by what meanes ſoeuer. Robbing from the dead.And thereupon I will ſay moreouer, that there haue beene ſome of them that came to that country to fetch vs home, that wickedly haue preſumed ſo much as to ſtrip the dead, and ſteale away the Beuers, which thoſe poore people doe put, for their laſt benefit, vpon them whom they bury, as we will declare more at large in the booke following. A thing that maketh the French name to be odious, & worthy diſdain among them, which haue no ſuch ſordide quality at all, but rather hauing a heart truly noble The Sauages be of a noble minde.and generous, hauing nothing in priuate to themſelues, but rather all things common, and which ordinarily doe preſent gifts (and that very liberally, according to their ability) to them whom they loue and honor. And beſides this miſchiefe, it came to paſſe that the Sauages, when that we were at Campſeau, killed him that had ſhewed them the Sepulchers of their dead. I need not to alleage heere what Herodote reciteth of the vile baſeneſſe of King Darius, who thinking to haue caught the old one in the neſt (as ſaith the prouerbe) that is to ſay, great treaſures, in the Tombe of The faire deceit of Semiramis.
                  
                  Semiramis, Queene of the Babylonians, went away altogether confounded, as wiſe as he came thither, hauing found in it a writing, altogether contrary to the firſt hee had read, which rebuked him very ſharply for his auarice and wickedneſſe.
               Let vs returne to our ſorowfull newes, and to the griefe

thereof. Monſieur De Poutrincourt hauing propounded to ſome of our company, whether they would tarry there for a yeare, eight good fellows offered themſelues, who were promiſed that euery one of them ſhould haue a hogſhead of wine, and corne ſufficiently for one yeare, but they demanded ſo great wages that they could not agree. So reſolution was taken for the returne. Towards the euening Bonfires made for the natiuity of the Duke of Orleans.
                  wee made bonfires for the natiuity of my Lord the Duke of Orleans, and began afreſh to make our Canons and falconets to thunder out, accompanied with ſtore of Musket ſhots, hauing before ſung for that purpoſe, Te Deum Laudamus.
               
               The ſaid Cheualier bringer of the newes had borne the office of Captaine in the Ship that remained at Campſeau, 
                  Refreſhings ſent to Monſieur de Poutrincourt.
                  & in this condition there was giuen to him, for to bring vnto vs ſix Weathers, 24. Hens▪ a pound of Peper, 20. pounds of Rice, as many of Raiſens, and of Prunes, a thouſand of Almonds, a pound of Nutmegs, a quarter of Cinamon, two pounds of Maces, halfe a pound of Cloues, two pounds of Citron rindes, two dozen of Citrons, as many Orenges, a Weſtphalia gamon of Bacon, and ſix other gamons, a hogſhead of Gaſcoine wine, and as much of Sacke, a hogſhead of poudred Beefe, foure pottles and a halfe of oile of Oliue, a Iar of Oliues, a barrell of Vinegar, and two Sugarloaues: but all that was loſt through Gutter-lane, and we A likoriſh tricke plaied to Monſieur De Poutrincourt.
                  ſaw none of all theſe things to make account of: Neuertheleſſe I haue thought good to name heere theſe wares, to the end that they which will trauell on the ſeas may prouide themſelues therewith. As for the Hens and Weathers it Sea prouiſionwas told vs that they died in the voyage, which we eaſily beleeued, but we deſired, at leaſt, to haue had the bones of them: they told vs yet, for a fuller anſwer, that they thought we had been all dead. See vpon what ground the conſuming of our prouiſion was founded. For all that, we gaue good entertainment to the ſaid Cheualier and his company, which were no ſmall number, nor drinkers like

                  The Marquis of Piſani a moſt ſober man in drinking. to the late deceaſed Monſieur Le Marquis de Piſani. Which made them like very well of our company: for there was but Cider well watred, in the ſhip wherein they came, for their ordinary portion. But as for the ſaid Cheualier, euen the very firſt day he ſpake of a returne, Monſieur De Poutrincourt kept him ſome eight daies in delaies, at the end whereof, this man willing to goe away, the ſaid 
                     Cheualiers bad ſpeeches told to Monſieur De Poutrincourt.
                  
                  Monſieur De Poutrincourt put men in his Barke, and detained him, for ſome report, that he had ſaid, that being come to Campſeau, he would hoiſe vp ſailes and leaue vs there.
               Fifteene daies after, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt ſent a barke to Campſeau, with part of our workmen, for to begin to pull downe the houſe. In the beginning of Iune The Sauages goe to the warres.the Sauages, about 400. in number, went away from the dwelling that the Sagamos Membertou had newly made, in forme of a towne, compaſſed about with high pales, for to goe to wars againſt the Armouchiquois, which was at Choüakoct ſome 80. leagues diſtant from Port Royall; from whence they returned victorious, by the ſtratagems which I will declare in the diſcription that I haue made of this war in French verſes. The Sauages were neere two moneths in the aſſembling themſelues thither. The great Sagamos Membertou had made them to be warned during, and before the Winter, hauing ſent vnto them men of purpoſe, namely his two ſonnes Actaudin and Actaudinech, to appoint them there the randez-uous, or place of meeting. What man Membertou is.This Sagamos is a man already very old, and hath ſeene Captaine Iames Qartier in that country, at which time he was already married and had children, and notwithſtanding did not ſeeme to be aboue 50. yeares old. He hath beene a very great warrier in his yong age, and bloody during his life: which is the cauſe why hee is ſaid to haue many enemies, and he is very glad to keepe himſelfe neere the French men, to liue in ſecurity. During this gathering of people, it behooued to make preſents vnto him, and

gifts of Corne and Beanes, yea of ſome barell of wine, to feaſt his friends. For he declared to Monſieur De Poutrincourt 
                  
                     Membertou his declaration.in theſe words: I am the Sagamos of this country, and am eſteemed to be thy friend, and of all the Normands (for ſo call they the French men, as I haue ſaid) and that you make good reckoning of me: It would be a reproch vnto me if I did not ſhew the effects of this loue. And notwithſtanding, whether it be through enuie, or otherwiſe, another Sagamos, named Shkoudun, who was a good friend to Bad report againſt Membertou.
                  the French, and vnfained, reported vnto vs, that Membertou did plot ſome thing againſt vs, and had made an Oration to that purpoſe. Which being vnderſtood by Monſieur De Poutrincourt, he ſent ſuddenly for him, to aſtoniſh him, and to ſee if he would obey. Vpon the firſt 
                     Membertous obeiſance.ſending he came alone with our men, not making any refuſall. Which was the cauſe that he was permitted to returne backe in peace, hauing firſt beene kindly vſed, and had ſome bottell of wine, which he loueth, becauſe (ſaith he) that when he hath drunke of it, he ſleepeth well, and hath no more feare nor care. This Membertou told vs, at our 
                     Membertou his liberality. A Copper Mine.firſt comming thither, that he would make the King a preſent of his Copper Mine, becauſe he ſaw we make account of Mines, and that it is meet that the Sagamos be Curteous and liberall one towards the other. For he, being Sagamos, eſteemeth himſelfe equall to the King, and to all his Lieutenants: And did ſay often to Monſieur De Poutrincourt 
                  The Sauages praiſe themſelues.that he was his great friend, brother, companion and equal, ſhewing his equality by ioyning the two fingers of the hand, that be called indices, or demonſtratiue fingers. Now although this preſent which he would giue to his Maieſty was a thing that he cared not for, notwithſtanding that proceedeth from a generous and good minde of his, which deſerueth as great praiſes as if the thing had beene of greater value. As did the Perſian King, who receiued with as good a will a handfull of water from a poore Country man, as the greateſt preſents that had beene made vnto him. For

if Membertou had had more, he would haue offered it liberally.
               
                  Monſieur De Poutrincourt being not willing to depart thence, vntill he had ſeene the iſſue of his expectation, that is to ſay, the ripeneſſe of his Corne, he deliberated, after that the Sauages were gone to wars, to make voyages along Voyages vpon the Coaſt of the French Bay.the Coaſt. And becauſe Chaualier was deſirous to gather ſome Beuers, he ſent him in a ſmall barke to the Riuer of S. Iohn, called by the Sauages, Oüigoudi, and to the Ile Saint Croix: And he, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt, went in a ſhaloup to the ſaid Copper Mine. I was of the ſaid Cheualier his voyage: we croſſed the French Bay to goe Salmons.to the ſaid riuer, where, as ſoone as we arriued, halfe a doſen Salmons newly taken, were brought to vs: we ſoiourned there foure daies, during which, we went into the Aſſemblie of Sauages a feaſting.Cabins of Sagamos Chkoudun, where we ſaw ſome 80. or 100. Sauages, all naked, except their priuy members, which were a making Tabagy (that is to ſay, abanquetting) with the meale that the ſaid Cheualier had trucked with Filthy trading.them for their old skinnes full of lice (for they gaue him nothing but that which they would caſt away:) So made he there a trafficke which I little praiſe. But it may be that the odour of lucre is ſauory and ſweet, of what thing ſo euer it be, and the Emperor Veſpaſian did not diſdaine to receiue in his owne hands, the tribute which came vnto him from the piſſing veſſels of Rome.
               Being among thoſe Sauages, the Sagamos Chkoudun would needes giue vs the pleaſure, in ſeeing the order and geſture that they hold going to the warres, and made them all to paſſe before vs, which I reſerue to ſpeake of in the Oüigoudi towne.booke following. The Towne of Oüigoudi (ſo I call the dwelling of the ſaid Chkoudun) was a great incloſure vpon an hill, compaſſed about with high and ſmall trees, tied one againſt another, and within it many Cabins, great and ſmall, one of which was as great as a Market hall, wherin many houſholds retired themſelues: And as for the

ſame where they made their Tabagie, it was ſomewhat leſſe. A good part of the ſaid Sauages were of Gachepè, 
                  
                     Gachapè is the beginning of the great riuer of Canada. How the Sauages doe make great voiages.which is the beginning of the great riuer of Canada; and they told vs, that they came from their dwelling thither in ſix daies, which made me much to maruell, ſeeing the diſtance that there is by ſea, but they ſhorten very much their waies, and make great voiages by the meanes of lakes and riuers, at the end of which being come, in carying their Canowes three or foure leagues, they get to other riuers that haue a contrary courſe. All theſe Sauages were come thither to goe to the warres with Membertou againſt the Armouchiquois.
               
               But becauſe I haue ſpoken of this riuer of Oüigoudi, in Monſieur De Monts voiage, I will not at this time ſpeake more of it. When we returned to our Barke, which was at the comming in of the Port, halfe a league off from thence, ſheltered by a cauſie that the ſea hath made there, our men, and ſpecially Captaine Champ-dorè, that conducted vs, were in doubt, leſt ſome miſchance ſhould happen vnto vs, and hauing ſeene the Sauages in armes, thought it had beene to doe vs ſome miſchiefe, which had beene very eaſie, for we were but two, and therefore they were very glad of our returne. After which, the next day come the wizard The ſubtilty of an Autmoi
                           •
                        
                      or Sauage Soothſaier.or Soothſaier of that quarter, crying as a mad-man towards our barke. Not knowing what he meant, he was ſent for in a Cocke boat, and came to parly with vs, telling vs that the Armouchiquois were within the woods, which came to aſſaile them, and that they had killed ſome of their folkes that were ahunting: And therfore that we ſhould come aland to aſſiſt them. Hauing heard this diſcourſe, which according to our iudgement, tended to no good, we told him that our iournies were limited, and our victuals alſo, and that it was behouefull for vs to begone. Seeing himſelfe denied, he ſaid that before two yeares were come about, they would either kill all the Normands, or that the Normands ſhould kill them. Wee mocked him and

told him that we would bring our Barke before their Fort to ranſacke them all; but we did it not, for we went away that day: And hauing the winde contrary, we ſheltred our ſelues vnder a ſmall Iland, where we were two daies: during which, ſome went a ſhooting at Mallards for prouiſion; others attended one the Cookery: And Captaine Champdorè and my ſelfe, went along the rockes with hammers A Mine of Steele.and chiſels, ſeeking if there were any Mines. In doing whereof we found quantity of ſteele among the rockes, which was ſince molten by Monſieur De Poutrincourt, who made wedges of it, and it was found very fine ſteele, wherof hee cauſed a knife to bee made, that did cut as a razor, which at our returne he ſhewed to the King.
               From thence we went in three daies to the Ile S. Croix, being often contraried with the windes. And becauſe we had a bad coniecture of the Sauages, which we did ſee in great number, at the riuer of S. Iohn, and that the troupe Menane.that was departed from Port Royall was yet at Menane (an Ile betweene the ſaid Port Royall and S. Croix) which Good watch. Seales voices.we would not truſt, we kept good watch in the night time: At which time we did often heare Seales voices, which were very like to the voice of Owles: A thing contrarie to the opinion of them that haue ſaid and written that fiſhes haue no voice.
               
                  The arriuall in the Ile of Saint Croix. The ſtate of the ſame. Being arriued at the Ile Saint Croix, we found there the buildings, left there all whole, ſauing that the Store-houſe was vncouered of one ſide. We found there yet Sacke in the bottome of a pipe, wereof we dranke, and it was not much the worſe. As for gardens, we found there Coaleworts, Sorrell, Lettuces, which we vſed for the kitching. Turtles.We made there alſo good paſties of Turtle Doues, which are very plentifull in the woods, but the graſſe is there ſo high that one could not finde them when they were killed and fallen in the ground. The court was there, full of whole caskes, which ſome ill diſpoſed Mariners did burn for their pleaſures, which thing when I ſaw, I did abhor, and I did

iudge, better than before, that the Sauages were (being The Sauages of better nature than many Chriſtians.leſſe ciuilized) more humane and honeſter men, than many that beare the name of Chriſtians, hauing, during three yeares, ſpared that place, wherein they had not taken ſo much as a peece of wood, nor ſalt, which was there in great quantity, as hard as a rocke.
               
                  A number of Iles. Going from thence, we caſt anker among a great number of confuſed Iles, where we heard ſome Sauages, and we did call to make them come to vs. They anſwered vs with the like call. Whereunto one of ours replied, Oüen Kirau? that is to ſay, What are ye? they would not diſcouer themſelues. But the next day Oagimont, the Sagamos of this riuer, came to vs, and we knew it was he whom we heard. He did prepare to follow Membertou and his troupe to the warres, where he was grieuouſly wounded, as I haue ſaid in my verſes vpon this matter. This Oagimont hath a daughter about eleuen yeares old, who is very comly, which Monſieur De Poutrincourt deſired to haue, and hath The loue of the Sauages towards their children.oftentimes demanded her of him to giue her to the Queene, promiſing him that he ſhould neuer want Corne, nor any thing elſe; but he would neuer condiſcend thereto.
               Being entred into our Barke he accompanied vs, vntill we came to the broad ſea, where he put himſelfe in his ſhaloup to returne backe; and for vs we bent our courſe for Port Royall, where we arriued before day, but we were Arriuall into Port Royall.before our Fort, iuſt at the very point that faire Aurora began to ſhew her reddy cheekes vpon the top of our woody hils; euery bodie was yet aſleepe, and there was but one that roſe vp, by the continuall barking of dogges; but we made the reſt ſoone to awake, by peales of Musket ſhots and trumpets-ſound. Monſieur De Poutrincourt was but the day before, arriued from his voyage to the mines, whither we haue ſaid that he was to goe: and the day before that, was the Barke arriued that had carried part of our workmen to Campſeau. So that all being aſſembled, there reſted nothing more than to prepare things neceſſary for

our ſhipping. And in this buſines our Water-Mill did vs very good ſeruice, for otherwiſe there had been no meanes to prepare meale enough for the voyage, but in the end we had more than we had need of, which was to the Sauages, to the end to haue vs in remembrance.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  The Port de Campſeau: our departure from Port Royall: fogs of eight daies continuance: a Raine-bow appearing in the water: the Port De Saualet: tillage an honour able exerciſe: the Sauages griefe at Monſieur De Poutrincourts going away: returne into France: voyage to Mount Saint Michael: fruits of New France preſented to the King: a voyage into New France after the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt his returne.
               
               VPon the point that we ſhould take our leaue of Port The diſcription of the Port De Campſeau.
                  Royall, Monſieur De Poutrincourt ſent his men, one after another, to finde out the ſhip at Campſeau, which is a Port being betweene ſeuen or eight Ilands, where ſhips may be ſheltered from windes: and there is a Bay of aboue 15. leagues depth, and 6. or 7. leagues broad. The ſaid place being diſtant from Port Royall aboue 150. leagues. We had a great Barke, two ſmall ones, and a ſhaloup. In one of the ſmall Barkes ſome men were ſhipped that were ſent before. And the 30. of Iuly the other two went away. I was in the great one, conducted by Monſieur De Champ-dorè. But Monſieur De Poutrincourt, deſirous to ſee an end of our ſowed corne, tarried till it was ripe, and The parting from Port Royall. Eight daies miſt.remained there eleuen daies yet after vs. In the meane time, our firſt iourny hauing beene the paſſage of Port Royall, the next day, miſtes came and ſpread themſelues vpon the ſea, which continued with vs eight whole daies: during which, all we could doe was to get to Cap De Sable, which we ſaw not.
               
                  
In theſe Cimmerian darkneſſes, hauing one day caſt anker in the ſea, by reaſon of the night, our anker driued in ſuch ſort, that in the morning, the tide had carried vs among Ilands; and I maruell that we were not caſt away, Perill. Abundance offaire Cod.ſtriking againſt ſome rocks. But for victuals, we wanted for no fiſh, for in halfe an houres fiſhing we might take Codde enough for to feed vs a fortnight, and of the faireſt and fatteſt that euer I ſaw, being of the colour of Carpes; which I haue neuer knowen nor noted, but in this part of the ſaid Cap De Sable; which after we had paſſed, the tide (which is ſwift in this place) brought vs in ſhort time as farre as to the Port De La Heue, thinking that we were no 
                     Port De la Heue.further than the Port Du Mouton. There we taried two daies, and in the very ſame Port we ſaw the Coddes bite at the hooke. We found there ſtore of red Gooſeberies, and a Marcaſſite of Copper Mine: we alſo made there ſome trucking with the Sauages for skinnes.
               From thence forward we had winde at will, and during that time it happened once, that being vpō the hatches, I cried out to our Pilote Monſieur De Champdore, that we were ready to ſtrike, thinking I had ſeene the bottome of the ſea; but I was deceiued by the Raine-bow which did The Rainebow appeaing in the water.appeare with all his colours in the water, procured by the ſhadow, that our boareſpright ſaile did make ouer the ſame, being oppoſite to the Sunne, which aſembling his beames, within the hollowneſſe of the ſame ſaile, as it doth within the clouds, thoſe beames were forced to make a reuerberation in the water, and to ſhew foorth this wonder. In the end we arriued within foure leagues of Campſeau, at a Port, where a good old man of Saint Iohn De Lus, called Captaine Saualet, receiued vs with all the kindneſſe in the world. And for as much as this Port (which is little, but very faire) hath no name, I haue qualified it in my Geographicall Port Saualet. 42. voyages made in New found land.Map, with the name of Saualet. This good honeſt man told vs that the ſame voyage was the 42. voyage that he had made into thoſe parts, and neuertheleſſe the

New-found-land-men do make but one in a yeare. He was maruellouſly pleaſed with his fiſhing; and told vs moreouer that he tooke euery day fifty Crownes worth of fiſh, Good fiſhing.and that his voyage would be woorth 1000. pounds. He paied wages to 16 men, and his veſſell was of 80. tunnes, which could carry 100000. dry fiſhes. He was ſometimes Sauages vnportunate.vexed with the Sauages that did cabine there, who too boldly and impudently went into his ſhip, and carried away from him what they liſted. And for to auoid their troubleſome behauiour, he threatned them that we would come thither, and that we would put them all to the edge 150. Leagues off 
                        •
                     hey feare the Frenchmen, inhabited beyond that.of the ſword, if they did him wrong. This did feare them, & they did him not ſo much harme, as otherwiſe they would haue done. Notwithſtanding whenſoeuer the Fiſhermen came with their ſhaloups full of fiſh, they did chuſe what ſeemed good vnto them, and they did not care for Codde, but rather tooke Merlus, or Whitings, Barſes or fletans, a kind of very great Turbots, which might be worth heere in Paris aboue foure crownes apeece, and paraduenture ſix or more, for it is a maruellous good meat, ſpecially when they be great, and of the thickneſſe of ſix fingers, as are thoſe that be taken there. And it would haue beene very hard to bridle their inſolency, becauſe that for to doe it, one ſhould be forced to haue alwaies weapons in hand, and 
                     Saualet his kindneſſe.ſo the worke ſhould be left vndone. The good nature and honeſty of this man was extended, not onely to vs, but alſo to all our people that paſſed by his Port, for it was the paſſage to goe and come from Port Royall. But there were ſome of them that came to fetch vs home, who did worſe than the Sauages, vſing him as the Souldier doth the poore peaſan, or country Farmer, heere: a thing which was very grieuous for me to heare.
               We were 4. daies there, by reaſon of the contrary wind. Then came we to Campſeau, where we taried for the other Barke, which came two daies after vs. And as for Monſieur De Poutrincourt, as ſoone as he ſaw that the corne

might be reaped, he pulled vp ſome Rie, root and all, for to ſhew heare the beauty, goodneſſe and vnmeaſurable height of the ſame. He alſo made gleanes of the other Exceeding faire Corne.ſorts of ſeedes, as Wheat, Barly, Oates, Hemp, and others, for the ſame purpoſe: which was not done by them that haue heeretofore beene in Braſill and in Florida. Wherein I haue cauſe to reioyce, becauſe I was of the company and of the firſt tillers of that land. And heerein I pleaſed my ſelfe the more, when I did ſet before mine eies our ancient father Noah, a great King, great Prieſt, and great Prophet The tillage of the ground is an honourable exerciſe., whoſe occupation was to husband the ground, both in ſowing of Corne and planting the Vine: And the ancient Romane Captaine, Seranus, who was found ſowing of his field, when that he was ſent for, to conduct the Romane Armie: And Quintus Cincinatus, who all duſty did plough foure akers of lands, bare headed and open ſtomackt, when the Senats Harold brought letters of the Dictatorſhip vnto him; in ſort, that this meſſenger was forced to pray him to couer himſelfe, before he declared his Embaſſage vnto him. Delighting my ſelfe in this exerciſe, God Faire Wheathath bleſſed my poore labour, and I haue had in my garden as faire wheat as any can be in France, whereof the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt gaue vnto mee a gleane, when he came to the ſaid Port De Campſeau.
               
               
                  The Sauages returne from the wars. He was ready to depart from Port Royall, when Membertou and his company arriued, victorious ouer the Armouchiquois. And becauſe I haue made a deſcription of this war in French Verſes, I will not heere trouble my paper with it, being deſirous rather to be briefe, than to ſeeke out new matter. At the inſtant of the ſaid Membertou he taried yet one day. But it was pitious to ſee at his departing The Sauages teares at the going away of the French men., thoſe poore people weepe, who had beene alwaies kept in hope that ſome of ours ſhould alwaies tarry with them. In the end promiſe was made vnto them, that the yeare following, houſholds and families ſhould be ſent thither, wholly to inhabit their land, and teach them trades

for to make them liue as we doe, which promiſe did ſomewhat Meale left behinde.comfort them. There was left remaining ten hogſheads of Meale, which were giuen to them, with the Corne that we had ſowed, and the poſſeſſion of the Mannour, if they would vſe it, which they haue not done. For they cannot be conſtant in one place, and liue as they doe.
               
                  
                     Monſieur De Poutrincourt his going away. The eleuenth of Auguſt the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt departed, with eight in his company, from the ſaid Port Royall, in a Shaloup to come to Campſeau: A thing maruellouſly dangerous to croſſe ſo many baies and ſeas in ſo ſmall a veſſell, laden with nine perſons, with victuals neceſſary for the voyage, and reaſonable great quantity of other ſtuffe. Being arriued at the Port of Captaine Saualet, he receiued them all as kindly as it was poſſible for him: And from thence they came to vs, to the ſaid Port of Campſeau, where we taried yet eight daies.
               
                  The departing from New France. The third day of September, we weighed ankers, and with much adoe came we from among the rockes, that be about the ſaid Campſeau. Which our Mariners did with two ſhaloups that did carry their ankers very farre into the ſea, for to vphold our ſhip, to the end ſhe ſhould not ſtrike againſt the rockes. Finally, being at ſea, one of the ſaid ſhaloups was let goe, and the other was taken into the Ionas, which beſides our lading, did carry 100000. of fiſh, as well drie as greene. We had reaſonable good winde vntill we came neere to the lands of Europe: But we were not ouercloied with good cheere, becauſe that (as I haue ſaid) they who came to fetch vs, preſuming we were dead did cramme themſelues with our refreſhing commodities. Our workmen dranke no more wine, after we had left Port Royall: And we had but ſmall portion thereof, becauſe that which did ouer abound with vs, was drunke merrily in the company of them that brought vs newes from The ſight of the Sorlingues.France.
               The 26. of September we had ſight of the Sorlingues, which be at the lands end of Cornewall in England, and

the 28. thinking to come to Saint Maloes, we were forced Then of France.(for want of good wind) to fall into Roſcoff in Baſe Bretaigne, where we remained two daies and a halfe, refreſhing our ſelues. We had a Sauage who wondred very much, ſeeing the buildings, ſteeples, and Wind-mils in France: yea alſo of the women, whom he had neuer ſeene clothed after our maner. From Roſcoff (giuing thankes to God) we came with a good winde vnto Saint Maloes. Wherein I cannot but praiſe the watchfull foreſight of our Maſter, Nicolas Martin, in hauing ſo ſkilfully conducted vs in ſuch a nauigation, and among ſo many bankes and dangerous rocks, wherewith the coaſt, from the Cap of Vſhant to Saint Maloes, is full. If this man be praiſe worthie, in this his action; Captaine Foulques deſerueth no leſſe praiſes, hauing brought vs thorow ſo many contrary windes, into vnknowen lands, where the firſt foundations of New France haue beene laid.
               
                  The voyage vnto S. Michael.
                   Hauing taried three or foure daies at Saint Maloes, Monſieur De Poutrincourts ſonne, and my ſelfe, went to Mount Saint Michael, where wee ſaw the relikes, all, ſauing the Buckler of this holy Archangell. It was told vs that the Lord Biſhop of Auranches, had, foure or fiue yeares ago, forbidden to ſhew it any more. As for the building, it meriteth The eight wonder of the world.to be called the 8. wonder of the world, ſo faire and great is it, vpon the point of one only rocke, in the middeſt of the waues, at full ſea. True it is, that one may ſay that the ſea came not thither when the ſaid building was made. But I will replie, that howſoeuer it be, it is admirable. The complaint that may be made in this reſpect, is, that ſo many faire buildings are vnprofitable in theſe our daies, as in the moſt part of the Abbies of France. And would to God that by ſome Archimedes means, they might be tranſported into New France, there to be better emploied to Gods ſeruice and the Kings. At the returne we came to ſee the fiſhing of Oyſters at Cancale.
               
               After we had ſoiorned eight daies at Saint Maloes, we

                  Monſieur De Poutrincourt his induſtry.
                   came, in a Barke, to Honfleur, where Monſieur De Poutrincourt his experience ſtood vs in good ſtead, who ſeeing our Pilots at their wits end, when they ſaw themſelues betweene the Iles of Ierzy and Sare (not being accuſtomed to take that courſe, where we were driuen by a great winde, Eaſt South-Eaſt, accompanied with fogs and rain) he tooke his ſea-chard in hand, and plaied the part of a Pilot, in ſuch ſort that we paſſed the Raz Blanchart (a dangerous paſſage for ſmall Barkes) and we came eaſily, following the coaſt of Normandie, to Honfleur; for which, eternall praiſes be giuen to God. Amen.
               
               
                  Harueſt of New France, ſhewed to the King. Being at Paris, the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt preſented the King with the fruits of the land from whence he came, and eſpecially the Corne, Wheat, Rie, Barly and Oates, as being the moſt precious thing that may bee brought from what country ſoeuer. It had beene very fit to vow theſe firſt fruits to God, and to place them in ſome church among the monuments of triumph, with more iuſt Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2.
                  cauſe than the ancient Romanes, who preſented to their country Gods and Goddeſſes Terminus, Seia, and Segeſta the firſt fruits of their tillage, by the hands of the Prieſts of the fields, inſtituted by Romulus, which was the firſt order in new Rome, who had for Blaſon, a hat of the eares of Corne.
               
                  
                     Outardes, or wild Geeſe, preſented to the King. The ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt had bred tenne Outards, taken from the ſhell, which he thought to bring all into France, but fiue of them were loſt, and the other fiue he gaue to the King, who delighted much in them; and they are at Fonteine Belleau.
               
               Vpon the faire ſhew of the fruites of the ſaid Country Priuiledge of Beauers confirmed to Monſieur De Monts. Three ſhips ſent 1608.the King did confirme to Monſieur De Monts the priuiledge for the trade of Beuers with the Sauages, to the end to giue him meanes to eſtabliſh his Colonies in New France. And by this occaſion he ſent thither in March laſt, Families, there to begin Chriſtian and French Commonwealths, which God vouchſafe to bleſſe and increaſe.
               
                  
The ſaid ſhips being returned, we haue had report by Newes from New France ſince our comming from thence.
                  Monſieur De Champ-dorè, and others, of the ſtate of the Country which we had left, and of the wonderfull beauty of the Corne that the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt had ſowed before his departure, together of the graines that be fallen in the gardens, which haue ſo increaſed that it is an incredible thing. Membertou did gather ſix or ſeuen barrels of the corne that we had ſowed: and had yet one left, which he reſerued for the Frenchmen, whom he looked It is very dangerous to teach the Sauages the vſe of gunnes.for, who arriuing he ſaluted with three Muſket ſhots and Bonfires. When it was laid to his charge that hee had eaten our Pigions, which we left there, he fell aweeping, and embracing him that told it him, ſaid, that it was the Macharoa, that is to ſay, the great birds which are Eagles, Eagles.which did eat many of them, while we w
                     •••
                   there. Moreouer, all great and ſmall, did inquire how we did, naming euery one by his owne name, which is a witneſſe of great loue.
               From Port Royall, the ſaid Champ-dorè went as farre as Chouakouet, the beginning of the Armouchiquois land, where he pacified that nation with the Etechemins, which was not done without ſolemnity. For as he had begun to ſpeake of it, the Captaine, who is now inſtead of Olmechin, named Aſtikou, a graue man and of a goodly preſence, how ſauage ſoeuer he be, demanded that ſome one of the ſaid Etechemins ſhould be ſent to him, and that he would treat with him. Oagimont, Sagamos of the riuer S. Croix, was appointed The Sauages wiſdome.for that purpoſe, and he would not truſt them, but vnder the aſſurance of the Frenchmē he went thither. Some preſents were made to Astikou, who, vpon the ſpeech of peace, began to exhort his people & to ſhew them the cauſes that ought to induce them to hearken vnto it. Wherunto they condeſcended, making an exclamation at euery article that he propounded to them. Some fiue yeares ago Monſieur De Monts had likewiſe pacified thoſe nations, and had declared vnto them, that he would be enemy to the firſt of

them that ſhould beginne the war, and would purſue him. But after his returne into France, they could not containe themſelues in peace. And the Armouchiquois did kill a Souriquois Sauage, called Panoniac, who went to them for to trucke merchandiſe, which he tooke at the ſtorehouſe of the ſaid Monſieur De Monts. The warre aboue mentioned happened by reaſon of this ſaid murther, vnder the conduct of Sagamos Membertou: the ſaid warre was made in the very ſame place, where I now make mention, that 
                     Monſieur Champlein is now in the riuer of Canada. Cattell. Fruit trees. Vines. Hempe.
                  Monſieur de Champdorè did treate the peace this yeare. Monſieur Champlein is in another place, to wit in the great riuer of Canada, neere the place where captaine Iames Quartier did winter, where he hath fortified himſelfe, hauing brought thither houſholds, with cattell and diuers ſorts o
                     •
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ite-trees. There is ſtore of vines, and excellent hempe, in the ſame place where he is, which the earth bringeth footh of it ſelfe. He is not a man to be idle, and we expect ſhortly newes of the whole diſcouerie of this great and vncomparable riuer, and of the countries which it waſheth on both ſides, by the diligence of the ſaid Monſieur De Poutrincourt his reſolution
                  
                  Champlein.
               
               As for Monſieur De Poutrincourt, his deſire is immutable, in this reſolution to inhabit and adorne his Prouince, to bring thither his familie, and all ſorts of trades neceſſary for the life of man. Which, with Gods helpe hee will 1609.continue to effect all this preſent yeare 1609. And, as long as he hath vigor and ſtrength, will proſecute the ſame, to liue there vnder the Kings obeyſance.
            
         
         
            
               
               The ſecond Booke of the Hiſtory of Noua Francia, containing the faſhions and maners of life of the people there, and the fertility of the Lands and Seas mentioned in the former Booke.
               
               THE PREFACE.
               
                  ALmighty God, in the creation of this world, hath ſo much delighted himſelfe in diuerſity, that, whether it be in Heauen, or in the Earth, either vnder the ſame or in the profound depth of waters, the effects of his might and glory doe ſhine in euery place. But the wonder that far exceedeth all others, is, that in one and the ſelfe ſame kind of Creature, I meane in Man, are found more variety than in other things created. For if one enters into the conſideration of his face, two ſhall not be found who in euery reſpect doe reſemble one another: If he bee conſidered in the voice, the ſame variety ſhall be found: If in the ſpeech, all Nations haue their proper and peculiar language, whereby one is diſtinguiſhed from the other. But in maners and faſhion of life, there is a maruellous difference, which (without troubling

our ſelues in croſsing the Seas to haue the experience thereof) we ſee viſibly in our very neighborhood. Now foraſmuch as it is a ſmall matter to know, that people differ from vs in cuſtomes and maners, vnles we know the particularities thereof; a ſmall thing is it likewiſe to know, but that, which is neere to vs: but the faire Science is to know the maner of life of all Nations of the World, for which reaſon Vlyſſes hath beene eſteemed, becauſe he had ſeene much and knowen much. It hath ſeemed neceſſary vnto me to exerciſe my ſelfe in this ſecond booke vpon this ſubiect, in that which toucheth the Nations ſpoken of by vs, ſeeing that I haue tied my ſelfe vnto it, and that it is one of the beſt parts of an History, which without it would be defectiue, hauing but ſlightly and caſually handled here aboue thoſe things that I haue reſerued to ſpeake of heere. Which alſo I doe, to the end, if it pleaſe God to take pitie of thoſe poore people, and to worke by his holy ſpirit, that they be brought into his fold, their children may know heereafter what their Fathers were, and bleſſe them that haue employed themſelues in their conuerſion, and reformation of their vnciuility. Let vs therefore begin with man from his birth, and hauing in groſſe marked out what the courſe of his life is, we will conduct him to the graue, there to leaue him to rest, and alſo to repoſe our ſelues.
            
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               Of the Natiuity of Man.
               
                  THe authour of the booke of Wiſdome, called Salomon, witneſſeth vnto vs a moſt true thing, that All men haue a like entrance into the world, and the like going out. But ech ſeuerall people hath brought ſome ceremonies, after theſe were accompliſhed. For ſome haue wept, ſeeing the birth of man vpon this worldly Theater. Others haue reioyced at it, as well becauſe Nature hath giuen to euery creature a deſire to preſerue his owne kinde, as for that, Man hauing beene made mortall by ſinne, he deſireth to bee in ſome ſort reſtored againe to that loſt right of immortality, and to leaue ſome viſible image iſſued from him, by the generation of children. I will not heere diſcourſe vpon euery Nation, for it would be an infinite thing. But I will ſay that the Hebrews at the natiuity of their children did make ſome particular ceremonies vnto them, ſpoken of by the Prophet Ezechiel, who hauing Ezech. 16. verſ. 23. 4.in charge to make a demonſtration to the Citie of Hieruſalem of her owne abomination, doth reproch vnto her, ſaying, that ſhe is iſſued and borne out of the Cananaeans Country, that her father was an Amorite, and her mother an Hittite. And as for thy birth (ſaith he) in the day that thou wast borne thy nauell was not cut, neither wast thou waſhed in water to ſoften thee, nor ſalted with ſalt, nor any wiſe 
                  Iulian. imp. Sidon. Car. 7. Claudian. in Ruffin. lib. 2.
                  
                  ſwadled in cloutes. The Cimbres did put their new borne children into the ſnow to harden them: And the Frenchmen

did plunge theirs into the riuer Rhine, to know if they Auguſt. epiſt. ad Maxim. Philoſ.were legitinate: for if they did ſinke vnto the bottome they were eſteemed baſtards, and if they did ſwimme on the water they were legitimate, meaning (as it were) that French-men ought naturally to ſwim vpon the waters. As for our Sauages of New France, when that I was there, thinking nothing leſſe than on this Hiſtory, I tooke not heed of many things which I might haue obſerued: But yet I remember, that as a woman was deliuered of her child they came into our Fort, to demand very inſtantly for ſome greaſe or oyle to make the child to ſwallow it downe before they giue him the dugge or any food: they can render no reaſon for this, but that it is a cuſtome of long continuance. Whereupon I coniecture that the diuell (who hath alwaies borrowed ceremonies from the Church, as well in the ancient as in the new law) would, that his people (ſo doe I call them that beleeue not in God, and are out of the Communion of Saints) ſhould be anointed like to Gods people: which vnction he hath made to be inward, becauſe the ſpirituall vnction of the Chriſtians is ſo.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the impoſition of names.
               AS for impoſition of names, they giue them by tradition, that is to ſay, they haue great quantity of names, which they chuſe and impoſe on their children. The dignity of elderſhip or firſt borne.But the eldeſt ſonne commonly beareth his fathers name, adding at the end ſome diminutiue: as the eldeſt of Membertou ſhall be called Membertouchis, as it were the leſſer, or the yonger Membertou. As for the yonger Son, he beareth not the Fathers name, but they giue him ſuch name as they liſt: And hee that is borne after him ſhall beare his name, adding a ſyllable to it: as the yonger of Membertou is called Actaudin, he that commeth after is called Actaudinech. So Memembourré had a ſonne named

                  Semcoud, and his yonger was called Semcoudech. It is not for all that a generall rule, to adde this termination ech. For Panoniacs yonger Sonne (of whom mention is made in Membertous warre againſt the Armouchiquois, which I haue deſcribed in the Muſes of New France) was called Panouiagués: ſo that this termination is done according as the former name requireth it. But they haue a cuſtome The changing of names.that when this elder brother, or father, is dead, they change name, for to auoid the ſorrow that the remembrance of the deceaſſed might bring vnto them. This is the cauſe why, after the deceaſe of Memembourré, & Semcoud, (that died this laſt Winter) Semcoudech hath left his brothers name, and hath not taken that of his father, but rather hath made himſelfe to be called Paris, becauſe he dwelt in Paris. And after Panoniacs death, Panoniagues forſooke his name, and was, by one of our men, called Roland: which I finde euill and vndiſcreetly done, ſo to prophane Chriſtians names, and to impoſe them vpon Infidels: as I remember of another that was called Martin. Alexander the Great (though he was an Heathen) would not that any ſhould beare his name, vnleſſe he ſhould render himſelfe woorthy thereof by vertue. And, as one day a ſouldier, bearing the name of Alexander, was accuſed before him to be voluptuous and lecherous, he commanded him, either to forſake that name, or to change his life.
               The Braſiliens (as Iohn De Leri ſaith, whom I had rather follow in that which he hath ſeene, than a Spaniard) impoſe names to their children of the firſt thing that commeth before them, as if a bow and ſtring come to their imagination, they will call their child Ourapacen, which ſignifieth a bow and a ſtring, and ſo conſequently. In regard of our Sauages, they haue at this day names without ſignification, which peraduenture in the firſt impoſing of them, did ſignifie ſome thing, but as the tongues do change the knowledge thereof is loſt. Of all the names of them that I haue knowen, I haue learned none, ſauing that

                  Chkoudun ſignifieth a Trowt: and Oigoudi the name of the riuer of the ſaid Chkoudun, which ſignifieth to ſee. It is very certaine, that names haue not beene impoſed, to what thing ſoeuer, without reaſon. For Adam gaue the name to euery liuing creature, according to the property and nature thereof, and conſequently names haue beene giuen to men ſignifying ſomething: As Adam ſignifieth▪ 
                  Man, or that which is made of earth: Euah ſignifieth, the Mother of all liuing: Abel, weeping: Cain, poſſeſſion: Ieſus, a Sauiour: Diuell, a Slanderer: Satan, an aduerſarie &c. Among the Romans, ſome were called Lucius, becauſe they were born at the breake of day; Others Caeſar, for that the Mothers belly was cut at the birth of him that firſt did beare this name: In like maner Lentulus, Piſo, Fabius, Cicero, &c. all nick-names, giuen by reaſon of ſome accident, like our Sauages names, but with ſome more iudgement.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of the feeding of their Children.
               
                  Eſay 49. verſ. 15. ALmighty God, ſhewing a true Mothers duty, ſaith by the Prophet Eſay: Can a woman forget her child, and not haue compaſſion on the Sonne of her wombe? This pity which God requireth in Mothers, is to giue the breſt to their children, and not to change the food which they haue giuen vnto them before their birth. But at this day the moſt part make their breſts to ſerue for alurements to whoredome, and being willing to ſet themſelues at eaſe, free from the childrens noiſe, do ſend them into the Country, where peraduenture they be changed or giuen to bad nurſes, whoſe corruption and bad nature they ſucke with their milke. And from thence come the changelings, weake and degenerate from the right ſtocke whoſe names they beare. The Sauage women beare a greater loue than that towards their yong ones: for none but themſelues doe nouriſh them: And that is generall thorowout all the Weſt

Indies: likewiſe their breſts are no baites of loue, as in theſe our parts, but rather, loue in thoſe lands is made by the flame that nature kindleth in euery one, without annexing any arts to it, either by painting, amorous poiſons or otherwiſe. And for this maner of nurſing their children, are the ancient German women praiſed by Tacitus, becauſe that euery one did nurſe their Children with her owne breſts, and would not haue ſuffered that another beſides themſelues ſhould giue ſucke to their children. Now our Sauage women do giue vnto them, with the dugge, meats which they vſe, hauing firſt well chawed them: and ſo by little and little bring them vp. As for the ſwadling of them, they that dwell in hot Countries and neere the Tropicks, haue no care of it, but leaue them free vnbound. But drawing towards the North, the mothers haue an euen ſmooth boord, like the couering of a drawer or cupborod, vpon which they lay the child wrapped in a Beauer fur, vnles it be too hot, and tied thereupon with ſome ſwadling band, whom they carry on their backes their legges hanging downe: then being returned into their Cabins they ſet them in this maner vp ſtraight againſt a ſtone or ſome thing elſe. And as in theſe our parts, one giues ſmall feathers and gilt things to little children, ſo they hang quantity of beades and ſmall ſquare toies, diuerſly coloured, in the vpper part of the ſaid boord or plancke, for the decking of theirs.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of their loue towards their children.
               THat which we haue ſaid euen now, is a part of true loue, which doth ſhame the Chriſtian women. But after the Children be weaned, and at all times, they loue them all, obſeruing this law that Nature hath grafted in the hearts of all creatures (except in leaud ſlippery women) to haue care of them. And when it is queſtion to demand

of them ſome of their children (I ſpeake of the S
                        ••
                     
                     riquois, in whoſe land we dwelt) for to bring them into France, they wil not giue them: but if any one of them doth yeeld vnto it, preſents muſt be giuen vnto him, beſides large promiſes. We haue alreadie ſpoken of this at the end of the 17. chapter. So then I finde that they haue wrong to be called Barbarous, ſeeing that the ancient Romans were far more Brabarous than they, who oftentimes ſold their The cauſe why the Sauages loue their children more than we doe in theſe parts.children for to haue meanes to liue. Now that which cauſeth them to loue their children more than we doe in theſe parts is, that they are the maintenance of their fathers in their old age, whether it be to helpe them to liue, or to defend them from their enemies: And nature conſerueth wholly in them her right in this reſpect. By reaſon whereof that which they wiſh moſt is to haue number of children, Genſ. 2. verſ. 28.to be thereby ſo much the mightier, as in the firſt age of the world, when virginity was a thing reproouable, becauſe of Gods commandement to man and women to increaſe, multiply and repleniſh the earth: but after it was filled, this loue waxed maruellous cold, and children began to be a burthen to fathers and mothers, whom many haue had in diſdaine, and haue verie often procured their Meanes to eaſe the families of France.death: Now is the way open for France to haue a remedy for the ſame. For if it pleaſe God to guide and proſper the voyages of New France. whoſoeuer in theſe parts ſhall finde himſelfe oppreſſed may paſſe thither, and there end his daies in reſt, and that without feeling any pouerty: or if any one findeth himſelfe ouerburthened with children, he may ſend halfe of them thither, and with a ſmall portion they ſhall be rich and poſſeſſe the land, which is the moſt aſſured condition of this life. For we ſee at this day, labor and paine in all vocations, yea in them of the beſt ſort, which are often croſſed through enuy and wants: others will make a hundred cappings and crouchings for to liue, and yet they doe but pine away. But the ground neuer deceaueth vs, if we earneſtly cheriſh her. Witneſſe the fable

of him, who by his laſt will and teſtament, did declare to his children that he had hidden a treaſure in his Vineyard, and as they had well and deepely digged and turned it they found nothing, but the yeere being come about, they gathered ſo great a quantity of grapes, that they knew not where to beſtow them. So thorow all the holy Scripture, the promiſes that God maketh to the Patriarches Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob, and afterwards to the people of Iſrael, by the mouth of Moſes, is, that they ſhall poſſeſſe the To poſſeſſe the land is a rich heritage.land, as a certaine heritage that cannot periſh, and where a man hath wherewith to ſuſtaine his familie, to make himſelfe ſtrong and to liue in innocency: according to the ſpeeches of the ancient Cato, who did ſay, that commonly Plin. lib. 18. cap. 5.
                  Husbandmen, or Farmers Sonnes be valiant and ſtrong, and doe thinke on no harme.
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               Of their Religion.
               MAn being created after the image of God, it is good reaſon that he acknowledge, ſerue, worſhip, praiſe and bleſſe his Creator, and that therein he imploy his whole deſire, his minde, his ſtrength and his courage. But the nature of man hauing been corrupted by ſinne, this faire light that God had firſt giuen vnto him, hath beene ſo darkned, that he is becom therby to loſe the knowledge of his beginning. And for as much as God ſheweth not himſelf vnto vs by a certaine viſible forme, as a father or a King might doe; man finding himſelfe ouercome with pouerty and infirmity, not ſetling himſelfe to the contemplation of the wonders of this Almighty workman, and to ſeeke him as he ought to be ſought for, with a baſe and brutiſh ſpirit, miſerably hath he forged to himſelfe gods, according to his owne fancy: And there is nothing viſible in the world, but hath beene deified in ſome place or other: yea euen in that rancke and degree, imaginary things hath alſo beene put, as Vertue, Hope, Honour, Fortune, and a thouſand

ſuch like things: Item infernall gods, and ſickneſſes, and all ſorts of plagues, euery one worſhipping the things that he ſtood in feare of. But notwithſtanding, though Tuliie hath ſaid, ſpeaking of the nature of the gods, that there is no nation ſo ſauage, or brutiſh nor ſo barbarous, but is ſeaſoned with ſome opinion of them: yet there haue been found, in theſe later ages, nations that haue no feeling thereof at all: which is ſo much the ſtranger that among them, there Idolaters in Virginia.
                  were, and yet are, Idolaters, as in Mexico and 
                     Ʋirginia. If we will we may adde heereunto Florida. And notwithſtanding, all being well conſidered, ſeeing the condition both of the one and of the other is to be lamented, I giue more praiſe to him that worſhippeth nothing, than to him who worſhippeth creatures without either life or ſenſe, for at leaſt, as bad as he is, he blaſphemeth not, and giueth not the glorie due to God to an other, liuing (indeed) a life not much differing from brutiſhneſſe: but the ſame is yet more brutiſh that adoreth a dead thing, and putteth his confidence in it. And beſides, he which is not ſtained with any bad opinion, is much more capable of true adoration, than the other: being like to a bare table, which is ready to receiue what colour ſoeuer one will giue to it. For when any people hath once receiued a bad impreſſiō of doctrine, one muſt roote it out from them before another may be placed in them. Which is very difficult, as well for the obſtinacy of men, which doe ſay, our fathers haue liued in this ſort: as for the hindrance that they giue them which doe teach them ſuch a doctrine, and others whoſe life dependeth thereupon, who doe feare that their meanes of gain be taken from them: euen as that Demetrius the ſiluerſmith, Act. 19. verſ. 24. The Sauages eaſie to be conuerted to the Chriſtian religion. Iames Cartier.
                  mentioned in the Acts of the Apoſtles. This is the reaſon why our Sauages of New France wil be found more eaſie to receiue the Chriſtian doctrine, if once the Prouince be thorowly inhabited. For (that we may begin with them of Canada) Iames Quartier, in his ſecond relation, reciteth that which I haue ſaid a little before, in theſe

words, which are not heere laied downe in the former Booke.
               
                  This ſaid people (ſaith he) hath not any beleefe of God The Sauages religion in Canada.(that may be eſteemed) for they beleeue in one, whom they call Cudoüagni, and ſay, that he often ſpeaketh to them, and telleth them what weather ſhall fall out. They ſay that when he is angry with them hee caſteth duſt in their eies. They beleeue alſo, that when they die they goe The ſtate of ſoules after death.vp into the ſtarres, and afterwards they goe into faire greenefields, full of faire trees, flowers and rare fruits. After they had made vs to vnderſtand theſe things, wee ſhewed them their error, and that their Cudoüagni is an euill Spirit that deceiueth them, and that there is but one God, which is in Heauen, who doth giue vnto vs all, and is Creator of all things, and that in him we muſt onely beleeue, and that they muſt be baptiſed, or goe into hell. And many other things of our faith were ſhewed them: which People eaſie to be conuerted. Agoiuda ſignifieth wicked.they eaſily beleeued, and called their Cudoüagni, Agoiuda. So that many times they requeſted our Captaine to cauſe them to be baptized, and the ſaid Lord (that is to ſay, Donnacona) Taiguragni, Domagaia, with all the people of their towne came thither for that purpoſe: but becauſe we knew not their intent and deſire, and that there was no body to inſtruct them in the faith, wee excuſed our ſelues to them for that time, and bad Taiguragni and Domagaia to make them vnderſtand that we would returne another voyage, and would bring Prieſts with vs and Chréme, telling them, for an excuſe, that one cannot be baptized without the ſaid Chréme, which they did beleeue. And they were very glad of the promiſe which the Captaine made them to returne, and thanked them for it.
               
                  Monſieur Champlein, hauing of late made the ſame voyage which the Captaine Iames Quartier had made, did diſcourſe with Sauages, that be yet liuing, and reporteth the ſpeeches that were betweene him and certaine of their Sagamos, concerning their beleefe in ſpirituall and heauenly

things, which I haue thought good (being incident to The Sauages beleefe and faith. this matter) to inſert heere; his words are theſe: The moſt part of them be people without law, according as I could ſee and informe my ſelfe, by the ſaid great Sagamos, who told mee that they verily beleeue there is one God, who hath created all things. And then I asked him, ſeeing that they beleeue in one onely God: by what meanes did hee place them in this world, and from whence they were Of the creation of man.come? He anſwered mee, that after God had made all things, he tooke a number of arrowes, and did ſticke them into the ground, from whence men and women ſprung vp, which haue multiplied in the world vntill now, and that mankinde grew by that meanes. I anſwered him, that what he ſaid was falſe: But that indeed there was one onely God, who had created all things both in Heauen and Earth. Seeing all theſe things ſo perfect, and being no body that did gouerne in this world, he tooke ſlime out of the Earth, and created thereof our firſt father Adam: And while he did ſleepe, God tooke one of his ribes, and formed Euah thereof, whom hee gaue to him for company, and that this was the truth that both they and we were made They beleeue one God, one Sonne, one Mother, and the Sunne.by this meanes, and not of arrowes, as they did beleeue. He ſaid nothing more to me, but that he allowed better of my ſpeech than of his owne. I asked him alſo if he beleeued not that there were any other but one onely God? He ſaid vnto me that their beleefe was: There was one onely God, one Sonne, one Mother, and the Sunne, which were foure. Notwithſtanding, that God was ouer and aboue all; but that the Sonne was good, and the Sunne, by reaſon of the good which they receiued of them: As for the Mother, ſhee was naught and did eat them; and that the Father was not very good. I ſhewed him his error according to our faith, whereunto he gaue ſome credit. I demanded of him if they neuer ſaw nor heard their anceſtors ſay that God was come into the world: He told me hee had not ſeene him: but that anciently there were fiue men, who trauelling

towards the ſetting of the Sunne, met with God, Of fiue men whom the Sauages beleeue to haue ſeene God. Men transformed into ſtones:who demanded of them, Whither go yee? They anſwered, We goe to ſeeke for our liuing: God anſwered them, You ſhall finde it heere. But they paſſed further, not making any account of that which God had ſaid vnto them; who tooke a ſtone and therewith touched two of them, who were turned into ſtones: And he ſaid againe to the three others, Whither goe yee? and they anſwered as at the firſt time: and God ſaid vnto them a gaine, Paſſe no further, you ſhall finde it heere: and ſeeing that they found no And into ſtaues.food they paſſed further: And God tooke two ſtaues, and touched therewith the two formoſt, who were transformed into ſtaues. But the fift man ſtaied and would paſſe no further: And God asked him againe, Whither goeſt thou? Who made anſwer, I go to ſeeke for my liuing: and God told him, Tarry and thou ſhalt finde it: and he ſtaied without paſſing any further: And God gaue him meat, and he did eat of it: and after he had made good cheare he returned among the other Sauages, and told them all that you haue heard. He alſo told me, that at another time there was a man who had ſtore of Tabacco (which is an hearbe Of an other Man whom the Sauages beleeue to haue ſpoken with God. Tabacco.the ſmoke whereof they take) and that God came to this man and asked him where his pipe was: The man tooke his Tabacco pipe and gaue it to God, who dranke very much Tabacco. After he had taken well of it, God brake the ſaid Tabacco-pipe into many peeces, and the man asked him, Why haſt thou broken my Tabacco-pipe, and thou ſeeſt well that I haue none other? And God tooke one which he had, and gaue it him, ſaying vnto him: Lo, heere is one which I giue to thee, carry it to thy great Sagamo, let him keepe it; and if he keepe it wel, he ſhall not want any thing, nor any of his companions: The ſaid man tooke the Tabacco-pipe, which he gaue to his great Sagamo, who (whileſt he had it) the Sauages wanted for nothing in the world: But that ſince the ſaid Sagamo had loſt this Tabacco-pipe, which is the cauſe of the great famine

which ſometimes they haue among them. I demanded of him, whether he did beleeue all that; he told me, yes, & that it was true. Now I beleeue that that is the cauſe why they ſay that God is not very good. But I replied and ſaid vnto him, that God was all good, and that without doubt it was the Diuell that had ſhewed himſelfe to thoſe men, and that if they did beleeue in God as we doe, they ſhould want nothing that ſhould be needfull for them: That the Sunne which they ſaw, the Moone and the Starres, were created by the ſame great God, who hath made both Heauen and Earth, and that they haue no power, but that which God I doe not thinke that this Theology may be expounded to theſe people, though one could perfectly ſpeak their language.hath giuen them: That we beleeue in that great God, who by his goodneſſe did ſend vnto vs his dearely beloued Son, who being conceiued by the Holy Ghoſt, tooke humane fleſh within the virgin wombe of the Virgin Mary, hauing been 33. yeeres on earth working infinit miracles, raiſing vp the dead, healing the ſicke, driuing out Diuels, giuing ſight to the blinde, ſhewing vnto men the wil of God his Father, for to ſerue, honour and worſhip him, hath ſpilled his bloud, and ſuffered death and paſſion for vs, and for our ſinnes, and redeemed mankind, being buried and riſen againe, went downe into hell, and aſcended vp into Heauen, where he ſitteth at the right hand of God his father. That this was the beleefe of all Chriſtians, which doe beleeue in the Father, in the Sonne, and in the holy Ghoſt, which be not for all that three Gods, but are one ſelfeſame and one onely God, and one Trinity, wherein there is nothing before nor after, nothing greater nor leſſer. That the Virgin Mary, Mother to the Sonne of God, and all men and women that haue liued in this world, doing Gods commandements, and ſuffered Martyrdome for his name, and who, by the permiſſion of God, haue wrought miracles, and are Saints in Heauen in his Paradiſe, pray all for vs vnto this great diuine Maieſtie, to pardon vs our faults and ſinnes, which we do againſt his law and commandements: And ſo by the Saints praiers in Heauen, and by our owne

that we make to his diuine Maieſtie, he giueth vs what we haue need of, and the Diuell hath no power ouer vs; and can doe vs no hurt. That if they had this beleefe they ſhould be eue as we are. That the Diuell ſhould not be able to doe them any more harme, and they ſhould not want what ſhould be needfull for them. Then the ſaid Sagamo ſaid vnto mee, that he granted all that I ſaid. I demanded of him what ceremony they vſed in praying to their God: he told me that they vſed no other ceremony, but that euery one did pray in his heart as he would. This is the cauſe why, I beleeue, there is no law among them, neither doe they know what it is to worſhip or pray to God, and liue the moſt part as brute beaſts: And I beleeue that in ſhort time they might be brought to be good Chriſtians, if one would inhabit their land, which moſt of them doe deſire. They haue among them ſome Sauages whom What Sauages ſpeake to the Diuell.they call Pilotoua, who ſpeake viſibly to the Diuell, and he telleth them what they muſt doe, as well for warres as for other things: And if he ſhould command them to goe and put any enterpriſe in execution, or to kill a French man or any other of their nation, they will immediately obey to The Sauages do beleeue firmly in dreames.his command. They beleeue alſo that all their dreames are true; and indeed, there be many of them which doe ſay that they haue ſeene and dreamed things that doe happen, or ſhall come to paſſe: but to ſpeake thereof in truth they be viſions of the Diuell, who doth deceiue and ſeduce them. So farre Monſieur Champleins report. As for our Souriquois, and other their neighbours, I can ſay nothing elſe, but that they are deſtitute of all knowledge of God, haue no Adoration, neither doe they make any diuine ſeruice, liuing in a pitifull ignorance; which ought to touch the hearts both of Chriſtian Princes, and Prelates, who very A leſſon for Chriſtian Princes and Prelates.often doe employ vpon friuolous things that which would be more than ſufficient to eſtabliſh there many Colonies, which would beare their names, about whom theſe poore people would flocke and aſſemble themſelues. I do

not ſay they ſhould goe thither in Perſon, for their preſence is heere more neceſſary, and beſides euery one is not fit for the Sea: but there are ſo many perſons well diſpoſed that would imploy themſelues on that, if they had the meanes: They then that may doe it are altogether vnexcuſable. To all ſorts and degrees of people.Our preſent age is fallen, as one might ſay, into an Astorgie, wanting both loue and Chriſtian charity, and retaine almoſt nothing of that fire which kindled our Fathers either in the time of our firſt Kings, or in the time of the Croiſades for the holy land; yea contrariwiſe if any venture his life, and that little meanes he hath, vpon this generous Chriſtian worke, the moſt part doe mocke him for it, like to the Salamandre, which doth not liue in the middeſt of flames, as ſome doe imagine, but is of ſo cold a nature that ſhee killeth them by her coldneſſe. Euery one would runne after treaſures, and would carry them away without paines taking, and afterward to liue frolike; but they come too late for it, and they ſhould haue enough if Luk. 12. verſ. 31.they did beleeue, as is meet to doe, in him that hath ſaid: Seeke firſt the kingdome of God, and all theſe things ſhall be giuen vnto you ouer and aboue.
               
               Let vs returne to our Sauages, for whoſe conuerſion it reſteth vnto vs to pray to God that it will pleaſe him to open the meanes to make a plentifull harueſt to the further manifeſtation of the Goſpell: for ours, and generally all thoſe people euen as farre as Florida incluſiuely, are very eaſie to be brought to the Chriſtian religion, according as I may coniecture of them which I haue not ſeene, by the diſcourſe of Hiſtories. But I finde that there ſhall be more facility in them of the neerer lands, as from Cap-Breton to Malebarre, becauſe they haue not any ſhew of religion (for I call not religion vnleſſe there be ſome Latria and diuine ſeruice) nor tillage of ground (at leaſt as farre as Chouakoet) which is the chiefeſt thing that may draw men to beleeue as one would, by reaſon-that out from the Earth commeth all that which is neceſſarie for the life, after the

generall vſe we haue of the other Elements. Our life hath chiefely need of meat, drinke and clothing. Theſe people (as one may ſay) haue nothing of all that, for it is not to be called couered, to be alwaies wandring and lodged vnder foure ſtakes, and to haue a skinne vpon their backe: neither doe I call eating and liuing, to eat all at once and ſtarue The right meanes to bring the Sauages to ones deuotion. Gen. 28. 20.the next day, not prouiding for the next day. Whoſoeuer then ſhall giue bread and clothing to this people, the ſame ſhall be, as it were, their God, they will beleeue all that he ſhall ſay to them. Euen as the Patriarch Iacob did promiſe to ſerue God if he would giue him bread to eat and garments to couer him. God hath no name: for all that wee can ſay, cannot comprehend him. But we call him God, becauſe hee giueth. And man in giuing may by reſemblance be called God. Cauſe (ſaith S. Gregorie Nazianzene) 
                  
                     Greg. Nazian in the oration of the care for the poore.that thou beeſt a God towards the needie, in imitating Gods mercifulneſſe. For man hath nothing ſo diuine in him as benefits. The heathen haue knowen this, and amongſt others Pliny, when he ſaith, that it is a great ſigne 
                     Plin. lib. 2. 7.of diuinitie in a mortall man, to helpe and aide an other mortall man. Theſe people then enioying the fruits of the vſe of trades and tillage of the ground, will beleeue all that ſhall be told them, in auditum auris, at the firſt voice that ſhal ſound in their eares: and of this haue I certain proofes, becauſe I haue knowen them wholly diſpoſed thereunto by the communication they had with vs; and there bee ſome of them that are Chriſtians in minde, & do performe the acts of it, in ſuch wiſe as they can, though they be not baptiſed: among whom I will name Chkoudun, Captaine (alias Sagamos) of the riuer of Saint Iohn, mentioned in the beginning of this worke, who, whenſoeuer he eateth, lifteth vp his eies to heauen, and maketh the ſigne of the croſſe, becauſe he hath ſeene vs doe ſo: yea at our praiers he did kneele downe as we did: And becauſe he hath ſeene a great croſſe planted neere to our fort, he hath made the like at his houſe, and in all his cabins; and carieth one at

his breſt, ſaying, that he is no more a Sauage, and acknowledging plainly, that they are beaſts (ſo hee ſaith in his language) but that he is like vnto vs, deſiring to be inſtructed. That which I ſay of this man, I may affirme the ſame almoſt of all the others: And though he ſhould be alone, yet hee is capable, being inſtructed, to bring in all the reſt.
               The Armouchiquois are a great people, which haue likewiſe no adoration: and being ſetled, becauſe they manure the ground, one may eaſily make a congregation of them, and exhort them to that which is for their ſaluation. Lib. 1. chap. 7.They are vicious and bloody men, as we haue ſaid heeretofore: but this inſolencie proceeds for that they feele themſelues ſtrong, by reaſon of their multitude, and becauſe they liue more at eaſe than the others, reaping the fruits of the earth. Their countrie is not yet well knowen, but in that ſmall part that wee haue diſcouered, I finde A conformity betweene the Armouchiquois and the naturall Virginians. The religion of the Virginians.they haue conformitie with them of Virginia, except in the ſuperſtition & error, in that which concerneth our ſubiect, for as much as the Virginians doe begin to haue ſome opinion of a ſuperior thing in nature, which gouerneth heere this world. They beleeue in many gods (as an Engliſh Hiſtorian that dwelt there reporteth) which they call Montóac, but of ſundry ſorts and degrees. One alone is chiefe and great, who hath euer beene, who purpoſing to make the world, made firſt other gods, for to be meanes and inſtruments, wherewith he might ſerue himſelfe in the Creation and in the gouernment. Then afterwards the Sunne, the Moone and the Starres, as demy gods, and inſtruments of the other Principall order. They hold that the woman was firſt made, which by coniunction with one of the gods had children. All theſe people doe generally beleeue the immortality of the ſoule, and that after death good men are in reſt, and the wicked in paine: Now them that they eſteeme to be the wicked are their enemies, and they the good men: In ſuch ſort that, in their opinion, they ſhall all after death be well at eaſe, and ſpecially when

they haue well defended their country, and killed many of their enemies. And as touching the reſurrection of the Fabulous tales of the reſurrection.bodies, there are yet ſome nations in thoſe parts that haue ſome glimpſe of it. For the Virginians doe tell tales of certaine men riſen againe, which ſay ſtrange things: As of one wicked man, who after his death had beene neere to the mouth of Popoguſſo (which is their Hell) but a god ſaued him, and gaue him leaue to come againe into the world, for to tell his friends what they ought to doe for to auoide the comming into this miſerable torment. Item, that yeare that the Engliſh men were there, it came to paſſe within 60. leagues off from them (as ſaid the Virginians) that a body was vnburied, like to the firſt, and did ſhew, that being dead in the pit, his ſoule was aliue, and had trauelled very farre, thorow a long and large way, on both ſides of which did grow very faire and pleaſant trees, bearing the rareſt fruits that can be ſeene: and that in the end he came to very faire houſes, neere to the which he found his father, which was dead, who expreſly commanded him to returne backe and to declare vnto his frinds the good which it behooued them to doe for to enioy the pleaſures of this place: And that after he had done his meſſage Hiſt. gen. of the Indies. 4. booke, the 124. chap.he ſhould come thither againe. The generall Hiſtory of the Weſt Indies reporteth, that before the comming of the Spaniards into Perou, they of Cuſco and thereabout, did likewiſe beleeue the reſurrection of the bodies. For ſeeing that the Spaniards, with a curſed auarice, opening the ſepulchers for to haue the gold and the riches that were in them, did caſt and ſcatter the bones of the dead heere and there, they praied them, not to ſcatter them ſo, to the end that the ſame ſhould not hinder them from riſing againe: which is a more perfect beleefe than that of the Sadduces, and of the Greekes, which the Goſpell and the Luc. 20. verſ. 27. Act. 17. verſ. 32.Acts of the Apoſtles witneſſe vnto vs that they ſcoffed at the reſurrection, as alſo, almoſt all the heathen antiquity hath done.
               
                  
Some of our Weſterne Indians, expecting this reſurrection, haue eſteemed that the ſoules of the good did got into heauen, & them of the wicked into a great pit or hole, which they thinke to be far off towards the Sunne ſetting, which they call Popoguſſo, there to burne for euer: and ſuch is the beleefe of the 
                     Ʋirginians: The others (as the Braſilians) that the wicked goe with Aignan, which is the euill ſpirit that tormenteth them: but as for the good, 4. Eſdras 7. ver. 31. 32. S. Paul to the Heb. ch. 11. at the end. Orig. 2. booke of principles.that they went behinde the Mountaines to dance and make good cheere with their fathers. Many of the ancient Chriſtians, grounded vpon certaine places of Eſdras, of S. Paul, and others, haue thought that after death our ſoules were ſequeſtred into places vnder the earth, as in Abrahams boſome, attending the iudgement of God: And there Origen hath thought that they are as in a Schoole of ſoules, and place of inſtruction, where they learne the cauſes and reaſons of the things they haue ſeene on the Earth, and by reaſoning make iudgements of conſequences of things paſt, and of things to come. But ſuch opinions haue beene reiected by the reſolution of the Doctours of Sorbone in the time of King Philip the faire, and ſince by the Councell of Florence. Now if the Chriſtians haue held that opinion, is it much to theſe poore Sauages to bee entred in thoſe opinions that we haue recited of them?
               As concerning the worſhipping of their gods, of all them that be out of the Spaniſh dominion, I finde none but the Virginians that vſe any diuine ſeruice (vnleſſe we will alſo comprehend therein, that which the Floridians doe, which we will recite heereafter) They then repreſent their gods in the ſhape of a man, which they call Kevuaſovuock. One onely is named Kevuas. They place them in houſes and Temples, made after their faſhion, which they call Machicómuck, wherein they make their praiers, ſinging and 
                     S. Aug. 4. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 31.
                  offering to thoſe gods. And ſeeing we are fallen to ſpeake of infidels, I praiſe rather the ancient Romans who were aboue 173. yeares without any images of Gods, as S. Auguſtin
                  
ſaith. Numa Pompilius hauing wiſely forbidden to make any, becauſe that ſuch a fooliſh and ſenſeles thing made them to be deſpiſed, and from this contempt came, that the people did caſt out all feare, nothing being better than to worſhip them in ſpirit ſeeing they are ſpirits. And Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7.indeed Pliny ſaith: That there is nothing which ſheweth more the weakneſſe of mans wit, than to ſeeke to aſſigne ſome image or figure to God. For in what part ſoeuer that God ſheweth himſelfe he is all ſenſe, all ſight, all hearing, all ſoule, all vnderſtanding: and finally he is all of himſelfe, without vſing any organe. The ancient Germans inſtructed in this doctrine, not onely did admit no images of their gods (as ſaith Tacitus) but alſo would not that they ſhould be drawen or painted againſt the walles, nor ſet in any humane forme, eſteeming that to derogate too much from the greatnes of the heauenly power. It may be ſaid among vs that figures and repreſentations are the bookes of the vnlearned: but leauing diſputations aſide, it were fitting that euery one ſhould be wiſe and wel inſtructed, and that no body ſhould be ignorant.
               
                  The Sauages haue the induſtrie both of painting and caruing. Our Souriquois and Armouchiquois Sauages, haue the induſtry both of painting and caruing, and doe make pictures of beaſts, birds and men, as well in ſtone as in wood, as pretilie as good workemen in theſe parts; and notwithſtanding they ſerue not themſelues with them in adoration, but onely to pleaſe the ſight, and the vſe of ſome priuat tooles, as in Tabacco-pipes. And in that (as I haue ſaid at the firſt) though they be without diuine worſhip, I praiſe them more than the Virginians and all other ſorts of people, which more beaſts than the very beaſts worſhip and reuerence ſenſeleſſe things.
               
                  The Floridians. Captaine Laudonniere in his Hiſtory of Florida, ſaith that they of that Country haue no knowledge of God, nor of any religion, but of that which appeareth vnto them, as the Sunne and the Moone; to whom, neuertheleſſe, I finde not in all the ſaid Hiſtory that they make any adoration,

ſauing that when they goe to warie, the Paracouſi maketh ſome praier to the Sunne for to obtaine victory, and which being obtained he yeeldeth him praiſes for it, with ſongs to the honour of him, as I haue more particularly ſpoken in my firſt booke the 10. chapter. And notwithſtanding 
                     Belleforeſts falſe report.
                  Monſieur De Belleforeſt writeth to haue taken from the ſaid Hiſtory that which he mentioneth of their bloudie ſacrifices, like to them of the Mexicains, aſſembling themſelues in one field, and ſetting vp there their lodges, where after many dances and ceremonies, they lift vp in the aire and offer to the Sunne, him vpon whom the lot is fallen to be ſacrificed. If he bee bold in this thing, he preſumeth no leſſe where he writeth the like of the people of Canada, whom he maketh ſacrificers of humane bodies, although they neuer thought on it. For if Captaine Iames Quartier hath ſeen ſome of their enemies heads, dreſſed like leather, ſet vpon peeces of wood, it doth not follow that they haue beene ſacrificed, but it is their cuſtome to doe ſo, like to the ancient Gaulois, that is to ſay, to take off the heads of their enemies whom they haue killed, and to ſet them vp in, or without their Cabins as a Trophee: which is vſuall thorow all the Weſt Indies.
               To returne to our Floridians, if any one will call the honour they doe to the Sunne, to be an act of religion, I will not contrary him. For in the old time of the golden age, when that ignorance found place amongſt men, many (conſidering the admirable effects of the Sunne and of the Moone, wherewith God vſeth to gouerne things in this low world) attributed vnto them the reuerence due to the Creator: And this maner of reuerence is expounded vnto Iob 31. verſ. 26. 27.vs by Iob, when he ſaith: If I haue beholden the Sunne in his brightneſſe, and the Moone running cleere: and if my heart hath been ſeduced in ſecret, and my mouth hath kiſſed my hand: this alſo had beene an iniquity to be condemned: for I had denied the great God aboue. As for the hand kiſſing it is a kind of reuerence which is yet obſerued in doing homages.

Not being able to touch the Sunne, they ſtretch forth their hands towards it, then kiſſed it: or they touched his Idoll, and afterwards did kiſſe the hand that had touched it. And into this idolatry did the people of Iſrael ſometime fall, as we ſee in Ezechiel. 
                  Ezech 8. ver. 16. Braſilians.
               
               In regard of the Braſilians, I finde by the diſcourſe of Iohn De Leri (whom I had rather follow than a Spaniſh Authour, in that which he hath ſeene) that not onely they are like vnto ours, without any forme of religion or knowledge of God, but that they are ſo blind and hardned in their anthropophagie, that they ſeeme to be in no wiſe capable of the Chriſtian doctrine. Alſo they are viſibly tormented and beaten by the diuell (which they call Aignan) and with ſuch rigor, that when they ſee him come, ſometimes in the ſhape of a beaſt, ſometimes of a bird, or in ſome ſtrange forme, they are as it were, in deſpaire. Which is not with the other Sauages, more hitherward, towards New-found-land, at leaſt with ſuch rigor. For Iames Quartier reporteth that he caſeth earth in their eies, and they call him Cudoüagni: & there, where we were (where they call him Aoutem) I haue ſometimes heard that he had ſcratched Membertou, being then, as it were, a kinde of Soothſaier of the Country. When one tels the Braſilians that one muſt beleeue in God, they like that aduice well enough, but by and by they forget their leſſon and returne againe to their owne vomit, which is a ſtrange brutiſhnes, not to be willing at the leaſt to redeeme themſelues from the diuels vexation, by religion Which maketh them vnexcuſable, ſeeing alſo they haue ſome memory remaining in them of the generall flood, and of the Goſpell (if it be ſo that their report be true) for they make mention in their ſongs that the waters being once ouerflowne, did couer all the earth, and all men were drowned, except their Grandfathers, who ſaued themſelues vpon the higheſt In the firſt booke third Chapter.trees of their Country. And of this flood other Sauages, mentioned by me elſe where, haue alſo ſome tradition.

As concerning the Goſpell, the ſaid de Leri ſaith, that hauing once found occaſion to ſhew vnto them the beginning of the world, and how it is meet to beleeue in God, and their miſerable condition, they gaue eare vnto him with great attention, being all amazed for that which they had heard: and that thereupon, an ancient man, taking vpon him to ſpeake, ſaid, that in truth he had recited wonderful things vnto them, which made him to call to minde, that which many times they had heard of their Grandfathers, that of a long time ſithence a Mair (that is to ſay, a ſtranger, clothed and bearded like to the Frenchmen) had beene there, thinking to bring them to the obedience of the God which he declared vnto them, and had vſed the like exhortatiō vnto them: but that they would not beleeue him. And therefore there came another thither, who, in ſigne of acurſe, gaue them their armours, wherewith ſince they haue killed one another: and that there was no likelihood they ſhould forſake that maner of life, becauſe that all their neighbour Nations would mocke them for it.
               But our Souriquois, Canadians and their neighbours are not ſo hardened in their wicked life, no neither the Virginians nor Floridians, but will receiue the Chriſtian doctrine very eaſily, when it ſhall pleaſe God to ſtirre vp them that be able to ſuccour them, neither are they viſibly tormented, beaten and torne by the Diuell, as this barbarous people of Braſil, which is a ſtrange malediction, more particular vnto them, than to other Nations of thoſe parts. Which maketh me beleeue that the voice of the Apoſtles may haue reached ſo farre, according to the ſaying of the ſaid old ancient man, to which hauing ſtopped their eares, they beare a particular puniſhment for it, not common to others, which peraduenture haue neuer heard the word of God, ſince the vniuerſall floud, whereof all thoſe Nations, in more than three thouſand leagues of ground haue an obſcure knowledge, which hath beene giuen them by tradition from father to ſonne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               Of the Sooth-ſaiers and Maſters of the Ceremonies among the Indians.
               I Will not call (as ſome haue done) by the name of Prieſts, them that make the ceremonies and inuocations of diuels among the Weſt Indies, but in as much as they haue the vſe of ſacrifices and gifts that they offer to their Gods, Hebr. 8. verſ. 3.for as much as (as the Apoſtle ſaith) euery Prieſt or Biſhop is ordained to offer gifts and ſacrifices: ſuch as were them of Mexico, the greateſt whereof was called Papas, who offered incenſe to their Idols, the chiefe of them was that of the god whom they did name Vitzilipuztli, although neuertheleſſe, the generall name of him, whom they held for ſupreame Lord and author of all things, was Viracocha, to whom they attributed excellent qualities, calling him Pachacamac, which is, Creator of Heauen and Earth: and Vſapu, which is, admirable, and other ſuch like names. They had alſo ſacrifices of men, as them of Perou haue yet, which they ſacrificed in great number, as Ioſeph Acosta 
                  Ioan. Acoſta, lib. 5. ch. 20. 21.
                  diſcourſeth thereof at large. Thoſe may be called Prieſts or Sacrificers: But in regard of them of Virginia and Florida, I doe not ſee any ſacrifices they make, and therefore I will qualifie them with the name of Wiſards, or Maſters of the Ceremonies of their religion, which in Florida I finde to be called Iarvars, and Ioanas: in Virginia, Vuiroances: in Braſill Caribes: and among ours (I meane the Soriquois) Aütmoins. Laudonniere, ſpeaking of Florida: 
                  They haue (ſaith he) their Prieſts, vnto whom they giue great credit, becauſe they be great Magicians, great Soothſaiers and callers on diuels. Theſe Prieſts doe ſerue them for Phyſicians and Chirurgians, and carrie alwaies with them a bagge full of hearbes and drugges to phyſicke them that be ſicke, which be, the moſt part, of the great pockes: for they loue women and maidens very much, whom they

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
call the daughters of the Sunne. If there be any thing to be treated, the King calleth the Iarvars, and the ancienteſt men, and demandeth their aduice. See moreouer what I haue written heeretofore in the ſixt Chapter of the firſt Virginia.booke. As for them of Virginia, they are no leſſe ſuttle than them of Florida, and do procure credit to themſelues, making them to be reſpected, by trickes or ſhew of religion, like to them that we haue ſpoken of in the laſt chapter, Atoſta 6. booke ch. 19.
                  ſpeaking of ſome dead men riſen vp againe. It is by ſuch meanes, and vnder pretect of religion that the Inguas made themſelues heeretofore the greateſt Princes of America. And them of theſe parts that would deceiue and blinde the people haue likewiſe vſed of that ſuttelty, as Numa Pompilius, Liſander, Sertorius, and other more recent, doing (as ſaith Plutarke) as the plaiers of tragedies, who deſirous to ſhew foorth things, ouerreaching the humane ſtrength, haue refuge to the ſuperior power of the Gods.
               The Aoutmoins of the laſt land of the Indies which is the neereſt vnto vs, are not ſo blockiſh but that they can make the common people to attribute ſome credit vnto them. For by their impoſtures they liue and make themſelues eſteemed to be neceſſary, playing the part of Phyſicions and Chirurgions as well as the Floridians. Let the great The Phyſicions and Chirurgions of the Sauages.
                  Sagamos Membertou be an example thereof. If any body be ſicke, he is ſent for, he maketh inuocations on his diuell, he bloweth vpon the part grieued, he maketh inciſions, ſucketh the bad bloud from it: if it be a wound he healeth it by the ſame meanes, applying a round ſlice of the Beauers ſtones. Finally, ſome preſent is made vnto him, either of veniſon or skinnes. If it be queſtion to haue newes of things abſent, hauing firſt queſtioned with his ſpirit, he rendreth his oracles commonly doubtfull, very often falſe, but ſometimes true: as when he was asked whether Panoniac were dead, he ſaid, that vnleſſe he did returne within fifteene daies, they ſhould not expect him any more, and that he was killed by the Armouchiquois. And for to haue

this anſwer he muſt be preſented with ſome gift. For there is a triuiall prouerbe among the Greekes, which beareth, That without mony Phoebus Oracles are dumbe. The ſame Membertou rendered a true Oracle of our comming to Monſieur du Pont, when that he parted from Port Royall, ſor to returne into France, ſeeing the 15. daie of Iuly paſſed without hauing any newes. For he did maintaine ſtill, and did affirme that there ſhould come a ſhip, and that his diuell had told it him. Item when the Sauages be a hungred they conſult with Membertous Oracle, and he ſaith vnto them, Go yee to ſuch a place & you ſhal finde game. It happeneth ſometimes that they finde ſome, and ſometimes none. If it chance that none be found, the excuſe is, that the beaſt is wandering and hath changed place: but ſo it comes to paſſe, that very often they finde ſome: And this is it which makes them beleeue that this diuell is a god, and they know none other, to whom notwithſtanding they yeeld not any ſeruice nor adoration in any forme of religion.
               
                  How the Aoutmoins inuocate the Diuell. When that theſe Aoutmoins make their mowes and moppes, they fix a ſtaffe in a pit, to which they tie a cord, and putting their head into this pit, they make inuocations or coniurations in a language vnknowen to the others that are about, and this with beatings and howlings, vntill they ſweat with very paine: yet I haue not heard that they ſome at the mouth as the Turkes doe. When this diuell is come, this maſter Aoutmoin makes them beleeue that he holdeth him tied by his cord, and holdeth faſt againſt him, forcing him to giue him an anſwer before he let him goe. By this is knowen the ſubtilty of this enemy of nature, who beguileth thus theſe miſerable creatures, and his pride withall, in willing that they which doe call vpon him, yeeld vnto him more ſubmiſſion then euer the holy Patriarches and Prophets haue done to God, who haue onely praied with their faces towards the ground. A ſong to the praiſe of the Divell.
               
               That done he beginneth to ſing ſome thing (as I thinke)

to the praiſe of the diuell, who hath diſcouered ſome game vnto them: and the other Sauages that are there doe anſwer, making ſome concordance of muſicke among them. Then they dance after their maner, as we will heereafter ſay, with ſongs which I vnderſtand not, neither thoſe of ours that vnderſtood their ſpeech beſt. But one day going to walke in our Medowes along the riuer, I drew neere to Membertous cabine, and did write in my table booke part of that which I vnderſtood, which is written there yet in theſe termes; haloet ho ho hé he ha ha haloet ho ho hé, which they did repeat diuers times. The tune is in my ſaid table booke in theſe notes: re fa ſol ſol re ſol ſol fa fa re re ſol ſol fa fa. One ſong being ended, they all made a great exclamation, ſaying E! Then began againe another ſong, ſaying: Egrigna hau egrigna he he hu hu ho ho egrigna hau hau hau. The tune of this was, fa fa fa ſol ſol fa fa re re ſol ſol fa fa re fa fa ſol ſol fa. Hauing made the vſuall exclamation they began yet another ſong which was: Tameia alleluia tameia dou veni hau hau hé hé. The tune whereof was: ſol ſolſolfafarererefafaſolfaſolfafarere. I attentiuely harkned vpon this word alleluia repeated ſundry times, and could neuer heare any other thing. Which maketh mee thinke that theſe ſongs are to the praiſes of the diuel, if notwithſtanding this word ſignifie with them that which it ſignifieth in Hebrew, which is, Praiſe ye the Lord. All the other Nations of thoſe Countries doe the like: but no body hath particularily deſcribed their ſongs, ſauing Iohn de Leri, who ſaith that the Braſilians doe make as good agreements, in their Sabbaths. And being one day at their ſolemnity he doth report that they ſaid, Hè hè hè hè hè hè hè hè hè hè; with this note: fa fa ſol fa fa ſol ſol ſol ſol ſol. And that done they cried out and howled after a fearefull maner the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, and the women did skip violently in the aire vntill they fomed at the mouth: then began againe their muſike, ſaying: Heu heür aüre heür a heür aüre heüra heura ouech: the note is, fa mi re ſol
                  
                  ſolſolfa mire mire mi vt re. This author ſaith that in this ſong, they bewailed their deceaſſed fathers, which were ſo valiant, and neuertheleſſe they comforted themſelues for that after their death, they were aſſured to goe to them behinde the high Mountaines, where they ſhould daunce and be merry with them. Likewiſe that they had, with all vehemency, threatned the Ouetacas their enemies to be in very ſhort time taken and eaten by them, according as the Caraibes had promiſed them: and that they had alſo made mention of the floud ſpoken of in the former chapter. I leaue vnto them that doe write of Demonomanie to philoſophize vpon that matter. But moreouer, I muſt ſay that whileſt our Sauages do ſing in that maner before ſaid, there be ſome others which doe nothing elſe but ſay He or Het (like to a man that cleaueth wood) with a certaine motion The daunces of the Sauages.of the armes: and daunce in round, not holding one another, nor moouing out of one place, ſtriking with their feet againſt the ground, which is the forme of their daunces, like vnto thoſe which the ſaid De Leri reporteth of them of Braſill, which are aboue 1500. leagues from that place. After which things our Sauages make a fire and leap ouer Leuit. 20. ve 2. 3. Deuter. 12. verſ. 31. and 18. verſ. 10. and 4. of Kin. 17. veſ. 17. 31. Pſal. 106.it, as the ancient Cananites, Ammonites, and ſometimes the Iſraelites did: but they are not ſo deteſtable, for they doe not ſacrifice their Children to the diuell, thorow the fire. Beſides all this, they put halfe a pole out of the top of the Cabin where they are, at the end whereof there is ſome Matachias, or ſome thing elſe tied, which the diuell carieth away. Thus haue I heard the diſcourſe of their maner of doing in this matter.
               
                  S. Iohns bonfire. There may be heere conſidered a bad vſe to leape ouer the fire, and to make the children to paſſe thorow the flame in the fire made vpon S. Iohn Baptiſts day; which Theod. vpon the 16. chap. of the foorth booke of Kings.cuſtome indureth yet to this day among vs, and ought to be reformed. For the ſame commeth from the ancient abominations that God hath ſo much hated, whereof Theodoret ſpeaketh in this wiſe: I haue ſeene (ſaith he) in ſome
                  
                  Townes piles of wood kindled once a yeare, and not onely children to leape ouer them, but alſo men, and the mothers bearing their children ouer the flame, which did ſeeme vnto them to be as an expiation and purification. And this in my iudgement was the ſinne of Achaz.
               
               Theſe faſhions haue beene forbiddeen by an ancient Can. 65. Synod. 6. in Trullo.Councell holden at Conſtantinople. Whereupon Balſamon doth note that the 23. daie of Iune (which is Saint Iohn Baptiſt eue) men and women did aſſemble themſelues at the Sea ſhore and in houſes, and the eldeſt daughter was dreſſed like a bride, and after they had made good cheare and well drunke, daunces were made, with exclamations and fires all the night, prognoſticating of good and bad lucke. Theſe fires haue beene continued among vs, vpon a better ſubiect. But the abuſe muſt be taken away.
               
                  The diuell will be ſerued as God. Now as the diuell hath alwaies beene willing to play the ape, and to haue a ſeruice like to that which is giuen to God, ſo would hee that his officers ſhould haue the marke of their trade, to the end to deceiue the ſimple people the better. And indeed Membertou, of whom we haue ſpoken, as a learned Aoutmoin, carieth hanged at his necke the marke of this profeſſion, which is a purſe trianglewiſe, couered with their imbrodery worke, that is to ſay with Matachiaz, within which there is I know not what as bigge as a ſmall nut, which he ſaith to be his diuell called Aoutem, which they of Canada doe name Cudouagni, as ſaith Iames Quartier. I will not mingle ſacred things with prophane, but according as I haue ſaid that the diuell plaieth the ape, this maketh me to remember of the Rational or Pectoral of iudgement, which the high Prieſt did carry before him in the ancient law, on the which Moſes had put 
                     Ʋrim and Thummim. Now Rabbi Dauid ſaith that it is not knowen what theſe 
                     Ʋrim and Thummim were, and it ſeemeth that they were ſtones. Rabbi Selomoh ſaith that it was the name of God Iehouah, an in effable name, which he did put within the foldes of the Pectoral, whereby he made

his word to ſhine. Ioſephus doth thinke that they were Twelue pretious ſtones. S. Hierome doth interpret theſe two words to ſignifie Doctrine and Truth.
               
               And as the Prieſtly office was ſucceſſiue, not onely in the houſe of Aron, but alſo in the family of the great Prieſt of Memphis, whoſe office was aſſigned to his eldeſt ſonne after him, as Thyamis ſaith in the Ethiopian Hiſtory of Heliodorus: Euen ſo among theſe people this office is ſucceſſiue; and by tradition they doe teach the ſecret thereof to their eldeſt ſonnes. For Membertous eldeſt ſonne (who was named Iudas, in ieſt, for which he was angry, vnderſtanding it was a bad name) told vs, that after his father, he ſhould be Aoutmoin in that precinct: which is a ſmall matter: for euery Sagamos hath his Aoutmoin, if himſelfe be not ſo, but yet they couet the ſame, for the profit that commeth thereof.
               The Braſilians haue their Caraibes, who trauell thorow the villages, making the people beleeue that they haue communication with ſpirits, through whoſe meanes they can, not onely giue them victory againſt their enemies, but alſo, that of them depends the fertility or ſterility of the ground. They haue commonly a certaine kinde of belles or rattles in their hands, which they call Maraca, made with the fruit of a tree, as bigge as an Eſtriches egge, which they make hollow, as they doe heere the bottels of the Pilgrims that goe to Saint Iames: And hauing filled Thoſe bottles, or ratties are made of Pompions.them with ſmall ſtones, they make a noiſe with them, in their ſolemnities, like the bladders of hogges: and going from towne to towne they beguile the world, telling the people that their diuell is within the ſame. Theſe Maracas or Rattles wel decked with faire feathers, they ſticke in the ground the ſtafe that is thorow it, and doe place them all along and in the middeſt of the houſes, commanding that meat and drinke be giuen to them. In ſuch wiſe that theſe The impoſture of the Caraibes.
                  cogging mates, making the other poore idiots to beleeue (as the Sacrificers of the idoll Bel did heeretofore, of whom

mention is made in the Hiſtory of Daniel) that thoſe fruits doe eat and drinke in the night: euery houſholder giuing credit thereto, doth not faile to ſet neere theſe Maracas, meale, fleſh, fiſh, and drinke, which ſeruice they continue by the ſpace of fifteene daies or three weekes: and during that time they are ſo fooliſh as to perſwade themſelues that in ſounding with theſe Maracas, ſome ſpirit ſpeaketh vnto them, and attribute diuinity vnto them. In ſuch ſort that they would eſteeme it a great miſdeed to take away the meat that is preſented before thoſe faire belles, with which meates thoſe reuerend Caraibes doe meerely fatten themſelues. And ſo vnder falſe pretexts, is the world deceiued.
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               Of their Language.
               THe effects of the confuſion of Babel are come in as farre as to thoſe people whereof we ſpeake, as well as in the hither world. For I ſee that the Patagons doe ſpeake another language than them of Braſil, and they otherwiſe than the Peroüans, and the Peroüans are diſtinct Sundrie languages.from the Maxicans: the Iles likewiſe haue their peculiar ſpeech: they ſpeake not in Florida as they doe in Virginia: Our Souriquois and Etechemins vnderſtand not the Armouchiquois: nor theſe the Iroquois: briefely, euery Nation is diuided by the language: yea in one and the ſelfe ſame Prouince there is difference in language, euen as in Gallia the Fleming, they of Baſſe Bretaigne, the Gaſcon and the Baſque doe not agree. For the Authour of the Hiſtory of Virgnia ſaith, that there euery Wiroans, or Lord, hath his peculiar ſpeech. Let this be for example, that the chiefe man or Captaine of ſome precinct (whom our Hiſtorians Iames Quartier and Laudonniere, doe call by the name of King) is called in Canada, Agohanna; among the Souriquois, Sagamos; in Virginia, Wiroans; in Florida, Paracuſſi; In the

Iles of Cuba, Cacique: the Kings of Perou, Inguas, and ſo foorth. I haue left the Armouchiquois and others, which I know not. As for the Braſilians they haue no Kings, but the old ancient men, whom they call Peoreroupichech, becauſe of the experience they haue of things paſt, are they which doe gouerne, exhort and diſpoſe of all things. The very tongues are changed, as we ſee, that with vs we haue not the language of the ancient Gaullois, nor that which was in Charolus Magnus time (at leaſt it doth differ very much) the Italians doe ſpeake no more Latin, nor the Grecians the ancient Greeke, ſpecially in the ſea coaſts, nor the Iewes the ancient Hebrew. In like maner Iames Quartier hath left vnto vs a kinde of Dictionary of the language of Canada, wherein our Frenchmen that haunt there, in theſe daies, vnderſtand nothing: and therefore I would not inſert it heere: onely I haue there found Caraconi which ſignifieth bread, and now they ſay Caracona, which I eſteeme to be a word of Baſque. For the ſatisfaction of ſome I will ſet heere ſome numbers of the ancient and new language of Canada.
               
               
                  
                     
                        The old.
                        The new.
                     
                     
                        1 Segada.
                        
                        1 Begou.
                        
                     
                     
                        2 Tigeni.
                        
                        2 Nichou.
                        
                     
                     
                        3 Aſhe.
                        
                        3 Nichtoa.
                        
                     
                     
                        4 Homacon.
                        
                        4 Rau.
                        
                     
                     
                        5 Oniſcon.
                        
                        5 Apateta.
                        
                     
                     
                        6 Indaic.
                        
                        6 Coutouachin.
                        
                     
                     
                        7 Ayaga.
                        
                        7 Neouachin.
                        
                     
                     
                        8 Addegue.
                        
                        8 Neſtouachin.
                        
                     
                     
                        9. Madellon.
                        
                        9 Peſcoüadet.
                        
                     
                     
                        10 Aſſem.
                        
                        10 Metren.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        The Souriquois doe ſay.
                        The Etechemins.
                        
                     
                     
                        1 Negous.
                        
                        1 Bechkon.
                        
                     
                     
                        2 Tabo.
                        
                        2 Nich.
                        
                     
                     
                        3 Chicht.
                        
                        3 Nach.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
4 Neou.
                        
                        4 Iau.
                        
                     
                     
                        5 Nan.
                        
                        5 Prenchk.
                        
                     
                     
                        6 Kamachin.
                        
                        6 Chachit.
                        
                     
                     
                        7 Eroeguenik.
                        
                        7 Coutachit.
                        
                     
                     
                        8 Meguemorchin.
                        
                        8 Erouiguen.
                        
                     
                     
                        9 Echkonadek.
                        
                        9 Pechcoquem.
                        
                     
                     
                        10 Metren.
                        
                        10 Peiock.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Conformity of languages. For the conformity of languages, there are ſometimes found words in theſe parts, which doe ſignifie ſome thing there, as Iohn de Leri ſaith, that Leri ſignifieth an Oiſter in Braſil: but very few words are found which come in one and the ſelfeſame ſignification. In Maffeus his Orient all 
                  Sagamos doth alſo ſignifie a King in the Eaſt Indies.Hiſtory I haue read Sagamos in the ſame ſignification as our Souriquois doe take it, to wit, a King, a Duke, a Captaine. And they that haue beene in Guinèe ſay, that this word Babougic ſignifieth there a little child, or a fawne of a beaſt, in that ſenſe as the ſaid Souriquois take that word, as this French word Mouſtache, which commeth of Miſtax, and that which we ſay in French boire a tire-larigot, which I conſtrue in Engliſh to drinke till ones eies be out, commeth of Larygx Lariggos &c. And the Greeke words Paradeiſos, Boſphoros, come from the Hebrew 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  The cauſe of the change of languages. But concerning the cauſe of the change of the language in Canada, whereof we haue ſpoken, I thinke that it hath happened by a deſtruction of people. For it is ſome eight yeeres▪, ſince the Iroquois did aſſemble themſelues to the number of 8000. men, and diſcomfited all their enemies, whom they ſurpriſed in their incloſures. To this I adde the trafficke which they make from time to time for their skinnes, ſince the French men came to fetch them: for in the time of Iames Quartier Beuers were not cared for. The hats that be made of it are in vſe but ſince that time: not that the inuention thereof is new: for in the ancient orders Beuer-hats.of the Hat-makers of Paris, it is ſaid that they ſhall make

hats of fine Beuers (which is the Caſtor) but whether it be for the deareneſſe, or otherwiſe, the vſe thereof hath beene long ſince left off.
               
                  Of the pronounciation. As for the Pronounciation, our Souriquois haue the Greeke (ȣ) which we call (v), and their words doe commonly end in (a) as Souriquois, Souriquoa: Captaine, Capitaina: Normand, Normandia: Baſque, Baſquoa: vne Martre (a Marten) Martra: a banquet, Tabaguia: &c. But there are certaine letters which they cannot well pronounce, that is to ſay, an (v) conſonant, and (f) in ſtead whereof they put (b) and (p) as for fevre (which is a ſmith) they will ſay (pebre.) And for (Sauvago, which ſignifieth Sauage) they ſay Chabaia, and ſo call they themſelues, not knowing in what ſenſe we take that word. And yet they pronounce the reſt of the French tongue better than our Gaſcons, who, beſides the turning of (v) into (b) and of the (b) into (v,) were yet diſcerned in the laſt troubles and badly handled in Prouence, by the pronouncing of In the booke of Iudges ch. 12. verſ. 6.the word (Cabre, in ſtead whereof they did ſay (Crabe,) as aforetime the Ephraiimtes hauing loſt the battel againſt the Galaadites, thinking to ſcape away, were well knowen in paſſing the riuer Iordan, in pronouncing the word Shibboleth, which ſignifieth an eare of Corne, in ſtead whereof they did ſay Sibboleth, which ſignifieth the foord of a riuer, asking if they might well paſſe. The Greekes had alſo a ſundry pronunciation of the ſelfeſame word, becauſe they had foure diſtinct tongues, varying from the common ſpeech. And in Plautus we read that the Peaeneſtins not farre diſtant from Rome did pronounce Konia, in ſtead of Ciconia. Yea euen at this day the good wiues of Paris doe yet ſay, mon Courin, for mon Couſin, which is my Cozen: and mon Mazi, for mon Mari, which ſignifieth huſband.
               
                  The Sauages haue a particular tongue. Now to returne to our Sauages: although that by reaſon of trafficke many of our Frenchmen doe vnderſtand them, notwithſtanding they haue a particular tongue, which is

onely knowen to them: which maketh me to doubt of that which I haue ſaid, that the language which was in Canada in the time of Iames Quartier is no more in vſe. For to accommodate themſelues with vs, they ſpeake vnto vs in the language which is to vs more familiar, wherein is much Baſque mingled with it: not that they care greatly to ſpeake our languages: for there be ſome of them which do ſometimes ſay, that they come not to ſeeke after vs: but by long frequentation they cannot but retaine ſome word or other.
               
                  Their maner of numbering. I will farther ſay, that concerning the numbers (ſeeing we haue ſpoken of it) they doe not recken diſtinctly as we doe, the daies, the weekes, the moneths, the yeares; but doe declare the yeares by number of ſummes, as for 100. yeares, they will ſay Cachmetren achtek, that is to ſay 100. Sonnes, bitumetrenaguè achtek 1000. Sonnes, that is to ſay 1000. yeares: metren knichkaminau, tenne Moneths, tabo metren guenak 20. daies. And for to ſhew an inumerable thing, as the people of Paris, they will take their haires or hands full of ſand: And after that maner doth the holy Scripture like wiſe vſe ſometimes to number, comparing (Hiperbolicalie) armies to the ſand that is on the Sea ſhore. They alſo ſignifie the ſeaſons by their effects, as for to make a man to vnderſtand that the Sagamos Poutrincourt will come at the ſpring time, they will ſay, nibir betour, Sagmo (for Sagamos, a word ſhortned) Poutrincourt betour kedretch; that is to ſay, the leafe being come, then will the Sagamos Poutrincourt come certainly. Therefore as they haue no diſtinction neither of daies nor of yeares, ſo be not they perſecuted, by the vngodlineſſe of their Creditors, as in theſe parts: neither doe their Aoutmoins ſhorten, nor lengthen, the yeares for to gratifie the Brokers and Bankers, as did, in ancient time, the Idolatrous Prieſts of Rome, to whom was attributed the gouernment and diſpoſing of Solin▪ Politi. Liſt. cap. 5.
                  times, ofſeaſons and of yeares, as Solin writeth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of the vſe of letters.
               
                  Of letters. IT is well knowen that theſe Weſterne Nations haue no vſe of letters, and it is that, which all them that haue written of them doe ſay they haue moſt admired, to ſee that by a peece of paper I giue knowledge of my will from one end of the world to the other▪ and they thought that there ſhould be enchantment in this paper. But that is not ſo much to be wondred at, if we conſider that in the time of the Romane Emperours, many Nations of theſe parts knew not the ſecrets of letters, amongſt whom Tacitus 
                  Dutch men.putteth the Germans (who at this day doe ſwarme with men of learning) and he addeth a notable ſentence, that good maners are in more credit there, then good lawes elſewhere.
               
                  Gaullois. As for our Gaullois, it was not ſo with them. For euen from the old time of the golden age they had the vſe of letters, yea (by the leaue of thoſe godly doctours who do call them Barbarous) before the Greekes and Latines. For Xenophon (who ſpeaketh largely of them, and of their beginning in his Aequiuoques) doth witneſſe vnto vs, that the letters which Cadmus brought to the Greekes were not ſo much like to the Phaenicien letters, as the Galatees were, that is the Gaullois. Wherein Caeſar did Aequiuocate in ſaying that the Druides did vſe of Greeke letters in priuate matters: for contrariwiſe the Greekes haue vſed of the See heereafter the 17. Chapter.
                  Gaullois letters. And Beroſe ſaith that the third King of the Gaullois, after the floud, named Sorron, did inſtitute Vniuerſities in theſe parts: and Diodorus doth adde that there was in the Gaulles Philoſophers and Diuines called Saronides (much more ancient then the Druides) which were greatly reuerenced, and vnto whom all the people did obey. The ſame Authours doe ſay, that Bardus, firſt King Diodor. lib. 
                        •
                     . Biblioth.of the Gaullois did inuent both rymes and muſike,

brought in Poets and Rhethoricians, who were called Bardes, whereof Caeſar and Strabo make mention. But the ſame Diodore writeth, that Poets were among them in ſuch reuerence, that when two armies were ready to ſtrike, hauing their ſwords drawen, and the iauelins in hand to giue the onſet, thoſe Poets comming, euery one did ſurceaſe and put vp their weapons: ſo much doth wrath giue place to wiſedome, yea among the wildeſt Barbarians, and ſo much doth Mars reuerence the Muſes, ſaith the Authour, So I hope that our moſt Chriſtian, moſt Auguſt, and moſt victorious king Henry the Fourth, after the thundring of beſieging of townes and battels is ceaſed, reuerencing The Kings eldeſt Daughter is the Vniuerſity of Paris. Geſnerus in the treaties of Serpents.the Muſes, and honoring them, as he hath alreadie done, not onely he will reduce his eldeſt daughter to her ancient glory, and giue vnto her being a roiall daughter, the proprietie of that Baſilic, faſtened to the temple of Apollo, who, by an hidden vertue, did hinder that the Spiders ſhould weaue their webbe along his walles: But will alſo eſtabliſh his New France, and bring to the boſome of the Church ſo many poore ſoules which that countrey beareth, al ſtarued for the want of the word of God, who are as a pray vnto hell: And that for to doe this hee will This French zeale ſhould ſtirre vp the Engliſh courage for Virginia.giue meanes to conduct thither, Chriſtian Sarronides and Bardes, bearing the Flower-deluce in their hearts, who will inſtruct and bring to ciuilitie thoſe barbarous people, and will bring them to his obedience.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Of their clothing and wearing of their haires.
               GOd in the beginning did create man naked, and innocent, made all the parts of his body to bee of honeſt ſight. But ſin hath made the members of generation to become ſhamefull vnto vs, and not vnto beaſts which haue no ſinne. It is the cauſe why our firſt parents

hauing knowen their nakedneſſe, deſtitute of clothes, did Genſ. 3.ſow figge leaues together for to hide their ſhame therewith: But God made vnto them coates of skinnes, and clothed them with it; and this before they went out of the gardē of Eden. Clothing then is not only to defend vs from cold, but alſo for decencie, and to couer our ſhame. And neuertheleſſe many nations haue anciently liued, and at this day doe liue naked, without apprehenſion of this ſhame, decencie, and honeſtie. And I maruell not of the Braſilien Sauages that are ſuch, as well men as women, nor of the ancient Picts (a nation of great Britaine) who (Herodian ſaith) had not any vſe of clothes, in the time of Seuerus the Emperour: nor of a great number of other nations that haue beene and yet are naked: for one may ſay of them, that they be people fallen into a reprobate ſenſe, and forſaken of God: But of Chriſtians which are in Aethiopia vnder the great Negus, whom we call Preſter-Ihon; 
                  Nakedneſſe of the Aethiopians.which, by the report of the Portingals that haue writen hiſtories of them, haue not their parts which wee call priuie members, any waies couered. But the Sauages of New France and of Florida, haue better learned and kept in minde the leſſon of honeſtie, than thoſe of Aethiopia. For they couer them with a skinne tied to a latch or girdle of leather, which paſſing between their buttocks, ioineth the other end of the ſaid latch behind. And for the reſt of their garments, they haue a cloake on their backs, made with many skinnes, whether they be of Otters or of Beauers: and one only skin, whether it be of Ellan, or Stagges skinne, Beare, or Luſerne, which cloake is tied vpward with a leather riband, and they thruſt commonly one arme out, but being in their cabins, they put it off, vnleſſe it be cold: And I cannot better compare it than to pictures that are made of Hercules, who killed a lion and put the skinne thereof on his backe. Notwithſtanding they haue more ciuilitie, in that they couer their priuie The Women.members. As for the women, they differ onely in one

thing, that is, they haue a girdle ouer the skin they haue on: and doe reſemble (without compariſon) the pictures that be made of Saint Iohn Baptiſt. But in Winter they make good Beuer ſleeues, tied behind, which keepe them very warme. And after this maner were the ancient Germans clothed, by the report of Caeſar and Tacitus, hauing the moſt part of the body naked.
               As for the Armouchiquois and Floridians they haue no furres, but onely ſhamois: yea the ſaid Armouchiquois haue very often but a peece of matte vpon their backe, for faſhions ſake, hauing neuertheleſſe their priuie members Gods prouidence.couered. God hauing ſo wiſely prouided for mans infirmitie, that in cold countries he hath giuen furres, and not in the hot, becauſe that otherwiſe men would make no eſteeme of them. And ſo for that which concerneth the body. Let vs come to the legges and feet, then we will end with the head.
               
                  Of Hoſing. Our Sauages in the Winter, going to ſea, or a hunting, doe vſe great and high ſtockings, like to our boote-hoſen, which they tie to their girdles, and at the ſides outward, there is a great number of points without tagges. I doe not ſee that they of Braſil or Florida, doe vſe of them, but ſeeing they haue leather, they may as well make of them, if they haue need as the others. Beſides theſe long ſtockings, Shooing.our Sauages doe vſe ſhooes, which they call Mekezin, which they faſhion very properly, but they cannot dure long, ſpecially when they goe into watrie places, becauſe they be not curried, nor hardened, but onely made after the maner of Buffe, which is the hide of an Ellan. Howſoeuer it be, yet are they in better order then The Gottes clothing.were the ancient Gottes, which were not throughly hoſed, but with buskins or halfe bootes, which came ſomewhat higher than the anckle of the foote, where they made a knot, which they bound with horſe haires, hauing the calfe of the legge, the knees and thighes naked. And for the reſt of their garments they had leather

coates pleated: as greaſie as Lard, and the ſleeues downe to the beginning of the arme. And on thoſe Ierkins in ſtead of gold lace, they made red borders, as our Sauages doe. Behold the ſtate of thoſe that ranſacked the Romane Empire, whom Sidonius Apollinaris Biſhop of Auuergne, 
                  Sidon. Ca
                        •
                     m. 7. & 
                        •
                     p. 20. lib. 4.
                  doth deſcribe after this maner, going to the Councell of Auitus the Emperour, for to treat of peace:
               
                  —Squalent vestes, acſordidamacro
                  Linteapingueſcunt tergo, nec tangere poſſunt
                  Altatae ſuram pelles, ac poplite nudo
                  Peronem pauper nudis ſuſpendit equinum, &c.
               
               
                  The Sauages head-attire. As for the head attire, none of the Sauages haue any, vnleſſe it bee that ſome of the hether lands trucke his skinnes with Frenchmen for Hattes and Cappes: but rather both men and women weare their haires flittring ouer their ſhoulders, neither bound nor tied, except that the men doe truſſe them vpon the crowne of the head, ſome foure fingers length, with a leather lace: which they let hang downe behinde. But for the Armouchiquois & Floridians, as well men as women, they haue their haires much longer, and they hang them downe lower than the girdle when they are vntruſſed: for to auoide then the hindrance that they might bring to them, they truſſe them vp as our horſe-keepers doe a horſes taile, and the men doe ſticke in them ſome feather that like them, and the women a needle or bodkin with three points after the faſhion of The Sauage Women weare Bodkins.the french Ladies, who alſo weare their needles or bodkins that ſerue them partly for an ornament of the head. All the ancient had this cuſtome to goe bareheaded, and the vſe of hats is but lately come in. The faire Abſalon was 2. Sam. 18. verſ. 9.hanged by his haires at an Oake, after he had loſt the battell againſt his fathers army, and they did neuer couer their heads in thoſe daies, but when they did mourne for ſome misfortune, as may be noted by the example of Dauid, who hauing vnderſtood his ſonnes conſpiracy fled Ibid▪ 15. ver. 30.from Ieruſalem, and went vp the Mountaine of Oliues

                  Eſter. 6. verſ. 12. weeping and hauing his head couered, and all the people that was with him. The Perſians did the like, as may be gathered by the Hiſtorie of Aman, who being commanded to honour him whom he would haue to be hanged, to wit Mardochee, went home to his houſe weeping, and his head couered, which was a thing extraordinary. The Romans at their beginning did the like, as I gather by the words which did command the hangman to doe his office, recited by Cicero and Titus Liuius in theſe termes: Vade lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubito, arbori infelici ſuſpendito. And if we will come to our Weſterly and Northerly people, we ſhall finde that the moſt part did were long haires, like vnto them that we call Sauages. That cannot be denied of the Tranſ-Alpin Gaullois, who for that occaſion gaue the name to Gallia Comata; whereof Martiall ſpeaking ſaith;

                     —Molleſque Flagellant Colla comae.
                  
               
               Our French Kings haue beene ſurnamed hairy, becauſe they did weare their haires ſo long that they did beat downe to the backe and the ſhoulders, ſo that Gregory of Tours ſpeaking of King Clouis haires, he calleth it Capillorum Flagella. The Gothes did the like, and left to hang ouer their ſhoulders great flockes of haires curled, which the authours of that time doe call granos, which faſhion of Concil. Braccarenſ. 1. Can. 29.
                  haires was forbidden to Prieſts, alſo the ſecular apparell, in a Councell of the Gothes: and Iornandes in the Hiſtory of the Gothes reciteth that King Atalaric would that the Prieſts ſhould were the Thiare, or hat, making two ſorts of people, ſome whom he called Pileatos, the others Capillatos, which theſe tooke for ſo great a fauour to be called hairy, that they made mention of this benefit in their ſongs: and notwithſtanding they braided not their haires. But I finde by the teſtimony of Tacitus that the Sueuians a Nation of Germany did wreath, knit, and tie their haires on the crowne of their heads, euen as we haue ſaid of the Souriquois and Armouchiquois. In one thing the Armouchiquois
                  
doe differ from the Souriquois and other Sauages of New-found-land, which is, that they pull out their haires before, which the others doe not. Contrary to whom, Pliny reciteth Plin. 6 booke chap. 13.that at the deſcent of the Ripheen Mountaines anciently was the region of the Arimpheons, whom we now call Muſcouites, who dwelt in foreſts, but they were all ſhauen as well men as women, and tooke it for a ſhamefull thing to weare any haires. So we ſee that one ſelfe ſame faſhion of liuing is receiued in one place and reiected in another. Which is familiarily euident vnto vs in many other things in our regions of theſe parts, where we ſee maners and faſhions of liuing, all contrary, yea ſometimes vnder one and the ſame Prince.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Of the forme, colour, ſtature, and actiuity of the Sauages: and incidently of the flies in thoſe Weſterne parts: and why the Americans be not blacke, &c.
               AMongſt all the formes of liuing and bodily creatures, that of man is the faireſt and the moſt perfect. Which was very decent, both to the creature and to the Creator, ſeeing that man is placed in this world to command all that is heere beneath. But although that Nature indeuoureth herſelfe alwaies to doe good, notwithſtanding ſhee is ſometimes ſhort and forced in her actions, and thereof it commeth that we haue monſters and vgly things, contrary to the ordinary rule of others. Yea euen ſometimes after that nature hath done her office, we helpe by our artes to render that which ſhe hath made, rediculous and miſshapen: As for example, the Braſilians are borne as faire as the common ſort of men, but comming out of the wombe, they are made deformed in ſquizing of their noſe, which is the chiefeſt part wherein conſiſteth the beauty of man. True it is that as in certaine Countries

                  The Braſilians be ſhort noſed. they praiſe the long noſes, in others the hawke noſes, ſo among the Braſilians it is a faire thing to be flat noſed, as alſo among the Moores of Africa, which we ſee to be all of the ſame ſort. And with theſe large noſtrils, the Braſilians are accuſtomed to make themſelues yet more deformed by Art, making great holes in their cheekes, and vnder the lower lippe, for to put therein greene ſtones and of other colours, of the bigneſſe of a teſter: ſo that thoſe ſtones being taken away, it is a hideous thing to ſee thoſe people. But in Florida, and euery where, on this ſide the Tropique of Cancer, our Sauages be generally goodly men, as they be in Europe: if there be any ſhort noſed one it is a rare thing. They be of a good ſtature, and I haue ſeene no dwarffes there, nor any that drew neere to it. Notwithſtanding (as I haue ſaid elſewhere) in the Mountaines of the Iroquois, which are beyond the great fall of the great riuer of Canada, there is a certaine Nation of Sauages, little men, valiant and feared euery where, which are more often aſſailers than defenders. But although that where we dwelt the men be of a good height, neuertheleſſe I haue ſeen none ſo tall as Monſieur De Poutrincourt, whoſe taleneſſe becommeth him very well. I will not ſpeake heere of the Patagons, a people which is beyond the riuer of Plate, whom Pighafetta in his voyage about the world, ſaith to be of ſuch an height, that the taleſt among vs could ſcarſe reach to their girdle. The ſame is out of the limits of our New France. But I will willingly come to the other circumſtances of body of our Sauages, ſeeing the ſubiect calleth vs thereunto.
               They are all of an Oliue colour, or rather tawny colour, like to the Spaniards, not that they be ſo borne, but being the moſt part of the time naked, they greaſe their bodies, 
                     The colour of the Sauages.
                     The importunity of flies.
                  and doe anoint them ſometimes with oile, for to defend them from the flies, which are very troubleſome, not onely, where we were, but alſo thorow all that new world and euen in Braſil, ſo that it is no wonder if Belzebub
                  
prince of flies hath there a great Empire. Theſe flies are The diſcription of the flies of New France.of a colour drawing towards red, as of corrupted bloud, which maketh me to beleeue that their generation commeth but from the rottenneſſe of woods. And indeed we haue tried that the ſecond yeare, being in a place ſomwhat more open, wee haue had fewer of them than at the firſt. They cannot endure great heat, nor winde: but otherwiſe (as in cloſe darke weather) they are very noyſome, by reaſon of their ſtings, which they haue, long for ſo ſmall a body: & they be ſo tender that if one touch them neuer ſo little they are ſquiſed. They begin to come about the 15. When the flies come in and when they goe out.of Iune, and doe retire themſelues in the beginning of September. Being in the Port De Campſeau in the moneth of Auguſt I haue not ſeene nor felt any one; whereof I did wonder, ſeeing that the nature of the ſoile and of the woods is all one. In September, after that this vermine is gone away, there grow other flies like vnto ours, but they are not troubleſome, and become very bigge. Now our Sauages The Sauages remodies againſt the flies.to ſaue themſelues from the ſtinging of theſe creatures, rubbe themſelues with certaine greaſes and oiles, as I haue ſaid, which make them foule and of a tawniſh colour. Beſides that alwaies they lie on the ground, or be expoſed to the heat and the wind.
               But there is cauſe of wondering, wherefore the Braſilians, and other inhabitants of America betweene the two Tropikes, are not borne blacke as they of Africa, ſeeing that it ſeemeth it is the ſelfeſame caſe, being vnder one and the ſelfeſame parallell and like eleuation of the Sunne. If the Poets fables were ſufficient reaſons for to take away this ſcruple, one might ſay that Phaeton hauing done the fooliſh deed in conducting the Charet of the Sunne, onely Africa was burned, and the horſes ſet againe in their right courſe, before they came to the New world. But I had rather From whence commeth the burning of Africa.
                  ſay, that the heat of Lybia, being the cauſe of this blackneſſe of men, is ingendred from the great lands ouer which the Sunne paſſeth before it come thither, from

whence the heat is ſtill carried more abundantly by the ſwift motion of this great Heauenly torch. Whereunto the great ſands of that Prouince doe alſo helpe, which are very capable of thoſe heates, ſpecially not being watered Frō whence proceedeth the cooling of America.with ſtore of riuers, as America is, which aboundeth in riuers and brookes as much as any Prouince in the World: which doe giue perpetuall refreſhing vnto it, and makes the region much more temperate: the ground being alſo there more fat, and retaining better the dewes of Heauen, which are there abundantly, and raines alſo, for the reaſons abueſaid. For the Sunne finding in the meeting of theſe lands thoſe great moiſtneſſes, he doth not faile to draw a good quantitie of them, and that ſo much the more plentifully, that his force is there great and maruellous: which makes there continuall raines, eſpecially to them that haue him for their zenith. I adde one great reaſon, that the Sunne leauing the lands of Africa, giueth his beames vpon a moiſt element by ſo long a courſe, that he hath good meanes to ſucke vp vapors, and to draw together with him great quantitie thereof into thoſe parts: which maketh that the cauſe is much differing of the colour of theſe two people, and of the temperature of their lands.
               
                  Black haires. Let vs come to other circumſtances, and ſeeing that we are about colours, I will ſay, that all they which I haue ſeene haue blacke haires, ſome excepted which haue abram colour haires: but of flaxen colour I haue ſeene none, and leſſe of red: and one muſt not thinke that they which are more Southerly be otherwiſe: for the Floridians and Braſilians are yet blacker than the Sauages of New found land. The beard of the chinne (which our Sauages call migidoni) is with them as blacke as their haires. They all take away the producing cauſe thereof, except the Sagamos, who for the moſt part haue but a little. Membertou hath more than all the others, and notwithſtanding it is not thicke, as it is commonly with Frenchmen. If theſe

people weare no beards on their chinne (at the leaſt the moſt part) there is no cauſe of maruelling. For the ancient Romans themſelues, eſteeming that that was a hinderance vnto them, did weare none, vntill the time of Adrian the Emperour, who firſt began to weare a beard. Which they tooke for ſuch an honour, that a man accuſed of any crime, had not that priuiledge to ſhaue his haires, as may be gathered by the teſtimonie of Aulus Gellius, ſpeaking A. Gel. li. 3 c. 4.
                  of Scipio, the ſonne of Paul. As for the inferiour parts, our Sauages doe not hinder the growing or increaſing of haires there. It is ſaid that the women haue ſome there alſo. And according as they be curious, ſome of our men haue made them beleeue, that the French women haue beards on their chinnes, and haue left them in that good opinion, ſo that they were very deſirious to ſee ſome of them, & their maner of clothing. By theſe particularities one may vnderſtand, that all theſe people haue generally leſſer haires than we: for along the body they haue none at all: ſo farre is it then that they be hairie as ſome thinke. This belongeth to the inhabitants of the Iles Gorgades, from whence Hanno the Carthaginien captaine brought two womens skinnes, which he did ſet vp in the temple of Iuno for great ſingularitie: But heere is to bee noted what we haue ſaid, that our ſauage people haue almoſt all their haires blacke: for the Frenchmen in one and the ſelfeſame degree are not commonly ſo. The ancient authors The corporall qualities of the ancient Gaullois.
                  Polybius, Caeſar, Strabo, Diadore the Cicilian, and particularly Ammian Marcellin, doe ſay, that the ancient Gaullois had almoſt all their haires as yellow as gold, were of high ſtature, and fearefull for their gaſtly lookes: beſides quarelſome and readie to ſtrike: a fearefull voice, neuer ſpeaking but in threatning. At this time thoſe qualities are well changed. For there are not now ſo many yellow haires: nor ſo many men of high ſtature, but that other nations haue as tall: As for the fearefull lookes, the delicacies of this time haue moderated that: and as for

the threatning voice, I haue ſcarſe ſeene in all the Gaules but the Gaſcons, and them of Languedoc, which haue their maner of ſpeech ſome what rude, which they retaine of the Gotiſh and of the Spaniard, by their neighbourhood. But as for the haires it is very farre from being ſo commonly blacke. The ſame author Ammian ſaith alſo, that the women of the Gaules (whom he noted to be good ſhrewes, and to bee too hard for their husbands, when they are in choler) haue blue eies: and conſequently the men: and notwithſtanding in that reſpect wee are much mingled: which maketh that one knoweth not what The beauty of the eies.rareneſſe to chuſe for the beautie of eies. For many doe loue the blue eies, and others loue them greene: which were alſo in ancient time moſt praiſed. For among the Sonnets of Monſieur de Couci, (who was in old time ſo great a clerke in loue matters, that ſongs were made of it) greene eies are praiſed.
               The Germans haue kept better than we the qualities which Tacitus giueth them, likewiſe that which Ammian reciteth of the Gaullois: In ſo great a number of men (ſaith Tacitus) there is but one faſhion of garments: They haue blue eies and fearefull, their haires ſhining as gold, and are very corpulent. Pliny giueth the ſame bodily qualities to the people of the Taprobane, ſaying that they haue redde haires, their eies blue, and the voice horrible and fearefull. Wherein I know not if I ought to beleeue him, conſidering the climate, which is in the 8, 9. and 10. degrees onely, and that in the kingdome of Calecute, farther off than the Aequinoctial line, the men are blacke. But as for our Sauages, concerning their eies, they haue them neither blue nor greene, but blacke for the moſt part, like to their haires: and neuertheleſſe their eies are not ſmall, as they of the ancient Scythians, but of a decent greatneſſe. And I may ſay aſſuredly and truely, that I haue ſeene there as faire boies and girles, as any can be in France. For as for the mouth, they haue no bigge mooriſh lippes, as in Africa,
                  
and alſo in Spaine; they are well limmed, well boned, and well bodied, competently ſtrong: and neuertheleſſe we had many in our company who might haue wreſtled well enough with the ſtrongeſt of them: but being hardned, there would be made of them very good men for the warre, which is that wherein they moſt delight. Moreouer, Monſtrous bodies. Plin. 6. booke, cap. 31.among them there is none of thoſe prodigious men whereof Pliny maketh mention, which haue no noſes in their faces, or no lips, or no tong: Item, which are without mouth, & without noſe, hauing but two ſmall holes, wherof one of them ſerueth for to breath, the other ſerueth in ſtead of a mouth: Item, which haue dogges heads, and a dogge for king: Item, which haue their heads on the breſt, or one onely eie in the middeſt of the forehead, or a flat broad foot to couer their heads when it raineth, and ſuch like monſters. There is none alſo of them which our Sauage Agohanna told captaine Iames Quartier that hee In this author his ſecond booke, chap. 25.had ſeene in Saguenay, whereof we haue ſpoken heeretofore. If there be any blinde with one eie, or lame (as it hapneth ſometimes) it is a caſuall thing, and commeth of hunting.
               Being well compoſed, they cannot chuſe but be nimble and ſwift in running. We haue ſpoken heeretofore of the nimbleneſſe of the Braſilians, Margaias and Ou-etacas: 
                  Nimbleneſſe of bodie, lib. 1. cap. 25.but all nations haue not thoſe bodily diſpoſitions. They which liue in mountains haue more dexteritie than they of the vallies, becauſe they breath a purer and cleerer aire, and that their food is better. In the vallies the aire is groſſer, and the lands fatter, and conſequently vnholeſommer. The nations that be between the Tropikes, haue alſo more agilitie than the others, participating more with the firie nature than they that are farther off. This is the cauſe why Pliny ſpeaking of the Gorgones and Iles Gorgonides (which Gorgones.are thoſe of Cap Ʋerd) ſaith, that the men are there ſo light of foote, that ſcarſe one may follow them by the eyeſight,

in ſuch maner, that Hanno the Carthaginian could not catch any one of them. He maketh the like relation of the Troglodytes, a nation of Guinee, whom hee ſaith are called Therothoens, becauſe they are as ſwift in hunting vpon the land, as the Ichthyophages are prompt in ſwiming in the ſea, who almoſt are as ſeldome wearie therein as a fiſh. And Maffeus in his Hiſtories of the Indies reporteth, that the Naires (ſo the nobles and warriours are called) of the kingdome of Malabaris, are ſo nimble and ſo ſwift, as it is almoſt incredible, and doe handle ſo well their bodies at will, that they ſeeme to haue no bones, in ſuch ſort, that it is hard to come to skirmiſh againſt ſuch men, foraſmuch as with this agilitie, they aduance and recoile as they liſt. But for to make themſelues ſuch, they helpe nature, and their ſinewes are ſtretched out euen 
                     Seſame a kind of corne, Plini. li. 18. ca. 10.from ſeuen yeeres of age, which afterward are anointed and rubbed with oile of Seſamum. That which I ſay, is knowen euen in beaſts: for a Spaniſh Genet or a Barbe is more liuely and light in running, than a Rooſſin or Germain Curtall; an Italian horſe more than a French horſe. Now although that which I haue ſaid be true, yet for all that there be nations out of the Tropikes, who by exerciſe Hazael. 2. Samuel 2.and Art come to ſuch agilitie. For the holy Scripture maketh mention of one Hazael an Iſraelite, of whom it witneſſeth, that he was as light of foot as a Roe bucke of the fields. And for to come to the people of the North, the Heruli are renouned for being ſwift in runing, by this verſe of Sidonius:
               
               
                  Curſu Herulus, iaculis Hunnus, Francuſque natatu. And by this ſwiftneſſe the Germans ſometimes troubled very much Iulius Caeſar. So our Armouchiquois are as ſwift as grey hounds, as we haue ſaid heertofore, and the other Sauages are little inferior vnto them, and yet they do not force nature, neither doe they vſe any Art to run well. But as the ancient Gaulois, being addicted to hunting (for

it is their life) and to warre, their bodies are nimble, and ſo little charged with fatte, that it doth not hinder them from running at their will.
               
                  Their dexteritie in ſwiming. Now the Sauages dexteritie is not knowen onely by running, but alſo in ſwimming; which they all can doe: but it ſeemes, that ſome more than others. As for the Braſilians they are ſo naturall in that trade, that they would ſwimme eight daies in the ſea, if hunger did not preſſe them, and they feare more that ſome fiſh ſhould deuoure them, than to periſh through wearineſſe. The like is in Florida, where the men will follow a fiſh in the ſea, and will take it vnleſſe it be too bigge. Ioſeph Acosta ſaith ſo much of them of Peru. And as for that which concerneth breathing, they haue a certaine Art to ſuppe vp the water, and to caſt it out againe, by which meanes they will remaine eaſily in it a long time. The women likewiſe haue a maruellous diſpoſition to that exerciſe: for the Hiſtory of Florida maketh mention that they can paſſe great riuers in ſwimming, holding their children with one arme: and they climbe very nimbly vp the higheſt trees of the countrey. I will affirme nothing of the Armouchiquois, nor of our Sauages, becauſe I tooke no heed to it: but it is very certaine that all can ſwim very cunningly. For the other parts of their bodies they haue them verie perfect, as likewiſe the naturall ſenſes. For Membertou (who is aboue an hundred yeeres old) did ſee ſooner a ſhaloupe or a Canow of the Sauages, to come afarre off vnto Port Royall, than any of vs: and it is ſaid of the Braſilians and other Sauages of Peru hidden in the mountaines, that they haue the ſmelling ſo good, that in ſmelling of the hand, they know if a man be a Spaniard or a French man: And if he be a Spaniard, they kill him without remiſſion, ſo much doe they hate him for the harmes that they haue receiued of them. Which the aboueſaid Acoſta doth confeſſe when he ſpeaketh of leauing the Indians Acoſta. lib. 6. cap. 1.
                  to liue according to their ancient policie, reprouing

the Spaniards in that. And therefore (ſaith he) this is a thing preiudiciall vnto vs, becauſe that they take occaſion to abhor vs (note that he ſpeaketh of them who doe obey them) as men who in all things, whether it be in good, whether it be in euill, haue alwaies beene, and ſtill are, contrary vnto them.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of the Paintings, Markes, Inciſions, and Ornaments of their body.
               IT is no maruell if the Ladies of our time do paint themſelues: for of a long time and in many places that trade hath had beginning. But it is reprooued in the holy bookes, and made a reproach by the voices of the Prophets, as when Ieremy threatneth the Citie of Ieruſalem: 
                  Ierem. 4. verſ. 30.
                  When thou ſhalt be deſtroied (ſaith he) what wilt thou doe? though thou clotheſt thy ſelfe with skarlet, though thou deckest thy ſelfe with Ornaments of gold, though thou painteſt thy face with colours, yet ſhalt thou trim thy ſelfe in vaine: for thy louers will abhor thee, and ſeeke thy life. The Prophet Ezech. 23. verſ. 40.
                  Ezechiel maketh the like reproach to the Cities of Ieruſalem and Samaria, which he compareth to two leaud harlots, who hauing ſent to ſeeke out men comming from far, and being come, they haue waſhed themſelues, and painted their faces, and haue put on their faire ornaments. The 4. Kings. 9. verſ. 30. Plin. lib. 33. cap. 7.Queene Ieſabel doing the ſame, was for all that caſt downe out of a window, and bare the puniſhment of her wicked life. The Romans did anciently paint their bodies with vermillion (as Pliny ſaith) when they entred in triumph into Rome, and he addeth, that the Princes & great Lords of Ethiopia made great account of that colour, wherewith they wholly painted themſelues red: alſo both the one and the other did ſerue themſelues therewith to make their god fairer: And that the firſt expence which was allowed of by the Cenſors and Maſters of Accounts in Rome was

of the monies beſtowed for to colour with vermilion the face of Iupiter. The ſame author reciteth in another place, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30.
                  that the Anderes, Mathites, Moſagebes and Hipporeens, people of Libya, did plaiſter all their bodies ouer with red chaulke. Briefely, this faſhion did paſſe as farre as to the North. And thereof is come the name that was giuen to the Picts, an ancient people of Scythia, neighbours to the Gothes, who in the yeare 87. after the Natiuity of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, vnder the Empire of Domitian made courſes and ſpoiles thorow the Iles which lie North ward, where hauing found men who made them reſiſtance, they returned backe without doing any thing, and liued yet naked in their cold Countrie vntill the yeare of our Lord 370. At which time vnder the Empire of Valentinian being ioyned 
                     Ammian lib. 26. & 27.with the Saxons and Scots they tormented very much them of Great Britan, as Ammian Marcellin reciteth: and being reſolued to remaine there (as they did) they demanded of the Britons (which now are Engliſhmen) wiues in marriage. Whereupon being denied, they retired themſelues to the Scots, of whom they were furniſhed, vpon condition that the maſculine race of the Kings comming to faile among them, that then the women ſhould ſucceed in the Realme. Now theſe people were called Picts, becauſe of the paintings which they vſed vpon their naked bodies, which (ſaith Herodian) they would not couer with Herod. 3. booke.any clothing for feare to hide and darken the faire painting they had ſet vpon it, where were ſet out beaſts of all ſorts, and printed with Iron inſtruments, in ſuch ſort that it was vnpoſſible to take them off. Which they did (as Solin ſaith) euen from their infancy: in maner that as the child did grow, ſo did grow thoſe fixed figures, euen as the markes that are graued vpon the yong pompions. The Poet Claudian doth alſo giue vs many witneſſes of this in his Panegyriques, as when he ſpeaketh of the Emperour Honorius his Grand-father:
               
                  Ille Leues Mauros, nec falſo nomine Pictos
                  
                     
                     Edomuit—And in the Gothicke warre
                  —Ferroque not at as
                  Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figur as.
               
               This hath beene noted by Monſieur de Belleforeſt, and afterward by the learned Sauaron vpon the obſeruation that Sidoine de Polignac maketh thereof. And albeit that our Celtique Poitevins, called by the Latines Pictones, be not deſcended from the race of thoſe (for they were ancient Gaullois euen in Iulius Caeſars time) neuertheleſſe I may well beleeue that this name hath beene giuen them for the ſame occaſion as that of the Picts. And as cuſtomes once brought in among a people are not loſt but by the length of many ages (as we ſee yet the follies of Shroue-Tueſday to continue) ſo the vſes of painting, whereof we haue ſpoken remaineth in ſome Northerly Nations. For I haue heard ſometimes Monſieur Le Comte D'Egmond tell, that he hath ſeene in his yong yeares them of Brunzwich come into his fathers houſe with their faces greaſed with painting, and their viſage all blacked, from whence peraduenture this word of Bronzer may be deriued, which ſignifieth in Picardy to blacke. And generally I beleeue that all thoſe Northerly people did vſe painting, when they would make themſelues braue. For the Gelons and Agathyrſes, Nations of Scythia like the Picts, were of this fraternity, and with Iron inſtruments did colour their bodies. The Engliſhmen Tertul. de veland. virgin. Iornandes de bello Got. Iſidor. lib. 16. cap. 23.
                  likewiſe, then called Britons, by the ſaying of Tertullian. The Gothes, beſides the Iron inſtruments, did vſe vermillion to make their faces and bodies red. Briefely, it was a ſport in the old time to ſee ſo many Antikes, men and women: for there are found yet old Pictures, which he that hath made the Hiſtory of the Engliſhmens voyage into Virginia hath cut in braſſe, where the Picts of both ſex are painted out, with their fair inciſions, and ſwords hanging vpon the naked fleſh, as Herodian deſcribeth them.
               
                  The Weſt Indians. This humour of painting hauing beene ſo generall in theſe parts, there is no cauſe of mocking, if the people of

the Weſt Indies haue done, and yet do the like: which is vniuerſall & without exception among thoſe nations. For if any one of them maketh loue, he ſhall be painted with blue or red colour, and his Miſtres alſo. If they haue veniſon in abundance, or be glad for any thing, they will doe the like generally. But when that they are ſadde, or plot ſome treaſon, then they ouercaſt all their face with blacke, and are hideouſly deformed. Touching the body, our Sauages apply no painting to it, which the Braſilians and Floridians doe, the moſt part whereof are painted ouer the bodie, the armes and thighes with faire branches, whoſe painting can neuer be taken away, becauſe they are pricked within the fleſh. Notwithſtanding many Braſilians doe paint onely their bodies (without inciſion) when they liſt: and this with the iuice of a certaine fruit which they call Genipat, which doth blacke ſo much, that though they waſh themſelues, they cannot bee cleane in ten or twelue daies after. They of 
                     Ʋirginia, which are more of this ſide, Virginia.haue markes vpon their backs, like to thoſe that our marchants doe put vpon their packs, by the which (euen as the ſlaues) one may know vnder what Lord they liue: which is a faire forme of gouernment for this people: ſeeing that the ancient Roman Emperors haue vſed the like towards their ſouldiers, which were marked with the Imperiall marke, as Saint Auguſtine, Saint Ambroſe, and 
                     Aug. contra Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 13. Ambroſ. in the funerall oration of Valentin.
                  others doe witneſſe vnto vs. Which thing Conſtantine the Great did likewiſe, but his marke was the ſigne of the Croſſe, which he made to be printed vpon the ſhoulders of his ſouldiers, as himſelfe ſaith in an Epiſtle which hee wrote to the king of Perſia, reported by Theodoret in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie. And the firſt Chriſtians, as marching vnder the banner of Ieſus Chriſt, did take the ſame marke, which they printed in their hand, or on the arme, to the end to know one another, ſpecially in time of perſecution, as Procopius ſaith, expounding this place of Iſaiah: One will ſay, I am the Lords, and the other will call 
                  Iſai. 44 5.
                  
                  himſelfe with the name of Iacob: and the other will write with his hand, I am the Lords, and will ſurname himſelfe with the 
                  Galat. 6.
                  name of Iſrael. The great Apoſtle S. Paul did beare the marks of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt in his fleſh, but it was yet after another maner, that is to ſay, by the bruſes, which he had on his body of the ſtripes that he had receaued for his name. And the Hebrewes had for marke the Circumciſion of the foreskinne, by the which they are ſequeſtred from other nations, and knowen for Gods people. But as for other bodily inciſions, ſuch as anciently the Picts did make, and the Sauages doe yet make at this day, they haue beene anciently very expreſly forbidden in the Law of Leu. 19. 28. Deut. 14. 1.God giuen to Moſes. For it is not lawfull for vs to disfigure the image and the forme that God hath giuen vnto vs. Yea the pictures and paintings haue beene blamed and reprooued by the Prophets, as wee haue noted elſewhere. And Tertullian ſaith, that the Angels which haue diſcouered and taught vnto men their paintings and counterfetted things, haue beene condemned of God: alleaging for profe of his ſaying, the booke of Enochs prophecie. By theſe things aboue recited, wee know that this hether world hath anciently been as much deformed and ſauage as they of the Weſt Indies: but that which ſeemeth vnto mee moſt woorthie of wondering, is the nakedneſſe of thoſe people in a cold countrie, wherein they delight, euen to harden their children in the ſnow, in the riuer, and among the Ice, as we touched heeretofore in an other chapter, ſpeaking of the Cimbres and French-men. Which alſo hath beene their chiefeſt ſtrength in the conqueſts that they haue made.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               Of their outward ornaments of the body, bracelets, Carkenets, Eare-rings, &c.
               WE that doe liue in theſe parts vnder the authoritie of our Princes, and ciuiliſed commonwealths, haue two great tyrants of our life, to whom the people of the New world haue not beene yet ſubiected, the exceſſes of the belly, and the ornament of body, and briefly all that which belongeth to brauerie, which if we ſhould caſt off, it would be a meane to recall the golden age, and to take away the calamitie which we ſee in moſt part of men. For hee which poſſeſſeth much, making ſmall expence, would be liberall, & would ſuccour the needie, whereunto he is hindred, willing not onely to maintaine, but alſo to augment his traine, and to make ſhew of himſelfe, very often at the coſts of the poore Pſal. 14. ver. 4. and 53. verſ. 5.people, whoſe bloud hee ſucketh, Qui devorant plebem meam ſicut eſcam panis, ſaith the Pſalmiſt. I leaue that which belongeth to food, not being my purpoſe to ſpeake Plin. lib. 33. cap. 11.
                  of it in this Chapter. I leaue alſo the exceſſes which conſiſteth in houſhold implements, ſending the reader backe to Pliny, who hath ſpoken amply of the Roman pompes and ſuperfluitie, as of veſſels after the Furvienne and Clodienne faſhion, of bed-ſteades after the Deliaque faſhion, and of tables all wrought with gold and ſiluer imboſſed; where alſo he ſetteth out a ſlaue Druſillanus Rotundus, who being Treaſurer of the higher Spaine, cauſed a forge to be made for to worke a peece of Siluer-plate of fiue quintals weight, accompanied with eight other, all weighing halfe 
                     Matuchias be bracelets, carkenets, and other iollities.a quintall. I will onely ſpeake of the Matachias of our Sauages, and ſay, that if we did content our ſelues with their ſimplicity we ſhould auoid many troubles that we put our ſelues vnto to haue ſuperfluities, without which we might liue contentedly (becauſe Nature is ſatisfied with little) and

the coueting whereof makes vs very often to decline from the right way, and to ſtray from the path of iuſtice. The exceſſes of men doe conſiſt the moſt part in things which I haue ſaid I will omit, which notwithſtanding I will not leaue vntouched, if it come to purpoſe. But Ladies haue alwaies had this reputation, to loue exceſſes in that which The firſt booke Padag. cap. 10.concerneth the decking of their bodies: And all the Moraliſts who haue made profeſſion to repreſſe vices haue mentioned them, wherethey haue found a large ſubiect to ſpeake of. Clement Alexandrine making a long numeration of womens trinckets (which he hath the moſt part taken out of the Prophet Iſaiah) ſaith in the end, that he is weary to ſpeake ſo much of it, and that he maruelleth that they are not killed with ſo great a weight.
               Let vs take them then by thoſe parts wherein they be Tert. in the booke of womens ornaments.complained of. Tertullian maruelleth of the audaciouſneſſe of man, which ſetteth himſelfe againſt the word of our Sauiour, which ſaid: that it is not in vs to adde any thing to the meaſure or height that God hath giuen vnto vs: and notwithſtanding 
                  A leſſon for the women of our time.
                  Ladies endeuour themſelues to doe to the contrary, adding vpon their heads cages made of haires, faſhioned like to loaues of bread, to hats, to panniers, or to the hollowneſſe of ſcutchions. If they be not aſhamed with this ſuperfluous enormity, at leaſt (ſaith he) let them be a ſhamed of the filth which they beare: and not to couer a holy and a Chriſtian head with the leauings of another head, per aduenture vncleane, or guilty of ſome crime, and ordained to a ſhamefull death. And in the ſame place, ſpeaking of them which do colour their haires: That is called Crecuphantia.
                  
                  I ſee ſome (ſaith he) who doe change the colour of their haires with ſaffron. They are aſhamed of their Countrie, and would be Gauloiſe women, or German women, ſo much doe they diſguiſe 
                  
                     S. Cypr. in the booke of the virgins clothing.
                     
                        S. Hierom. Epi. to Lata.
                   
                  themſelues. Whereby is knowen how much red haires were eſteemed in the old time. And indeed the holy Scripture praiſeth that of Dauid, which was ſuch. But to ſeeke it out by art, S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, with our Tertullian doe ſay, that the ſame doth preſage the fire of

hell. Now our Sauages, in that which conſiſteth in the borrowing of haires, are not reprouable: for their vanity ſtretcheth not ſo farre: but for the colouring of them, for as much as when they are merry, and paint their faces, be it with blue or with red, they paint alſo their haires with the ſame colour.
               Now let vs come to the eares, to the necke, to the armes and to the hands, and there we ſhall finde wherewith to buſie our ſelues: theſe are parts where iewels are eaſily ſeene: which Ladies haue learned very well to obſerue. The firſt men which haue had piety in them haue made conſcience to offer any violence to Nature, and to pierce the eares for to hang any precious thing at it: for none is Lord of his owne members to abuſe them, ſo ſaith the Ciuilian 
                     Ʋlpian. And therefore when the ſeruant of Abraham 
                  Genſ. 24. ver. 22.went into Meſopotamia for to finde out a wife for Iſaac, and had met with Rebecca, he put vpon her forehead a iewell of gold hanging downe betweene her eies, and alſo bracelets of gold vpon her hands: for which reaſon it is ſaid in the Prouerbs, that A faire woman which lacketh diſcretion 
                  Prou. 11. ver. 22.
                  is like a golden ring in a ſwines ſnout. But men haue taken more licence than they ought, and haue defaced the workmanſhip of God in them, to pleaſe their owne fancies. Wherein I doe not wonder at the Braſilians) of whom we will heereafter ſpeake) but of ciuiliſed people, which haue called other nations barbarous, but much more of the Chriſtians of this age. When Seneca did complaine 
                     Senec. 7. of benefits.of that which was in his time; The follie of women (ſaith he) had not made men ſubiect enough, but it hath beene yet behouefull to hang two or three patrimonies at their eares. But what patrimonies? They carry (ſaith Tertullian) Ilands and Farme-houſes vpon their neckes, and great regiſters in their eares containing the reuenues of a great rich man, and euery finger of the left hand hath a patrimony to play withall. Finally, he cannot compare them better than to condemned men that are in the Caues of Ethiopia, which the more they are

culpable, ſo much the richer are they, becauſe that the fetters and bolts, wherewith they are tied, are of gold. But he exhorteth the Chriſtian women not to be ſuch, for as Plin. lib. 9. cap. 35.
                     much as thoſe things are certaine markes of laſciuiouſnes, which doe belong to thoſe miſchieuous oblations of publike vnchaſtity. Pliny, albeit he was an heathen, doth no leſſe abhor thoſe exceſſes. For our Ladies (ſaith he) for to be braue doe beare hanging at their fingers thoſe great pearles which are called Elenchus, in faſhion of pearles, & haue two of them, yea three at their eares. Yea they haue inuented names to ſerue themſelues therewith in their curſed and troubleſome ſuperfluities. For they call Belles, them which they carry in number at their eares, as if they did take pleaſure to heare pearles gingling at their eares. And that which▪is more, the huſwifly women, yea the poore women alſo, decke themſelues therewith; ſaying, that a woman ought to goe as ſeldome without pearles, as a Conſull without his Vſhers. Finally, they are come ſo farre as to adorne their ſhooes with them, and garters, yea their buskins are yet full and garniſhed therewith. In ſuch ſort that it is not now any more queſtion to weare pearles, but they muſt bee made to ſerue for pauement, 
                  Fol. 736.to the end to tread but vpon pearles. The ſame Authour doth recite that Lollia Paulina forſaken by Caligula, in the common feaſts of meane men was ſo ouerladen with Emeralds and with Pearles, on her Plin. lib. 33. c. 3.
                  head, her haires, her eares, her necke, her fingers and her armes, as well in colars, necklaces, as bracelets, that all did ſhine at it, and that ſhe had of them to the woorth of a million of gold. The ſame was exceſſiue: but ſhee was the greateſt Princeſſe of the world, and yet hee doth not ſay that ſhe did weare any on her ſhooes: as he doth yet complaine in ſome other where that the Dames of Rome did weare gold on their feete. What diſorder! (ſaith hee) Let vs permit the women to weare as much gold as they will in bracelets, at their fingers, at their necks, at their eares, and
                  
                  in kark
                        •
                     nets and bridles, &c. muſt they for all that decke their feete with it? &c. I ſhould neuer make an end, if I ſhould continue this ſpeech.
               The Spaniſh women in Peru do go beyond that, for their ſhooes are ſet ouer with nothing but plates of gold and ſiluer, and garniſhed with pearles. True it is that they are in a countrie, which God hath bleſſed abundantly with all theſe riches. But if thou haſt not ſo much of them, do not vex thy ſelfe at it, & be not tempted through enuy: ſuch things are but earth, digged and purified with a thouſand troubles, in the bottome of hell, by the incredible labor, & with the life of men like vnto thee: Pearles are but dew, receaued within the ſhell of a fiſh, which are Pearles what they be.fiſhed by men that be forced to become fiſhes, that is to ſay, to be alwaies diuing in the depth of the ſea. And for to haue theſe things, and to be clothed in ſilke, and for to haue robes with infinite foldes, we turmoile our ſelues, wee take cares which doe ſhorten our daies, gnaw our bones, ſucke out our marrow, weaken our bodies, and conſume our ſpirit. He that hath meat and drinke is as rich as all theſe, if he could conſider it. And where thoſe things doe abound, there delights doe abound, and conſequently vices: and to conclude, behold what God ſaith by his Prophet: They ſhall caſt their ſiluer out into the ſtreetes, and their gold ſhall be but dung, and ſhall not deliuer them in the 
                  Ezec. 7. 19.
                  day of my great wrath. Hee that will haue further knowledge of the chaſtiſements wherewith God doth threaten the woman that abuſe carkenets and iewels, which haue no other care but to attire and decke themſelues, goe with their breaſts open, their eies wandring, and with a proud gate, let him reade the third chapter of the Prophet Iſaiah. I will not for all that blame the Virgins which haue ſome golden things, or chaines of pearles, or other iewels, alſo ſome modeſt veſture: for that is comlineſſe, and all things are made for the vſe of man: but exceſſe is that which is to be blamed, becauſe that vnder that, very

often is laſciuiouſneſſe hidden. Happie are the people which not hauing the occaſions to ſinne, doe purely ſerue God, and poſſeſſe a land which furniſheth them of that which is neceſſarie for life. Happie are our Sauage people if they had the full knowledge of God: for in that caſe they be without ambition, vaine-glorie, enuie, auarice, & haue no care of theſe braueries, which wee haue now deſcribed: but rather doe content themſelues to haue Matachias, hanging at their eares, and about their necks, bodies, armes, and legges. The Braſilians, Floridians, and Armouchiquois, doe make carkenets and bracelets (called bou-re in Braſill, and by ours Matachias) of the ſhelles of thoſe great ſea cockles, which be called Vignols, like vnto ſnailes, which they break & gather vp in a thouſand peeces, then doe ſmooth them vpon a hot ſtone, vntill they do make them very ſmall, and hauing pierced them, they make them beads with them, like vnto that which wee call Pourcelaine. Among thoſe beads they intermingle betweene ſpaces other beads, as blacke as thoſe which I Iet.haue ſpoken of to be white, made with Iet, or certain hard and black wood which is like vnto it, which they ſmooth and make ſmall as they liſt, and this hath a very good grace. And if things are to be eſteemed for their faſhion, as we ſee it practiſed in our merchandiſes, theſe colars, skarffes, and bracelets made of great periwincles or pourcelaine, are richer than pearles, (notwithſtanding none will beleeue me heerein) ſo doe they eſteeme them more than pearles, gold or ſiluer: And this is that which they of Beades much eſteemed.the great riuer of Canada in the time of Iam. Quartier did call Eſurgin (wherof we haue made mention heertofore) a word which I haue had much ado to know, and which Belleforeſt the Coſmographer vnderſtod not, when hee would ſpeake of it. At this day they haue not any more of them, or elſe they haue loſt the knowledge to make them: For they vſe Mattachias very much, that are brought vnto them out of France. Now as with vs, ſo in that country,

women doe decke themſelues with ſuch things, and will haue chaines that will goe twelue times about their necks, hanging downe vpon their breſts, and about their hand wreſts, and aboue the elbow. They alſo hang long ſtrings of them at their eares, which come downe as low as their ſhoulders. If the men weare any, it will bee onely ſome yong man that is in loue. In the country of Virginia where Pearles in Virginia. Copper.ſome pearles be found, the women do weare carkenets, colars and bracelets of them, or elſe of peeces of copper (made round like ſmall bullets) which is found in their mountaines, where ſome mines of it are. But in Port Royall, and in the confines thereof, and towards New-found land, and at Tadouſſac, where they haue neither pearles nor vignols, the maides and women doe make Mattachias, with the quilles or briſtles of the Porc-epine, which they die with blacke, white, and red colours, as liuely as poſſibly may be, for our skarlets haue no better luſtre Excellent skarlet die.than their redde die: But they more eſteeme the Mattachias which come vnto them from the Armouchiquois countrey, and they buy them very deare; and that becauſe they can get no great quantitie of them, by reaſon of the warres that thoſe nations haue continually one againſt another. There is brought vnto them from France Mattachias made with ſmal quilles of glaſſe mingled with tinne or lead, which are trucked with them, and meaſured by the fadam, for want of an ell: and this kind of Merchandiſe is in that country, that which the Latins doe call Mundus muliebris. They alſo make of them ſmall ſquares of ſundry colours, ſowed together, which they tie behinde, on the little childrens haires. The men doe not much care for them, except that the Braſilians doe weare about their neckes halfe moones of bones very white, which they call y-aci of the Moones name: And our Souriquois doe likewiſe weare ſome iollities of like ſtuffe, without exceſſe. And they which haue none of that, doe commonly carry a knife before their breſts, which they doe not for ornament: but

for want of pocket, and becauſe it is an implement which at all times is neceſſary vnto them. Some haue girdles made of Matachias, wherewith they ſerue themſelues, only when they will ſet out themſelues and make them braue. The Autmoins or Sooth-ſaiers do carry before their breaſts ſome ſigne of their vocation, as we will heereafter ſay. But as for the men of the Armouchiquois they haue a faſhion to weare at their hand-wreſts, and aboue the anclebone of the foot, about their legs, plates of Copper, fetterwiſe, and about their waſts girdles, faſhioned with Copper quils as long as the middle finger filed together the 
                     Herodian the 3. booke.length of a girdle, euen iuſt of that faſhion which Herodian reciteth to haue beene in vſe among the Picts, wherof we haue ſpoken, when he ſaith, that they girded their bodies and their necks with iron, eſteeming that to be a great ornament vnto them, & a teſtimony of their great riches, euen Sauage Scots.as other Barbarians do to haue gold about them. And there are yet in Scotland Sauage men, which neither ages, nor yeeres, nor the abundance of men could yet reduce vnto ciuilitie. And although that (as we haue ſaid) the men be not ſo deſirous of Matachias as the women, notwithſtanding the men of Braſill, not caring for clothing, take great pleaſure to decke and garniſh themſelues with the feathers of birds, and doe vſe thoſe wherewith we vſe to fill our beds whereon we lie, and chop them as ſmal as piemeat, which they die in red, with their Braſill-wood, then hauing anointed their bodies with certaine gums, which ſerue them in ſtead of paſte or glue, they couer themſelues with thoſe feathers, and make a garment at one clap, after the anticke faſhion: which hath made (ſaith Iohn de Leri in his Hiſtorie of America) the firſt of our men that went thither to beleeue that the men which be called Sauages were hairie ouer all their bodies, which is nothing ſo. For (as wee haue alreadie ſaid) the Sauages in what part ſoeuer, haue leſſer haires than we. They of Florida doe alſo vſe this kinde of downe, but it is onely about their heads, to

make themſelues more vglie. Beſides this that wee haue ſaid, the Braſilians doe make frontlets of feathers, which they tie and fit in order of all colours: thoſe frontlets being like in faſhion to thoſe rackets or periwigges, which Ladies vſe in theſe parts, the inuention whereof they ſeeme to haue learned of thoſe Sauages. As for them of our New France, in the daies that be of ſolemnitie and reioycing among them, and when they goe to the warres, they haue about their heads as it were a crowne made with long haires of an Ellan or Stagge, painted in redde, paſted, or otherwiſe faſtned, to a fillet of leather of three fingers bredth, ſuch as Iames Quartier ſaith he had ſeene with the King (ſo doth he call him) and Lord of the Sauages, which he found in the towne of Hochelaga. But they doe not vſe ſo many ornaments of feathers as the Braſilians, which make gownes of them, cappes, bracelets, girdles, and ornaments for their cheekes, and targets vpon their loines, of all colours, which would bee more tedious than delightfull to ſpecifie, ſince it is an eaſie matter for euery one to ſupplie the ſame, and to imagine what it is.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Of Marriage.
               HAuing ſpoken of the Sauages garments, deckings, ornaments and paintings, it hath ſeemed good vnto me to marry them, to the end the generation of them be not loſt, and that the countrie remaine not deſert. For the firſt ordinance that euer God made, was to increaſe and multiply, and euery creature capable of generation to bring foorth fruit according to his kind. And to This is in the gloſſe of the Talmud in the Treatie of Idolatrie.the end to incourage young folkes that doe marrie, the Iewes had a cuſtome anciently to fill a trough with earth, in the which, a little before the wedding, they did ſowe barley, and the ſame being ſprung, they brought it to the Bridegroome and the Bride, ſaying: Bring foorth
                  
                  fruit and multiply as this barley, which brings foorth ſooner than all other ſeeds.
               
               Now to returne to our Sauages, many thinking (as I beleeue) that they be ſome logges of wood, or imagining a Common-wealth of Plato, doe demand if they haue any marriage, and if there be any Prieſts in Canada to marrie them. Wherin they ſeeme to be very raw and ignorant. Canadians.Captaine Iames Quartier ſpeaking of the marriage of the Canadians, in his ſecond relation ſaith thus: They obſerue the order of marriage, ſauing that the men take two or three wiues. And the husband being dead the women doe neuer marrie againe, but doe mourne for his death all their life long, and doe daube their face with coale beaten to powder and with greaſe, the thickneſſe of a knife, and thereby are knowen to be widowes. Then he goeth further: They haue another bad cuſtome with their daughters: The proſtituting of Maidens.For being come to be marriageable, they are put all in a ſtewe houſe, abandoned to all commers, vntill they haue found out a match: And all this haue wee ſeene by experience. For we haue ſeene the houſes as full of theſe maidens, as is a Schoole of boies in France. I would haue thought that the ſaid Iames Quartier had (touching this proſtituting of maides) added ſomewhat of his owne, but the diſcourſe of Monſieur Champlein, which is but ſix yeres ſince, doth confirme the ſame thing vnto me, ſauing that he ſpeaketh not of aſſemblies: which keepeth me frō 
                  Souriquois.contrarying it. But among our Souriquois there is no ſuch thing: not that theſe Sauages haue any great care of continencie and virginitie, for they doe not think to doe euill in corrupting it: But whether it be by the frequentation of French-men or otherwiſe, the maides are aſhamed to doe any vnchaſt thing publikely: and if it happen that they abandon themſelues to any one; it is in ſecret. The firſt booke, ch. 4.Moreouer, he that will marrie a Maid it behooueth him to demand her of her father, without whoſe conſent ſhee ſhall be none of his, as we haue already ſaid heeretofore,

and brought foorth the example of one that had done otherwiſe. And if he will marry, he ſhall ſometimes make loue, not after the manner of the Eſſeens, who (as Ioſephus 
                  
                     Ioſephus of the warres of the Iewes, lib. 2. cap. 12.ſayeth) did try the maidens by the ſpace of three yeeres, before they married them, but by the ſpace of ſix months or a yeere, without abuſing of them: will paint his face that he may ſeeme the fairer, and will haue a new gowne of Beuers or Otters, or of ſome thing elſe, well garniſhed with Matachias garded and laid ouer in forme of parchment lace of gold and ſiluer, as the Gothes did vſe heeretofore. It is meete moreouer that he ſhew himſelfe valiant in hunting, and that they know him able to doe ſome thing, for they doe not truſt in a mans meanes, which are none other than that which he getteth by his daies labor, not caring any wiſe for other riches than hunting: vnleſſe our maners make them to haue a deſire of it.
               
                  The proſtituting of the Maidens in Braſil. The Maidens of Braſill haue liberty to proſtitute themſelues aſſone as they are able for the ſame, euen as them of Canada. Yea the fathers do ſerue for pandors to their daughters, and they repute for an honour to communicate them to the men of theſe parts that goe thither, to the end to haue of their race. But to conſent vnto it, would bee too damnable an abomination, and that would deſerue rigorous puniſhment, as indeed for the ſlackneſſe of men God hath puniſhed this vice in ſuch wiſe, that the fore hath been communicated in theſe parts, euen to them that haue been too much addicted after Chriſtian wenches and women, The Poxe.by the ſickneſſe which is called the pox, which before the diſcouery of thoſe lands was vnknowen in Europe: for theſe people are very much ſubiect to it, and euen they of Florida: but they haue the Guayac, the Eſquin, and the Saſafr 
                  Guayac. Eſquin. Saſafras. Annida.as, trees very ſoueraign for the cure of that leproſie, and I beleeue that the tree Annedda, whoſe wonders we haue recited, is one of theſe kinds.
               One might thinke that the nakedneſſe of this people would make them more lecherous, but it is not ſo. For as

                  The chaſtity of the ancient Germans, and of the Sauages of New France. 
                  Caeſar giueth the Germans this commendation, that they had in their ancient Sauages life ſuch a continency, as they reputed it a thing moſt vile for a yong-man to haue the company of a woman before he came to the age of 20. yeares: and in their owne diſpoſition alſo, they were not mooued thereunto, although that pell mell, all together men and women, yongue and old did bathe themſelues in riuers: So alſo may I ſay for our Sauages, that I neuer ſaw amonſt them any vnſeemely geſture or vnchaſte looke, & I dare affirme that they be leſſer giuen to that vice than we in theſe parts. I attribute the cauſe thereof, partly to this their nakedneſſe, and chiefely to the keeping bare of their head, from whence the matter of generation hath his originall: partly to the want of hot ſpices, of wine, and of meats that doe prouoke to that which is primary ſigne 
                     Itiphalles. Tabacco contrary to Venus.
                  of vncleane deſires, and partly to the frequent vſe which they haue of Tabacco, whoſe ſmoake dulleth the ſenſes, and mounting vp to the braines hindereth the functions of 
                     Ʋenus. Iohn De Leri praiſeth the Braſilians for this continencie: neuertheleſſe he addeth, that when they are angrie they call ſometimes one another Tiuiré, that is to ſay, So domite, whereby it may be coniectured that this ſinne raigneth among them, as Captaine Laudonniere ſaith it doth in Florida: and that the Floridians loue the feminine ſex very much. And indeed I haue heard, that for to pleaſe the women the more they buſie themſelues very much about that which is the primary ſigne of vncleane deſires, whereof we ſpake euen now; and that they may the better Great ſtore of Ambergris.
                  doe it, they furniſh themſelues with Ambergris, wherof they haue great ſtore, which firſt they melt at the fire, then iniect it (with ſuch paine, that it maketh them to gnaſh their teeth) euen ſo farre as to the bone Sacrum, and with a whippe of nettles, or ſuch like thing, make that idoll of Maacha to ſwell, which king Aſa made to be conſumed into aſhes, and caſt it into the brooke Cedron. On the other ſide the women vſe certaine herbes, and endeuour

themſelues as much as they can to make reſtrictions for the vſe of the ſaid Ityphalles, and to giue either partie their due.
               
                  Contract of marriage. Let vs returne to our marriages, which are better than all theſe rogueries. The contracters do not giue their faith betweene the hands of Notaries, nor of their Sooth-ſaiers, but ſimply doe demand the conſent of the parents: and ſo they doe euery where. But heere is to be noted, that they keepe (and in Braſill alſo) three degrees of conſanguinity, Degrees of conſanguinity.in the which they are not vſed to contract marriage, that is to wit, of the ſonne with the mother, of the father with his daughter, and of the brother with the ſiſter. Theſe excepted, all things are permitted. As for dowry, there is no mention of it. Alſo when any diuorce hapneth, the husband is bound to nothing. And although that (as it hath been ſaid) there is no promiſe of loialtie giuen before any ſuperior power, neuertheles in what part ſoeuer, the wiues keepe chaſtitie, and ſeldome is any found that breaketh it. Yea I haue heard oftentimes ſay, that in yeelding The Sauage women in the venerious action.the dutie to the husband, they make themſelues oftentimes to be conſtrained: which is rare in theſe parts. For the Gaulloiſe women are renowned by Strabo to bee good Porters (I meane fruitfull) and breeders: and contrariwiſe The fruitfulneſſe of the women of the Gaules.
                  I doe not ſee that the people doe abound as in theſe parts, although that they all labour for generation, and that Polygamie is ordinarie with them, which was not among the ancient Gaullois, nor among the Germans, though they bee a more ruſtike people. True it is that our Sauages doe kill one an other daily, and are alwaies in feare of their enemies, keeping watches vpon their frontiers.
               This frigidity of 
                     Ʋenus bringeth an admirable and incredible thing among theſe women, and which was not to be found euen among the wiues of the holy Patriarch Iacob, which is, that although they be many wiues to one husband (for Polygamie is receiued thorow all that New Polygamie.
                  
world) notwithſtanding there is no iealouſie among them: which is in Braſill, a hot Country as well as Canada: But as for the men, they are in many places very iealous: and if the wife be found faulty ſhe ſhall be put away, or in danger to be killed by her husband: And in that (as for the ſpirit of ielouſie) there needes not ſo many ceremonies as thoſe that were done amongſt the Iewes, recited in the Numbers 5. verſ. 12. and ſo following. S. Aug. againſt Manicheus the 19. booke, chap. 26.booke of Numbers. And as for diuorcement, not hauing the vſe of letters, they doe it not in writing, in giuing to the wife a bill ſigned by a publike notary, As S. Auguſtin doth note, ſpeaking of the ſaid Iewes: but are contented to cell to the parents, and vnto her, that ſhe prouide for her ſelfe: and then ſhe liueth in common with the others, vntill that ſome body doe ſeeke after her. This law of putting away hath beene receiued almoſt among all Nations, exexcept among the Chriſtians, which haue kept this precept of the Gſpell, that which God hath ioyned together, let no man put a ſunder. Which is moſt expedient and leſſe See the Commentor of Ben-Sira.ſcandalous: And very wiſely did Ben-Sira anſwer (who is ſaid to haue beene nephew to the Prophet Ieremy) being asked of one, who had a leaud wife, how hee ſhould doe by her: Gnaw (ſaith he) that bone which is fallen to thee.
               
               As for the widows, I will not affirme that which Iames Quartier hath ſaid of them in generall, but I will ſay, that where we haue beene, they ſtaine their faces with blacke, when they pleaſe, and not alwaies: if their husband hath beene killed, they will not marry againe, nor eat fleſh, vntill they haue ſeene the reuenge of his death. And ſo we haue ſeene the daughter of Membertou to practiſe it, who after the warre made to the Armouchiquois, heereafter deſcribed, did marrie againe. Except in that caſe, they make no other difficulty to marry againe, when they finde a fit match.
               Sometimes our Sauages hauing many wiues will giue one of them to their friend, if he hath a deſire to take her

in marriage, and ſhall be thereby ſo much disburdened. Touching maidens that be looſe, if any man hath abuſed of 
                     Abominable whore dome among the Infidels.
                     A note for the Engliſh Magiſtrates in Virginia. Numb. 25. 11. 12. 13.
                   them, they will tell it at the firſt occaſion, and therfore it is bad ieſting with them: for the chaſtiſement ought to bee very rigorous againſt them that mingle the Chriſtian blood with the Infidels, and for the keeping of this iuſtice Monſieur de Ʋille-gagnon is praiſed, euen by his enemies: And Phinees the Sonne of Eleazar the Sonne of Aron becauſe he was zealous of the law of God and appeaſed his wrath, which was about to exterminate the people, for ſuch a ſinne, had the couenant of perpetuall Prieſt-hood, promiſed to him and to his poſterity.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               The Tabagie.
               
                  The Sauages doe ſay Tabaguia, that is to ſay, a feaſt. THe ancient haue ſaid Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus, that is, without Ceres and Bacchus Venus is cold. Hauing then married our Sauages, it is meet to make dinner ready and to vſe them after their owne maner. And for to doe it one muſt conſider the times of the marriage. For if it be in Winter they will haue Veniſon from the woods, if it be in the Spring time or in Summer, they will make prouiſion of fiſh. As for bread there is no talke of it from the North of New-found-land, vntill one come to the country of the Armouchiquois, vnleſſe it be in What Sauage countries haue come.trucking with French-men, for whom they tarry vpon the ſea ſhoares, ſitting on their tailes like apes, as ſoone as the Spring time is come, and receiue in exchange for their skins (for they haue no other merchandiſe) bisket, beanes, peaſen and meale: The Armouchiquois and other Nations more remote, beſides hunting and fiſhing haue wheat, called Mais, and beanes, which is a great comfort vnto them in time of neceſſity. They make no bread with it: for they haue neither Millnor Ouen, and they cannot knead it otherwiſe than in ſtamping it in a morter, and in gathering

thoſe peeces the beſt they can they make ſmall cakes with it, which they bake betweene two hot ſtones. Moſt often they drie this Corne at the fire, and parch it vpon the 
                     Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2. & 10.coales. And after that maner did the ancient Italians liue, as Plinie ſaith. And therefore one muſt not ſo much wonder at theſe people, ſeeing that they which haue called others barbarous, haue beene as barbarous as they.
               If I had not recited heeretofore the maner of the Sauages Tabagi (or banket) I would make heere a larger deſcription: But I will onely ſay that when we went to the Riuer Saint Iohn, being in the towne of Ouigoudi (ſo may I well call a place encloſed repleniſhed with people) we ſaw in a great thicket 80. Sauages all naked, except the middle parts, making Tabaguia with meale they had of vs, whereof they had kettels full. Euery one had a diſh made with the barke of a tree, and a ſpoone as deep as the palme of ones hand, or more: and with this they had veniſon beſides. And heere is to be noted, that he which entertaineth the others doth not dine, but ſerueth the company, as very often the Bridegroomes doe heere in France.
               
                  The women do not eate with the men. The women were in an other place apart, and did not eat with the men. Wherein may be noted a bad vſe among thoſe people, which haue neuer beene vſed among the nations of theſe parts, ſpecially the Gaullois and Germains, which haue admitted the women, not onely in their banquets, but alſo in their publike counſels, (ſpecially with 
                     The good condition of the women among the Gaullois.
                     See yet hereafter in the 16. chapter of the conſtancie of women.
                   the Gaullois) after they had pacified a great warre which aroſe betweene them, and did decide the controuerſie with ſuch equitie (as Plutarch ſaith) that thereby enſued a greater loue than euer before. And in the treaty that was made with Annibal, being entred into Gallia, to goe againſt the Romans, itw as ſaid, that if the Carthaginienſes had any difference againſt the Gaullois, it ſhould bee decided by the aduice of the Gaulloiſe women. It was not ſo in Rome, where their condition was ſo baſe, that by the law Voconia, the very father could not make them to inherite

more then of the one third part of his goods: And the Emperour Iustinian forbiddeth them in his decrees to accept the awardſhip which had beene deferred vnto them: which ſheweth either a great ſeueritie againſt them, or an argument that in that countrie they haue a very weake ſpirit. And after this ſort be the wiues of our Sauages, yea in woorſe condition, in not eating with the men in their Tabagies: and notwithſtanding it ſeemeth vnto mee that their fare is not in their feaſts ſo delicate, which ought not to conſiſt only in eating and drinking, but in the ſocietie of that ſex which God hath ordained vnto man for to helpe him and to keepe him companie.
               It will ſeeme to many that our Sauages doe liue verie poorely, in not hauing any ſeaſoning in thoſe few meſſes that I haue named. But I will replie that it was not Caligula 
                  What men haue raiſed Rome to her greatneſſe.nor Heliogabalus, nor ſuch like that haue raiſed the Romane Empire to his greatneſſe: neither was it that Cooke who made an imperiall feaſt all with hogs fleſh, diſguiſed in a thouſand ſorts: nor thoſe likeriſh companions, who after they haue deſtroied the aire, the ſea, and the land, now knowing what to finde more to aſſwage their gluttonie, goe a ſeeking wormes from the trees, yea doe keepe them in mew, and doe fatten them, for to make thereof a delicate meſſe: But rather it was one Curius Dentatus who did eat in woodden diſhes, and did ſcrape radiſhes by the fire ſide: Item thoſe good husbandmen The maner of liuing of the ancient Romans and other nations.whom the Senate did ſend for, from the plough for to conduct the Romane armie: And in one word thoſe Romans which did liue with ſodden food, after the maner of our Sauages: for they had not the vſe of bread but about 600. yeres after the foundatiōof the city, hauing learned in tract of time to make ſome cakes groſſely dreſſed & baked vnder the embres, or in the ouen. Pliny author of this report, 
                     Plin. lib. 18. ca. 8. 10. 11.ſaith, moreouer that the Scythians, now Tartares, doe alſo liue with ſodden food and raw meale as the Braſilians. And neuertheleſſe they haue alwaies beene a warlike and

mightie nation. The ſame ſaith, that the Arympheens (which be the Moſcouites) doe liue in foreſts (as our Sauages do) with graines and fruits which they gather from the trees, without mention neither of fleſh nor of fiſh. And indeed the prophane Authors doe agree, that the firſt men did liue after that maner, to wit, of corne, graines, pulſe, acornes, and maſtes, from whence commeth the Grerke worde Phagein, to wit, to eate: ſome particular nations (and not all) had fruits: as peares were in vſe among the Argiues, figges with the Athenians, almonds with the Medes, the fruite of Cannes with the Ethiopians, the Cardamuin with the Perſians, the dates with the Babilonians, the Treffle or three leaued graſſe with the Egyptians. They which haue had none of thoſe fruits haue made war againſt the beaſts of the woods and foreſts, as the Getulians and all the Northern men, yea alſo the ancient Germans, notwithſtanding they had alſo meates made of milke: Others 
                     Ichthyophages. Aethiopians doe liue of Graſhoppers.dwelling vpon the ſhores of the ſea, or lakes and riuers, liued on fiſhes, and were called Ichthyophages: others liuing of Torteſes, were called Chelonophages. Part of the Aethiopians doe liue of Graſhoppers, which they ſalt and harden in the ſmoake in great quantitie for all ſeaſons, and therein do the Hiſtorians of this day agree with Plinie. For there is ſometimes clouds of them, that is to ſay, ſuch infinite numbers, that they hide the clouds; and in the Eaſt 
                     The food of S. Iohn Baptiſt. S. Hieroms 2. book againſt Iouian. S. Augnſtin vpon the 14. chap. to the Romans, verſ. 15.
                     Niceph. li. 1. cap. 14.
                     
                     Ammian. l. 18.
                     
                   likewiſe, which deſtroy all the fields, ſo that nothing remaineth vnto them to eate but thoſe graſhoppers, which was the food of Saint Iohn Baptiſt in the deſart, according to the opinion of Saint Hierome and Auguſtine: Although Nicephorus thinketh that they were the tender leaues of the toppes of trees, becauſe that the Greeke word achrides ſignifieth both the one and the other. But let vs come to the Romane Emperour, beſt qualified. Ammian Mercellin ſpeaking of their maner of life, ſaith that Scipio, Aemiliar, Metellus, Traian, and Adrian, did content themſelues ordinarily with the meate of the campe, that is to ſay,

with Bacon, cheeſe, and bruvage. If then our Sauages haue Sturgeons, Salmons, and other fiſh.veniſon and fiſh abundantly, I doe not thinke them ill furniſhed: for many times we haue receaued of them quantitie of Sturgeons, of Salmons and other fiſhes: beſides their veniſon, and Beuers which liue in ponds, and liue partly on the land, partly in the water. At leaſt one laudable Antropophagesthing is knowen in them, that they are not men eaters, as the Scythians haue beene aforetime, and many other nations of theſe parts of the world; and as yet are at this day the Braſilians, Canibals, and others of the new world.
               
                  Bred. The inconuenience which is found in their maner of life is, that they haue no bread. Indeed bread is a food very naturall for man, but it is eaſier to liue with fleſh, or with fiſh, then with bread onely. If they haue not the vſe of ſalt, the moſt parte of the world doe vſe none. It is not altogether neceſſary, and the principall profit thereof conſiſteth in preſeruing, whereunto it is altogether proper, Notwithſtanding if they had any to make ſome prouiſions they would be more happie then vs. But What time is hard for the Sauages.for want of that they ſometimes ſuffer ſome need: which hapneth when the winter is too milde, or the latter end of the ſame. For then they haue neither veniſon nor fiſh, as wee will declare in the chapter of hunting: and are then conſtrained to feed vpon the barkes of trees, and on the parings of skinnes, and on their dogges, which (vpon this extremitie) they do eate. And the hiſtorie of the Floridians ſaith, thas in extremitie they eate a thouſand filthes, euen to the ſwallowing downe of coales, and to put earth in their ſpoone meate. True it is that in Port Royall there is alwaies ſhell fiſh, ſo that in all caſes one cannot die there for hunger. But yet haue they one ſuperſtition 
                     Superſtition of the Sauages, and of the Chriſtians.
                     Plin. lib. 22. ca. 2.
                     
                   that they will not feed on muſſels, and they can alleage no reaſon for it, no more than our ſuperſtitious Chriſtians which will not bee thirteene at a table, or which feare to paire their nailes on the Friday, or which haue other ſcrupuloſities, true apiſh-toies, ſuch as Plinie reciteth a good

number of them in his naturall hiſtorie. Notwithſtanding in our company ſeeing vs to eate of them they did the like: for we muſt ſay heere by the way, that they will eate no vnknowen meat, but firſt they muſt ſee the triall of it by The Sauages ſuſpitious.others. As for beaſts of the woods they eate of all them, the woolfe excepted. They alſo eate egges, which they go gathering along the ſhoares of waters, and they doe lade their Ca
                     •
                  owes with them, when the Geeſe and Outardes haue done laying in the Spring time, and they vſe all, as The ſobriety and gluttony of the Sauages.well them that be old as new. As for modeſtie they vſe it being at table with vs, and eate very ſoberly: but at home in their owne houſes (as the Braſilians) they ſtretch out their bellies as much as they can, and doe not leaue eating as long as there is any meat: And if any of ours be at their Tabagie, they will bid him doe as they doe. Notwithſtanding Hercules, oxe eater.I ſee no gluttonie like to that of Hercules, who alone did eate whole oxen, and did deuoure one from a Paiſan called Diadamas, by reaſon whereof hee was called Butheues, or Buphagos, Oxe-eater. And without going ſo far, wee ſee in the Countries of theſe parts greater gluttonies then that which one would impute to the Sauages. For in the diet of Ausbourg was brought to the Emperor Charles the fift, a great whoreſon which had eaten a calfe and a ſheepe, and yet was not full: And I doe not know that our Sauages doe waxfatte, or that they haue great bellies, but that they are nimble and ſwift, like to our ancient Gaullois and high Allemans or Germans, who by their agilitie, did trouble very much the Roman armies.
               
                  The meat of the Braſilians.
                   The food of the Braſilians are ſerpents, crocodills, toads and great lizards, which they eſteeme as much as wee doe capons, leverets, and conies. They alſo make meale of white rootes, which they call Maniel, hauing the leaues of Paeoniamas, and the tree of the height of the Elder tree: Thoſe rootes as bigge as the thigh of a Man, which the woman doe crumble very ſmall, and eat them raw, or elſe they make them to ſeeth well in a

great earthen veſſell, ſturring it alwaies as the comfitmakers doe make ſuger plummes. They are of very good taſte, and of eaſie diſgeſtion, but they be not fitt to make bread, becauſe they dry and burne themſelues, and alwaies return into meale. They haue alſo with this Mahis or Mais, which groweth in two or three months after it is ſowed: and that is a great ſuccour vnto them. But A ſtrange proſtitution.they haue a curſed and an vnhumane coſtome to eat their priſoners, after they haue well fatted them. Yea (a moſt horrible thing) they giue them in marriage the faireſt maidens they haue, putting about their necks as many halters as they will keep him moons. And when the time is expired they make wine of the ſaid Mais and rootes, wherewith they make themſelues drunke, calling all their friends. Then he that hath taken him knocketh him on the head with a clubbe, and deuideth him into peeces, and make carbonnadoes of him, which they eat with a ſingular pleaſure aboue all meats in the world.
               
                  Commonalty of life. Furthermore all Sauages generally doe liue euery where in common: the moſt perfect and moſt woorthy life of man, ſeeing that he is a ſociable creature, the life of the ancient golden age, which the holy Apoſtles would haue reſtored againe: But being to eſtabliſh the ſpirituall life, they Hoſpitality.could not execute that good deſire. If it happens then that our Sauages haue veniſon, or other food, all the company haue part of it. They haue this mutuall charity which hath beene taken away from vs ſince that Mine and Thine haue come into the world. They haue alſo Hoſpitality, a vertue peculiar to the ancient Gaulois (according to the witneſſe of Parthenius in his Erotigues, of Caeſar, Saluian and others) who did conſtraine trauellers and ſtrangers to come into their houſes and there to take their refreſhing: A vertue which ſeemeth to haue conſerued her ſelfe onely with the Nobility and gentry: for among the other ſort we ſee her very weake and at the point of death. Tacitus giueth the ſame praiſe to the Germans, ſaying that with them all

howſes are opened to ſtrangers, and there they are in ſuch aſſurance that (as if they were ſacred) none dare doe them any injury; Charity and Hoſpitality which are mentioned Leuit. 19. ver. 34.in the law of God who ſaid to his people: The ſtranger which ſoiourneth among you, ſhall be vnto you as he which is borne among you, and you ſhall loue him as your ſelues: for you haue beene ſtrangers in the land of Aegypt. So doe our Sauages, which, ſturred vp with an humane nature, receiue all ſtrangers (except their enemies) whom they accept in their commonalty of life.
               
                  Of drinking. But we haue ſpoken enough of eating, let vs now ſpeake of drinking. I know not whether I ought to place among the greateſt blindneſſes of the Weſt Indians to haue abundantly the moſt excellent fruit that God hath giuen vnto vs, and they know not the vſe thereof. For I ſee that the Plin. lib. 18. cap. 4.
                  ancient Romans were a long time (as Pliny ſaith) without either Vines or Vine-yards: And our Gaulloas did make beere, the vſe whereof is yet frequent in all Gallia Belgica: And this kind of drinke did the Aegyptians alſo vſe in former times (as ſaith Diodorus) who attributeth the inuention thereof to Oſiris. Notwithſtanding after that the vſe of wine was come among the Romans the Guallois tooke ſo good a taſte in it, in the voyages that they made there with their Armies, that they continued afterwards the ſame Strabo.way. And afterward the Italian Merchants did draw much money from the Gaullois with their wine that they Caeſar.brought thither. But the Germans knowing their owne nature ſubiect to drinke more then is needfull would haue none brought to them, for feare that being drunke they Tacitus.might be a pray to their enemies: and contented themſelues Wine forbibden among the Germans.with beere: And notwithſtanding becauſe the continuall drinking of water ingendreth crudities in the ſtomacke, and thereby great indiſpoſitions, the nations haue commonly found better the moderate vſe of wine which Pſal. 104. verſ. 16. 17.hath beene giuen of God to reioyce the heart, as bread for to ſtrengthen him, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith: And the Apoſtle

                  S. Paul himſelfe doth councell his Diſciple Timothy to vſe it by reaſon of his infirmity. For wine (ſaith Oribaſius) recreateth 
                  
                     Oribaſius, in the firſt book of things cō
                     modious and eaſie, ch. 12.
                  and quickneth our heat: whereby, by conſequence, the diſgeſtures are made better, and good bloud is engendred, and good nouriſhment thorow all the parts of the body where the wine hath force to pierce: and therefore they which be weakened by ſickneſſe doe recouer by it a ſtronger being, and doe likewiſe renew by it an appetite to their meat. It breaketh the ſleame, it purgeth collericke humours by the vrine, and with his pleaſant odour and liuely ſubſtance gladdeth the heart of man, and giueth ſtrength to the body. Wine taken moderatly is the procurer of all thoſe goodeffects, but if it be drunke vnmeaſuably it produceth effects quite contrary. And Plato willing 
                     Plate in his Timoeo.
                  to ſhew foorth in one word the nature and property of wine: That which warmeth (ſaith he) beth body and ſoule, is that which is called wine. The Sauages which haue no vſe of wine nor of ſpices, haue found out another meanes to warme the ſame ſtomake, and in ſome ſort to breake ſo many crudities proceeding from the fiſh that they eat, which otherwiſe would extinguiſh their naturall heat: it is the hearb which the Braſilians doe call Petun, that is to ſay, Tabacco, 
                  Tabacco.the ſmoake whereof they take almoſt euery houre, as we will declare more at large when we come heereafter to ſpeake of that hearbe. Then as in theſe parts one drinketh to another, in preſenting the glaſſe to him to whom one hath drunke (which is done in many places) ſo the Sauages willing to feaſt ſome body and to ſhew him ſigne of amity, after they haue well taken of that ſmoake, they preſent the Tabacco pipe to him that they like beſt. Which cuſtome to drinke one to another is not new, nor particular to the Flemings and Germans: for Holiodorus in the 
                     Holiodor. firſt booke 1. cha. and. 3. booke ch. 3.
                  Aethiopian Hiſtory of Chariclea witneſſeth that the ſame was a cuſtome altogether vſed in the Countries whereof he ſpeaketh to drinke one to the other in token of friendſhip. And becauſe it was abuſed, and men were appointed to conſtraine them that would not pledge, Aſſuerus King of

the Perſians at a banket that he made to all the principall Eſter. 1. ver. 8.Lords and Gouernors of his Countries, did forbid by an expreſſe law to force any, and did command that euery one ſhould be ſerued after his owne will. The Aegiptians did vſe no forcing, but not withſtanding they drunke vp all, and that by great deuotion. For after they had found out the inuention to applie painting and Matachiz vpon ſiluer they tooke great delight to ſee their God Anubis 
                  Plin. lib. 33. cap. 9.
                  painted in the bottome of their cups, as Pliny ſaith.
               Our Sauages Canadians, Souriqnois and others are far from theſe delights, and hauing nothing but the Tabacco ſpoken of by vs to warme their ſtomakes after the crudities of waters, and to giue ſome ſmatch to the mouth, hauing that in common with many other Nations, that they loue that which is biting, ſuch as the ſaid Tabacco is, which (euen as wine or ſtrong beere) taken (as it is ſaid) in ſmoake, maketh giddy the ſenſes and in ſome ſort, procureth ſleep: So that this word drunkard is among them, by this word The Floridians drinke.
                  Eſcorken▪, as well as amongſt vs. The Floridians haue a certaine ſort of drinke called Caſinè which they drinke all hot, which they make of certaine leanes of trees. But it is not lawfull for euery one to drinke of it, but onely to the Paraouſti, and to them that haue made proofe of their vallour in the warres. And this drinke hath ſuch vertue that as ſoone as they haue drunken it, they become all in a ſweat which being paſt, they be fedde for 24. houres by the nouriſhing The drinke of the Braſilians.
                  force of the ſame. As for them of Braſil they make a certaine kinde of drinke which they call Caoü-in, with roots and a graine called Mil which they put to ſeeth and ſoften in great earthen veſſels, made in the maner of a tub, ouer the fire, and being ſoftned, it is the office of the women to chaw it all, and to ſet them againe to ſeeth in other veſſels: then hauing left all to be ſetled and skimmed, they couer the veſſell vntill that it muſt bee drunken: and this drinke is as thicke as lees, after the manner of the defrutum of the latins, and of the taſte of ſowre milke,

white and red as our wine is: and they make it in euery ſeaſon, becauſe that the ſaid rootes doe grow there at all times. Furthermore they drinke this Coü-in ſomewhat warme, but with ſuch exceſſe that they neuer depart from the place where they make their feaſts vntil that they haue drunke all out, though there were of the ſame a tun for euery one. So that the Flemings, high Duch-men, and Switzers are but yongue nouices in that trade in regard of them. I will not ſpeak heere of the Ciders & Peries of Normandy, nor of the Hidromels, the vſe whereof, by the report of Plutarch, was long before the inuention of wine: 
                     Plutar. in the 4. of the Sympoſiaq. Cha. 5.ſeeing our Sauages vſe none of it. But I haue thought good to mention the fruit of the vine, by reaſon that New France is plentifully furniſhed therewith.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               Of their Dances and Songs▪
               
               VVHen the belly is full then comes mirth (ſaith the Prouerb) it will not be then vnfit to ſpeake of dancing after feaſting. For it is alſo ſaid of the people of Iſrael that after they had well filled their bellies 
                     Exod. 31. ver. 6. 19.
                     Dances inſtituted in diuine things.
                   they aroſe for to plaie and dance about their golden Calfe. Dancing is a thing very ancient among all people. But it was firſt made & inſtituted in diuine things, as we did now marke an example of it: and the Cananites who did worſhip the fire, did dance about it & ſacrificed their children vnto it. Which maner of dancing was not inuented by the Idolaters, but rather by the people of God. For 
                     Iudges 21. v. 19. 21.
                     2. King. 6. c.
                   we read in the booke of Iudges that there was a ſolemnity to God in Silo where the maidens came to dance at the ſound of the fluit. And Dauid bringing backe the Arke of Couenant into Hieruſalem, went before it in his ſhirt, dancing with all his ſtrength.
               As for the Heathen they haue followed this faſhion. For Plutarch in the life of Nicias ſayth that the Townes

of Greece had a cuſtome euery yeere to goe into Dellos for to celebrate the dances and ſongs in the honour of Apollo. And in the life of Licurgus the Orator, ſaith that he did ordaine a very ſolemne dance in the Pyree vnto the honour of Neptune, with a wager of a hundred crownes price to the beſt dancer, and to the ſecond of 80. crownes, and The muſes Dances.to the third of 60. The Muſes▪
                   daughters of Iupiter doe loue dancing: and all they that haue ſpoken of them make vs to goe ſeeke for them vpon the Mountaine Parnaſſus, where (ſay they) they dance, at the ſound of Apolloes Harpe.
               
                  The College of the Saliens.
                   As for the Latins, the ſame Plutarch ſayth in the life of Numa Pompilius that he did inſtitute the coledge of the Salians (which were Prieſts dancing and gamboling, and ſinging ſongs in the honour of God Mars) when that a Buckler of braſſe fell miraculouſly from Heauen, which was a gage from that God for the conſeruation of the Empire. Ancyle.And that Buckler was called Ancile, but for feare that it ſhould be ſtolen away he cauſed 12. others to bee made a like named Ancilia, which were carried in the warres, as wee did heertofore our Oriflamme, and as the Oriflamme. Labarum.Emperour Conſtantine did the Labarum. Now the formoſt of thoſe Salians that did lead the others in the dance Praeſul. Festus lib. 16.
                  was called Praeſul, that is to ſay, firſt dancer, prae alijs Salians, ſayth Festus, who taketh from that the name of the French-people, which were called Salians becauſe they did loue to dance, to skippe and to gambole: and of 
                     Salique Law.theſe Salians are come the lawes which wee call Saliques, that is to ſay Lawes of dances.
               So then to come againe to our purpoſe, the dances haue beene firſt inſtituted for holy things. Whereto I 
                     
                        Arrian of the geſts of Alexander.
                     
                     Dances profitable for health.
                   will adde the teſtimony of Arrian, who ſayth that the Indians which did worſhip the Sunne riſing, did not thinke to haue duely ſaluted him, vnleſſe their ſongs and prayers were accompanied with dances.
               This kinde of exerciſe was ſince applied to another vſe,

that is to ſay, for the gouerment of health, as Plutarche ſayth in the treatie for the ſame. So that Socrates himſelf (howſoeuer preciſe and reformed) tooke pleaſure therein, for which cauſe he deſired to haue a houſe large and ſpacious, as Xenophon writeth in his bancquet, and the Perſians 
                  Xenophon. Duris.did expreſly vſe the ſame, as Duris writeth in the ſeuenth of his hiſtories.
               But the delights, laciuiouſneſſe, and diſorders did conuert them ſince to their owne vſe, and the dances haue ſerued for proxenetes and broakers of vnchaſtity, as wee find it but to much, whereof wee haue teſtimonies in the Goſpell, where wee finde that it coſt the life of the greateſt that euer aroſe amongſt men, which is Saint Iohn Baptist. And Arceſilaus ſayd very well, that dances are venoms, ſharper then all the poiſons that the Earth bringeth 
                     Plutar. in the 7. of the Sympoſe. quest. 5.foorth, for as much as by a certaine incitement they inſinuate into the Soule, wherein they communicate and imprint voluptuouſneſſe and delectation, which the bodies properly doe affect.
               
                  All Sauages doe dance. Our Sauages, and generally all the people of the weſt Indies, haue time out of minde the vſe of dances. But laſciuious Pleaſure hath not yet ſo farre preuailed againſt them as to make them dance at the pleaſure thereof, a thing which ought to ſerue as a leſſon to the Chriſtians. The vſe then of their dances is for foure ends, either to pleaſe their gods (let who will call them diuels it is all one to me) as wee haue marked in two places before, or to cheare vp ſome body, or to reioyce themſelues of ſome victory or to preuent ſickeneſſes. In all theſe dances they ſing, and make no dombe ſhewes, as in thoſe dances whereof the Pythienne Oracle ſpeaketh, when hee ſaith: It behooueth that the beholder vnderſtand the dancing ſtage plaier, although he be dombe: and that hee heare him though hee Dombe geſtures.doth not ſpeake: But as in Delos they did ſing to the honour of Apollo, the Salians to the honour of Mars, likewiſe the Floridians doe ſing to the honour of the Sunne, to

whom they attribute all their victories: not, for all that ſo filthily as Orpheus, inuentor of the heatheniſh diueliſhneſles, of whom Saint Gregorie Nazianze mocketh himſelfe in an oration, becauſe that among other follies, in an A fooliſh filthy ſong to Iupiter.
                  himme he ſpeaketh of Iupiter in this wiſe: O glorious Iupiter! the greatest of all the gods, which art reſident in all ſorts of dung, as well of ſheepe as of horſes and mules, &c. And in another himme that he maketh to Ceres, he ſaith, that ſhe diſcouereth her thighes for to ſubmit her body to her Paramours, and to make hir ſelfe to be tilled.
               Our Souriquois doe make alſo dances and ſongs to the The Songs of the Chriſtians to God.honour of the diuell, which ſheweth them their game, and that they thinke to gratifie him: whereof one needeth not to maruell, becauſe that we our ſelues, that be better inſtructed, doe ſing Pſalmes and Songs of praiſe to our God, for that he giueth vs our daily food: And I doe not 
                     Cicero in the Oration for Murena.
                  ſee that a man who is a hungred haue any great luſt either in ſinging or dancing: Nemo enim ſaltat feré ſobrius, ſaith Cicero.
               
               Alſo when they will feaſt any body, they haue no fairer The Dances and ſongs of the Souriquois Sauages.geſture, in many places then dancing: as in like maner if any one maketh them a feaſt, for all thankes giuing, they betake themſelues to dancing, as it hath beene ſeene ſomtimes when Monſieur de Poutrincourt did giue them their dinner, they did ſing ſongs of praiſes vnto him, ſaying, that he was a braue Sagamos, who had made them good cheere, and which was their good friend: which they did comprehend very miſtically vnder theſe three words, Epigico iaton edico: I ſay miſtically: for I could neuer know the proper ſignification of euery of theſe words. I beleeue that it is of the ancient language of their forefathers which is out of vſe, like as the old Hebrew is not the Iewes language at this day, and was alreadie changed in the time of the Apoſtles.
               
                  Praiſes of the braue Captaines. They ſing alſo in their common Tabagies, the praiſes of the braue captaines and Sagamos that haue killed many of

their enemies. Which was practiſed anciently in manie nations, and is practiſed yet amongſt vs at this day; and is found to be approoued and of decencie, in the holie Scripture, in the Canticle of Debora, after the ouerthrow Iudges cha. 5.of king Siſara. And when yoong Dauid had killed the great Goliath, as the king did returne victorious into Ieruſalem, the women came out of al the towns, and met him 1. Of Samuel, 18. ver. 6. 7.with tabrets, rebecks, and timbrels, dancing and ſinging merily, ſaying by courſe and anſwering one another; Saul hath ſlaine his thouſand, and Dauid his ten thouſand. Atheneus 
                  
                     Gaullois Diodo. Atheneus in the 6. booke of the banket of the wiſe.ſaith, that the Gaullois had Poets named Bardes, whom they reuerenced very much: and thoſe Poets did ſing Viua voce the deeds of vertuous and famous men: but they did write nothing in publike, becauſe that writing maketh men ſlothfull and negligent in learning. Notwithſtanding Charolus Magnus was of an other opinion: For The Songs of the Frenchmen.he cauſed ſongs to be made in the vulgar tongue, containing the deeds and acts of the ancient, and commanded that the children ſhould be made to learne them by heart, and that they ſhould ſing them, to the end, that their memorie ſhould remaine from father to ſonne, and from race to race, and by this meanes others ſhould be ſtirred vp to doe good, and to write the actions and deeds of valiant men. I will further ſay heere by the way, that the Lacedemonians 
                  
                     
                        Plutar. in the life of Lycurgus.
                     
                     Lacedemonians
                   had a certaine maner of dancing which they vſed in all their feaſts and ſolemnities, which did repreſent the three ages: to wit, the time paſt, by the old men which did ſay in ſinging this burthen; We were heeretofore valorous: the preſent, by the yoong men in the flower of their youth ſaying: We be ſo now at this time: the future, by the children, who did ſay, We ſhall be ſo too, when our turne comes.
               
               
                  What are the Sauages dances. I will not buſie my ſelfe in deſcribing all the faſhions of the gambols of their ancient predeceſſors, but it ſufficeth me to ſay that the dances of our Sauages are made without remoouing from one place, and notwithſtanding

they are all in a round (or very neere) and doe dance with vehemencie, ſtriking with their feet vpon the ground, and lifting themſelues vp as in halfe a leape: And as for their hands they hold them cloſe, and their armes in the aire, in forme of a man that threatneth, with a motion of them. As for the voice, there is but one that ſingeth, bee it man or woman: all the reſt do & ſay, Het, het, as ſome that breatheth out with vehemencie: And at the end of euery ſong, they all make a loud and long exclamation, ſaying Héeee. For to be more nimble, they commonly put themſelues ſtarke naked, becauſe that their gownes made of skinnes doe hinder them: And if they haue any of their enemies heads or armes, they will carrie them about their necks, dancing with this faire iewell, which they will ſometimes bite, ſo great is their hatred euen againſt the dead. And for to end this chapter as we began it, they neuer make any Tabagie or feaſt, but that there is a dance after it: And afterward if the Sagamos be diſpoſed, according to the ſtate of their affaires, he will make an oration of one, two, The orations of the Sagamos of one 2. or 3. houres continuance.or three houres continuance, and at euery demonſtration asking the aduice of the companie: if they approoue his propoſition, euery one will crie out aloud Hé e e e in ſigne of allowing and ratifying of the ſame. Wherein they giue him very attentiue audience, as wee haue ſeene many times: And alſo when that Monſieur De Poutrincourt did feaſt our Sauages, Memberton, after dancing made an oration with ſuch vehemencie that he made the world to woonder, ſhewing the curteſies and witneſſes of friendſhip that they receaued of the Frenchmen, what they might hope of them heereafter; and how much their preſence was profitable, yea neceſſarie vnto them, becauſe that they did ſleepe in ſecuritie: and had no feare of their enemies, &c.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               Of the diſpoſition of their bodies: and of their Phyſike and Cheirurgie.
               WE haue ſaid in the laſt Chapter that dancing is profitable for the preſeruation of health. Alſo it is one of the cauſes why our Sauages do delight ſo much in it: But they haue yet ſome other preſeruatiues which they vſe very often, that is to ſay, ſweates, whereby they preuent ſickneſſes. For they be ſometimes touched with this Phthiſie wherewith the men of Captain 
                     Phthiſie firſt booke chap. 16.
                  Iames Quartier and Monſieur De Monts were annoied, which notwithſtanding is but ſeldome. But when it hapneth they haue in Canada the tree called Annedda, which Annedda.I terme the tree of life for the excellencie thereof, wherewith they heale themſelues; and in the countrie of the Armouchiquois they haue Saſſafras, and in Florida Eſquine. 
                  Saſſafras▪ Eſquine.The Souriquois which haue none of theſe kinds of woods, doe vſe ſweats, as we haue ſaid, and they haue their Aoutmoins for Phiſitions, who for that purpoſe doe digge in the The Sauages ſtowes or hot houſes.ground, and make a pit which they couer with wood and bigge flatte ſtones ouer it: then they put fire to it by a hole, and the wood being burned they make a raft with poles, which they couer with all the skinnes and other couerings which they haue, ſo as no aire entereth therein, they caſt water vpon the ſaid ſtones, which are fallen in the pit, and doe couer them: then they pu themſelues vnder the ſame raft, and with motions the Aoutmoin ſinging, and the others ſaying, (as in their dances) Het, het, het, they put themſelues into a ſweat. If they happen to fall into ſickneſſe (for one muſt die in the end) the Aoutmoin doth blow, with exerciſings, vpon the member grieued, doth licke it and ſucke it: and if that be not ſufficient, he letteth the patient bloud, ſcotching his fleſh with the

point of a knife, or ſome thing elſe. If they doe not heale them alwaies, one muſt conſider that our Phyſicians doe not alwaies cure their patients neither.
               
                  The Phyſitions in Florida.
                   In Florida they haue their Iarvars, who continually carry a bagge full of hearbs and drugges hanging about their necks to cure the ſicke, which are for the moſt part ſicke of the Pox: and they blowe vpon the parts affected, vntill they draw the very bloud from it.
               
                  The Braſilians Phyſicians. The Braſilians Phiſitions are named among them Pagés (they be not their Caraibes or Southſaiers) who in ſucking as aforeſaid, they endeuour themſelues to heale diſeaſes. But they haue one ſickeneſſe which is vncureable, which they call Pians, proceeding of lecherie, which notwithſtanding little children ſometimes haue, euen as them in theſe our parts that be full of pock-holes, which commeth vnto them (as I thinke) from the corruption of their Parents. This contagion doth conuert it ſelfe into boiles broader then the thombe, which diſperſe themſelues throughout all the bodie, and euen as farre as the face, and being touched therewith they beare the marks thereof all their life time, fowler then lepers, as well Braſilians as other nations. As for the ſicke bodie his diet, they giue him not any thing, vnleſſe he asketh for it: and without taking any other care of them, they ceaſe not to make their noiſe and hurly burlies before them, drinking, skipping and ſinging, according to their cuſtome.
               
                  The Souriquois cheirurgeons. 
                  As for the wounds, Aoutmos of our Souriquois, and their neighbours, doe licke and ſucke them, vſing the Beuers kidney, whereof they put a ſlice vpon the wound, and ſo doth heale it ſelfe with that. The ancient Germans (ſaith Tacitus) not hauing yet the Art of Cheirurgie did the like: They bring (ſaith he) their wounds to their Mothers and to their Wiues, who are not afraid neither to number them, nor to ſucke them: yea they bring them vittails to the campe, and exhort them to fight valiantly: ſo that ſometimes armies readie to runne away, haue beene reſtored by the prayers

of the women, opening their breaſts to their husbands. And afterwards they willingly vſed the womens aduices and counſels, wherein they eſteeme ſome holy thing to be.
               And among the Chriſtians, many (not caring for God no longer then they receaue good gifts of him) doe ſeeke for the healing of their diſeaſes by charmes and helpe of Witches: So among our Sauages the Aoutmoin hauing ſome ſore in cure, inquireth often of his diuell to know whether he ſhall heale or no: and hath neuer no anſwer but doubtfully, by if, or and. There bee ſome of them which ſometimes doe make incredible cures, as to heale one that hath his armes cut off. Which notwithſtanding I know not, why I ſhould finde it ſtrange, when I conſider what Monſieur de Buſbeque writeth in his diſcourſe of his Embaſſie into Turkie the fourth Epiſtle.
               
                  Comming neere vnto Buda, the Baſha ſent ſome of his houſhold Seruants to meete vs, with many Haraldes and officers: But among the reſt a faire troupe of yong men on horſe-backe, remarkable for the nouelty of their order. They had their heads bare and ſhauen, vpon the which they had made a long bloudie ſlaſh, and thruſt diuers feathers of birds within the wound, from whence the very pure bloud did trickle downe: but inſteed of ſhrinking at it, they went lifting vp their heads with a laughing countenance. Before me marched ſome foote men, one of them had his armes naked and hanging down on his ſides: both which armes aboue the Elbowe was thruſt quite through with a knife that ſtucke faſt in them. Another was naked from his head to the nauell, hauing the skinne of his-backe ſo iagged vp and downe in two places, achwart which he had made to paſſe, an hatchet of armes, which he did carry in ſcarffe wiſe as we would doe a cuttleaxe. I ſaw another of them who had fixed vpon the crowne of his head a horſe ſhooe with many nailes, and of ſo long continuance that the nailes were ſo fixed and faſt in the fleſh, that they ſtirred not. Wee entred

into Buda in this pompe, and were brought into the Baſhas houſe, with whom I treated of my affaires. All this youthly company little caring for their wounds were in the lower court of the houſe; And as I was a looking on them the Baſha asked of me what I thought of it: All well ſaid I, except that theſe men doe with the skinne of their bodies, that which I would not doe with my coat: For I would ſeeke to keepe it whole. The Baſha laughed, and we tooke our leaue.
               
               
                  The triall of the Sauages conſtancy. Our Sauages doe very well ſometimes make triall of their conſtancie, but we muſt confeſſe that it is nothing in regard of the things aboue rehearſed. For all that they do is to put burning coales vpon their armes, and to ſuffer their skinnes to burne, ſo that the marks thereof doe remaine there for euer: which thing they doe alſo on other parts of the body, and ſhew theſe marks to ſay that they Romans.haue a great courage. But the ancient Mutius Sceuola did much more then that, burning courageouſly his arme in the fire, after he had miſſed the killing of king Porſenna. If this were of my purpoſe I would declare the cuſtomes Lacedemonians.of the Lacedemonians, who did make euery yeare a feaſt to the honour of Diana, where the yong boies did ſhew their triall by whipping of themſelues: Item the cuſtome of the Perſians.ancient Perſians, who worſhiping the Sunne, which they called Mithra, none could be receiued to that fraternity vntill he had giuen his conſtancy to be knowen, by foureſcore kindes of torments, of fire, of water, of faſting, of ſolitarineſſe, and other things.
               But let vs return to our Sauages Phyſicions & Chierurgeons. Although the number of them be but ſmall, yet ſo it is that the hope of their liuing doth not conſiſt wholy in Healthfull Country.that trade. For as concerning the ordinary ſickneſſes they are ſo rare in thoſe parts, that the verſe of Ouid may be very well applied vnto them:

                     Si valeant homines ars tua Phaebe iacet:
                  
               
               In ſaying 
                     Si, pro Quia.
                   For theſe doe alſo liue a great

age, which is commonly ſeuen ſcore or eight ſcore yeare. Long liues.And if they had our commodities to liue by forecaſt, and induſtry to gather vp in ſummer for the Winter, I beleeue they would liue aboue three hundred yeares. Which may be coniectured by the report that we haue made heeretofore of an old man in Florida, who had liued that great age. In ſuch ſort that it is no particular miracle of that which Pliny ſaith that the Pandorians doe liue 200. yeares or that they of Taprobane are liuely and nimble at a 100. yeares old. For Membertou is aboue a 100. yeares old, and yet hath not one white haire on his head, and ſo ordinarily be the others. And that which is more in euery age they haue all their teeth, and go bareheaded, not caring at leaſt to make any hats of their skinnes, as the firſt did that vſed them in theſe parts of the world. For they of Pel
                        •
                     poneſus 
                  The firſt originall of hats.the Lacedemonians did call a hat Cynen, which Iulius Pollux ſaith to ſignifie a dogges skinne. And of theſe hats doe yet the Northerly people vſe at this day, but they are well furred.
               
                  Concord is a cauſe of long life. That which alſo procureth the health of our Sauages, is the concord which they haue among them, and the ſmal care they take for the commodities of this life, for the which we torment and vex our ſelues. They haue not that ambition, which in theſe parts gnaweth and fretteth the mindes and ſpirits, and filleth them with cares, making blinded men to goe to the graue in the very flower of their age, and ſometimes to ſerue for a ſhamefull ſpectacle to a publike death.
               I dare alſo, and that very well, attribute the cauſe of this diſpoſition and long health of our Sauages, to their maner of life, which is after the ancient faſhion, without curioſity. For euery one doth grant that Sobrietie is the mother of Sobriety.health. And although they ſometimes exceed in their Tabagies or feaſts, they diet themſelues afterwards well enough, liuing very often eight daies more or leſſe with the ſmoake of Tabacco, not returning to hunting vntil they

be a hungry. And that beſides being nimble they want no exerciſe, ſome way or other. Briefely there is no mention amongſt them of thoſe ſhort ages which doe not out paſſe fourty yeares, which is the life of certaine people of Aethiopia (as Pliny ſaith) which doe liue of Locuſtes (or graſhopers) Multitude of officers is the ſigne of a corrupted eſtate.ſalted in the ſmoake. Alſo corruption is not among them, which is the foſtering mother of Phyſitions and of Magiſtrates, and of the multiplicity of officers, and of publike extortioners, which are created and inſtituted for to giue order vnto it, and to cut off the abuſes. They haue no ſutes in law (the plague of our liues) to the proſecuting whereof we muſt conſume both our yeares & our meanes, and very often one cannot obtaine iuſtice, be it either by the ignorance of the Iudge, to whom the caſe is diſguiſed, or by his owne malice, or by the wickedneſſe of an Atturney that will ſell his Clyant. And from ſuch afflictions do proceed the teares, fretfulneſſes, and deſolations, which Eccleſiaſt. 30. at the end of the chapter.bring vs to the graue before our time. For ſorrow (ſaith the wiſe man) hath killed many, and there is no profit in it. Envy and wrath ſhorten the life, and care bringeth old age before the time. But the ioy of the heart is the life of man: and a mans gladneſſe prolongeth his daies.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               The exerciſes of the Men.
               AFter health, let vs ſpeake of exerciſes which be the maintainers and protectors thereof. Our Sauages haue no baſe exerciſe, all their ſport being either the wars, or hunting (whereof we will ſpeake ſeuerally) or in making implements fit for the ſame (as Caeſar witneſſeth of the ancient Germans) or a dancing (and of that we haue Bowes and arrowes.already ſpoken) or in paſſing the time in play. They make then Bowes and Arrowes▪ bowes which be ſtrong and without fineneſſe. As for the arrowes it is an admirable thing, how they can make them ſo long and ſo ſtraight

with a knife, yea with a ſtone onely, where they haue no kniues. They feather them with the feathers of an Eagles taile, becauſe they are firme, and carry themſelues well in the aire: And when they want them they will giue a Beauers skinne, yea twaine for one of thoſe tailes. For the No wiſe trade to ſell any weapons to them.head, the Sauages that haue traffike with French-men doe head them with iron heads which are brought to them. But the Armochiquois & others more remot haue nothing but bones, made like Serpents tongues, or with the tailes 
                     Sicnau, or Seekanauk, a fiſh in Virginia.
                  of a certaine fiſh called Sicnau, the which fiſh is alſo found in 
                     Ʋirginia by the ſame name (at leaſt the Engliſh Hiſtorian doth write it Seekanauk.) This fiſh is like to a Crauiſe lodged within a very hard ſhell, which ſhell is of the greatneſſe of a diſh, a long taile, likewiſe hard (for it is ſhell and ſharpe). His eies are vpon his backe, and is very good meate.
               
                  Maſes, or clubs, ſhields. They alſo make wooden maſes or clubbes, in the faſhion of an Abbots ſtafe, for the warre, and ſhields which couer all their bodies, as did our ancient Gaullois. As for the Quiuers that is the womens trade.
               
                  Fiſhing lines. Hempe. For fiſhing. The Armouchiquois which haue hempe doe make fiſhing lines with it, but ours that haue not any manuring of the ground, doe trucke for them with 
                     Bowe-ſtrings made with guts.
                     Rackets.
                   French-men, as alſo for fiſhing hookes to baite for fiſhes: onely they make with guttes bow-ſtrings, and rackets, which they tie at their feet to goe vpon the ſnow a hunting.
               And for as much as the neceſſity of life doth conſtraine them to change place often, whether it be for fiſhing (for euery place hath his particular fiſhes, which come thither in certaine ſeaſon) they haue neede of horſes in their remooue for to carry their ſtuffe. Thoſe horſes be Canowes 
                  
                     Canowes, or boats.and ſmall boates made of barkes of trees, which go as ſwiftly as may be without ſailes. When they remooue they put all that they haue into them, wiues, children, dogges, kettles, hatchets, Matachiaz, bowes, arrowes, quiuers,

skinnes, and the couerings of their houſes. They are made in ſuch ſort that one muſt not ſturre, nor ſtand vp when he is in them, but crouching or ſitting in the bottome, otherwiſe the marchandize would ouerturne. They are fower foot broad or thereabouts, in the middeſt, and are ſharpe towards the ends: and the noſe is made riſing, for to paſſe commodiouſly vpon the waues. I haue ſaid that they make them of the barkes of trees, for the keeping whereof in meaſure, they garniſh them within, with halfe circles of Ceder wood, a wood very ſouple and pliable, whereof Noahs Arke was made. And to the end they leake not, they couer the ſeames (which ioyne the ſaid barkes together, which they make of rootes) with the gumme of firretrees. They alſo make ſome with willowes very properly, which they couer with the ſaid gumme of Firre-trees: a thing which witneſſeth that they lacke no wit, where neceſſity preſſeth them.
               Many nations of theſe parts haue had the like in times paſt. If wee ſeeke in the holy Scripture, wee ſhall finde that Moſes mother, ſeeing ſhee could hide her child no Exod. 2. v. 3.longer, ſhe did put him in a little Cheſt (that is to ſay in a little Canowe: (for Noahs Arke, and this ſame ſmall cheſt is one ſame word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Hebrew, made of reede, and 
                  Canowes made of willowes.
                  daubed it with ſlime and pitch: then put the childe in it, and laid it among the bullruſhes by the ſhoare of the Riuer. And the Prophet Iſaiah threatning the Aethiopians and Aſſyrians: Woe (ſaith he) vnto the Countrie which ſendeth by ſea Ambaſſadors in paper veſſels (or ruſhes) vpon the waters, ſaying: 
                  Paper Canowes.
                  
                  Meſſengers goe yee quickly, &c. The Aegyptians, neighbours to the Aethiopians had in the time of Iulius Caeſar, the ſame veſſels, that is to ſay, of paper, which is a rinde of a barke of a tree: witneſſe Lucan in theſe 
                     Lucani. 4. booke.verſes:

                     Conſeritur bibula Memphitis cymba papyro.
                  
               
               
                  Plin. lib. 4. ca. 16.
                   But let vs come from the Eaſt and South to the North: Pliny ſaith, that anciently the Engliſhmen & Scotiſhmen,

fetched Tinne in the land of Mictis, with Canowes of Willowes ſewed in leather. Solin ſaith as much, and Iſidore, 
                  Iſidor. li. 19. cap. 1.
                  which calleth this faſhion of Canowes, Carabus, made of Willowes, and enuironed with oxe hides all raw, which (ſaith he) the Saxon Pirats doe vſe, who with thoſe inſtruments are ſwift in flight. Sïdoneus de Polignac, ſpeaking of Sidon. Carm. 7.
                  the ſame Saxons, ſaith,

                     —Cui pelle ſalam ſulcare Britannum
                     Ludus, & aſſuto glaucum mare findere Lembo.
                  
               
               The Sauages of the North towards Labrador, haue certaine ſmall Canowes of thirteene or foureteene foote long, and two foot broad, made of this faſhion, all couered with leather, yea ouer head, and there is but one hole in the midſt, where the man putteth himſelfe on his knees, hauing halfe his body out, ſo that he cannot periſh, furniſhing his veſſels with victuales before he commeth in it. I The originall of the Sirens fables.dare beleeue that the fables of the Sirenes or Marmaidens come from that, the dunces eſteeming that they were fiſhes, halfe men or women, as they haue fained Centaures by ſeeing men on horſebacke.
               
                  
                     Canowes of holowed▪ trees. The Armouchiquois, Ʋirginians, Floridians, and Braſilians, doe make another faſhion of Canowes, for hauing neither hatchets nor kniues, (except ſome copper ones) they burne a great tree very ſtraight, at the foot, and fall it downe, then they take ſuch length as they will, and vſe to burne it in ſteed of ſawing it, ſcraping the burnt part of the tree with ſtones: and for the hollowing of the veſſell, they doe continue the ſame. In one of thoſe boats ſix men will ſaile with ſome ſtuffe, and will make long voiages. But theſe kinde of Canowes are heauier than the others.
               
                  Long voiages in the woods. They alſo make long voyages by land, as well as by ſea, and they will vndertake (a thing vncredible) to goe twentie or thirtie yea fortie leagues through the woodes, without meeting with any path or Inne, and without carying any victuales but Tabacco, and a tinder box, with their bow in hand, and their quiuer at their backs. And we

in France are much troubled when we haue neuer ſo little loſt our way in ſome great forreſt. If they be preſſed with thirſt, they haue the skill to ſucke the trees, from whence They are commonly Birch trees.doe trickle downe a ſweet and very pleaſant liquor, as my ſelfe haue tried it ſometimes.
               In the countries where they vſe tillage, as in that of the Armouchiquois, and farther off, the men doe make an infinite quantitie of Earthen pots, like in faſhion to Potterie of earth.night caps, in which they ſeeth their meats, fleſh, fiſh, beanes, corne, pompions &c. Our Souriquois did ſo anciently and did till the ground, but ſince that French-men doe bring vnto them kettles, beanes, peaſon, bisket and other foode they are become ſlouthfull, and make no more accompt of thoſe exerciſes. But as for the Armouchiquois which haue yet no commerce with vs, and them that are further of, they till the ground, doe fatten it The tilling of the groūd. Germans.with ſhells of fiſh, they haue their families diſtinct▪ and their plots of ground about them; contrary to the ancient Germans which (as Caeſar ſaith) had not any field proper, neither did they dwell aboue a yeere in one place, hauing almoſt no other liuing then milke, fleſh, and cheeſe, thinking it too tedious a thing for them to tary a whole yeere of purpoſe, for to reape a harueſt. Which is alſo The Sauages be not laborious.the humor of our Souriquois and Canadians, who, and all others (as wee muſt needs confeſſe) are nothing laborious but in hunting. For, the manuring of the ground, the women doe take the greateſt paines in it, who amongſt them doe not command at home, and doe not make their husbands to go to the Market, as they doe in many prouinces in theſe our parts, and eſpecially in the Country of Iealouſie.
               
                  The Floridians tillage. Sowing twiſe a yeere. As for the tillage of the Floridians, heare what Laudomniere ſaith of it: They ſow their corne twiſe a yeere, that is to ſay, in March and in Iune, and all in one and the ſelfe ſame lande. The ſaid Mill from the time that it is ſowed vntill it be ready to be reaped, is not aboue three

monthes in the ground. The ſix other monthes they ſuffer Plowing.the ground to reſt. They alſo gather faire Pompians and very good beanes. They doe not dung their land: onely when they will ſow, they ſet the weeds on fire which are growen during the ſix monthes, and burne them all. They till their land with an Inſtrument of wood, which is made like to a broad pickaxe, wherewith they digg their vines in France: They put two graines of mill together. When the lands are to be ſowed, the king commandeth one of his men to call his ſubiects together euery day to come to labour, during the which, the king cauſeth great ſtore of that drinke whereof we haue ſpoken to bee made. In the ſeaſon that the Corne is gathered, it is all carried into the common ſtore-houſe, where it is diſtributed to euery one according to his qualitie. They ſowe but ſo Their liuing during the Winter.much as they thinke will ſerue them for ſix moneths, and that very hardly: for during the winter they retire themſelues three or foure moneths of the yeere into the woods: where they make little houſes of Palme leaues, to lodge themſelues in, and there doe liue of acornes, of fiſh which they take, of oyſters, of Stagges, Turkie hennes, and other beaſts that they take.
               
                  The townes of the Sauages. And ſeeing they haue townes and houſes, or Cibanes, I may yet well put this among their exerciſes. As for the Towns, they be multitudes of Cabins, made ſomwhat Piramide wiſe, others in forme of a cottage, others like garden bowres, compaſt as it were with high pales of trees ioined one neere the other, euen as I haue ſet out the town of Hochelaga, in my mappe of the great riuer of Canada. Furthermore, one muſt not maruel of this ſhape of a town, which might ſeeme ſimple: ſeeing that the faireſt townes of Moſcouie haue no better incloſure. The ancient Lacedemonians would haue no other walles then their courage The beginning of townes.and valour. Before the generall ſloud Cain did builde a town, which he named Henoch (I beleeue it was no otherwiſe made then thoſe of our Sauages) but he did feele the

wrath of God which purſued him, and had loſt all aſſurance. Gen. 4. 20.Men had but Cabins and Pauillions, and as it is written of Iabal the ſonne of Hada; that he was the father of the dwellers in Tabernacles and of Shepheards. After the floud they builded the tower of Babel, but this was folly. Tacitus writing of the maners of the Germans, ſaith that in his time they had not any vſe neither of lime nor ſtones. The Engliſh Britons much leſſe. Our Gaullois were then, from many ages before, come to ciuility. But yet The firſt builder in the Gaulles.were they along time in the beginning without any other habitations than Cabins: and the firſt Gaullois king that built townes and houſes, was Magus, who ſucceded his father the wiſe Samothes, three hundred yeeres after the floud, eight yeeres after the natiuitie of Abraham, and the one and fiftie yeere of the raigne of Ninus, as Beroſius the Chaldean doth ſay. And although they had buildings, they lay notwithſtanding on the ground vpon skinnes, like to our Sauages. And as in the ancient times the names were giuen which contained the qualities and acts of perſons, Magus was ſo called, becauſe hee was the firſt builder. For in the Scythian and Armenian language (from whence our Gaullois came ſhortly after the floud) and in the ancient Gaullois toong, Magus ſignifieth a builder, ſaith the ſame Author, and ſo hath Iohn Annius of Viterbe very well marked: from whence came our names of the The Gaullois Philoſophers. Diog. Laert. in the beginning of the liues of Philoſophers. Games of the Sauages.Townes of Rothomagus, Neomagus, Nouiomagus. So likewiſe Samothes ſignifieth wiſe, and the old Gaullois Philoſophers were (before the Druides) called Samotheans, as Diogenes Laertius reporteth, who confeſſeth that Philoſophie did begin from them whom the Greeke vanitie did call Barbarous.
               
               I will adde heere for an exerciſe of our Sauages, their play at hazard, whereunto they are ſo addicted that ſometimes they play out all that they haue: And Iames Quartier writeth the ſame of them of Canada, in the time that hee was there. I haue ſeene a kind of game that they

haue, but not thinking then to write this treatie, I tooke no heede to it. They put ſome number of beanes coloured and painted of the one ſide in a platter: and hauing ſtretched out a skinne on the ground, they play there vpon, ſtriking with the diſh vpon this skinne, and by that meanes the beanes doe skippe in the aire, and doe not all fall on that parte that they be coloured: and in that conſiſteth the chance and hazard: and according to their chance they haue a certaine number of quils made of ruſhes, which they diſtribute to him that winneth for to keepe the reckoning.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               Of the Womens exerciſes.
               THe woman was giuen in the beginning vnto Man, not onely for to aide and aſſiſt him, but alſo to be the ſtore houſe of generation. Their firſt exerciſe then that I will attribute vnto her, after that ſhe is married is to bring foorth goodly children, and to aſſiſt her huſband in this worke: for this is the end of marriage. And therfore is ſhe very wel and fitly called in hebrew 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  The woman is called Pierced.
                  that is to ſay pierced, becauſe it is meete that ſhe be pierced, if ſhee will imitate our common mother the Earth, which in the Spring time, deſirous to bring forth, openeth her boſome for to receaue the raine and dewes which the 
                     Marriage requiſite for planters in a new poſſeſſed Land.
                     Great encouragement for the honeſtly minded that goe to inhabite in thoſe parts.
                   heauen powreth vpon her. Now I find that this exerciſe ſhalbe requiſite for them that will inhabite New France to bring foorth there ſtore of creatures, which ſhall ſing the praiſes of God. There is land enough to nouriſh them, ſo that they be willing to worke: and their condition ſhall not be ſo miſerable as it is with many in theſe partes, which doe ſeeke to emploie themſelues and doe not find wherein: and albeit they find it, yet very often is their labour vnrewarded and vnfruitfull. But in that countrie he that will take pleaſure, and as it were ſport himſelfe

with ſweete labour, he ſhall be aſſured to liue out of bondage, and that his children ſhall yet be in better ſtate then himſelfe was. The firſt exerciſe then of the woman is to worke in generation, which is a labour ſo faire and ſo meritorious, 
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 2. 15.that the great Apoſtle. S. Paul, to conſolate them in the paines they take in that labour hath ſaid: that the woman ſhall be ſaued through bearing of children, if they remaine in faith, and loue, and holineſſe with modesty. That is to ſay, If ſhe inſtruct them in ſuch ſort that the godlineſſe of the mother may be knowen by the good inſtitution of the children.
               This firſt and chiefeſt article being mentioned, let vs come to the others. Our Sauage women after they haue brought foorth the fruite of this exerciſe, by I know not what practiſe, doe obſerue without law that which was Leuit. 12. purification.commanded in the lawe of Moſes touching purification. For they ſhut vp themſelues a parte, and know not their husbands for thirty yea fourty daies: during which time they doe not leaue for all that from going here and there, where they haue buſineſſe, carrying their children with them, and taking care for them.
               
                  Heere aboue chap. 14. I haue ſaid in the chapter of the Tabagie that among the Sauages, the women are not in as good a condition as they were anciently among the Gaullois and Germans. For (by the report of Iames Quartier himſelfe) they labour more then the men, ſaith he, whether it be in fiſhing, be it in tilling or in any thing elſe. And notwithſtanding they are neither forced, nor tormented: but they are neither in their Tabagies nor in their counſels, and doe the ſeruile buſineſſes, for want of ſeruants. If there be any veniſon killed, they goe to flay it and to fetch it, yea were it three leagues off: and they muſt finde it out by the onely circumſtance that ſhall be deſcribed to them by words. They that haue priſoners doe alſo employ them to that, and to other labours, as to goe fetch wood with wiues: which is folly in them to goe fetch drie and rotten wood very farre

off for to warme them, although they be in the middeſt of a forreſt. True it is that the ſmoake is very irkeſome to them: which it may be is the cauſe thereof.
               Touching their ſmaller exerciſes; when the winter doth approch they prepare that which is neceſſary to oppoſe themſelues againſt this rigorous aduerſary, and make mattes of ruſhes, wherewith they garniſh their Cabins, Mattes.and others to fit vpon, and all very artificially, yea alſo colouring their ruſhes, they make partitions in their workes, like to them that our gardeners doe make in their garden knots, with ſuch meaſure and proportion as nothing is found amiſſe therein. And becauſe that the body The currying and dreſſing of skinnes.muſt alſo be clothed, they curry and ſupple the skinnes of Beuers, Stagges and others, as well as can be done heere. If they be little they few many together, and make cloakes, ſleeues, ſtockens, and ſhooes, vpon all which things they make workes which haue a very good grace. Item they Panniers.make Panniers of ruſhes and rootes, for to put their neceſſities in, as corne, beanes, peaſon, fleſh, fiſh and other things. They make alſo purſes of leather, vpon which Purſes.they make workes woorthy of admiration, with the haires of Porckepines, coloured with red, black, white and blew, which Dies.be the colours that they make, ſo liuely that oures ſeeme in nothing to be comparable to them. They alſo exerciſe Diſhes.themſelues in making diſhes of barke to drinke, and put their meates in, which are very faire according to the ſtuffe. Item skarfes, necklaces and bracelets which they Matachia▪
                  and the men doe weare (which they call Matachia) are of their making. When the barkes of trees muſt be taken off in the Spring-time, or in Summer, therewith to couer their howſes, it is they which doe that worke: As likewiſe they labour in the making of Canowes and ſmall boates, when Canowes▪
                  they are to be made: And as for the tilling of the ground (in the countries▪ where they vſe it) they take therin more paines then the men, who doe play the gentlemen, and haue no care but in hunting, or of warres. And notwithſtanding

all their labours, yet commonly they loue their The womens loue to their husbands.husbands more then the women of theſe our parts. For none of them are ſeene to marry againe vpon their graues, that is to ſay preſently after their deceaſe, but rather doe tarry a long time. And if he hath beene killed, they will eat no fleſh nor will condeſcend to ſecond marriage vntill they haue ſeene the reuenge thereof made: A teſtimony both of true loue (which is ſcarſe found among vs) and alſo of chaſtity. Alſo it happeneth very ſeldome that they haue any diuorcements, but ſuch as are voluntary. And if they were Chriſtians they would be families with whom God would dwell and be well pleaſed, as it is meet it ſhould be ſo, for to haue perfect contentment: for otherwiſe Faire obſeruation vpon the names of the Man and the woman. Aben Hezra on the 2. cha. of the Prouer. 17. verſ.marriage is but torment and tribulation. Which the Hebrewes great ſpeculators and ſearchers into holy things, by a ſuttle animaduerſion, haue very well noted, for Aben Hezra ſaith, that in the name of the man 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and of the woman 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the name of God, Iah, is contained: And if the two letters which doe make this name of God be taken away, there ſhall remaine theſe two words 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which do ſignifie fire and fire, that is to ſay, that God being taken away it is but anguiſh, tribulation, bitterneſſe and griefe.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               Of their Ciuility.
               
                  Math. 15. v. 2. ONe muſt not hope to finde in our Sauages that ciuility which the Scribes and Phariſees did require in the Diſciples of our Lord. For which their ouer great curioſity he made them ſuch anſwer as they deſerued. For they had brought in ceremonies and cuſtomes which were repugnant to Gods commandement, which they would haue ſtraightly to be obſerued, teaching vngodlineſſe vnder the name of Piety. For if a wicked child did giue and put into the common box of the temple that

which appertained to his father, or to his mother, they (for to draw this profit) did iuſtifie this wicked Sonne, againſt the commandement of God, who hath aboue all things commended & commanded the childrens obedience and reuerence towards them that haue brought them into the world, which are the image of God, who hath no need God wil haue no oblation made of another bodies goods.of our goodes, and doth not accept the oblation that is made vnto him of the goods of another. The ſame Scribes and Phariſees did alſo bring in, a ciuility to waſh hands, which our Lord doth not blame but in as much as they made the not obſeruing of it, to be a great ſinne.
               
                  Sauages. I haue no cauſe to praiſe our Sauages in thoſe kind of ciuilities, for they waſh not themſelues at meales, vnleſſe they be monſtrouſly fowle: and not hauing any vſe of linnen, when their hands be greaſie they are conſtrained to wipe them on their haires, or vpon their dogges haires. They make no curioſity of belching, being at meales: which the Germans and others in theſe parts do as well as they. Not hauing the art of ioyners worke they dine vpon the broad table of the world, ſpreading a skinne where they eat their meat, and ſit on the ground. The Turkes Gaullois.alſo doe the ſame. Our ancient Gaullois were no better then they, who (Diodorus ſaith) did vſe the ſame, ſpreading on the ground dogges skinnes, or woolues skinnes, vpon which they did dine and ſuppe, making themſelues to be Germanes.ſerued by yongue boies. The Germans were more rude. For they had not learning, Phyloſophy, nor ſo much delicateneſſe as our Nation, which Caeſar ſaith to haue had the vſe of a thouſand things by the meanes of their Nauigations on the ſeas, whereby they helped the bordering people of Germany, who vſed ſome ſmall ciuilitie, and more humanity then the others of their Nation, by reaſon of the communication they had with our people.
               
                  Sauages arriuing in ſome place. As for the complements that they vſe one towards another comming from farre they may very briefely be recited. For we haue many times ſeene Sauage ſtrangers to

arriue in Port Royall, who being landed, without any diſcourſe, went ſtraight to Membertous cabin, where they ſat downe, taking Tabacco, and hauing well drunken of it, did giue the Tabacco-pipe to him that ſeemed to be the worthieſt perſon, and after conſequently to the others: The Sauages ſalutations.Then ſome halfe an howre after they did begin to ſpeake. When they arriued at our lodgings, their ſalutation was, Ho, ho, ho, and ſo they doe ordinarily: but for making of curteſies and kiſſing of hands they haue no skill: except ſome particulars which indeuoured themſelues to be conformable vnto vs, and ſeldome came they to ſee vs without a hat, to the end they might ſalute vs with a more ſolemne action.
               
                  The Floridians Salutations. The Floridians doe make no enterpriſe, before they aſſemble their Counſell diuers times: and in theſe aſſemblies when they arriue they ſalute one another. The Paraousti (whom Laudonniere calleth king) placeth himſelf alone vpon a ſeate which is higher then the others: where, one after another, they come to ſalute him, and the eldeſt beginne their ſalutation, lifting vp twiſe both their hands as high as their faces, ſaying Ha, he, ya, ha, ha, and the others doe anſwer Ha, ha. And they ſit euery one vpon ſeats which are about the Counſell chamber.
               Now whether the ſalutation Ho, ho, doe ſignifie any thing or no (for I know no particular ſignification in it) yet notwithſtanding it is a ſalutation of Ioy, and the onely voice Ho, ho, cannot be made but almoſt in laughing, teſtifying thereby that they are glad to ſee their friends. The Greeks haue neuer had any thing elſe in 
                     The Greekes ſalutations. Plato in Charmide.
                     
                     The ſalutations of the Latins and Hebrewes.
                   their ſalutations, but a witneſſing of Ioy by their word Chaire; which ſignifieth, be ye merry: which Plato diſliking was of aduice that it were better to ſay Sophroney, be ye wiſe. The Latins haue had their Aue, which is a wiſh of happineſſe: ſometimes alſo Salue, which is a wiſhing of health to him whom one ſaluteth. The Hebrews had the verbe ſhalum which is a word of peace and of

health. According vnto which Our Sauiour did command Math. 10. 12.his Apoſtles to ſalute the houſes where they ſhould enter in, that is to ſay (according to the interpretation of the common tranſlation) to pronounce peace vnto them: which ſalutation of peace was from the firſt ages amongſt the people of God. For it is written that Iethro, Moſes father in law, comming to reioice with him for the graces that God had done vnto him and vnto his people, by the deliuering of them from the land of Aegypt, Moſes went 
                  Exod. 18. 7.
                  out to meet his father in law, and hauing bowed himſelfe kiſſed him: and they ſaluted one another with words of peace. Wee Frenchmen doe ſay, Dieu vous gard, that is, God keepe you, Dieu vous doint le bon Iour, God giue you good morrow; Item Le bon Soir, good Euening. Notwithſtanding there be many, who ignorantly doe ſay, Ie vous donne, Le bon Iour, Le bon Soir, that is to ſay, I giue (or bid) you good morow, good euening: A maner of ſpeech which would be more decent, by deſiring and praying to God that it be ſo. Angels haue ſometimes ſaluted men, as he who did ſay to Gedeon: Moſt ſtrong and valiant man, the Lord is 
                  Iudg. 6. 12.
                  with thee. But God ſaluteth no body: for it belongeth to him to giue ſaluation, and not to wiſh it by praier.
               
                  Salutation in Sneezing. The Heathen had yet a ciuilitie in ſaluting them which did ſneeze, which cuſtome we haue kept of them. And the Emperour Tiberius, the ſaddeſt man in the world (ſaith Pliny) would be ſaluted in ſneezing, although he were in his Coach &c. All thoſe ceremonies and inſtitutions (ſaith the ſame Authour) are come from the opinion of them which think that the gods will aſſiſt our affaires. Out of theſe words may be eaſily coniectured that the ſalutations of the Heathen were praiers and vowes for health, or other felicity, that they made to the gods.
               
                  The ancient faſhion in the beginning of letters. And as they did ſuch things in meetings, ſo did they vſe the word 
                     Ʋale (be ye well, be ye in health, as wee vſe to ſay in Engliſh fare you well) at the departure: yea in letters and Epiſtles; which alſo they began alwaies

with theſe words: If you be in health, it is well: I am in 
                  Senec. ep. 15.
                  
                  health. But Seneca ſaith that this good cuſtome was broken in his time: As at this day among vs it is to write clowniſh like to put in the beginning of a letter, God keepe you in health: which was in times paſt a holy and chriſtian maner of writing. In ſtead of this Vale, which is often found in the holy Scriptures, we ſay in our language Of A Dieu, God be with you.
                  A Dieu God be with you, wiſhing not onely health to our friend, but alſo that God doe keepe him.
               But our Sauages haue not any ſalutation at the departure, but onely the A Dieu which they haue learned of vs. And to finiſh this diſcourſe where wee began, they are to be commended for their obedience that they yeeld The Sauages obedient to their parents.to their fathers and mothers, to whoſe commandements they obey, doe nouriſh them in their old age, and defend them againſt their enemies. And heere with vs (oh miſerable thing!) there is often ſeene the childrens ſutes in law againſt their parents: books of the fatherly power are ſeene publiſhed, concerning the childrens withdrawing from theit obedience. An vnworthy act for children that be Chriſtians, to whom may be applied the ſpeeches 
                     Tit. Lib. 1. Decad. 1. Deut. 27. 16.of Turnus Herdonius, recited in Titus Liuius, ſaying, that there is no ſpeedier deciding and taking vp of any matter, then betweene the father and the ſonne; a thing that might be diſpatched in few words: for if he would not obey and giue place to his father, vndoubtedly euill ſhould come to him. And the word of God which is a thunder boult ſaith: Curſed be he who honoureth not his Father and his Mother, and all the people ſhall ſay Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               Of the Vertues and Vices of the Sauages.
               VErtue like vnto wiſedome, diſdaineth not to be lodged vnder a meane roofe. The Northerly nations are the laſt that haue beene brought to ciuilitie:

And notwithſtanding, before that ciuility, they haue done great actions. Our Sauages, although they bee naked, are not voide of thoſe vertues, that are found in men of ciuilitie, For euery one (ſaith Ariſtotle) hath in him, euen from his 
                  Ariſt. 6 Eth▪ chap. 13.
                  
                  birth, the principles and ſeedes of vertue. Taking then the fowre vertues by their ſprings, we ſhall finde that they participate much of them. For firſt concerning fortitude and courage, they haue thereof as much as any nation of the Sauages (I ſpeake of our Souriquois and of their allied) in ſuch ſort, that ten of them will alwaies aduenture themſelues againſt twentie Armouchiquois: not that they be altogether without feare (a thing which the fore aleaged Ariſtotle doth reproch to the ancient Celtien-Gaullois, 
                  The ancient Gaullois were without feare.who feared nothing, neither the motions of the earth, nor the tempeſts of the ſea, ſaying, that this was the property of an hairebraine fellow) but with that courage they haue, they eſteeme that wiſedome giueth vnto them much aduantage. They feare then, but it is that which all wiſe men doe feare, and that is death, which is terrible and dreadfull, as ſhe that rifleth all, through which ſhee paſſeth. They feare ſhame and reproch, but this feare is coſen germane to vertue. They are ſtirred to doe good by What it is that the Sauages doehonour, for as much as he, amongſt them, is alwaies honored, and getteth renoune to himſelfe that hath done ſome faire exploit. Hauing theſe things proper vnto them, they are in a mediocritie, which is the very ſeate of vertue. One point maketh this vertue of force and courage vnperfect in them, that is, they are too reuengefull, and in that they put their ſoueraing cōtentment, which inclineth Sauages reuengefull.to brutiſhneſſe. But they are not alone, for all thoſe nations how farre ſoeuer they may ſtretch themſelues from one Pole to the other, are infected with this vice. The Chriſtian Religion onely may bring them to reaſon, as in ſome ſort ſhe doth with vs (I ſay in ſome ſort) becauſe that wee haue men very vnperfect, as well as the Sauages.
               
                  Temperance. Temperance is another vertue▪ conſiſting in the mediocritie

in things that concerne the pleaſures of the body: for as for that which concerneth the minde he is not called temperate or vntemperate, who is mooued with ambition, or with deſire to learne, or that emploieth his time in toies. And for that which concerneth the body, temperance or vntemperance, is not applied to all things that might be ſubiect to our ſenſes, vnleſſe it be by accident, as to colour, to a picture: Item to flowers and good ſentes: Item to ſongs and hearing of orations, or commedies: but rather to that which is ſubiect to feeling, and to that which ſmelling ſeeketh by arts, as in eating and drinking, in perfumes, in the venerian act, to teniſe play, to wreſtling, to running, and ſuch like. Now all theſe things do depend of the will; which being ſo, it is the part of a man to know how to bridle his appetites.
               Our Sauages haue not all the qualities requiſite for the perfection of this vertue. For as for meates we muſt acknowledge their vntemperance, when they haue wherewith, and they doe eat parpetually, yea ſo farre as to riſe in the night to banquet. But ſeeing that in theſe our parts many are as vicious as they, I will not be to rigorous a Cenſurer of them. As for the other actions there is no more to be reprooued in them then in vs: yea I will ſay leſſe, in that which concerneth the 
                     Ʋenerian action, wherto they are little addicted: not comprehending heere, Heeretofore chap. 13.for all that, them of Florida, and in hotter countries, of whom wee haue ſpoken heeretofore.
               
                  Liberality. Liberalitie is a vertue as worthy praiſe, as auarice and prodigalitie, her oppoſites are blame worthy. It conſiſteth in giuing and receauing, but rather in giuing in time and place, and according to occaſion, without exceſſe. This vertue is proper and befitting great perſonages, which be as it were Stewards of the goods of the earth, which God hath put into their hands, for to vſe them liberally, that is to ſay to diſtribute them to him that hath none, not being exceſſiue in needleſſe expences, nor too

ſparing where magnifiicencie is to bee ſhewed.
               Our Sauages are praiſe worthy in the exerciſe of this vertue, according to their pouerty. For as we haue ſaid before, when they viſit one another, they giue mutuall preſents one to the other. And when ſome French Sagamos commeth to them, they doe the like with him, caſting at his feete ſome bundle of Beuers, or other furres, which be all their riches: And ſo did they to Monſieur de Poutrincourt, but he tooke them not to his owne proper vſe, but rather put them into Monſieur de Monts his ſtorehouſe, becauſe he would not goe againſt the priuiledge giuen vnto him. This cuſtome of the ſaid Sauages proceedeth but from a liberall minde, and which hath ſome generoſitie. And although they bee very glad when the like is done vnto them, yet ſo it falleth out, that they begin the venture, and put themſelues in hazard to looſe their merchandiſe. And who is hee amongſt vs that doth more than they, that is to ſay, which giueth but with intention to receaue? the Poet ſaith,

                     Nemo ſuas gratis perdere vellet opes▪
                     
                  
There is no body that giueth, intending to looſe. If a great perſonage giueth to a meane man, that is for to draw ſome ſeruice from him. Euen that which is giuen to the poore, is to receiue the hundred fold, according to the promiſe of the Goſpel. And for to ſhew the galantneſſe of our ſaid Sauages: they doe not willingly cheapen, and do content themſelues with that which is giuen them honeſtly with a willing minde, diſdaining and blaming the faſhions of our petie merchants, which bee an houre a Heeretofore 1 booke chap. 17.cheapning for to buy a Beuer skinne: as I ſaw being at the riuer Saint Iohn, whereof I haue ſpoken heeretofore, that they called a yoong merchant of Saint Maloes Mercatoria, which is a word of reproch among them, borrowed of the Baskes, ſignifying as it were, a hagling fellow. Finally, they haue nothing in them but frankneſſe and liberalitie in their exchanging. And ſeeing the baſe maners

of ſome of our men, they demanded ſometimes, what they came to ſeeke for in their countrie, ſaying, that they came not into ours: and ſeeing that wee are richer than they, we ſhould giue them liberally that which we haue,
               Out of this vertue, there groweth in them a magnificence which cannot appeare, and remaineth hidden, but for all that they are prouoked by it, doing all they can for to welcome their friends. And Membertou was very deſirous that ſo much honour ſhould be done vnto him as to ſhoot off our Canons when he did arriue, becauſe he ſaw that the ſame was done to the French Captaines in ſuch a caſe, ſaying that it was due vnto him, ſeeing that he was a Sagamos.
               
               
                  Page 224. Heere Hoſpitality may be mentioned, but hauing ſpoken theereof heeretofore, I will refer the Reader to the chapter of the Tabagi, where I giue them the praiſe attributed to the Gaullois and ancient French-men for this reſpect. True it is that in ſome places there be ſome which be friends for the time, and take their aduantage in neceſſitie, as hath beene noted in Laudonniere his voyage. But we cannot accuſe them in that, leaſt we alſo accuſe our The pietie of the Sauages towards their parents.ſelues, which doe the like. One thing I will ſay that belongeth to fatherly Pietie, that the children are not ſo curſed as to diſpiſe their patents in old age, but doe prouide for them with veniſon, as the Storkes doe towards them that haue ingendred them. A thing which is the ſhame of many Chriſtians, who being weary of their Parents long life, doe oftentimes ſtrip them before they goe to bed, and ſo doe leaue them naked.
               They vſe alſo humanity and mercy towards their enemies wiues and little children, whoſe liues they ſpare, but they remaine their priſoners for to ſerue them, according to the ancient right of ſeruitude, brought in amongſt all the nations of the other world, againſt the naturall liberty. But as for the men of defence they ſpare none, but kill as many of them as they can catch.
               
                  
As for iuſtice, they haue not any Law neither deuine nor humane, but that which Nature teacheth them, that one muſt not offend another. So haue they quarels very ſeldome. And if any ſuch thing doe chance to happen, the Sagamos quieteth all, and doth iuſtice to him that is offended, giuing ſome baſtanadoes to the wrong doer, or condemning him to make ſome preſents to the other, for to pacifie him, which is ſome forme of dominion. If it be one of their priſoners that hath offended, he is in danger to goe to the pot. For after he is killed no body will reuenge his death. The ſame conſideration is in theſe parts of the world. There is no account made of a mans life that hath no ſupport.
               
                  Execution of iuſtice made by the Sauages. One day there was an Armouchiquois woman, priſoner, who had cauſed a country-man of hers, priſoner, to eſcape away: & to the end to trauel and paſſe on the way ſhe had ſtollen from Membertous cabin a tinder-box (for without that they can doe nothing) and a hatchet. Which being come to the knowledge of the Sauages, they would not proceed on the execution thereof neere vnto vs, but they went to Cabin themſelues fower or fiue leagues from Port Royall, where ſhe was killed. And becauſe ſhe was a woman, our Sauages wiues and daughters did execute her. Kinibech-coech a yong maide of eighteene yeares of age, faire and well ſpotted with colours, gaue her the firſt ſtroake in the throat, which was with a knife: An other maide of the ſame age, handſome enough, called Metembroech, followed on, and the daughter of Membertou which we called Membertou-ech-coech made an end. We reprooued them ſharpely for this cruelty, whereof they were all aſhamed, and durſt not ſhew themſelues any more. This is their forme of Iuſtice.
               Another time a man and a women, priſoners, went cleane away, without tinder-box or any prouiſion of meat. Which was hard to be performed, as well for the great diſtance of way, which was aboue 300. leagues by land becauſe

it behooued them to goe ſecretly, and to take heed from meeting with any Sauages. Neuertheleſſe thoſe poore ſoules pulled off the barke of certaine trees, and made a little boat, with the barke of them, wherein they croſſed the Bay Françoiſe, and got to the other ſhoare ouer againſt Port Royall, ſhortning their way aboue one hundred and fifty leagues: and got home into their Country of the Armouchiquois.
               
               
                  Wherein the Sauages are diligent and ſlothfull. I haue ſaid in ſome place that they are not laborious, but in hunting and fiſhing, louing alſo the labour taken by ſea: ſloathfull at all other painefull exerciſe, as in the manuring of the ground, and in our mechanicall trades: alſo to grinde Corne for their owne vſe. For ſometimes they will rather ſeeth it in graines, then to grinde it by handy ſtrength. Yet notwithſtanding they will not be vnprofitable. For there will be ſome meanes to employ them, to that whereunto they be inclined by nature: without forcing it, as heeretofore did the Lacedemonians to the yongue men of their Common-wealth. As for the children, hauing yet taken no byas, it will be eaſier to keepe them at home and to employ them in thoſe things that ſhall be thought fit. Howſoeuer it be, hunting is no bad thing, nor fiſhing neither. Let vs ſee then how they behaue themſelues therein.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               Of their Hunting.
               
                  Genſ. 1. v. 29. GOd, before ſin, gaue for food vnto man euery hearbe bearing ſeed vpon all the earth, and euery tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing ſeed: without making mention of the ſpilling of the bloud of beaſts: And notwithſtanding after the baniſhment from the Garden of pleaſure, the labour ordained for the puniſhment of the ſaid ſinne required a ſtronger and more ſubſtantiall food then the former: ſo man full of carnallity accuſtomed

himſelfe to feed vpon fleſh, and did tame certaine number of beaſts for to ſerue him to that effect: though ſome would ſay that before the floud no fleſh was eaten: for in vaine Geneſ. 4. verſ. 4. 20.had Abel been a ſhepheard, and Iabel father of ſhephards. But after the floud, God renewing his couenant with man: Geneſ. 9. Verſ. 2▪ 3.
                  The feare and dread of you (ſaith the Lord) ſhall be vpon euery beast of the Earth, and vpon euery fowle of the Heauen, with all that mooueth on the earth, and vpon all the fiſhes of the Sea: they are giuen into your hands: all that mooueth hauing 
                  The beginning of the right of hunting.
                  life ſhall he vnto you for meat. Vpon this priuiledge is formed the right of hunting: the nobleſt right of all rights that be in the vſe of man, ſeeing that God is the Authour of it. And therefore no maruell if kings and their Nobilitie Why it appertaineth to kings and to their nobility▪
                  haue reſerued it vnto them, by a wel concluding reaſon, that if they command vnto men with farre better reaſon may they command vnto beaſts. And if they haue the adminiſtration of Iuſtice to Iudge malefactors, to ouercome Rebels, and to bring to humane ſocietie wild and Sauage men: with farre better reaſon ſhall they haue it for to doe the ſame towards the creatures of the aire, of the forreſts and of the fields. As for them of the ſea wee will For what end kings haue beene choſen.ſpeake of them in another place. And ſeeing that kings haue beene in the beginning choſen by the people for to keep & defend them from their enemies, whilſt that they are at their neceſſary works, and to make warre as much as need is for the reparation of iniury, and recouery of that which hath been wrongfully vſurped, or taken away: it is very reaſonable and decent that as well them as the nobility that doe aſſiſt and ſerue them in thoſe things, haue the exerciſe of hunting, which is an Image of warre, to the end to rowſe vp the mind and to be alwaies nimble, ready to take horſe, for to goe to encounter with the enemy, to ly in ambuſh, to aſſaile him, to chaſe him, to trample him vnder feete. There is another and firſt aime The firſt end of hunting▪
                  in hunting, it is the food of Man, whereunto it is deſtinated, as is knowen by the place of Scripture afore alleadged:

yea, I ſay, ſo deſtinated that in the holy language it is but one and the ſelfe ſame word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   for to ſignifie hunting (or veniſon) & meat: As among a hundred places this of the one hundred thirtie two Pſalme. Where our God hauing choſen Sion for his habitation and perpetuall reſt, promiſeth vnto her that he will aboundantly bleſſe Interpretation.her victuals, and will ſatisfie her poore with bread. Vpon which place Saint Hierome tearmeth 
                     Ʋeniſon, that which the other tranſlators doe call 
                     Ʋictuals, better to the purpoſe then Widow in the common tranſlation.
               Hunting then hauing beene granted vnto man by a heauenly priuiledge, the Sauages throughout all the Weſt Indies doe exerciſe themſelues therein without diſtinction of perſons, not hauing that faire order eſtabliſhed in theſe parts, whereby ſome are borne for the gouernment of the people and the defence of the Country, others for the exerciſing of arts and the tillage of the ground, in ſuch ſort, that by this faire oeconomie euery one liueth in ſafety.
               This hunting is made amongſt them chiefely in the The winter dwelling.winter. For all the Spring and Sommer time, and part of Autumne, hauing fiſh aboundantly for them and their friends, without taking any paines, they doe not much ſeeke for other food. But in winter when that fiſh goeth away, feeling the cold, they forſake the ſea ſhoars and cabinne themſelues within the woods, where they know to haue any pray: which is done as farre as the Countries that approach neer to the Tropique of Cancer. In the countries where Beuers are, as throughout all the great Riuer of Canada, and vpon the coaſts of the Ocean, as farre as the Country of the Armouchiquois, they doe winter vpon the ſhoars of lakes, for the fiſhing of the ſaid Beuers, whereof wee will ſpeake in due place: but firſt let vs The deſcripon of the Ellan or Stagg.ſpeake of the Ellan, which they call Aptaptou, and our Baſques Orignac.
               
               It is the talleſt creature that is, next vnto the Dromadaire
                  
and Camell, for it is higher then the horſe. His haires be commonly of gray colour, and ſometimes of dunne or fallow, almoſt as long as the fingers of ones hand. His head is very long and hath almoſt an infinite order of teeth. He beareth his hornes double like the Stagge, but as broad as a plancke, and three foot long, garniſhed with ſprigges growing vpward all along vpon one ſide. His feet be forked as the Stagges but much more flat. His fleſh is ſhort and very delicate. He feedeth in the medowes, and liueth alſo of the tender cropes of trees. It is the plentifulleſt thing that the Sauages haue, next to fiſh.
               
                  Fit time to hunt. Wee may ſay then that the beſt and fitteſt time for the ſaid Sauages, to all hunting by land is the Winter ſeaſon, when that the forreſts be hoarie, and the ſnow deepe, and eſpecially if vpon the ſnow there comes a hard froſt which doth harden it. Then being well clothed with a cloake furred with Beuers, and ſleeues on the armes tyed together with a latch: Item ſtockens made with the leather of Ellans like to Buffe (which they tie at their girdles) and ſhooes on their feet of the ſame leather, very finely made, they goe with their Bow in hand, and the Quiuer on their backes, that way that their Aoutmoin hath ſhewed them (for we haue ſaid heeretofore that they conſult with the Oracle when they are a hungry) or ſome where elſe, where they thinke they ſhal not looſe their time and labour. They haue dogges or hounds, almoſt like to foxes in forme and bigneſſe, and of haires of all colours▪ which follow them, and although they doe not ſpend nor call neuertheleſſe they can very well finde the haunt of the beaſt which they ſeeke for, which being found they purſue her couragiouſly, and they neuer giue her ouer vntill they haue her downe: And for to f
                     •
                  llow the game more eaſily, they tie Rackets at their feet.rackets (thriſe as great as oures) vnder their feet, with the which they runne ſwiftly vpon that hard ſnow without ſincking. If it be not hard enough, yet they giue not ouer hunting, but will follow the chaſe three daies together, if

                  Their conſtancy in hunting. neede be. Finally, hauing wounded her to death they ſo tire her with their hounds, that ſhe is forced to fall downe. Then they cut and rip her belly, giue releefe to the hunters, and take their ſhare of it. One muſt not thinke that they eat the fleſh raw, as ſome doe imagine, and as Iames Quartier himſelfe doth write, for they carry alwaies, going The Sauages doe carry Tinder-box in the woods.through the woods, a Tinder-boxe before their breſts, for to make fire when hunting is done, where the night doth force them to tarrie.
               Wee went once to the ſpoile of an Ellan left dead vpon the brinck of a great brooke about two leagues and an halfe within the lands: where we paſſed the night, hauing taken the ſnowes for to lodge vs. Wee made there a very dainty feaſte with this veniſon, more tender then any other kind of fleſh: and after the roſt wee had ſodden meat, and broth aboundantly, made ready at an inſtant by a Sauage, who did frame with his hatchet a tubbe or trough of the body of a tree, in which he boiled his Faire inuention of a Sauage for the kitchin.fleſh. A thing which I haue admired, and hauing propounded it to many, who thought themſelues to haue good wits, could not finde out the inuention of it, which notwithſtanding is but briefe, which is, to put ſtones made red hot in the fire in the ſaid trough, and to renew them vntill the meat be ſodde. Ioſeph Accoſta reciteth that the Sauages of Perou doe the ſame.
               The chiefe hunter being returned to the cabines telleth the women what hee hath done, and that in ſuch a place which he nameth to them, they ſhall finde the veniſon. The womans duetie.It is the ſaid womens dutie to goe and flaie the Ellan, the Deare, Stagge, Beare, or other game, and to bring it home. Then they make good cheere as long as there is any prouiſion: And he that hath hunted, is he that hath the leſſer ſhare: for their cuſtome is, that hee muſt ſerve the others, and eateth none of his owne purchaſe. As long as the winter continueth, they lacke none of it: and there hath beene ſome one Sauage that in a hard ſeaſon hath

killed fifty of them for his part, as I haue ſometimes heard.
               
                  Why the Beuer is not taken in Summer. As for the hunting of the Beuer, it is alſo in Winter that chiefely they vſe it, for two reaſons, one of them we haue alleaged heeretofore, the other becauſe that after Winter this beaſt ſheddeth her haires, & hath no furre in Summer. Beſides that when in ſuch a ſeaſon they would ſeeke out for Beuers, hardly ſhould they meet with any, becauſe this creature is Amphibie, that is to ſay, earthly and wateriſh, Amphibie.and more wateriſh then otherwiſe: And hauing no inuention to take her in the water, they might be in danger to looſe their paines. Notwithſtanding if by chance they meet any in Summer time, Spring time, or Autumne, they faile not to eat it.
               
                  The deſcription and fiſhing of the Beuer. Behold then how they catch them in Winter time, and with moſt profit. The Beuer is a beaſt very neere as bigge as a ſhorne ſheepe, the young ones be leſſer, the colour of his haire is of a cheſt-nut colour. His feet be ſhort, the forefeet haue clawes, and the hinder feet with fins, like geeſe; the taile is as it were, skailed, almoſt of the forme of a ſolefiſh, notwithſtanding the skaile goeth not off. It is the beſt and delicateſt part of the beaſt. As for the head it is ſhort and almoſt round, hauing two ranckes of iawes at the ſides, and before fower great ſharpe teeth one by another, two aboue and two beneath. With theſe teeth he cutteth ſmall trees, and powles in ſundry peeces, wherewith he buildeth his houſe. That which I ſay is an admirable and incredible The Beuers cabin or denne.thing. This creature lodgeth himſelfe vpon the brinckes of lakes, and there he firſt maketh his couch with ſtraw or other things fit to lie vpon, as well for him as for his female: raiſeth a vaut with his wood, cut and prepared, which he couereth with turffe, in ſuch ſort that no winde enters therein, for as much as all is couered and ſhut vp, except one hole which leadeth vnder the water, and by that way he goeth foorth to walke where he liſteth. And becauſe the waters of the lakes doe ſometimes riſe, he maketh

a chamber aboue the lower dwelling, for to retire himſelfe, if in caſe any inundation ſhould happen: In ſuch ſort that ſome Beuers cabin is aboue eight foot hight, all made with wood, piramide wiſe, and dawbed with mudde. Moreouer it is held that being amphibie, as we haue ſaid, he muſt alwaies participate with water, and that his taile be dipped in it: which is the cauſe why he lodgeth himſelfe ſo neere a lake▪ But being ſuttle he contenteth not himſelfe with that which we haue ſaid, but hath moreouer an iſſue into another place out of the lake, without any cabin, by which way he goeth on the land and beguileth the hunter. But our Sauages being aware of it, take order for the ſame, and ſtop this paſſage.
               
                  How the Beuer is taken. When they will, then, take the Beuer, they pierce through the iſe of the frozen lake, about his cabin, then one of the Sauages thruſteth his arme into the hole▪ tarying the comming of the ſaid Beuer, whileſt that another goeth vpon this iſe, ſtriking with a ſtafe vpon it for to aſtoniſh him, and make him to returne into his lodging. Then one muſt be nimble for to ſeaze on his necke, for if one catch him by any part where hee may bite, hee will bite very ſore. The fleſh thereof is very good, almoſt as if it were mutton.
               And as euery Nation hath commonly ſomthing peculiar that it bringeth foorth, which is not ſo common with others; So anciently the Realme of Pontus had the ſame for the producing of Beuers, as I learne it out of Virgil, where he ſaieth.
               
                  —Ʋiroſaque Pontus Caſtorea.
               
               
                  Sidon. Apol. in carm 5.
                   And after him of Sidonie de Polignac Biſhop of Auvergne in theſe verſes,
               
                  —Fert Indus ebur, Chaldaeus amomum,
                  Aſſirius gemmas, Ser vellera, thura Sabaeus,
                  Attis mel, Phoenix palmas, Lacedaemon olivum,
                  Argos equos, Epirus equas, pecuaria Gallus,
                  Arma Calybs, frumentalibes, Campanus iacchum,
                  
                     
Aurum Lydus, Arabs guttam, Panchaia myrrham,
                  Pontus caſtorea, blattam Tyrus, aera Corinthus, &c.
               
               But at this day the land of Canada beareth the bell away for that reſpect, although that ſome of them are brought out of Moſcouy, buy they are not ſo good as ours.
               Our Sauages haue alſo made vs to eat of Beuers fleſh, which was very good and tender, and like to beefe: Item, of Leopards, reſembling much the wilde cat; and of a beaſt which they call Nibathes, which hath his pawes almoſt Nibathes.like to the apes pawes, by meanes whereof he climeth eaſily vpon the trees, yea he laieth his young ones there. He is of graieſh haires, and his head like to a foxes. But he is ſo fat that it is almoſt incredible. Hauing deſcribed the principall game, I will not ſtand to ſpeake of woolues (for they haue ſome, and yet eat none of them) nor of Lucerns, Otters, Conies, and others which I haue mentioned in my farwell to New France, whereto I referre the reader▪ and to the recitall of Captaine Iames Cartier.
               
               
                  Hogges. Neuertheleſſe it is good to ſhew heere that our French cattell profiteth very well in thoſe parts. We had hogges which haue multiplied very much. And although they had a ſtigh, they did lie a broad, euen in the ſnow and during the froſt. We had but one weather, which prooued A Weather.very well, althogh he was not taken in by night, but was in the middeſt of our yard in Winter time. Monſieur De Poutrincourt made him twice to be ſhorne, and the woll of the ſecond yeare hath beene eſteemed in France better by two ſous in the pound, than that of the firſt. Wee 
                     Fiue Souſe make ſix pence Engliſh.
                     Outards a kinde of wild geeſe.
                   had no other houſhould-cattell, but hennes and pigions, which failed not to yeelde the accuſtomed tribute, and to multiply aboundantly. The ſaid Monſieur de Poutrincourt tooke comming out of the ſhell ſmall Outards which hee did very will breed, and gaue them to the King at his returne. When the country is once ſtored with thoſe creatures and others, they will encreaſe ſo much that

                  Maruellous multiplication of beaſts. one ſhall not know what to doe with them, like as in Perou, where are at this day, and long ſince, ſuch quantity of Oxen, kine, ſwine, horſes and dogges, that they haue no more owners, but doe appertaine to the firſt that doe kill them. Being killed they carry away the hides to trafficke withall, and the carkaſes are left there: which I haue many times heard of them that haue beene there, beſides the witneſſing of Ioſeph Acoſta.
               
               
                  The beaſts of Florida and Virginia.
                   Comming into the Country of the Armouchiquois, and going farther towards Virginia and Florida, they haue no more Ellans nor Beuers, but onely Stagges, Hindes, Roebuckes, Deeres, Beares, Leopards, Lucernes, Onces, woolues, wilde-dogges, Hares and Conies, with whoſe skinnes they couer their bodies, making Chamois of them of the biggeſt beaſts. But as the heat is there greater then in the Countries more Northernly, ſo they do not vſe furres, but plucke out the haires from their skinnes, and very often for all garment they haue but halfe bretches, or a ſmall cuſhion made with their mattes, which they weare on that ſide that the winde doth blow.
               But they haue in Florida Crocodils alſo, which doe aſſaile them oftentimes in ſwimming. They kill ſome of them ſometimes, and eat them. The fleſh whereof is very faire and white, but it ſmelleth of muske. They haue alſo a certaine Lions.kinde of Lions which little differ from them of Africa.
               
               
                  Braſilians. As for the Braſilians they are ſo far from New France, that being as it were, in another world, their beaſts are quit Tapirrouſſou.differing from thoſe that we haue named, as the Tapirouſſou, which if one deſireth to ſee, he muſt imagine a beaſt halfe an Aſſe and halfe a Cow, ſauing that her taile is very ſhort. His haires draw towards redde, no hornes, eares hanging, and an aſſes foot. The fleſh therof is like to beefe.
               They haue a certaine kinde of ſmall Stagges and hindes, Stagges.which they call Seou-aſſous, whoſe haires be as long as Goates haires.
               
                  
But they are perſecuted with an euill beaſt which they call Ianou-arè, almoſt as tall and ſwift as a Gray-hound, much like to the Once. Shee is cruell, and doth not ſpare them if ſhe can catch them. They take ſometimes ſome of them in ſnares, and do kill them with long torments. As for their Crocodils they be not dangerous.
               
                  Wilde-boares. Their wilde-boares are very leane and vnfleſhie, and they haue a fearefull grunting and crie. But there is in them a ſtrange deformity, which is, that they haue a hole vpon the backe, through which they blow and breath. Thoſe three be the biggeſt beaſts of Braſill. As for ſmall ones they haue ſeuen or eight ſorts of them, by the taking whereof they liue, and alſo of mans fleſh: and are better and more prouident husbands then ours. For one cannot find them vnprouided, but rather hauing alwaies vpon the Boucan (that is to ſay a wooden grate ſomewhat high built vpon foure forks) ſome veniſon or fiſh, or mans fleſh: and with that they liue merrily and without care.
               
                  
                     
                        Anthropophages men eaters.
                     The Sauages of New France be truely noble.
                   Now leauing there thoſe Anthropophages Braſilians, let vs returne to our New France, where the Men there are more humane, and liue but with that which God hath giuen to Man, not deuouring their like. Alſo wee muſt ſay of them that they are truely noble, not hauing any action but is generoſe, whether we conſider their hunting, or their employment in the warrs, or that one ſearch out their domeſticall actions, wherein the women doe exerciſe themſelues, in that which is proper vnto them, and the men in that which belongeth to armes, and other things befitting them, ſuch as we haue ſaid, or will ſpeake of in due place. But heere one muſt conſider that the moſt parte of the world haue liued ſo from the beginning, and by degrees men haue beene ciuilized, when that they haue aſſembled themſelues, and haue formed common-wealths for to liue vnder certaine lawes, rule and policie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               Of Hawking.
               SEeing that wee hunt on the land let vs not ouerſtray our ſelues, leaſt if wee take the ſea, wee loſe out Prou. 1. 17.fowles: for the wiſe man ſaith, that in vaine the net is ſpred before the eies of all that haue wings. If hunting then be a noble exerciſe, wherein the very Muſes themſelues take delight, by reaſon of ſilence and ſolitarineſſe, which brings foorth faire conceits in the minde: in ſuch ſort that 
                     Plin. ſecond Epiſt. 6. of
                  Diana (ſaith Pliny) doth not more frequent the mountaines then Minerva. If, I ſay, hunting be a noble exerciſe, hauking the 1. booke. Pſal. 8. 9.is farre more noble, becauſe it aymeth at an higher ſubiect, which doth participate of Heauen, ſeeing, that the inhabitants of the aire are called in the ſacred Scripture, Volucres coeli, the foules of the aire. Moreouer, the exerciſe therof doth belong but to kings, & to the nobles, aboue which their brightneſſe ſhineth, as the Sunnes brightneſſe doth aboue the ſtarres. And our Sauages being of a noble heart, which maketh no account but of hunting and martiall affaires, may very certainly haue right of vſage, ouer the birds that their land doth affoord them. Which they doe likewiſe, but with much difficulties, becauſe they haue not (as we haue) the vſe of guns. They haue enough, and too many birds of pray, as Eagles, Laynards, Faulcons, Tiercelets, Sparow-haukes, and others, which I haue ſpecified in my farewell to New France, but they haue neither the vſe nor induſtrie to A ſport they haue in France to ſhoote at the picture of a bird, ſet at a ſtake.bring them to ſeruice, as the French Gentlemen: and therefore they looſe much good fowle, hauing no other meanes to ſeeke after them, or to take them but onely with the Bowe and arrowes, with which inſtruments they doe like vnto them who in France ſhoote at the Geay in time of middle-lent: or creepe along the graſſe, and go to aſſaile the Outardes, or wild Geeſe, which doe graze in

the Spring time, and in Summer along the medowes▪ Sometimes alſo they carrie themſelues ſoftly and without making any noiſe in their canowes and light veſſels made with barkes of trees, euen to the ſhores where the Malards and other water fowle are, and there ſtrike them downe. But the greateſt abundance they haue, come from certaine Ilands, where ſuch quantitie of them are, to wit, of Malards, Margaux, Roquettes, Outards, or Great aboundance of water foule.wilde Geeſe, Curlies, Cormorants, and others, that it is a woonderfull thing, yea that which captaine Iames Quartier reciteth, will ſeeme to ſome altogether vncredible. When we were vpon our returne into France, being yet beyond Campſeau, wee paſſed by ſome of thoſe Ilands, where in the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, we laded our barke with them, wee had no need but to ſtrike downe with ſtaues, and not to go about to gather vntill one were wearie a ſtriking. If any man doth aske why they flie not away, one muſt conſider that they be birds onely of two three, or fower moneths old, which haue beene there hatched in the ſpring time, and haue not yet wings great enough to take ſlight, though they be well fleſhie and in good plight. As for the dwelling of Port Royall we had The foule of Port Royall.many of our men that furniſhed vs with them, and particularlie one of Monſieur de Monts his houſhold ſeruants, called François Addeni, whoſe name I inſert heere to the end he be had in memorie, beecauſe he alwaies prouided for vs abundantly with it. During the winter he made vs to liue onely of Mallards, Cranes, Hernes, Woodcocks, Partriges, Blackbirds, & ſome other kinds of that country birds. But in the ſpring time it was a ſport to ſee the gray Geeſe and the bigge Outardes (a kinde of wilde Geeſe) to keepe their Empire and dominion in our meddowes▪ and in Autumne the white Geeſe, of which ſome did alwaies remaine for a pawne: then the ſea Larks flying in great flocks vpon the ſhores of the waters, which alſo very often were paied home.
               
                  
Touching the birds of pray, ſome of our men tooke from the neſt an Eagle, from the top of a Pine-apple tree, of the monſtrouſeſt height that euer I ſaw any tree, which Eagle Monſieur de Poutrincourt did breed for to preſent her to the king, but ſhe brake her ties, ſeeking to take her flight, and loſt her ſelfe in the ſea comming home. The Sauages of Campſeau had ſix of them pearched neere to their cabins, at our comming thither, which wee would not trucke for, becauſe they had pulled off their tailes to to feather their arrowes. There bee ſuch a quantitie of them in thoſe parts, that often they did eat our pigeons, and it did behooue vs to looke narrowly to them.
               The birds that were knowen vnto vs, I haue enrowled them (as I haue ſaid) in my farwell to New France, but I haue omitted many of them, becauſe I knew not their names. There alſo may be ſeene the deſcription of a little 
                     Niridau, an admirable little ſmall bird. Flies.ſmall bird, which the Sauages doe call Niridau, which liueth but with flowers, and ſhe did come noiſing in my eares, paſſing inuiſibly (ſo ſmall is ſhee) when in the morning I went to take a walke in my garden. There will be ſeene alſo the diſcription of certaine flies, ſhining in the euening, in the ſpring time, which doe flie vp and downe the woods in ſuch a multitude that it is woonder. For the birds of Canada, I alſo refer the Reader to the report of Captaine Iames Quartier.
               
               
                  A wonderfull foule. The Armouchiquois haue the ſame birdes, whereof there are many which are not knowen vnto vs in theſe parts. And particularly there is one kinde of water foule which haue their bils made like two kniues, hauing the two edges one vpon another: and that which is worth the wondering at, the vppermoſt part of the ſaid bill is ſhorter by the one halfe then the lower-moſt: in ſuch wiſe that it is hard to thinke how this bird taketh her food. But in the Spring Turkiecockes.time the cockes and hennes, which we call Indien or Turkie cockes doe flie thether as wandring birdes, and ſoiorne there without paſſing further hetherward. They come

from the parts of 
                     Ʋirginia and Florida. There be yet, beſides 
                     Come from Virginia.
                     
                     Birds and foules of Virginia and Florida▪
                        
                     
                   theſe, Partridges, Parrats, Pigeons, Stocke-doues, Turtle-doues, Blacke-birds, Crowes, Tiercelets, Faulcons, Laniers, Hernes, Cranes, Storckes, Wilde-geeſe, Mallards, Cormorans, white Aigrets, red, blacke, and gray ones, and infinite ſorts of foule.
               As for the Braſilians they alſo haue ſtore of Turkie-cockes and hennes, which they name Arignan-ouſlou, of whom they make no account, nor of their egges: In ſuch maner that the ſaid Turkie-hennes breede their young ones as they can, without ſo much a doe as in theſe parts. They haue alſo duckes but becauſe they goe heauily they eat none of them, ſaying that they would hinder them from running ſwiftly. Item a kinde of Pheaſants which they call Iacous: Other foules which they name Mouton as bigge as peacocks: ſome kindes of Partridges as bigge as Geeſe, called Mocacoüa: Parrats of ſundry ſorts, and many other kindes altogether vnlike vnto ours.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII.
               Of their Fiſhing.
               
                  OPpian, in the booke that he hath made vpon this ſubiect, ſaith, that in the hunting of beaſts and of Compariſon betweene hunting, hauking, and fiſhing.birdes, beſides the facility, there is more contentment and delight then in fiſhing, becauſe that a man hath many retreats, one may get himſelfe into the ſhadow, one may meet with brookes to quench his thirſt, one may lie downe on the graſſe, one may take his repaſt vnder ſome ſhelter. As for birdes one may take them in the neſt and with bird-lime, yea of themſelues very often they fall into the nets. But poore fiſher-men caſt their baite vpon an vncertainty; yea, double vncertaintie, as well becauſe they know not what aduenture ſhall happen vnto them, as becauſe they are vpon an vnconſtant and vntameable Element, whoſe very ſight onely is fearefull: They are alwaies wandering from place to place, ſubiects

to tempeſts, and beaten with ſtormes and winds. But yet in the end he concludeth that they are not deſtitute of all pleaſure, but rather that they haue enough, when they are in a Shippe well built, well tight, well cloſed, and ſwift in ſailing. Then cutting the waues they goe to ſea, where the great skulls of deuouring fiſhes are, and caſting into the ſea a line well twiſted, the weight of it is no ſooner in the bottome, but that as ſoone the baite is ſnatched vp, and ſuddenly the fiſh is drawen vp with An Emperour delighting in fiſhing.great pleaſure. And in this exerciſe did Marc Antonia, the Sonne of the Emperor Seuerus delight himſelfe very much: notwithſtanding Platoes reaſon, who forming his common-wealth hath forbidden his Citizens the exerciſe of fiſhing, as vnnoble, and iliberall, and foſterer of idleneſſe. Wherein he did groſſely aequiuocate, ſpecially when he chargeth fiſher-men with idleneſſe. Which is ſo euident that I will not vouchſafe to refute him. But I maruel not of that which he ſaith of fiſhing, ſeeing that with the ſame he alſo reiecteth hauking, vpon the ſame reaſons. Plutarch ſaith that it is more laudable to take either a Hart, a Roebuck, or a Hare, then to buy them: but he wadeth not ſo farre as the other. Howſoeuer it be, the Church, which is the firſt order in humane ſociety, whoſe Prieſthood is called Royall by the great Apoſtle Saint Peter, hath permitted fiſhing to church-men, and forbidden hunting and hauking. And indeed, to ſay that which is moſt probable, the food of fiſh is the beſt and foundeſt of Ariſtotle 8. of the Hiſtory of beaſts. c. 9.all, for as much (as Ariſtotle ſaith) that it is not ſubiect to any ſickneſſe: from whence commeth the common prouerb: Sounder then a fiſh. So that in the ancient hieroglyphickes a fiſh is the ſimbole of health. Which notwithſtanding I would meane, eaten whileſt it is new. for otherwiſe (as Plautus ſaith) Piſcis niſi recens nequam est, it is nothing woorth.
               Now our Sauages doe eat it new enough, as long as it laſteth: which I beleeue to bee one of the beſt Inſtruments

of their health and long life. When winter commeth, Fiſhes doe retire themſelues in Winter.all fiſhes are aſtoniſhed, and ſhunne the ſtormes and tempeſts, euery one where he may: ſome doe hide themſelues in the ſand of the ſea, others vnder the Rocks, others doe ſeeke a milder country where they may be better at reſt. But as ſoone as the mildneſſe of the Spring time doth returne, and the Sea doth calme it ſelfe, as after a long ſiege of a Towne, Truce being made, the people being before a priſoner, iſſueth forth by troupes to goe and take the aire of the fields and to reioice themſelues: So thoſe Citizens of the Sea, after the guſts and furious ſtormes be paſt, they come to enlarge themſelues through the ſalted fields, they skippe, they trample, they make loue, they approach to the ſhoare and come to ſeeke the refreſhing of freſh water. And then our ſaid The fiſhes rendez-vous.Sauages that know the Rendez-vous of euery one, and the time of their returne, goe to waite for them in good deuotion to bidde them welcome. The Smelt is the firſt fiſh of all that preſent himſelfe in the Spring. And to the end wee goe no further to ſeeke out examples then at our Smelts in great quantity.Port Royall, there be certaine brooks where ſuch skulls of theſe Smelts doe come, that for the ſpace of fiue or ſix weeks one might take of them ſufficient to feed a whole Citie. There be other brooks, where after the Smelt Herrings.commeth the Herring, with like multitude, as we haue already marked elſe where. Item the Pilchers doe come in their ſeaſon, in ſuch aboundance that ſometimes willing to haue ſome thing more for our ſupper then ordinary, in leſſe then the ſpace of an houre, wee had taken enough of them to ſerue vs for three daies. The Dolphins, Sturgeons Dolphins, Sturgions, Salmons.and Salmons doe get to the head of the Riuer in the ſaid Port Royall, where ſuch quantitie of them are, that they carried away the nets which we had laid for them, by reaſon of the multitude of them that we ſaw there. In all places fiſh aboundeth there in like maner, as wee our Fiſhing of the Sauages.ſelues haue ſeene. The Sauages doe make a hurdle, or

weare, that croſſeth the brooke, which they hold almoſt vpſtraight, propped againſt wooden barres, archwiſe, & leaue there a ſpace for the fiſhes to paſſe, which ſpace they ſtop when the tide doth retire, and all the fiſh is found ſtaied in ſuch a multitude that they ſuffer it to be loſt. And as for the Dolphins, Sturgions and ſalmons, they take them after that maner, or doe ſtrike them with harping irons, ſo that theſe people are happie. For there is nothing in the world ſo good as theſe freſh meats. And I find by my The abuſe of Pithagoras.
                  reckening that Pythagoras was very ignorant, forbidding in his faire goulden ſentences the vſe of fiſhes without diſtinction. One may excuſe him, in that fiſh being dumbe hath ſome conformity with his ſect, wherein dumbneſſe (or ſilence) was much commended. It is alſo ſaid that he did it becauſe that fiſh is nouriſhed in an Element enemy to mankinde. Item that it is a great ſinne to kill and to eat a creature thar doth not hurt vs. Item that it is a delicious & luxurious meat, not of neceſſity (as indeed in the Hieroglyphiques of Orus Apollo, fiſh is put for a marke of delicacie and voluptuouſneſſe) Item that he (the ſaid Pythagoras) did eat but meats that might be offered to the gods: which is not done with fiſhes: and other ſuch toies recited by Plutarch in his Convivial queſtions. But all thoſe ſuperſtions be fooliſh: and I would faine demand of ſuch a man if being in Canada he had rather die for hunger then to eat fiſh. So many anciently to follow their owne fancies, and to ſay theſe be we, haue forbidden their followers the vſe of meats that God hath giuen to man, and ſometimes laied yoakes vpon men that they themſelues would not beare. Now whatſoeuer the Philoſophy of Pythagoras is, I am none of his. I finde better the rule of our good religious men, which pleaſe themſelues in eating of fleſh, which I liked well in New France, neither am I yet diſpleaſed when I meet with ſuch fare. If this Philoſopher did liue with Ambroſia and of the food of the Gods, and not of fiſhes, of which none are ſacrificed vnto them. Our ſaid

good religious, as the Cordeliers, or Franciſcans of Saint Maloes, and others of the maritime townes, together with the Prieſts, may ſay that in eating ſometimes fiſh, they eate of the meat conſecrated to God. For when the 
                     The French men that goe there a fiſhing.
                     Sanctorum.
                   New found land men doe meet with ſome woonderfull faire Codde, they make of it a Sanctorum, (ſo doe they call it) and doe vow and conſecrate it to Saint Frances, Saint Nicholas, Saint Leonard and others, head and all, whereas in their fiſhing they caſt the heads into the ſea.
               I ſhould be forced to make a whole booke if I would diſcourſe of all the fiſhes that are cōmon to the Braſilians, Floridians, Armouchiquois, Canadians, & Souriquois. But I will reſtrain my ſelfe to two or three, hauing firſt told that in Port Royall there is great beds of Muſcles, wherewith Muſcles.we did fill our Shallops, when that ſometimes wee went into thoſe parts. There be alſo Scallops twiſe as bigge as Scalloppes.Oyſters in quantitie. Item Cockles, which haue neuer Cockles. Sea Cheſtnuts.failed vs: As alſo there is Chatagnes demer, ſea Cheſtnuts, the moſt delicious fiſh that is poſſible to bee: Item Crabbes and Lobſtarts: thoſe be the ſhell fiſhes. But one Crabbes. Lobſtarts. A Port of eight leagues▪ compaſſe.muſt take the pleaſure to fetch them, and are not all in one place. Now the ſaid Port being eight leagues compaſſe, there is (by the aboueſaid Philoſophers leaue) good ſport to row in it for ſo pleaſant a fiſhing.
               
                  The fiſhing of Codde. And ſeeing wee are in the Countrie where the Coddes are taken, I will not yet leaue off worke, vntill I haue ſpoken ſomething thereof. For ſo many people and in ſo great number goe to fetch them out of all the parts of Europe euery yeere, that I know not from whence ſuch a ſwarme may come. The Coddes that bee brought into theſe parts are either drie or wet. The fiſhing of the wee fiſh is on the banke in the open ſea, on this ſide New found land, as may be noted by my Geographicall mappe. Fifteene Banke: See heeretofore in the 1. book chap. 12.or twentie (more or leſſe) mariners haue euery one a lyne (it is a corde) of fortie or fiftie fathams long, at the end whereof is a hooke baited, and a lead of three pounds

waight to bring it to the bottome: with this implement they fiſh their Coddes, which are ſo greedie, that no ſooner let downe, but as ſoone caught, where good fiſhing is. The fiſh being drawen a ſhippe-boord, there are boords in forme of narrow tables along the ſhip where the fiſh is dreſſed. There is one that cutteth off their heads and caſteth them commonly in the ſea: Another cutteth their bellies and garbelleth them, and ſendeth backe to his fellow the biggeſt part of the backe-bone which hee cutteth away. That done, they are put into the ſalting tubbe for fower and twentie houres: then they are laid vp: And in this ſort doe they worke continually (without reſpecting the Sunday, which is the Lords day) for the ſpace of almoſt three moneths, their ſailes downe, vntill the lading be fully made. And becauſe the poore mariners doe endure there ſome cold among the fogges, ſpecially them that be moſt haſtie, which begin their voiage in Februarie: from thence commeth the ſaying, that it is cold in Canada.
               
               
                  Drying of the Codde. As for the drie Codde one muſt goe a land. There is in New-found-land and in Bacaillos great number ef Ports, where Ships lie at Ancker for three months. At the very breake of day the Mariners doe goe two or three leagues off in the ſea to take their lading. They haue euery one filled their ſhaloupe by one or two a clock in the afternoone, and do returne into the Port, where being, there is a great Scaffold built one the ſea ſhoare, whereon the fiſh is caſt, as one caſt ſheaues of corne through a barne window. There is a great table whereon the fiſh caſt, is dreſſed as aboue ſaid. After ſix houres they are turned, and ſo fundry times. Then all is gathered, and piled together; and againe at the end of eight daies put to the aire. In the end being dried it is laid vp. But there muſt be no fogges when it is a drying, for then it will rot: not too much heat, for it would become red: but a temperate and windy weather.
               
                  
                  Whether the Codde doth ſleepe. They doe not fiſh by night becauſe then the Cod will not bite. I durſt beleeue that they be of the fiſhes which ſuffer themſelues to be taken ſleeping, although that Oppian is of opinion that fiſhes, warring and deuouring one another, as doe the Braſilians and Canibals, are alwaies Why fiſhes ſleepe not.watchfull and ſleepe not: excepting neuertheleſſe the Sargot onely, which he ſaith putteth himſelfe in certaine caues to take his ſleepe. Which I might well beleeue, and this fiſh deſerueth not to be warred vpon, ſeeing he maketh warrs vpon none others, and liueth of weeds: by reaſon whereof all the Authours doe ſay that he chaweth his cudde like the Sheepe. But as the ſame Oppian ſaith that this fiſh onely in chawing his cudde doth render a moiſt voice, and in that he is deceaued, becauſe that my ſelfe haue heard many times the Seales, or Sea woolues, Heeretofore firſt booke, chap. 17.in open ſea, as I haue ſaid elſewhere: He might alſo haue aequiuocated in this.
               The ſame Cod leaueth biting after the month of September is paſſed, but retireth himſelfe to the bottome of the broad ſea, or elſe goeth to a hotter country vntill the Spring time. Whereupon I will heere aleadge what Pliny 
                  Plin. lib. 9. c. 16.
                  noteth; that fiſhes which haue ſtones on their heads doe feare winter, and retire themſelues betimes, of whoſe number is the Cod, which hath within her braines two white ſtones made gundole wiſe and iagged about: which Stones in the Cods head.haue not thoſe that be taken towards Scotland, as ſome learned and curious man hath tould me. This fiſh is wonderfully greedy, and deuoureth others, almoſt as bigg as himſelfe yea euen lobſters, which are like bigge Langoustes, and I maruell how he may digeſt thoſe bigge and hard ſhells. Of the liuers of Cods our New-found-land-men doe make oiles, caſting thoſe liuers into barels ſet in the Sunne, where they melt of themſelues.
               There is great trafficke made in Europe of the oile of the fiſh of New-found-land. And for this only cauſe many Fiſh oile or traine.go to the fiſhing of the whale, and of the Hippopotames,
                  
which they call the beaſt with the great tooth or the Morſes: of whom ſome thing we muſt ſay.
               
                  Fiſhing of the Whale. Plin▪ li. 9. ca. 3. The Almighty, willing to ſhew vnto Iob how wonderfull are his works: wilt thou draw (ſaith he) Leuiathan with a booke, and his tongue with a ſtring which thou haſt caſt in the water? By this Leuiathan is the whale meant, and all fiſhes of that reach, whoſe hugeneſſe (and chiefely of the whale) is ſo great, that it is a dreadfull thing, as wee haue ſhewed elſewhere, ſpeaking of one that was caſt on the Coaſt of Braſill by the tide: And Plinie ſaith that there be ſome found in the Indies which haue fower acres of ground in length. This is the cauſe why man is to be admired (yea rather God, who hath giuen him the courage to aſſaile ſo fearefull a monſter, which hath not his equall on the land.) I leaue the maner of taking of her, deſcribed 
                     
                        Oppian of fiſhing the 5. booke.
                     S. Baſil 10. Ho. vpon the 6. daies of creation.
                     The riuer where the Whale is fiſhed.
                   by Oppian, and S. Baſil for to come to our French-men, and chiefely the Baſques, who doe goe euery yeare to the great riuer of Canada for the Whale. Commonly, the fiſhing thereof is made in the riuer called Leſquemin towards Tadouſſac. And for to doe it they goe by skowtes to make watch vpon the tops of rockes, to ſee if they may haue the ſight of ſome one: and when they haue diſcouered any, foorth with they goe with fower ſhaloupes after it, and hauing cunningly borded her, they ſtrike her with a harping iron to the depth of her lard, and to the quicke of the fleſh. Then this creature feeling herſelfe rudely pricked, with a dreadfull boiſterouſneſſe caſteth herſelfe into the depth of the ſea. The men in the meane while are in their ſhirts, which vere out the cord whereunto the harping iron is tied, which the whale carrieth away. But at the ſhaloupe ſide that hath giuen the blow there is a man redy with a hatchet in hand to cut the ſaid cord, leaſt perchance ſome accident ſhould happen that it were mingled, or that the Whales force ſhould be too violent: which notwithſtanding hauing found the bottome, and being able to goe no further, ſhe mounteth vp againe leaſurely aboue the water:

and then againe ſhe is ſet vpon with glaue-ſtaues, or pertuifanes, very ſharp, ſo hotly that the ſalt-water pierceing within her fleſh ſhe looſeth her force, and remaineth there. Then one tieth her to a cable at whoſe end is an anker which is caſt into the ſea, then at the end of ſix or eight daies they goe to fetch her, when time and opportunity permits it they cut her in peeces, and in great kettles doe ſeeth the fat which melteth it ſelfe into oile, wherewith they may fill 400. Hogſ-heads, ſometimes more, and ſomtimes leſſe, according to the greatneſſe of the beaſt, and of the tongue commonly they draw fiue, yea ſix hogſ-heads full of traine.
               
                  
                     How the Indians doe take the Whale.
                     Ioſeph Acoſta▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        5. c. 15.
                     
                   If this be admirable in vs, that haue induſtry, it is more admirable in the Indian people, naked and without artificiall inſtruments: and neuertheleſſe they execute the ſame thing, which is recited by Ioſeph Acoſta, ſaying that for to take thoſe great monſters they put themſelues in a Canow or Barke, made of the barkes of trees, and bording the Whale they leape nimbly on her necke, and there doe ſtand, as it were on horſe-backe, attending the fit meanes to take her, and ſeeing their opportunity, the boldeſt of them putteth a ſtrong and ſharpe ſtafe, which he carrieth with him, into the gap of the Whales noſtrils (I call noſtrill the condut, or hole thorow which they breath) foorth with he thruſt it in far with another very ſtrong ſtafe, and maketh it to enter in as deepe as he can. In the meane while the Whale beateth the ſea furiouſly, and raiſeth vp mountaines of water, diuing downe with great violence, then mounteth vp again not knowing what to do through very rage. The Indian notwithſtanding remaineth ſtill ſitting faſt, and for to pay her home for this trouble, fixeth yet another like ſtalke in the other noſtrill, making it to enter in, in ſuch wiſe that it ſtoppeth her winde quite, and taketh away her breath, and he commeth againe into his Canow, which he holdeth tied at the ſide of the Whale with a cord, then retireth himſelfe on land hauing firſt tied

his cord to the Whale, which he vereth out on her; which whileſt ſhe findeth much water, skippeth heere and there, as touched with griefe, and in the end draweth to land, where foorth with, for the huge enormity of her body, ſhe remaineth on the ſhore, not being able to mooue or ſtur herſelfe any more. And then a great number of Indians doe come to finde out the Conquerer for to reape the fruit of his conqueſt, and for that purpoſe they make an end of killing of her, cutting her and making morſels of her fleſh (which is bad enough) which they drie and ſtampe to make powder of it, which they vſe for meat, that ſerueth them a long time.
               
                  Morſes. As for the Hippopotames, or Morſes, we haue ſaid in the voiages of Iames Quartier that there be great number of them in the Gulfe of Canada, and ſpecially in the Ile of 
                     Ile de Brion.
                  Brion, and in the ſeuen Iles, which is the riuer of Chiſchedec. It is a creature which is more like to a Cow then to a 
                     Hippopotame, or riuer Horſſe.
                  horſe. But we haue named it Hippopotamus that is to ſay the horſe of the riuer, becauſe Pliny doth ſo call them that be in the riuer Nilus, which notwithſtanding do not altogether reſemble the horſe, but doth participate alſo of an oxe or a cow. He is of haire like to the ſeale, that is to ſay, daple graie, and ſomewhat towards the redde, the skinne very hard, a ſmall head like to a Barbarie Cowe, hauing two ranks of teeth on ech ſide betweene which there is two of them of ech part hanging from the vpper iaw downward, of the forme of a young Elephants tooth, wherewith this creature helpeth her ſelfe to climbe on the rocks. Becauſe of thoſe teeth, our Mariners doe call it La beste a La grand' dent, the beaſt with the great teeth. His eares be ſhort and his taile alſo, he loweth as an Oxe, and hath wings or finnes at his feete, and the female calleth her young ones on the land. And becauſe that he is a fiſh of the whales kind and very fatte, our Baſques and other Mariners doe make oile thereof, as they doe with the whale and they doe ſurpriſe him on the land.
               
                  
                  Plin. li. 8. c. 25.
                   Thoſe of Nil (ſaith Pliny) are clouen footed, the maine, the back, and the neighing of a horſe, the teeth iſſuing foorth as to a wild Boare. And he addeth, that when this creature hath beene in the corne for to feed, he goeth away backwards, vpon his returne for feare hee ſhould be followed by his traces.
               I doe not purpoſe to diſcourſe heere of all the ſorts of fiſhes that are in choſe parts, the ſame being too ſpacious a ſubiect for my hiſtorie, becauſe alſo that I haue ſpecified a good number of them in my farewell to New France. I will ſay onely that by maner of paſtime on the coaſts of New France, I will take in one day fiſh enough for to ſerue as foode for a longer time then ſix weeks, in the places where the abundance of Codde is: for that kinde of fiſh is there moſt frequent. And hee that hath the induſtry to take Mackrels at ſea, may there take ſo many that he ſhall Infinite multitude of Mackerels.
                  not know what to doe with them, for in many places I haue ſeene infinite numbers of them cloſe together, which did occupie more ſpace there three times then the market hals of Paris doe containe. And notwithſtanding I ſee a The idlenes of people in theſe daies.number of people in our countrie of France, ſo rechleſſe, and ſo idle in theſe daies, that they had rather die for hunger, or liue in ſlauerie, at the leaſt to languiſh vpon their miſerable dunghill, then to endeauour to get out of the mire, and to change their fortune by ſome generous action, or to die in it.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               Of the qualitie of the Soile.
               VVE haue made prouiſion in the three laſt chapters of veniſon, of foule, and of fiſh; which is much. But in our old ancient France, bread and wine being our vſuall ſuſtenance, it would bee hard vnto vs to make heere our aboade, vnleſſe the land were fit for the ſame. Let vs then enter into conſideration of it,

and let vs put our hands into our boſome, to ſee if the dugges of this mother will yeeld any milke to nouriſh her children, and as for the reſt, wee will take what may bee 
                     Plin. l. 18. c. 5. Which is the good land.hoped for of her. Attilius Regulus, twiſe Conſull in Rome, did commonly ſay, that one muſt not chooſe places ouer ranke, becauſe they are vnhealthfull; neither places ouer barren, although one may liue healthily in them. And with ſuch a modetate ſoile did Cato content himſelfe. The ground of New France is ſuch, for the moſt part of fatte ſand, vnder which we haue often found clay ground: and of that earth did Monſieur de Poutrincourt cauſe a quantitie of bricks to be made, wherewith he builded a furnance to melt the gum of the firre tree, and chimneies. I will ſay farther, that one may make with this earth ſuch operations, The earth of New France hauing the ſame effects as terra ſigillata.as with the earth which we call terra ſigillata, or Bolus Armenicus, as in many occaſions our Apothecarie maſter Lewes Hebert moſt ſufficient in his Arte, hath made triall of it; by the aduice of Monſieur de Poutrincourt: yea euen when that Monſieur du Pont his ſonne had three fingers cut off with a musket-ſhot, which did burſt being ouercharged, in the countrie of the Armouchiquois.
               
               This prouince hauing the two natures of Earth that God hath giuen vnto man for to poſſeſſe, who may doubt but that it is a land of promiſe, when it ſhalbe manured? Wee haue made triall of it, and haue taken pleaſure therein, which neuer did all them that haue gone before vs, The bleſſing of God vpon our labour.whether it be in Braſill, whether it be in Florida, or in Canada. God hath bleſſed our labours and hath giuen vnto vs faire wheate, Rie, Barly, Oates, Peaſon, Beanes, Hempe, Turneps, and garden hearbs: and this ſo plentifully that the Rie was as high as the talleſt man that may be ſeene, and we did feare that this height ſhould hinder it from bringing foorth ſeed: But it hath ſo well fructified that 150. eares of corne from one graine.one french-graine ſowed there hath yeelded one hundred and fifty Eares of corne, ſuch as by the teſtimony of my Lord Chancellour, the Iland of Cicilia nor the countrie

of Beauſſe doe yeeld none fairer. I did ſow wheate, without ſuffring my land to reſt, and without dunging it at all: and neuertheleſſe it grew vp in as faire perfection as the faireſt wheate in France, although the corne and all that wee did ſow was to long kept. But the new corne which the ſaid Monſieur de Poutrincourt did ſow before his departure from thence grew vp ſo beautifull that it was wonderfull, according to the report of them that haue beene there a yeere after our departure. Whereupon I will ſay that which was of mine owne doing, that in the month of Aprill in the yeere 1607 hauing ſowed too thicke & too  neere one to the other, ſome few grains of the Rie that was gathered at Saint Croix (the firſt dwelling of Monſieur de 
                  S. Croix is 25. leagues from Port Royall.
                  Monts, ſome twenty fiue leagues from Port Royall) theſe graines did multiplie ſo aboundantly that they choaked one another, and came to no good perfection.
               
                  The fertiity of the ground mended. But as for the ground mended, dunged with our hogs dung, or with the ſweepings of the kitchinne, ſhels of fiſh, or ſuch like things, I would not beleeue▪ vnleſſe I had ſeene it, the exceſſiue loftineſſe of the plants that it hath produced euery one in his kinde. Yea the Sonne of Monſieur de Poutrincourt, a yong Gentleman of great forwardneſſe, hauing ſowed graines of Oringes and of Citrons in Orenges▪ Citrons.his garden, they ſprung plants of a foote high at three months end. We did not expect ſo much, and notwithſtanding we tooke pleaſure therein, emulating one another. I referre to any mans Iudgement if the ſecond triall will be done with a good courage. And heere I muſt ſay by the way that the Secretary of the ſaid Monſieur de Monts, being come into thoſe parts before our departure, did ſay that he would not for any thing in the world, but to haue made the voyage, and that vnleſſe he had ſeene The abuſe of them that haue diſcredited the country of Canada.
                  our corne, he would not haue beleeued it. Behold how continually the country of Canada hath beene diſcredited (vnder whoſe name all that land is comprized) not knowing what it is, vpon thereport of ſome Mariners, who

onely doe goe to fiſh for Coddes, and vpon the rumor of ſome ſickneſſes, which may bee avoided in maintaining of mirth. So that men be well furniſhed of neceſſaries.
               But to continue our purpoſe of the mending of the ground, whereof wee ſpake euen now, one certaine ancient Authour ſaith that the Cenſors of Rome did let to farme the dunghils and other vncleaneneſſe, which were drawen out of ſinckes for 1000 tallents a yeere (which is woorth 600000 French-crownes) to the Gardeners of Rome, becauſe that it was the excellenteſt dung of all: And there was to that end Commiſſioners ordained for to cleanſe them: Likewiſe the bottome and Channell of the Riuer Tybre, as certaine ancient inſcriptions, which I haue ſometimes read, doe record.
               The land of the Armouchiquois doth beare yeerely ſuch corne as that which wee call Sarrazen wheate, Turkie 
                  
                     
                        Plin. l. 18. c. 7. &. 10.
                     The Virginians haue two harueſts in the yeare.
                     The maner of fatting, tilling, and ſowing the grounds.
                   wheate, and Indian wheate, which is the Irio or Eryſimon fruges of Pliny and Columella. But the 
                     Ʋirginians, Floridians, and Braſilians, more ſoutherly, make two harueſts a yeere. All theſe people doe till their land with a woodden picke-axe, weed out the weeds and burne them, fatten their fieldes with ſhell-fiſh, hauing neither tame Cattell nor dung: then they heape their ground in ſmall heapes two foote diſtant one from another. and the month of Maie being come, they ſet their Corne in thoſe heapes of earth as wee doe plant beanes, fixing a ſtick, and putting foure graines of corne ſeuerally one after another (by certaine ſuperſtition) in the hole, and betweene the plants of the ſaid corne (which groweth like a ſmall tree, and is ripe at three months end) they alſo ſet beanes ſpotted with all colours, which are very delicate, which by reaſon they be not ſo high, doe grow very well among theſe plantes of corne: Wee haue ſowed of the ſaid corne this laſt yeere in Paris in good ground, but with ſmall profit, hauing yeelded euery plant but one eare or two, and yet

very thinne: Where in that country one graine will yeld foure, fiue and ſix eares, and euery eare one with another aboue 200 graines, which is a maruellous increaſe. Which 
                     Theophraſtus in the 8. booke of plants.ſheweth the prouerbe reported by Theophraſtus to be very true, that it is the yeere that produced the fruit, and not the field: That is to ſay, that the temperature of the aire, and condition of the weather, is that which maketh the plants to budde and fructifie more then the nature of the earth. Wherein is to be wondred that our Corne groweth Our corne profiteth better in their ground then their corne in ours.better there, then their corne heere. A certaine teſtimonie that God hath bleſſed that country, ſince that his name hath beene called vpon there: Alſo that in theſe parts, ſince ſome yeeres, God beateth vs (as I haue ſaid elſewhere) with rods of iron, and in that country he hath ſpred his bleſſing aboundantly vpon our labour, and that in one parallele and eleuation of the Sunne.
               This Corne growing high, as we haue ſaid, the ſtalke of it is as bigge as Canes, yea bigger. The ſtalke & Corne taken greene, haue a ſugar taſte, which is the cauſe why the Mowles and field Rattes doe ſo couet it, for they ſpoiled me a plot of it in New France. The great beaſts, as Stagges and other beaſts, as alſo birds doe ſpoile it. And the Indians are conſtrained to keepe them as wee doe the vines heere.
               
                  Barnes vnder ground. The Harueſt being done, this people laieth vp their Corne in the ground, in pits which they make in ſome diſcent of a hill, for the running downe of waters, furniſhing thoſe pits with mattes: and this they doe becauſe they haue no houſes with loftes, nor cheſts to lay it vp otherwiſe: then the corne conſerued after this maner, is out of the way of Rats and Miſe.
               Sundry nations of thoſe parts haue had the ſame inuention to keepe corne in pits. For Suidas maketh mention of it vpō the word Seiroi. And Procopius in the ſecond book of the Gothicke warre, ſaith that the Gothes beſieging Rome fell within the pits, where the inhabitants were

woont to lay their Corne. Tacitus reporteth alſo that the Germans had ſuch pits. And without particulariſing any farther, in many places of France that keepe at this day 
                     
                        •
                     4. chap.their corne after that maner. We haue declared heeretofore in what faſhion they ſtampe their Corne, and make bread with it, and how by the teſtimonie of Pliny, the ancient Italians had no better induſtrie then they.
               
                  The cauſe why the Canadians haue giuen ouer their tillage. They of Canada and Hochelaga, in the time of Iames Quartier, did alſo till after the ſame maner, and the land did affoord them Corne, Beanes, Peaſon, Milions, Pompions, & Cucumbers, but ſince that their furres haue been in requeſt, and that for the ſame they haue had bread and other victuals, without any other paines, they are become ſluggiſh, as the Souriquois alſo, who did addict themſelues to tillage in the ſame time.
               
                  Hemp. But both the one and the other nation haue yet at this time excellent Hempe, which the ground produceth of it ſelfe. It is higher, finer, whiter, and ſtronger then ours in theſe our parts. But that of the Armouchiquois beareth at the top of the ſtalke thereof a cod, filled with a kinde of Cotton.cotten, like vnto ſilke, in which lieth the ſeed. Of this cotton, or whatſoeuer it be, good beddes may be made, more excellent a thouſand times then of feathers, and ſofter than common cotten. We haue ſowed of the ſaid ſeed, or graine in diuers places of Paris, but it did not prooue.
               We haue ſeene by our Hiſtorie, how along the great Vines and grapes.riuer, beyond Tadouſſac, Vines are found innumerable, and grapes at the ſeaſon. I haue ſeene none in Port Royall, but the land and the hils are very proper for it. France had none in ancient time, vnleſſe peraduenture along the 
                     Aurel. Victor in Prob. when the Vine was firſt planted in France.coaſt of the Mediterranean ſea. And the Gaullois hauing done ſome notable ſeruice to the Emperour Probus, they demanded of him for recompence, permiſſion to plant Vines: which he granted vnto them: But they were firſt denied by the Emperor Nero. But why doe I aleadge the Gaullois, ſeeing that in Braſill, being a hot countrie, there

was none vntill that the Frenchmen and Portugeſes had planted ſome there: So there is no doubt but that the Vine will grow plentifully in the ſaid Port Royall, ſeeing likewiſe that at the riuer Saint Iohn (which is twentie leagues more Northward than the ſaid Port) there be many of them: yet for all that not ſo faire as in the countrie of the Armouchiquois, where it ſeemeth that Nature did delight herſelfe in planting of them there.
               And for as much as we haue handled this ſubiect, ſpeaking of the voiage that Monſieur De Poutrincourt made thether, we will paſſe further, to declare vnto you that the moſt part of the woods of this land be Oakes and Walnut-trees, Oakes. Nut-trees. Plumb-trees.bearing ſmall-nuts with fower or fiue ſides, ſo ſweet and delicate as any thing may be: And likewiſe Plumb-trees which bring foorth very good Plumbes: As alſo Saſſafras, a tree hauing leaues like to Oake-leaues, but Saſſafras.leſſe iagged, whoſe wood is of very good ſent, and moſt excellent for the curing of many diſeaſes, as the pox, and the ſickneſſe of Canada, which I call Phthiſie, whereof we 
                     Phthiſie. 1. book. c. 13.haue diſcourſed at large heeretofore.
               They alſo plant great ſtore of Tabacco, a thing moſt precious with them, and vniverſally amongſt all thoſe nations. It is a plante of the bigneſſe of Conſolida maior, the Tabacco and the vſe of it.ſmoake whereof they ſucke vp with a pipe in that manner that I will declare vnto you, for the contentment of them that know not the vſe of it. After that they haue gathered this hearbe, they lay it to dry in the ſhade, and haue certaine ſmall bagges of leather, hanging about their neckes or at their girdles, wherein they haue alwaies ſome and a Tabacco-pipe with all, which is a little pan hollowed at the one ſide, and within whoſe hole there is a long quill or pipe, out of which they ſucke vp the ſmoake, which is within the ſaid pan, after they put fire to it with a cole that they laie vpon it. They will ſometimes ſuffer hunger eight daies, hauing no other ſuſtenance then that ſmoake. And our Frenchmen who haue frequented them are ſo bewitched

with this drunkenneſſe of Tabacco, that they can no more be without it, then without meat or drinke, and vpon that doe they ſpend good ſtore of mony. For the good Tabacco which commeth out of Braſil doth ſometimes Fooliſh greedineſſe of ſome men after Tabacco.
                  coſt a French-crowne a pound. Which I deeme fooliſhneſſe in them, becauſe that notwithſtanding they doe not ſpare more in their eating and drinking then other men, neither doe they take a bit of meat nor a cup of drinke the leſſe by it. But it is the more excuſable in the Sauages, by reaſon they haue no greater deliciouſneſſe in their Tabagies, or bankets, and can make cheere to them that come to viſit them with no greater thing, as in theſe our parts one preſents his friend with ſome excellent wine: In ſuch ſort that if one refuſeth to take the Tabacco-pipe, it is a The Sauages doe thinke that God hath taken Tabacco.ſigne that he is not a friend. And they, which among them haue ſome obſcure knowledge of God, doe ſay that he taketh Tabacco as well as they, and that it is the true nectar, deſcribed by the Poets.
               This ſmoake of Tabacco taken by the mouth, in ſucking, The vertues and properties of Tabaco.as a child that ſucketh his dugge, they make it to iſſue thorow the noſe, & paſſing thorow the conduits of breathing, the braines are warmed by it, and the humiditie of the ſame dried vp. It doth alſo in ſome ſort make one giddie, and as it were drunke, it maketh the belly ſoluble, mitigateth the paſſions of Venus, bringeth to ſleepe, and the leafe of Tabacco, or the aſhes that remaine in the pan healeth wounds. Yea I will ſay more that this nectar is vnto them ſo ſweet, that the children doe ſometimes ſup vp the ſmoake that their fathers caſt out of their noſtrils, to the Belle Foreſt.end that nothing be loſt. And becauſe that the ſame hath a tart biting taſte, Monſieur de Belleforeſt, reciting that which Iames Quartier (who knew not what it was) ſaith of it, will make the people beleeue that it is ſome kind of pepper. But whatſoeuer ſweeteneſſe is found therein I could neuer vſe my ſelfe to it, neither doe I care for the vſe and cuſtome to take it in ſmoake.
               
                  
                  Rootes Afrodilles.
                   There is yet in the land of the Armouchiquois, certaine kinde of Rootes as bigge as a loafe of bread, moſt excellent for to be eaten, hauing a taſte like the ſtalkes of Artichocks, but much more pleaſant, which being planted do multiply in ſuch ſort, that it is woonderfull. I beleeue that they be thoſe which be called Afrodilles, according to the deſcription that Pliny maketh of them: Theſe Roots 
                        Plin. l. 21. c. 17.
                        
                        Theſe ſeem to be ground▪ nuts.
                      (ſaith he) are made after the faſhion of ſmal turneps & there is no plant that hath ſo many roots as this hath: for ſometimes one ſhall find fower ſcore Afrodilles tied together. They are good roſted vnder the imbers, or eaten raw with pepper, or oile and ſalt.
               
                  Conſideration of the miſerie of many. Conſidering all this, it ſeemeth vnto mee that theſe are men very miſerable, who being able to liue a countrie life in quiet and reſt, and take the benefit of the ground, which doth pay her creditor with ſo profitable an vſurie, doe paſſe their age in townes in following of ſutes in law, in toiling heere and there, to ſeeke out the meanes how to beguile and deceaue ſome one or other, taking ſuch pains as doe euen bring them to their graue, for to pay their houſe rent, for to be clothed in ſilke, for to haue ſome precious moueables: briefly for to ſet out and feed themſelues with all vanitie, wherein contentment is neuer to be found. Poore fooles! (ſaith Heſiod) which know not 
                        Heſiode in the booke of workes and daies.how one halfe of theſe things with quiet is more woorth then all heaped together with freatfullneſſe: nor how great benefit is in the Malous and the Daffadilles. The Gods certainely haue hidden from men the manner of liuing happily. For otherwiſe one daies labour would be ſufficient for to nouriſh a man a whole yeere, and the day following he would ſet his Plough vpon his dunghill, and would reſt his Oxen, his mules, and himſelfe.
               
                  The tilling of the ground full of innocency. This is the contentment which is prepared for them that ſhall inhabite New-France, though fooles doe deſpiſe this kind of life, and the tilling of the ground, the moſt harmeles of all bodily exerciſes, and which I will tearme

the moſt noble as that which ſuſtaineth the life of all men. They diſdaine (I ſay) the tillage of the ground, and notwithſtanding all the vexations wherewith one tormenteth himſelfe, the ſutes in law that one followes, the wars that are made, are but for to haue landes. Poore mother! what haſt thou done that thou art ſo deſpiſed? The other Elements are very often contrarie vnto vs, the fire conſumeth vs, the aire doth infect vs with plague, the water ſwalloweth vs vp, onely the earth is that which comming into the world, and dying, receaueth vs kindly, it is ſhe alone that nouriſheth vs, which warmeth vs, which lodgeth vs, which clotheth vs, which contrarieth vs in nothing, and ſhee is ſet at naught, and them that doe manure her are laughed at, they are placed next to the idle and bloud-ſuckers of the people. All this is done heere among vs: But in New-France the goulden age muſt be brought in againe, the ancient Crownes of eares of corne muſt be renewed; and to make that to be the firſt glory 
                     Pli. 18. booke ch. 3.which the ancient Romans did call Gloria adorea, a glory of wheate, to the end to inuite euery one to till well his field, ſeeing that the land preſenteth it ſelfe liberally to them that haue none.
               Being aſſured to haue corne and wine, there reſteth but to furniſh the Country with tame cattell: for they will breede there very well, as we haue ſaid in the chapter of hunting.
               Of fruite-trees, there be but few, beſides nut-trees, Heeretofore ch. 21.Plumb-trees, and ſmall chery-trees, and ſome hazellnut-trees. True it is that all that which is within the land Orenge-trees Fruit-trees.is not yet diſcouered, for in the country of the Iroquois there are Oreng-trees, and they make oiles with the fruite of trees. But no French-men nor other Chriſtians haue beene there yet. That want of fruit-trees is not to be found very ſtrange. For the moſt part of our fruits are come out of other places: And very often the fruites beare the name of the country from whence they haue been brought. The

land of Germanie is good, and fruitfull: but Tacitus ſaith, The trees and▪ fruits of the land in Port Royall.that in his time there were no fruit-trees.
               As for the trees of the foreſts the moſt common in Port Royall be Oakes, Elmes, aſhes, Birch (very good for Ioiners-worke) Mapels, Sicomores, Pine-trees, Firretrees, White-thornes, Hazell-trees, Willowes, Baytrees, Bay trees commonly grow in warme countries.and ſome others beſides which I haue not yet marked. There is in certaine places ſtore of Strawberries, and Raſpiſes. Item in the wooddes ſmall fruit, blew and redde. I haue ſeene there ſmall Peares very delicate: and in the meddowes all the winter long, there be certaine ſmal fruits like to ſmall apples coloured with redde, whereof wee made Marmelade, for to eate after meat. There beſtore of Gooſeberries like vnto ours, but they grow redde. Item thoſe other ſmal roūd gooſeberries which we do cal Guedres. And Peaſon in great quantitie along the ſea ſhoares, 
                     Guedres be a kinde of Corinthes.
                  the leaues whereof we tooke in Spring time, and put among our old Peaſon, and ſo it did ſeeme vnto vs that we did eate greene Peaſon. Beyond the ſaid Baie Françoiſe, that is to ſay, in the riuer S. Iohn, and Saint Croix, there is ſtore of Cedar trees, beſides thoſe trees that I haue named. As for them of the great riuer of Canada, they haue beene ſpecified in the ſecond booke, in the relation of the voyages of captaine Iames Quartier, & of Monſieur Champlein.
               
               
                  Trees of Florida.
                   Thoſe of Florida be Pyne trees (which beare no kernels in the fruits that they produce) Oakes, Wall-nut trees, blacke Cherrie trees, Lentiskes, Cheſt-nut trees (which be not naturall as in France) Cedar trees, Cypres trees, Palme trees, Holy trees, and Wilde vines, which climbe vp to the trees, and bring foorth good grapes. There is a kind of Medlers, the fruit whereof is better and bigger then that of France: there are alſo Plumbe trees which beare a very faire fruit, but not very good, Raſpiſes: A ſmall graine which we call with vs bleues (blewes) which are very good to bee eaten. Item roots which they call Haſſez, whereof in their neede they make bread.
               
                  
                  Trees of Braſill.
                   The prouince of Braſill hath taken her name, as wee thinke, of a certaine tree which we call Breſill, and the Sauages of the countrie Arabouton, it is high, and as bigge as our Oakes, and hath the leafe like to the Box leafe. Our French men and others doe goe into that countrie for to lade their ſhippes with it. The fire of it is almoſt without ſmoake. But hee that would thinke to whiten his linnen with the aſhes of that wood, would farre deceiue himſelfe. For he ſhould finde it died in redde. They haue alſo Palme trees of ſundry ſorts: And trees the wood whereof, of ſome, is yellow, and others violet. They haue alſo ſome that haue the ſent of Roſes, and others ſtinking, whoſe fruits are dangerous to be eaten. Item a kinde of Guayac which they name Hinouraé, which they vſe for to cure a diſeaſe called among them Pians, as dangerous as the Pox. The tree which beareth the fruit that wee call the Indian Nut, is called among them Sabaucaië. They haue alſo Cotten trees, of the fruit whereof they make beds, which they hang betweene two forks or poſts. This countrie is happie in many other ſorts of fruit trees, as Orenge trees, Citron trees, Leamon trees, and others, alwaies greene, whereby the loſſe of that countrie where the Frenchmen had begun to inhabite, is ſo much the more greeuous vnto them that loue the welfare of France. For it is more than euident, that the dwelling is there more pleaſant and delightfull then the land of Canada, for the temperature of the aire. True it is that the voiages thither are long, as of fower and fiue moneths, & that in performing of them ſomtimes wants muſt be endured, as may be ſeene by the The benefit of taking the ſeaſon of the yeare.voiages made thither in the time of Ville-gagnon: But to New France where we were, when one beginneth his voiage in due ſeaſon, the voiages are but of three weeks, or a moneth, which is but a ſmall time.
               If the ſweetneſſe and delicacies be not there, ſuch as they are in Perou, one muſt not ſay therefore that the countrie is nothing woorth. It is much that one may liue

there inreſt & ioyfully without taking care for ſuperfluous things. The couetuouſneſſe of men hath cauſed that no countrie is thought good, vnleſſe there be Mines of gold in it. And ſots as they be, they doe not conſider that the The deſpiſing of gold and ſiluer Mines.country of France is now vnfurniſhed of the ſame: And Germany alſo, whereof Tacitus ſaid, that he knew not whether the gods in their anger or in their fauour had denied gold and ſiluer to that Prouince. They doe not ſee that all the Indians haue not any vſe of ſiluer, and liue more contentedly then we. If we call them fooles they may ſay as much of vs, and peraduenture with better reaſon. They know not that God promiſing to his people a happy land he ſaith that it ſhall be a land of Corne, of Barly, of Vines, of Fig-trees, of Oliue-trees, and of Hony, where they ſhal Deut 8 v. 8 
                        •
                     .eat their bread without ſcarcity, &c. And for all mettels he giueth them but Iron and Copper, leaſt that gold and ſiluer make them to lift vp their heart, and forget their God: And he will not that when they ſhall haue kings they Deut. 17 v. 17.ſhould hoord vp much gold or ſiluer. They doe not conſider that Mines be the Church-yards of men: That the Spaniard hath conſumed therein aboue ten millions of poore Indian Sauages, inſtead of inſtructing them in the Chriſtian faith: That there be Mines in Italy, but that the Plin. l. 33. c. 4.
                  ancients would not giue leaue to worke in them for the preſeruation of the people: That in the Mines is a thicke aire, groſſe and infernall, where one neuer knoweth when it is day, or night: That to doe ſuch things is to ſeeke to diſpoſſeſſe the diuell of his kingdome. That it is a thing vnworthy to a man to bury himſelfe in the entrailes of the earth, to ſeeke out for hell, and miſerably to abaſe himſelfe vnder all vncleane creatures: He to whom God hath giuen an vpright forme, and his face looking vpward, for to behold the Heauen, and to ſing praiſes vnto him: That in Countries where Mines be, the land is barren: That we doe not eat neither gold nor ſiluer, and that the ſame of it ſelfe doth not keepe vs warme in Winter: That he which

hath Corne in his Barne, Wine in his ſeller, Cattell in his Medowes, and afterwards Codde-fiſh and Beuers, is more aſſured to haue gold and ſiluer, then he which hath Mines Mines in New France.to finde victuals. And neuertheleſſe there be Mines in New France, as we haue mentioned elſewhere. But that is not the firſt thing that one muſt ſeeke for, men doe not liue with opinion onely. And this conſiſteth but in opinion, nor the precious ſtones neither (which are fooles bables) wherin one is moſt often deceiued, ſo well art can counterfeit nature: witneſſe him that did ſell, ſome fiue or ſix yeeres ſince, veſſels for fine Emerald, and had made himſelfe rich by the folly of others, if he could haue plaied his part aright.
               
                  Fruites to be hoped for in New France. Now without making ſhew of any Mines, profit may be made in New France of diuers furres that be there, which I finde are not to be diſpiſed, ſeeing that we ſee ſo much enuy againſt a priuiledge that the King did grant to Monſieur de Monts for to helpe to eſtabliſh and ſettle there The like may be to England from Virginia.ſome French Colony. But there may be drawen a generall commodity to France, that in the ſcarſity, of victuals, one Prouince may ſuccour the other: which might be done now if the Country were well inhabited: ſeeing that ſince we haue beene there the ſeaſons haue alwaies beene good in it, and in theſe our parts rough to the poore, which doe die for hunger, and liueth but in want and penury: in ſtead that there many might liue at their eaſe, who it were better to preſerue then to ſuffer to periſh. Beſides fiſhing being made in New France, the New-found-land-ſhips ſhall Good conſiderations.haue nothing to doe but to lade, arriuing thither, in ſtead that they are forced to tarry three moneths there: and ſhal be able to make three voiage for one.
               Of exquiſit woods I know none there, but the Cedar and the Saſſafras: but good profit may be drawen from the Firre and Pruſe-trees, becauſe they will yeeld aboundance of gumme, and they die very often thorow ouer much liquor. This gumme is very faire like the Turpentine of Venice,

and very ſoueraigne for medicines. I haue giuen ſome to ſome Churches of Paris for Frankenſence, which hath beene found very good. One may moreouer furniſh the Citie of Paris and other places of France with Sope-aſhes, Sope aſhes.which at this preſent be all bare and without woods. They who finde themſelues afflicted may haue there a pleaſant place to retire themſelues into, rather then to yeeld themſelues ſubiect to the Spaniard, as many doe. So many families as be in France ouercharged with Children, may diuide themſelues, and take there their portion with thoſe ſmall goods and moueables as they haue. Then time will diſcouer ſome thing a new: and one muſt helpe all the world, if it be poſſible. But the chiefeſt good one muſt aime at, is the eſtabliſhment of Chriſtian religion, in a Country where God is not knowen, and the conuerſion of theſe poore people, whoſe damnation crieth vengance againſt them that may, and ought to employ themſelues thereto, and to contribute, at leaſt with their names, to that effect, ſeeing that they gather vp the fat of the earth, and are conſtituted Stewards of the things of this world.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               Of their Warre.
               OF poſſeſſing of land commeth warre: And when one hath eſtabliſhed himſelfe in New-France, ſome greedy fellow peraduenture will come to take away the labour of honeſt painefull men. This is that which many doe ſay. But the ſtate of France is (God be praiſed) too well ſetled, for to be affraid of ſuch trickes. We are not now in the time of leagues and partialties. There is none that will beginne with our king, nor make aduentuturous enterprizes for a ſmall purchaſe. And though any one would doe it, I beleeue that the remedies haue beene thought vpon alreadie. And moreouer this action is for religion, and not to take away anothers goods. This

being ſo, Faith maketh one to march bouldly with aſſurance, and to paſſe through all difficulties. For beholde what the Almightie ſaith by his Prophet Iſaiah to them whom he taketh in his tuition, and to the Frenchmen And by conſequent to the Engliſhmen of Virginia.of New-France: Harken vnto me you that follow Iuſtice, and that ſeeke after the Lord. Behold the rocke out of which you were cut, and to the deepe of the Ciſterne from whence you haue been drawen; That is to ſay, conſider that you are French-men. Looke to Abraham your father and to Sara who hath brought you foorth, how I haue called him he being all alone, and haue bleſſed and multiplied him. Therefore aſſuredly the Lord will comfort Sion &c.
               
                  To what end the Sauages doe make warre. Our Sauages doe not ground their wars vpon the poſſeſſion of the land. Wee doe not ſee that they encroatch one vpon another for that reſpect. They haue lande enough for to liue and for to walke. Their ambition is limited within their boundes. They make war as Alexander the great did make it, that they may ſay I haue beaten you: or elſe for reuenge in remembrance of ſome iniurie receaued, which is the greateſt vice that I find in them, becauſe they neuer forget iniuries: Wherein they are ſo much the more excuſable, becauſe they doe nothing but that which our ſelues doe alſo. They follow nature: And if wee refraine any thing of that inſtinct, it is the commandement of God which maketh vs to doe it; whereunto many doe ſtoppe their eies.
               Therefore when they will make warres, the Sagamos who hath moſt credit among them, maketh them to know the cauſe why, the rendez-vous, and time of the aſſembly. The Sauages Orations.Being arriued he maketh long orations vnto them vpon the occaſion which is offered and for to encourage them. At euery propoſition he demandeth their aduiſe, and if they giue conſent they all make an exclamation, ſaying Hau: if not, ſome Sagamos will beginne to ſpeake, and Surprizes of the Sauages.ſay what he thinketh good of it: being both the one and the other well heard. Their warres are made but by ſurprizes,

in the darke of the night, or by Moone-ſhine, by ambuſhments or ſubtiltie. Which is generall throughout all thoſe Indies. For we haue ſeene in the firſt booke in what faſhion the Floridians doe make warre: And the Braſilians doe no otherwiſe, And the ſurprizes being done they come to handie blowes, and doe fight very often by day.
               
                  The maner to foretell or▪ preſage the euent of the warre. But before they goe from home, ours (I meane the Souriquois) haue this cuſtome to make a fort▪ within which all the yongue men of the armie doe put themſelues: where being, the women come to compaſſe them about and to keepe them as beſieged. Seeing themſelues ſo enuironned they make ſailies, for to ſhunne and deliuer themſelues out of priſon. The women that keepe watch doe repulſe them, doe arreſt them, doe their beſt endeauour to take them. And if they be taken they lay loades at them, doe beate them, ſtrippe them, and by ſuch a ſucceſſe they take a good preſage of the warre they goe to make. If they eſcape it is an euill ſigne.
               They haue alſo another cuſtome concerning ſome one particular man, who bringing an enemies head, they make great feaſts, dances and ſongs for many daies: and whileſt theſe things be in doing they ſtrippe the Conqueror, & giue him but ſome bad ragge to couer himſelfe withall. But at the end of eight daies or there about, after the feaſt, euery one doth preſent himſelfe with ſome thing, to honour him for his valour.
               
                  Succeſſion of Captains. The Captaines amongſt them take their degree by ſucceſſion, as the regalitie in theſe our parts (which is to be vnderſtood if the Sonne of a Sagamos imitateth the vertues of his father) for otherwiſe they doe as in the old time when that firſt the people did chuſe kings: whereof Iohn de Meung Author of the Roman de la Roſe, ſpeaking hee ſaith: that, They chuſed the talleſt, that had the biggeſt body, and biggeſt bones amongst them, and made him their Prince and Lord. But this Sagamos hath not an abſolute

authoritie among them, but ſuch as Tacitus reporteth of the ancient Germaine Kings: the power of their Kings, ſaith he, is not free, nor infinite, but they conduct the people rather by example, then by commandement. In Virginia and in Florida they are more honoured then among The naturall Virginians doe honour their kings. The Sauages armes.the Souriquois.
                   But in Braſill he that hath taken and killed more priſoners they will take him for Captaine, and yet his children may not inherite that dignitie.
               Their armes are the firſt which were in vſe after the creation of the world, Clubbes, bowes, arrowes: for as for ſlings and Croſſe-bowes they haue none, nor any weapons of iron or ſteele, much leſſe thoſe that humane wit hath inuented ſince two hundred yeeres, to counterfaite the thunder: nor Rammes or other ancient engins of batterie.
               
                  Heeretofore the firſt book. chap. 15. They are very skilfull in ſhooting an arrow, and let that be for an example which is recited heeretofore of one that was killed by the Armouchiquois, hauing a little dogge pierced together with him with an arrow, ſhot a farre off. Yet I would not giue them the praiſes due to many nations of this hither world, which haue beene famous for that exerciſe, as the Scythians, Getes, Sarmates, Goths, Scots, Parthians, and all the people of the Eaſt, of whom a great number were ſo skilfull, that they had hit a haire: which the holy Scripture witneſſeth of many of Gods people, namely of the Beniamites, who going to warre Iudges ch. 10. verſ. 15. Eccellent Archers.againſt Iſrael: Of all this people (ſaith the Scripture) there was ſeuen huudred choſen men, being left-handed: all theſe could fling a ſtone at an haires breadth, and not faile. In Creete there was an Alcon ſo skilfull an archer, that a dragon carrying away his Sonne, he purſued after him and killed him without hurting his child. One may read of the Emperour Domitian that he could direct his arrow farre of between his two fingers, being ſpred abroad. The writings of the ancient make mention of many who ſhotte birds through, flying in the aire, and of other wonders

which our Sauages would admire at. But notwithſtanding they are gallant men and good warriers, who will goe through euery place being backt by ſome number of French-men: and, which is the ſecond thing next vnto courage, they can endure hardeneſſe in the warre, lie in the ſnow, and on the iſe, ſuffer hunger, and by intermiſſion feede themſelues with ſmoake, as we haue ſaid in the former chapter. For warre is called Militia, not From whence commeth this word malice, or Militia. Vlpian. l. 1. §. vlt. D. de. tiſtum. mil. Mat. 6. v. 34.out of the word Mollitia, as Vlpian the lawyer, and others would haue it, by an antiphraſticall manner of ſpeaking: But of Malitia which is as much to ſay as Duritia, Kakia: or of Afflictio, which the Greekes doe call Kakoſis. And ſo it is taken in Saint Mathew where it is ſaid that the day hath enough of his own griefe Kakia that is to 
                     ••
                  y his affliction, his paine, his labour, his hardeneſſe, as Saint Hierome doth expound it very well. And the word in S. Paul Kakopatheſon 
                  Hierom. opiſt. ad 247. Amand.
                  Hos kalos ſtratiotis Ieſon Chriſtion, had not beene ill tranſlated Dura, that is, Suffer affliction as a good ſouldier of Ieſus Chriſt, inſteed of Labora, harden thy ſelfe with patience, as it is in 
                     Ʋirgill,
                  
                     Durate, & rebus voſmet ſeruate ſecundis▪
                     
                  
               
               And in another place he calleth the Scipios Duros belli, to ſignifie braue and excellent Captaines: which hardnes and malice of warre Tertullian doth expound Imbonit as in the booke that he hath written to the Martirs, for to exhort them to ſuffer afflictions manfully for the name of Ieſus Chriſt: A ſouldier (ſaith he) cannot come to the wars with pleaſures, and he goeth not to the fight comming foorth from his chamber, but out oftents and pauillions ſtretched out, and tied to ſtalkes and forkes, Ʋbi omnis duritia & imbonit as & inſuauit as, where no pleaſure is.
               
               Now although the war which is made comming foorth out of tents and pauilions is hard, yet notwithſtanding the life of our Sauages is yet harder, and may be called a true milicia, that is to ſay, malice, which I take for hardneſſe. And after this maner doe they trauell ouer great countries

through the woods for to ſurpriſe their enemy and to aſſaile Subiect of the Sauages feare.him on the ſudden. This is that which keepeth them in perpetuall feare. For at the leaſt noiſe in the world, as of an Ellan which paſſeth among branches and leaues, they Heretofore cha. 17.take an alarme. They that haue townes after the maner that I haue deſcribed heeretofore, are ſomewhat more aſſured. For hauing well barred the comming in they may aske quiva là who goeth there? and prepare themſelues to the combat. By ſuch ſurpriſes the Iroquois being in number eight thouſand men, haue heeretofore exterminated the Algumequins, them of Hochelaga, and others bordering vpon the great riuer. Neuertheleſſe when our Sauages vnder the conduct of Membertou went to the warre againſt the Armouchiquois, they imbarked themſelues in ſhaloupes and Canowes: But indeed they did not enter within the Country, but killed them on their frontieres in the Port of Choüakoet. And for aſmuch as this war, the cauſe thereof, the counſell, the execution, and the end of it hath beene deſcribed by me in French verſes, which I haue annexed vnto my poem intituled the Muſes of New France I refer the reader to haue recourſe to it, becauſe I will not writ one thing twiſe. I will onely ſay that being at the riuer Saint Iohn, the Sagamos Chkoudun a Chriſtian and Frenchman, in will and courage, made a yong man of Retel, called Leſevre, and my ſelfe to ſee how they goe to the warres: And after their feaſt they came foorth ſome foure-ſcore out of his Towne, hauing laied downe their mantles of furre, that is to ſay ſtarke naked, bearing euery one a ſhield which couered all their body ouer, after the faſhion of the ancient Gaulois, who paſſed into Greece vnder the Captaine Brennus, of whom they that could not wade the riuers, did lay themſelues on their Bucklers, Their maner of marching to the wars. A martialldance.which ſerued them for Boates, as Pauſanias ſaith. Beſides theſe ſhieldes they had euery one his wodden mace, their quiuers on their backes, and their bow in hand: marching as it were in dancing wiſe. I doe not thinke for all

that, that when they come neere to the enemy for to fight, that they be ſo orderly as the ancient Lacedemonians, who from the age of fiue yeares were accuſtomed to a certaine maner of dancing, which they vſed going to fight, that is to ſay with a milde and graue meaſure, to the ſound of flutes, to the end to come to blowes with a coole and ſetled ſenſe, and not to trouble their mindes: to be able alſo to diſcerne them that were couragious from them that were fearefull, as Plutarch ſaith. But rather they goe furiouſly, 
                     Plutar. in the treaty of the refraining of cboler. and in the Apophth.
                  with great clamors and fearefull howlings, to the end to aſtoniſh the enemy, and to giue to themſelues mutuall aſſurance. Which is done amongſt all the Weſterly Indians▪
               
               In this muſtering our Sauages went to make a turne about a hill, and as their returne was ſomewhat ſlow, we tooke our way towards our barke, where our men were in feare, leaſt ſome wrong had beene done vnto vs.
               
                  How the Sauages doe vſe with the victory. In the victory they kill all that may make reſiſtance, but they pardon the women and children. The Braſilians contrariwiſe do take priſoners as many as they can, and reſerue them for to be fatnéd, to kill and to eat them in the firſt aſſembly they ſhall make. Which is a kinde of ſacrifice among thoſe people that haue ſome forme of religion, from whom thoſe men haue taken this inhumane cuſtome. For anciently they that were ouercome, were ſacrificed to the gods who were thought to be authours of the victory, whereof it came that they were called 
                     Ʋictimes, becauſe that they were ouercome: Victima à Victis: They were alſo called Hosties, ab Hoſte, becauſe they were enemies. They that did ſet foorth the name of Supplice did it almoſt vpon the ſame occaſion, cauſing ſupplications to be made to the Gods of the goods of them whom they condemned to death. Such hath beene the cuſtome among many Nations to ſacrifice the enemies to the falſe gods, and it was alſo practiſed in Perou in the time that the Spaniards came thither firſt.
               
                  
                  1. Samuel. 15. verſ. 33. We read in the holy Scripture, that the Prophet Samuel cut in peeces Agag king of the Amalekites, before the Lord in Gilgal. Which might bee found ſtrange, ſeeing that there was nothing ſo milde as this holy Prophet was. But one muſt cōſider heere that it was by a ſpecial motion of the ſpirit of God which ſtirred Samuel to make himſelfe executioner of the the Diuine Iuſtice againſt an enemie of the people of Iſrael, in ſteed of Saul, who had neglected the commandement of God, which was enioyned to ſmite Hamaleke and to put all to the edge of the ſword, without ſparing any liuing ſoule; which hee did not: and therefore was hee forſaken of God. Samuel then did that which Saul ſhould haue done, he cut in peeces a man who was condemned of God, who had made many widdowes in Iſrael, and iuſtly did receaue the like paiment: to the end alſo to fulfill the prophecie of Balaam, 
                  Num. 24. v. 7.who had foretold long before that the king of the Iſraelites ſhould be raiſed vp aboue Agag, and his kingdome ſhould be exalted. Now this action of Samuel is not without example. For when they were to appeaſe Exod. 32. v. 27. 1. King. 18. verſ. 40. Act. 5. v. 5.the wrath of God, Moyſes ſaid: Put euery man his ſword by his ſide: and ſlay euery man his brother, and euery man his companion, and euery man his neighbour. So Elijah made the Prophets of Baal to be killed. So at Saint Peters words Ananias and Saphira fell downe dead at his feete.
               Now to returne to our purpoſe, our Sauages as they haue no religion, ſo make they no ſacrifices: and beſides are more humane than the Braſilians, foraſmuch as they eate no mans fleſh, contenting themſelues to deſtroy them, that doe annoy them. But they haue ſuch a generoſitie in them, that they had rather die then to fall into the hands of their enemies. And when Monſieur de Poutrincourt tooke reuenge of the Armouchiquois, which murthered ſome of our men, there were ſome who ſuffered themſelues rather to bee hewed in peeces, then that they would bee carried away priſoners: or if by maine force

they be carried away, they will ſtarue or kill themſelues. Yea alſo they will not ſuffer the dead bodies of their people to remaine in the poſſeſſion of their enemies, and in the perill of their owne liues, they take them and carrie them away: which Tacitus doth alſo teſtifie of the ancient Germains, and it hath beene an vſuall thing with all generous nations.
               The victorie being gotten of one ſide or other, the victorious cutteth off the heads of the enemies ſlaine, how great ſoeuer the number of them is, which are diuided among the captaines, but they leaue there the carkaſe, contenting themſelues with the skinne, which they cauſe to bee dried, or doe tanne it, and doe make trophies with it in their cabins, taking therein all their contentment. And ſome ſolemne feaſt hapning among them (I call feaſt whenſoeuer they make Tabagie) they take them, and dance with them, hauing them hanging about their neckes at their armes, or at their girdles, and with very rage they ſometimes bite at them: which is a great proofe of this diſordinate appetite of reuenge, wherof we haue ſomtimes ſpoken.
               
                  Diodor. 6. booke Biblios. Tit. Liue. 1 decad. 10. booke.
                   Our ancient Gaullois did make no leſſe trophies with the heads of their enemies than our Sauages. For (if Diodorus and Titus Liuius may bee beleeued) hauing cut them, they bring them backe from the fielde hanging at the petrall of their horſes, and did tie or naile them ſolemnely, with ſonges and praiſes of the vanquiſhers (according to their cuſtomes) at their gates, as one would doe a wilde boares. As for the heads of the nobles Strabo lib. 4. Geogr.they did enbalme them and kept them carefully within caſes, for to make ſhewe of them to thoſe that come to ſee them, and for nothing in the world they would reſtore them, neither to kinſemen nor any other. The Boians (which bee the Bourbonnois) did Idem lib. 3. Decad. 3.
                  more. For after they had taken out the braines, they did giue the skuls to Goldſmiths for to garniſh them with

gold, and to make veſſels of them to drinke in, which they vſed in ſacred things and holy ſolemnities. If any man thinketh this ſtrange, he muſt yet finde more ſtrange that which is reported of the Hungarians by Viginere vpon Titus Liuius, of whom he ſaith, that in the yeere 1566. being neere Iauarin, they did licke the bloud of the Turkes heads which they brought to the Emperor Maximilian: which goeth beyond the barbarouſneſſe that might bee obiected to our Sauages.
               Yea I muſt tell you that they haue more humanity then many Chriſtians, who within theſe hundred yeeres haue committed in diuers occurrences, vpon women and children cruelties more then brutiſh, whereof the hiſtories be full: and our Sauages doe extend their mercie to theſe two ſortes of creatures.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               Of their funerals.
               THe warre being ended, humanity doth inuite vs to bewaile for the dead, and to bury them. It is a worke wholy of pietie, and more meritorious then any other. For he that giueth ſuccour to a man whilſt he is a life may hope for ſome ſeruice of him, or a reciprocall kindneſſe: But from a dead creature wee can expect nothing more: This is that which made that holy man Tobie to be acceptable to God: And for that good office, they that employed themſelues in the burying of our Sauiour are praiſed in the Goſpell. As for teares and mournings Eccles. 38. ve. 16. 17.behold what ſaith the wiſe Sonne of Sirach, My Sonne power forth teares ouer the dead, and begin to mourne as if thou hadſt ſuffered great harme thy ſelfe: and then couer his body according to his appointment, and neglect not his buriall. Make a grieuous lamentation, and be earnest in mourning, and vſe lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, leaſt thou be euill ſpoken off.
               
               
                  
This leſſon being come, whether it be by ſome tradition, or by the inſtinct of nature, as farre as to our Sauages, they haue yet at this day that common with the nations of theſe parts to weepe for the dead, and to keepe the bodies of them after their deceaſe, as it was done in the time of the holy Patriarches Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, and ſince. But they make ſtrange clamours many daies together, as we ſaw in Port Royall, ſome monthes after our arriuall into that country (to wit in Nouember) where they made the funerall ceremonies for one of theirs, named Panonic who had taken ſome marchandiſes out of Monſieur de Monts his ſtore houſe, and went to trucke with the Armouchiquois. This Panoniac was killed, and the body brought backe into the cabins of the Riuer Saint Croix, where our Sauages did both weepe for him and enbalmed him. Of what kinde this balme is, I could not know, not being able to enquire of it vpon the places. I beleeue they iagge the dead corpſes and make them to dry. Certaine it is that they preſerue them from rottenneſſe: which thing they doe almoſt throughout all theſe Indies. He that hath written the hiſtory of Virginia ſaith that they Virginia.draw out their entralles from the body, flea the dead, take away the skinne, cut all the fleſh off from the bones, drie it at the Sunne, then lay it (encloſed in mattes) at the feete of the dead. That done they giue him his owne skinne againe, & couer therewith the bones tied together with leather, faſhioning it euen ſo as if the fleſh had remained at it.
               It is a thing well knowen that the ancient Aegyptians did enbalme the dead bodies, and kept them carefully. Which (beſides the prophane Authours) is ſeene in the holy Scripture, where it is ſaid that Ioſeph did commande his Seruants and Phiſitions to embalme the body of Iacob 
                  Geneſ▪ 50. v. 5his father. Which he did according to the cuſtome of the country. But the Iſraelites did the like, as it is ſeene in the 2. Paralip▪
                      16 v. 14. &. 21. verſ. 19.holy Chronicles, where it is ſpoken of the death of the kings Asa and Ioram.
               
               
                  
From the Riuer of Saint Croix the ſaid deceaſſed Panoniac was brought into Port Royall, where againe he was wept for. But becauſe they are accuſtomed to make their lamentations for a long continuance of daies, as during a month fearing to offend vs by their cries (for as much as their cabins were but ſome fiue hundred paſſes off from our forte) Membertou came to intreat Monſieur de Poutrincourt not to diſlike that they ſhould mourne after their wonted manner, and that they would be but eight daies in performing of it. Which he eaſily granted them: And then afterwards they began the next day following, at the breake of day, their weepings and cryings, which we did heare from our ſaid fort, taking ſome intermiſſion on the middeſt of the day. And they mourne by intermiſſion euery cabin his day, and euery perſon his turne.
               It is a thing woorthy maruelling that nations ſo far diſtant doe agree in thoſe ceremonies with many of the hether world. For in ancient times the Perſians (as we read in many places of Herodotus, and Q. Curtius did make ſuch lamentation, did rent their garments, did couer their heads, did cloath themſelues with a mourning garment, which the holy Scripture doth call Sackcloth, and Ioſephus Schema tapeinon. Alſo they ſhaued themſelues, and their horſes and mules, as the learned Druſius hath noted in Eſter. 4. v. Druſ. obſeru. 12. cap. 6.his obſeruations, alleaging for this purpoſe both Herodote and Plutarch.
               
               The Aegyptians did as much, and peraduenture more, in that which concerneth lamentations. For after the death of the holy I Fatriarke Iacob, All the ancients, men of calling, and the Counſellers of the houſe of Pharao, and of the Countrie of Aegypt went vp in great multitude euen as far as to the corne floore of Atad in Canaan, and did weepe for him with great and grieuous complaints: In ſuch ſort that the Cananites ſeeing it did ſay: This mourning is grieuous to the Aegyptians: and for the greatneſſe and nouelty of the ſame mourning they called the ſaid floore

                  Abel Miſraim, that is to ſay the mourning of the Aegyptians.
               
               The Romans had hired women to weepe for the dead, and to relate their praiſes by long mournefull complaints: and thoſe women were called Praeficae, as it were Praefectae, becauſe that they did beginne the motion when it was needefull to lament, and to relate the praiſes of the dead.
               
                  Mercede quae conductae flent alieno in funere preficae multo & capillos ſcindunt, & clamant magis, ſaith Lucilius by the report of Nonius: Sometimes the very trumpets were not neglected at it, as 
                     Ʋirgill teſtifieth in theſe words:

                     It coelo clamor, clangórque tubarum.
                  
               
               I will not heere make a collection of all the cuſtomes of other nations: for it would neuer be at an end: But in France euery one knoweth that the women of Picardy do lament their dead with great clamors. Monſieur des Accords amongſt other things by him collected reciteth of one, who making her funerall complaints, that ſhe ſaid to her deceaſſed husband: Good God! My poore husband thou haſt giuen vs a pittifull farewell! O what farewell! It is for euer. O what long congie! The women of Bearn are yet more pleaſant. For they recount during the time of a whole day the whole life of their husbands. Lamiamou, la mi amou: Cara rident, oeil de ſplendou: Cama leugé bet danſadou: lo mé balen balem, lo m'eſburbat: mati de pes: fort tard cougat: and ſuch like things: That is to ſay; My loue, my loue: ſmiling countenance: bright eie: nimble legge: and good dancer: mine owne valiant, mine owne valiant: early vp, and late a bedde &c. Iohn de Leri reciteth that which followeth of the Gaſcoin women: yere, yere, ô le bet renegadou, ô le bet iougadou qu'here, that is to ſay: ô the braue ſwaggeren, ô what a faire player he was! And thereupon he reporteth that the women of Braſill doe howle and bawle with ſuch clamors, that it ſeemeth that it be ſome aſſembly of dogges and woolues. He is dead (will ſome women

ſay drawing their voices) he was ſo valiant, and who hath made vs to eat of ſo many priſoners: Others making a Quire apart will ſay: Oh what a good hunter and what The Tovoupinambaoults are enemies to the Portuges.
                  an excellent fiſher he was! Oh what a braue knocker down of Portuges and of Margaias he was! of whom he hath ſo well auenged vs. And at the pauſe of euery complaint they will ſay: he is dead, he is dead for whom we do now mourne! whereunto the men doe anſwer, ſaying: Alas it is true! we ſhall ſee him no more vntill we ſee him behinde The Braſilians beleeue the reſurre. ction.the mountaines where we ſhall dance with him! and other ſuch things. But the moſt part of theſe people doe end their mourning in one day, or ſome what more.
               As for the Indians of Florida, when any of their Paraouſtis dieth they weepe three daies and three nights continually and without eating: And all the Paraouſtis, that be his allies and friendes, doe the like mourning, cutting halfe their haires as well men as women in token of loue. And that done there be ſome women ordained, who during the time of ſix Moones doe lamente the death of their Paraousti three times a day, crying with a loud voice, in the morning, at noone, and at night: which is the faſhion of the Roman Praefices, of whom we haue, not long ſince, ſpoken.
               For that which is of the mourning apparell, our Souriquois doe paint their faces all with blacke; which maketh them to ſeeme very hidious: But the Hebrewes were more reprouable, who did ſcotch their faces in the time of mourning, Ierem. 41. v. 3.and did ſhaue their haires, as ſaith the Prophet Ieremie: which was vſuall among them of great antiquity: By reaſon whereof the ſame was forbidden them by the Leuit. 19. v. 27. 28.law of God in Leuiticus: You ſhall not cut round the corners of your haires, neither marre the tufts of your beards, and you ſhall not cut your fleſh for the dead, nor make any print of a 
                  Deut. 14. 1.
                  marke vpon you. I am the Lord. And in Deuteronomie: you are the children of the Lord your God, you ſhall not cut your ſelues, nor make any baldneſſe betweene your eies for the dead.
                  
Which was alſo forbidden by the Romans in the lawes of the twelue tables.
               
                  Herodotus and Diodorus doe ſay, that the Aegyptians (chiefly in their Kings funerals) did rent their garments, and beſmeered their faces, yea all their heads: and aſſembling themſelues twiſe a day, did march in round, ſinging the vertues of their King: did abſtaine from ſodden meats, from liuing creatures, from wine, and from all daintie fare during the ſpace of 70. daies, without any waſhing▪ nor lying on any bed, much leſſe to haue the company of their wiues: alwaies lamenting.
               The ancient mourning of our Queenes of France (for as for our Kings they weare no mourning apparell) was in white colour, and therefore after the death of their huſbands they kept the names of Roines blanches (white Queenes.) But the common mourning of others is, at this day in blacke, qui ſub perſonariſus eſt. For all theſe mournings are but deceits, and of a hundred there is not one but is glad of ſuch a weed. This is the cauſe that the ancient Soli
                        •
                     , cap. 17. Valer. li. 2. c. 1▪
                  
                  Thracians were more wiſe, who did celebrate the birth of man with teares, and their funerals with ioy, ſhewing that by death we are deliuered from all calamities, wherewith we are borne, and are in reſt. Heraclides ſpeaking of the Locrois, ſaith, that they make not any mourning for the dead, but rather banckets and great reioycing. And the wiſe Solon knowing the foreſaid abuſes doth aboliſh all thoſe renting of cloathes, of thoſe weeping fellowes, and would not that ſo many clamors ſhould be made ouer the dead, as Plutarch ſaith in his life. The Chriſtians yet more wiſe did in ancient time ſing Alleluia at their burials, and this verſe of the Pſalme, Reuertere anima mea in requiem tuam, 
                  Pſal. 11
                        •
                     . v. 7
                  quia Dominus benefecit tibi,
               
               
                  And now my ſoule ſith thou art ſafe,
                  returne vnto thy reſt:
                  For largely loe the Lord to thee,
                  his bounty hath expreſt.
               
               
                  
Notwithſtanding becauſe that we are men, ſubiect to ioy, to griefe, and to other motions and perturbations of minde, which at the firſt motion are not in our power, as ſaith the Philoſopher, weeping is not a thing to be blamed, whether it be in conſidering our fraile condition, and ſubiect to ſo many harmes, be it for the loſſe of that which we did loue and held deerely. Holy perſonages haue bene touched with thoſe paſſions, and our Sauiour himſelfe wept ouer the Sepulchre of Lazarus, brother to the holy Magdalein. But one muſt not ſuffer himſelfe to be carried away with ſorrow, nor make oſtentations of clamors, wherewith very often▪ the heart is neuer a whit touched. Whereupon the wiſe ſonne of Sirach doth giue Ecel. 22. v. 11vs an aduertiſement, ſaying: Weepe for the dead, for he hath loſt the light [of this life] but make ſmall weeping, becauſe he is in reſt.
               
               
                  The Sauages doe burne the moouable goods of the deceaſed. After that our Sauages had wept for Panoniac, they went to the place where his cabin was whilſt hee did liue, and there they did burne all that hee had left, his bowes, arrowes, quiuers, his Beuers skinnes, his Tabacco (without which they cannot liue) his dogs and other his ſmall mooueables, to the end that no body ſhould quarrell for his ſucceſſion. The ſame ſheweth how little A faire leſſon for the Couetous.they care for the goods of this world, giuing thereby a goodly leſſon to them who by right or wrong doe runne after this ſiluer diuell, and very often doe breake their necks, or if they catch what they deſire, it is in making bankerout with God, and ſpoiling the poore, whether it be with open warre, or vnder colour of iuſtice. A faire leſſon I ſay to thoſe couetous vnſatiable Tantaluſſes, who take ſo much paines, and murther ſo many creatures to ſeeke out hell in the depth of the earth, that is to ſay, the Luk. 16. 9. Hierom. epiſt. 2. ad Nepotian.
                  treaſures which our Sauiour doth call the Riches of iniquitie. A faire leſſon alſo for them of whom Saint Hierome ſpeaketh, treating of the life of Clearks: There bee ſome (ſaith he) who doe giue a little thing for an alme, to the
                  
                  end to haue it againe with great vſurie; and vnder colour of giuing ſome thing, they ſeeke after riches, which is rather a hunting than an almes: So are beaſts, birds, and fiſhes taken. A ſmall bait is put to a hooke to the end to catch at it ſilly womens purſes. And in the Epitaph of Nepotian to Heliodore: Some (ſaith he) doe heape money vpon money, and making their purſes to burst out by certaine kinde of ſeruices, they catch at a ſuare the richeſſe of good matrons, and become richer being Monkes, then they were being ſecular. And for this couetouſneſſe the regular and ſecular haue beene by imperiall Edicts, excluded from legacies, whereof the ſame doth complaine, not for the thing, but for that the cauſe thereof hath beene giuen.
               Let vs come againe to our burning of goods. The firſt people, that had not yet couetouſneſſe rooted in their hearts, did the ſame as our Sauages do. For the Phrygians (or Troyians) did bring to the Latins the vſe of burning, not onely of mooueables, but alſo of the dead bodies, making high piles of wood for that effect, as Aeneas did in the funerals of Miſenus:
                  
                     
                        Virgil. 6. Aeneid.—& robore ſecto
                     Ingentem ſtruxere pyram—
                  
Then the body being waſhed and annointed, they did caſt all his garments vpon the pile of wood, frankincenſe, meats, and they powred on it oile, wine, honie, leaues, flowers, violets, roſes, ointments of good ſmell, and other things, as may be ſeene by ancient hiſtories and inſcriptions. And for to continue that which I haue ſaid of Miſenus, Virgil doth adde:
               
                  Purpureáſque ſuper veſtes, velamina nota
                  Conijciunt: pars ingenti ſubiere feretro, &c.
                  —congeſta cremantur
                  Thura, dona, dapes, fuſo crateres oliuo.
               
               
                  
                     Aeneid. 1
                        •
                     . And ſpeaking of the funerals of Pallas a young Lord, friend to Aeneas:
               
               
                  Tum geminas vestes, oſtróque, auróque rigentes,
                  
                     
Extulit Aeneas—
                  Multaque praeterea laurentis praemia pugnae
                  Aggerat, & longo praedam iubet ordine duci:
                  Addit equos & tela, quibus ſpoliaverat hoſtem.
               
               
                  And vnderneath:
                  Spargitur & tellus lachrimis, ſparguntur & arma.
                  Hinc alij ſpolia occiſis direpta Latinis
                  Conijciunt igni, galeas, enſéſque decoros,
                  Fraenáque feruent eſque rotas: pars munera nota
                  Ipſorum clypeos, & non faeliciatela,
                  Setigeróſque ſues, raptáſque ex omnibus agris
                  In flammam iugulant pecudes—
               
               
                  1. Samuel, laſt chap. In the holy Scripture I finde but the bodies of Saul and of his Sonnes to haue beene burnt after their ouerthrow, but it is not ſaid that any of their mooueables were caſt into the fire▪
               
               The old Gaullois and Germains did burne with the dead bodie all that which he had loued, euen to the very beaſts, papers of accounts and obligations, as if by that meanes they would either haue paied, or demanded their 
                     Caeſar in the 6. booke of the warre of the Gaullois.
                  debts. In ſuch ſort, that a little before that Caeſar came thither, there was ſome that did caſt themſelues vpon the pile where the body was burned, in hope to liue elſe where with their kinred, Lords, and friends. Concerning the Germains, Tacitus ſaith the ſame of them in thoſe termes: Quae viuis cordi fuiſſe arbrit antur in ignem inferunt etiam animalia, ſeruos, & clientes.
               
               Theſe faſhions haue beene common anciently to many nations, but our Sauages are not ſo fooliſh as that: for they take good heede from putting themſelues into the fire, knowing that it is to hot. They content themſelues then in burning the dead man his goods: And as for the body they put him honourably in the graue. This Panoniac of whom wee haue ſpoken was kept in the cabin of Niguiroet, his father, and of Neguioadetch, his mother, vntill the Spring time, when that the aſſembly of the Sauages

was made for to goe to reuenge his death: In which aſſembly he was yet wept for, and before they went to the warres they made an end of his funerals, and carried him (according to their cuſtome) into a deſolate Ilande, towardes Cap de Sable, ſome fiue and twenty or thirtie leagues diſtant from Port Royall. Thoſe Iſles which doe ſerue them for Church-yardes are ſecret amongſt them, for feare ſome enemy ſhould ſeeke to torment the bones of their dead.
               
                  
                     Plin. l. 7. 
                        •
                     . 56. 
                  Pliny, and many others, haue eſteemed that it was fooliſhneſſe to keepe dead bodies vnder a vaine opinion that after this life one is ſomething. But one may apply vnto him that which Portius Feſtus Gouernour of Caeſarea did fooliſhly ſay to the Apoſtle Saint Paul: Thou art beſides 
                  Act. 26. v. 34.
                  thy ſelfe: much learning hath made thee mad. Our Sauages are eſteemed very brutiſh (which they are not) but yet they haue more wiſedome in that reſpect then ſuch Philoſophers.
               We Chriſtians doe commonly bury the dead bodies, that is to ſay, we yeeld them to the earth (called Humus, from whence commeth the word Homo a Man) from which they were taken, and ſo did the ancient Romans before the cuſtome of burning them. Which amongſt the Weſt Indians the Braſilians doe, who put their dead into pits digged after the forme of a tunne, almoſt vpright, ſometimes in their owne houſes, like to the firſt Romans, according as Seruius the Commentor of Virgill doth ſay. But our ſauages as far as Perou do not ſo, but rather do keepe them whole in Sepulchers, which be in many places as ſcaffoldes of nine and ten foote height. the rooffe wherof is all couered with mattes, whereuponthey ſtretch out their dead rancked according to the order of their deceaſe. So almoſt our Sauages doe, ſauing that their ſepulchers are leſſer and lower, made after the forme of Cages, which they couer very properly, and there they lay their dead.

Which we call to bury, and not to interre ſeeing they are not within the earth.
               Now although that many nations haue thought good to keepe the dead bodies: yet it is better to follow that which nature requireth, which is, to render to the earth that which belongeth vnto her, which (as Lucrece ſaith)

                     Omniparens eadem rerum est commune ſepulchrum
                  
               
               
                  
                     Tul. in the 2 booke of the lawes which Xenophon aleadgeth. Alſo this is the ancienteſt faſhion of burying, ſaith Cicero: And that great Cirus King of the Perſians would not be otherwiſe ſerued after his death then to be reſtored to the earth: ô my deare children! (ſaid he before he died) When I haue ended my life, doe not put my bodie, neither in gould nor in ſiluer, nor in any other ſepulcher, but render it foorthwith to the earth. For what may be more happy and more to be deſired then to ioine himſelfe with her that produceth and nouriſheth all good and faire things? So did he eſteeme for vanity all the pompes and exceſſiue expences of the Pyramides of Aegypt, of the Mauſolees and other monuments made after that imitation: As the ſame of Auguſtus, the Great, and magnificall maſſe of Adrian, the Septizone of Seuerus, and other yet leſſer, not eſteeming himſelfe after death more then the meaneſt of his Subiects.
               The Romans did leaue the entombing of the bodies, hauing perceiued that the long warres did bring diſorder vnto it, and that the dead corps were vnburied, which Arnob. lib. 8.
                  by the lawes of the twelue Tables it was behoouefull to bury out of the towne, like as they did in Athens. Wherupon Arnobius ſpeaking againſt the Gentils: Wee doe not feare (ſaith he) as you thinke, the ranſacking of our graues, but wee keepe the moſt ancient and beſt cuſtome of burying.
               
               
                  Pauſanias (who blameth the Gaullois as much as he can) ſaith in his Phociques, that they had no care to bury their dead, but we haue ſhewed the contrary heeretofore: And though it were ſo, he ſpeaketh of the ouerthrow of the army of Brennus. The ſame might haue beene ſaid of the Nabateens, Who (according to Strabo) did that

which Pauſanias doth obiect to the Gaullois, and buried the bodies of their kinges in dunghils.
               Our Sauages are more kinde then ſo, and haue all that which the office of humanitie may deſire, yea euen more. For after they haue brought the dead to his reſt, euery one maketh him a preſent of the beſt thing he hath. Some doe couer him with many skinnes of Beuers, of Otters and other beaſtes: others preſent him with bowes, arrowes, quiuers, kniues, Matachiaz, and other thinges. Which they haue in common, not onely with them of Florida, who for want of furres, doe ſet vpon the ſepulchers the cuppe wherein the deceaſſed was accuſtomed to drinke, and all about them they plant great number of arrowes: Item they of Braſill who doe bury with their dead, thinges made of feathers and Carkenets: and they of Perou, who (before the comming of the the Spaniardes) did fill their tombes with treaſures: But alſo with many nations of theſe our partes, which did the ſame euen from the firſt time after the floud, as may be coniectured by the writing (though deceitfull) of the Sepulcher of Semiramis Queene of Babylon, containing that he of her ſucceſſors that had neede of mony ſhould make it to be opened, and that he ſhould finde there euen as much as he would haue. Whereof Darius willing to make triall, found in it nothing elſe but other letters ſpeaking in this ſorte: 
                     Ʋnleſſe thou wert a wicked man and vnſatiable thou wouldst not haue, through couetouſneſſe, ſo troubled the quiet of the dead, and broken downe their Sepulchers. I would thinke this cuſtome to haue beene onely among the Heathen, were it not that I finde in Ioſephus his hiſtory that 
                     Ioſeph. 7. booke 12 th. of the antiquity of the Iewes.
                  Salomon did put in the Sepulcher of Dauid his father aboue three millions of gould, which were rifled thirteene hundred yeeres after.
               This cuſtome to put gould into the Sepulchers being come euen to the Romans, was forbidden by the twelue tables, alſo the exceſſiue expences that many did make in

watering the bodies with precious liquors, and other myſteries that we haue recited heeretofore. And notwithſtanding many ſimple and fooliſh men and women did ordaine by will and teſtament, that one ſhould bury with their bodies their ornamentes, ringes, and iewels (which the Greekes did call entaphia) as there is a forme ſeene of L. Medico. D de auro, arg. &c. leg. L. feruo alieno. D. de leg. 1. L. & ſiquis. D. de relig. & ſump. fun.it, reported by the lawyer Scaeuola in the bookes of the Digeſtes. Which was reprooued by Papiniam and Vlpian likewiſe ciuill lawyers: in ſuch ſort that for the abuſe thereof the Romans were conſtrained to cauſe that the Cenſors of the womens ornamentes did condemne, as ſimple and effeminated, them that did ſuch thinges, as Pluturch ſaith in the liues of Solon and Sylla. Therefore the beſt courſe is to keepe the modeſty of the ancient Patriarches, and euen of king Cyrus, whom we haue mentioned before, on whoſe tombe was this inſcription, reported by Arrian.
               
               
                  Thou that paſſest by, whomſoeuer thou beeſt, and from what parte ſoeuer thou commeſt, for I am ſure that thou wilt come: I am that Cyrus who got the dominion to the Perſians: I pray thee enuie not this little parcell of grounde which couereth my poore body.
               
               So then our Sauages are not excuſable in putting all the beſt ornamentes they haue into the Sepulchers of the dead, ſeeing they might reape commodity by them. But one may anſwer for them that they haue this cuſtome euen from their fathers beginning (for we ſee that almoſt from the very time of the floud the like hath beene done in this hither world) and giuing to their dead their furres, Matachias, Bowes, Arrowes, and Quiuers, they were thinges that they had no neede of.
               And notwithſtanding this doth not cleere the Spaniardes from blame, who haue robbed the Sepulchers of the Indians of Perou, and caſt the bones on the dunghill: nor

our owne men that haue done the like, in taking away the Beuers skinne, in our New-France, as I haue ſaid heeretofore. 
                     Heeretofore 1. booke. ch. 17.
                     I ſidor. ad Caſium ſcholasticum, Epiſt. 146.
                     
                  
               
               
                  For as Iſodorus ſaith of Damiette in an Epiſtle: It is the parte of enemies voide of all humanitie to robbe the bodies of the dead, which cannot defende themſelues, Nature it ſelfe hath giuen this to many, that hatred doth ceaſſe after death, and doe reconcile themſelues with the deceaſſed. But riches make the couetous to become enemies to the dead, againſt whom they haue nothing to ſay, who torment their bones with reproach and iniury. And therefore not without cauſe haue the ancient Emperors made lawes, and ordained rigorous paines againſt the ſpoilers and deſtroiers of Sepulchers.
               
            
            All praiſes be giuen to God.
         
      
      
         
            The Errata.
            
               PAge 8. for Ile of Sand or Sablon, or Sand. read Ile of Sablon or Sand. p. 9. for Pourtrincourt r. Poutrincourt, p. 14. for Peron r. Perou. p. 42. for haue raiſed r. haue beene raiſed, ib, for toones r. tonnes. p. 52. for Point r. Pont.
         
      
   