
      
         
            
            
            AN ITALIAN GRAMMER; VVRITTEN IN LATIN BY SCIPIO LENTVLO A NEAPOLITANE:
            And turned in Engliſhe: By H. G.
            
            
               Imprinted at London by Thomas Ʋautroullier dwelling in the Blackefrieres.
            
            1575.
            
               〈2… pages missing〉
            
         
         
            
            
               therin all the rules that may ſerue for the better vnderſtanding of that tonge, are ſo well ſet forth, and in ſo good ordre diſpoſed, with ſo apt examples, and with that breuitie and facilitie, as none other written before of that matter in any tonge that I haue ſeene, as I haue ſeene diuerſe, is (in my iudgment) comparable vnto it. Now ſuche as it is, rudely attired with this engliſhe habit, I betake vnto your fauorable acceptance as a token of the dutifull good will I beare you. And as a pledge of the ſeruice and dutie I owe to your parentes. And ſo humble I take my leaue. the 4, of December 1574.
            
               Yours vvholy at commaundement
HENRY GRANTHAN.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Letters.
            The letters vvhiche the Italians vſe, are tvventy. A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, Ʋ, Z.
            
            Theſe are deuided in to vouelles, A, E, I, O, V: & into conſonantes, vvhich are the reſt.
            Hovvbeit, H is no letter: but a ſigne of aſpiration, or dravving of the breathe.
            But 
                  Ʋ, is ſomtymes a conſonant: as in theſe vvordes. Vênere, Venus: Verità, Truthe: Virtù, Vertue: Vità, Lyfe.
            The like is I, for although the letter G, be added to vvords, that vvith the latins do begin vvith Iu or Ia, Io or Ie: as in Giouànni, Iohne: Giùsto, Iuſt: Giesù, Ieſus: Giàſone, Iaſon: yet in pronouncing of the latter vouel the ſounde is onely harde And the firſt cōſonant by that means is in reaſon conceiued
         
         
            Of the vſe of the Letters.
            Firſt of letters are framed ſyllables, and of ſyllables are made vvordes, and that of diuerſe diuerſly.
            
               
Vouelles may be put in the begynning, middeſt, and ende of a vvorde: as dothe appere by this vvorde, Amore, Loue.
            But cōſonantes are ſet, either in the begynning, or in the middeſt of a vvorde, and in thende very ſeldom, as hereafter is ſhevved.
            Further, many conſonantes are put in ſyllables, before other conſonantes: as B, before R, in brèue in bryefe: Ténebre, Darkneſſe: Libro, a Booke. And before L, as in Oblio, Forgeatfulneſſe: Obliquo, Croked: Obligò, Bonde or duty.
            
               C before R, as in Crudelè, Cruell: Credo, I beleue: And before L, as in Clamòre, Clamour or crying out: Inclito, Renoumed: Inclinato and Inchinato, Inclined: Conclùdo and Conchiudo, I conclude: ſo Concluſione and not Conchiuſione, is rightly ſaide.
            
               D before R, as in Dritto, Right: Padre, a Father: Madre, a Mother: Ladro, a Theefe.
            
               F before R, as in Frutto, Frute: Fratello, a Brother: Fraude, Fraude or diſceite.
            
               G before N, as in Benigno, benigne: ordigno, an inſtrument: Ingegno, vvyt: Lamagna, Almaigne: Compagno, a compaignion. And before R, as in Gratia, grace or fauour: Gràto, thankefull: Gràue, grave. And before L, as in Gloria, glorye: Conſiglio, Counſaile.
            
               P before R, as in Prègio, the price: Sèmpre, alvvays: Prudente, prudent: Lèpre, a hare. And before L,
               
as in Contèmplo, I do contemplate, or beholde diligently: Multiplico, I do multiply.
            
               S before B, as in Sbaſſamēto, an imbaſing: Shandito, a baniſhed man. And before C, as in Scacciàto, put avvay: Naſco I ſpring or am borne: Paſco, I feede. And before D, as in Sdègno, anger or diſdain: Sdrucito, rypte. And before F, as in Sfacèndato, vnoccupied: Sfodràto, dravvne or vnſheathed (as a ſvvorde). And before G, as in Sgomento, I feare: Sganno, I do deliuer from diſceite. And before L, as in Sleàle, vnfaithfull: Slegato, vnbounde. And before M, as Smembràto, diſmēbred: Smorto, pale or vvanne. And before N, as in Snèruo, to debilitate or make feoble: Snello, nymble: Snòdo, I do vnknitt. And before P, as in Spirito, a ſpirit: Speranza, hope. And before Q, as in Squàlido, ſluttiſhe: Squàme, the ſkale of a fiſhe. And before R, as in Sregolato, vnruled. And before T, as in Studio, ſtudye.
            
               T before R, as in Trèmo, I tremble: Trònco, the ſtumpe or ſtem of a tree: Tranquillità, tranquillitye or reſt.
            But the letter Z, neither goeth before, neither yet follovveth an other conſonant in one ſelfe ſyllable.
            Further, tovvching that vvhiche belongethe to the letters, it is very neceſſary to knovve, by vvhat reaſon the letters conſonantes are doubled in a vvorde: the vvhiche I vvill ſhevve by ordre of the

letters as briefly as I can, that therby the ſame may the more eaſely be commytted to memory.
            
               B, therfore is doubled in thes vvordes, Dubbio, a doubt: Dèbbo, I ought, alſo Deggio: Sàbbia, grauell: Scàbbia, the ſkabbe: Abbète, a fyr tree: Hàbbia, he hathe, and alſo Hàggia: Robba, gooddes. & it is ſayde, Rubàre, to ſteale: But Làbbro, a lippe: Fabbro, a carpenter: Libbro, a booke: Ebbro, drōke: maye either be vvritten thus, or vvith a ſingle B. It is alſo doubled in the thirde perſonnes ſingular and plurall of the preter imperfectenſe of the ſubiunctiue mode: as Amerèbbe & Amerèbbono, Valerèbbe & Valerèbbono, Leggerèbbe, & Leggerèbbono, Vdirèbbe & Vdirèbbono: that is, he ſhold loue, they ſhold loue, he ſhold be vvorth, they ſhold be vvorth: he ſhold reade, thy ſhold reade: he ſhold heare, they ſhold heare. Againe it is doubled in this vvorde Obbietto, vvhiche is alſo ſaide Oggètto, that is, the obiect. Alſo in many verbes, vvhich are compound vvith the prepoſitiō 
               Ad, changing the letter D, into B, vvher vvith the ſimple vvordes do begyn, as Abbàrbaglio, that is, I do daſell: Abbràccio, I do imbrace: There is excluded Abòndo, that is, I do abbounde: & Abandóno, I do forſake.
            
               C is doubled in thes vvordes, vvhiche are taken from the latin, hauing the letter X, in the firſt ſyllable: and of excellens, is made Eccèllente, of excepto, Eccètto, and of exceptio, Eccettione. And in thes

vvordes Occhio an eye, Ginocchio, a knee: vvhich haue in the plurall Occhi, & Ginòcchi: ſo Finòcchio, Fennell, & Finócchi. But here I vvill note by the vvaye, that the ſyllable Chi, is to be pronounced more mildely in thoſe vvordes, then in Stocchi, arming ſvvordes: Fiòcchi, lockes of heare or vvoll, the vvhiche hathe othervvyſe in the ſingular nomber Stòcco & Fiòcco. But this manner of pronunciation, vvho can teache by vvriting? Further this letter is doubled in Sácco a ſacke, Giáccio I lye, Ghiàccio, a froſte. Lykevvyſe in verbes compound vvith the prepoſition AD, the letter D being changed in to C, as vvee ſaide of late of the letter B, as Accòlgo, I do vvelcome: Accènno, I do nop. Accoppio, I do cople. Laſtly in verbes begynning vvith RA, as Racconciàre, to repaire: Racommandàre, to recommende.
            Further, D is doubled in Cadde, vvhich is the preterperfectenſe of the indicatiue mode, and third perſon ſingular, of the verbe Cádo or Caggio, I fall: and in Càddero, vhich is of the plurall nomber. It is doubled alſo in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as are Addúco, I bring forthe: Addòrmo, I fall on ſleepe: Addolciſco, I do ſvveeten: So likevvyſe in the verbe Raddolcire. There are that do double it alſo in the verbe Traduco, but that is not allovved of vvith ſome.
            Alſo, F is doubled in thes vvordes Offéſa, Vfficio, Bèffe, Affànno, and very manny ſuche like. Likevviſe

in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition A D, as Afférmo, I affirme: Affrètto, I do make haſte. The ſame is to be vnderſtode of verbes compound vvith the prepoſition D I, as Differiſco, Diffido, Diffiniſco. And ſo likevviſe of many verbes, taking theire originall from latin verbes that haue in the firſt ſyllable the prepoſition O B, B being chaunged into F, in this vvyſe, Offéro, Offéndo, Offùſco.
            
            Beſides, G is vvont to be doubled, ſo often as I and O, or I & A, do meete together in a dipthonge, ſo that they make one ſyllable: as is ſeene in theſe vvordes, Sàggio, Sàggia, ſage or vvyſe, vvhich haue in the plurall Sàggi & Sàgge. Here is to be noted that the letter I of this laſt vvorde Saggè, and ſuche like, is of very many vvrongfully placed betwene G & E, to thende they maye ſaye Sàggie, Piàggie, Grèggie: vvhere they are to ſaye Sàgge, vvyſe, Piàgge, Brymmes or Brinkes, Grègge, flockes. But contrary vvyſe vvhen I and O, do make tvvo ſyllables, the G that goeth before them ſhalbe ſingle, as Priuilégio, Régio, Litigio, Veſtigio: vvee do ſaye alſo Dionigio & Dionigi, Dennys, Ambrògio & Ambròſio. Neither is double G, vvrittē in thoſe vvords, that do ende tvvo vvayes in I, as are Pariſi & Parigi Parrys, Tùniſi and Tùnigi, Lùiſi and Lùigi, Malagiſi and Malagigi. But it is doubled in thoſe that come from the latin ending in X, as Grex, from vvhence Grègge or Grèggia, poeticall: from Lex, Lègge:
               
But from Fex, is made Fèccia, bycauſe the latin hathe in the genitiue ſingular Fecis. And from Rex, is made Re, aſvvell in the ſingular as in the plurall nomber, although Poetes maye ſaye ſomtymes in the plural Règi. It is doubled alſo in certaine verbes ending in Gò, as Lèggo, Corrèggo, Veggo & alſo Vèggio. In fine, it is doubled in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition A D, ſuche as are Agghiáccio, Aggiùngo, Agguàglio, & Aggiornàrſi.
            
            Ther follovveth L, vvhiche is founde double in thes vvordes, Bèllo, Caſtèllo, Fratèllo, Fàllo, Cauàllo, Metàllo, and many ſuche like. Further, it is found doubled in the thirde perſonnes ſingular of the preterperfectenſe of the indicatiue mode, in thoſe verbes that are of the firſt and fourth coniugation, vvhen in thende there is added an article, as Amòllo, Vdillo. It is doubled alſo in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition A D, as Allàrgo, Allèuio, Allòggio, Alletto, Allènto, The ſelfe ſame is donne in verbes vvhervnto there is ſet before Ra, as is Rallènto, Rallègro, Rallùmo. Alſo I vvill not omit hovv in proſe the moſte parte do vſe to vvrite, Dèllo, Allo, Dàllo, Dèlli, Alli, Dàlli, Dèlla, Alla, Dàlla, Dèlle, Alle, and Dàlle: for De lo, A lo, Da lo, De li, &c. as Poetes do vvrite. But Allùi, Dallùi, and ſuche like, I vvolde not vſe, although very many do allovve of them.
            As concerning the letter M, it is doubled in theſe vvordes. Dàmma, Epigràmma, Fiàmma, Gèmma,

Gieruſalèmme, Boèmme. Alſo it is doubled vvhen Mi is put to a verbe in thende: as Emmi, it is to me: Dàmmi, giue me: Fàmmi, do me. Againe in the firſt perſonnes of the plurall nomber, of the preterperfectenſe of the indicatiue mode: As Amàmmo, vvee haue loued: Valèmmo, vvee haue ben vvorthe: Leggèmmo, vvee haue redde: Vdimmo, vve haue harde: Fummo, vvee haue ben. Alſo in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition A D, as Ammaèſtro, I do teache: Ammoniſco, I do Admoniſhe: Ammiro, I maruaile. VVee ſaye Rammentáre, to call to remembrance.
            Further, N is doubled in theſe noumes: Dònna, Madònna, Sònna, Anno, Affànno, Iugànno, Senno, Innocente. It is doubled alſo in theſe vvordes vvhich are deriued from the latin noumes, vvherin M goeth before N, as of Somnus Sónno, Columna Colónna, Damnum Dànno, Scamnum Scànno, Autamnus Autónno, & ſuche other like. It happeneth likevviſe ſo in the thirde perſonnes plurall, of the preſentenſe, of the indicatiue mode, of verbes that in the firſt perſon are of one ſyllable: vvherfore Ho, I haue, hath Hànno, they haue: Sto, I ſtande, hath Stanno, they ſtande: Fo, I doo or make, hathe Fanno, They doo or make: Do, I giue, hath Dànno, they giue. There is excepted So I am, vvhich hath Sóno (They are) vvith a ſingle N. The thirde perſonnes plurall of the future tenſe, in the indicatiue mode, haue alſo a double N, as Amerànno, they

ſhall loue, Valerànno, they ſhalbe vvorth: Leggerànno, & Vdirànno. Lykevvyſe theſe preterperfectenſes in the ſingular nomber ſhalbe vvrittē vvith double N, Venni, I haue come: Venne he hath come: Tènni, I haue hilde: Tènne, he hathe hilde: in the plurall, Vènnero, they haue come: Ténnero, they haue hilde. Againe in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as Annottàrſi, To vvaxe night: Annidàrſi, To be neaſted: Annuntio, I do tell tydinges: Annullàre, to Adnull. Laſtly it is doubled in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition In, as Innouàre, & Innamoràrſi.
            
            Novv follovveth P, vvhich is doubled in theſe vvordes: Zoppo, lame: Appetito, an appetite: Doppio, double: Coppia, as Vna coppia d'huomini da bene, A couple of honeſt men: Doppo After, hovvbeit Poetes do vvrite Dòpo. It is doubled alſo in theſe preterperfectenſes: Ruppi, I haue broken: Ruppe, he hath broken: Ruppero, they haue broken. Sèppi, I haue knovvne: Sèppe, he hath knovvne: Seppero, they haue knovvne. So Sàppia I may knovve: Sappiamo, vvee maye knovve: Sappiàte, you may knovv, Sappiàno, they maye knovve. Againe it is doubled in certaine noumes proper: as Filippo, Ariſtippo, Egèſippo, Ippolito, Ippodámia, Giosèppe. Alſo in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as Approuo, Appàre. And in theſe that are compounde vvith RA, as Rappòrto, I report: Rappèllo, I repeale or call backe. And to conclude, in the verbe Oppòngo,
               
Ilaye againſt.
            Neither vvil I ouerpaſſe the letter Q, for although it be not doubled in any vvorde, nevertheleſſe in theſe vvordes Acqua, vvater, Acque vvaters: Giàcqui, I haue layne: Giàcque, he hath layne: Giàcquero, they haue layne: & in like ſorte of others that haue C before Q, it ſeemeth in the pronouncing to haue a ſounde as though the Q vvere double. The ſame doth happen of theſe verbes Nocqui, I haue hurt: Nocque, he hath hurt: Nocquero, they haue hurt: Nacqui, I haue ben borne: Nàcque, he hath ben borne: Nacquero, they haue ben borne: Piàcqui, I haue pleaſed: Piacque, he hath pleaſed: Piacquero, they haue pleaſed. Againe, in the verbes Acquisto, I gette: Acquèto, as mi acqueto, I do quiet me.
            
               R is founde diuerſly doubled in vvordes: as firſt in verbes vvhoſe thirde perſonnes ſingular of the preſent tenſe in the indicatiue mode do ende in Re, ſuche as are Soccòrre, he doth ſuccour: Abbórre, he doth abhorre: Córre, he runneth. There is excepted Móre, he dyeth. It is furthermore doubled in verbes, out of vvhoſe middeſt, for elegancy of ſpeache, there is taken avvaye the ſyllable Ne, and Glie, vvhich dyd go before the letter R, and an other R added in theire place: vvhervpon, of Tenerò is made Terrò, I ſhall holde: of Venerò is made Verrò, I ſhall come: of Coglierò Corrò, I ſhall gather: Cógliere, Córre,
               
to gather: Venerèi, Verrèi, I ſholde come: It is alſo doubled in theſe vvordes, Càrro, a carte: Tórre, a tovver: Térra, Arra, Orrèndo, vvhich are noumes: and in verbes, as Nàrro, I ſhevve: Attèrro, I caſt to the ground: Serro, I ſhut: Afférro, I grype or holde faſt: Sottèrro, I put in to the grounde. Laſtly in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as Arreſtàrſi, to be arreſted: Arriſchio, I do haſarde: Arriuo, I do arriue: Arricchire, to enryche: Arroſtiſco, I do roſte.
            
               S is alſo doubled, for vvee ſaye Càſſa, a cheſt: Oſſo, a bone: Foſſo, a dyche. There are alſo verbes, as Pòſſo, I can: Arroſsiſco, I bluſhe. Furthermore it is doubled in theſe noumes vvhich are takē from the latin vvordes, having the letter X: and by that means of Saxum, is made Saſſo, a ſtone: of Luxuria, Luſſuria luſt: of Fixus, Fiſſo, and Fitto fixed: of Alexander, Aleſſàndro: of Dixit, Diſſe, he hath ſaide: of Vixi, Viſſi, I haue lyved: of Rexi, Rèſſi, I haue ruled: of Texo, Teſſo, I do vveave. Againe it is doubled in noumes that come from the latines hauing P, and S: as for Ipſe, vvee may ſaye Eſſo, he: for Gypſum, Geſſo, plaiſter: for ſcripſit, Scriſſe, he hath vvrittē. But P, is retained in theſe noumes proper, Ipſifile, Ipſicratea, & Capſa the proper name of a cittye. And I ſhall note by the vvaye, hovv P is taken avvaye, vvhen it goeth before the letter S, as Sàlmo for Pſalmꝰ. Further, it is doubled in vvords that come from the latin, hauing B before S, as

               Aſſoluto from Abſolùtus abſolute: Aſſerto from abſorptus, ſupped vp. Aſſente from Abſens, abſent. Astèmio from abstemius, that abſteineth from drinke. Aſſéntio from abſyntium, vvormevvood. It is doubled alſo in the laſt ſyllable of the preter imperfectenſe of the optatiue mode, ſingular nomber: as Amàſſi, I did loue, or thou dideſt loue: Amaſſe, he dyd loue: and in like ſorte in thother coniugations. And alſo vvhen it is of the plurall nomber, in a middle ſyllable: as Amàſſimo, vvee did loue, Amaſſero, they did loue. Lykevviſe in the preterperfectenſe of the indicatiue mode, of verbes of the thirde coniugatiō: as Percòſſi, I haue ſtryken: Percòſſe, he hath ſtryken: Percòſſero, they haue ſtryken. Againe in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as Aſſàggio, I do aſſaye: Aſſálto, I do aſſaulte: Aſſicùro, I do aſſuer: Aſſégno, I do aſſygne: Aſsòrdo, I make deafe: Aſſomiglio, I do reſemble. VVee ſaye Raſsùmo, I take againe: & Raſſétto, I do ſet or agree.
            Touching the letter T, it is foūde alſo doubled in theſe vvordes vvhich come from the latin, hauing B C, or P, before T: herevpon it is, that for Obtuſus vvee ſaye Ottùſo, dull or blunt: for obtineo Ottèngo, I do obtaine: for octo Otto eight: for doctus Dotto learned: for factus Fatto donne or made: for baptiſmus Battéſimo baptyſme: for ſeptē Sétte ſeuen: for ruptus Rotto broken: and for corruptus Corrotto corrupt. Hovvbeit Petrarke hathe

vvritten Rapto of raptus, a ſnatching or taking a vvaye: VVherby he vvolde make a difference betvvene the noume Rapto, and the aduerbe Ratto, ſvvyftly. It is doubled againe in theſe diminutiues, Pouerétto, a little poure vvretche: Librètto, a little booke: Fanciullètto, a little childe: Boſchetto, a little vvood. And to conclude, in verbes compounde vvith the prepoſition AD, as Attriſto, I make ſorrovvfull: Attèrro, I caſt to the grounde, &c.
            
               V is doubled in theſe verbes Auuētàrſi, to be caſt. Auuertire, to aduertyſe or admoniſhe. Auuicinàrſi, to Approche. Auuedèrſi, to be advvares. Auuotirſi, to make a vovve. Auualèrſi, to vſe any thing of an others or an others trauell. Notvvithſtanding, Auenire and not Auuenire, is to be vvritten as many vvill haue it: For bycauſe Auuenire, is not deriued from the verbe Aduenio, but from the verb Euenit, to happen or come to paſſe: the vvhiche ſignification dothe aptly agree to Auenire.
            
            Further, tovvching the letters X, Y, & K: vvee ought not to be ignorant, hovve they are in no vſe vvith the Italiās, for that they are not nōbred emō
               geſt the other letters. For in ſteade of Y, they vſe I: for K, C: and for X, they vſe S: as vvee haue ſhevved before, either doubled in the middeſt of a vvorde, or ſometymes ſingle in the middeſt of a vvorde, and alvvayes ſingle in the begynning. And therfor in vvhat belongeth to the begynning, vve ſaye Senòcrate, for Xenocrates: Senofónte for Xenophon:
               
and Serſe for Xerſes.
            
            Laſtly the letter Z, vvhich is the laſt of all the letters, that the Italians do vſe, is doubled vvhen it is placed betvvene tvvo vouelles: as in Bellèzza, Dolcèzza, Gentilèzza. But vvhen any conſonant goeth before it, then is it put ſingle: as in Sperànza, Partènza, Licènza, Sapienza. But here is to be noted, that Z is not rightly doubled in this vvorde Mezo, although it be betvvene tvvo vouelles: Notvvithſtanding Petrarke hath donne othervvayes, being brought thervnto for neceſſities ſake in thendes of his verſes, for the keping of his ryſme. For vvhen vvee pronounce Mèzo, it appereth plainely (vvho that obſerueth the Italian pronunciation) not to be pronounced like vnto Pèzzo, a peece: Auèzzo, accuſtomed, and ſuche like. And bycauſe ſometymes, not onely like conſonantes are doubled in a vvorde, but alſo diuerſe: and not onely doubled, but are founde alſo tripled: therfore I do iudge it neceſſary to declare the reaſon therof. This therfore is firſt to be conſidred, hovv that the Italian ſpeache doth not ſuffer tvvo like conſonantes to be put before vvordes. For if any ſholde thus vvrite, Sſoperbo, Vuenere, he ſhould not do Italian like. And yet, there is no lack, but that tvvo diuerſe conſonantes maye be ſet before in very many vvordes, as maye be ſeene in Spèro, Stùdio, Scàrico, Crèdo, Prèzzo. Yea, and ſomtymes three alſo are founde before in Italian

vvordes: as in Stràda, Stràle, Stratagèma, Stràno, Stringo, Strètto, Sprèzzo, Splendòre, Splèndido, Scriuo. Further, there cannot be put three diuerſe conſonantes in the middeſt of a vvorde, and therfore vvee ſaye not, Conſtànte, Transfórmo, Tranſmùto, Obſtácolo, Subſtègno, Poſtpòſto: But Coſtânte, Traſfórmo, Traſmùto, Oſtácolo, Soſtègno, Poſpòſto: There are excepted, Mòſtro, Sèmpre, Sepòlero, Tèmpro, Abbrèuio, Accrèſco, Attrauèrſo.
            
            Moreouer, H thorough vſe of a knovvne aſpiration, ought not to remaine vnknovvne: and hovv that of the moſt Italian vvriters it is put almoſt in to all thoſe vvordes, that vvee receiue from the latines, and in the vvhich the latines them ſelues do vſe an aſpiration: as in Húomo, from homo: Humàno, from humanus: Ho, from Habeo, &c. But ſince in our age the cauſe is taken avvay, vvhy the vſe of a knovvne aſpiration is ſought for, ſuerly me thinketh theffecte ought to ceſſe: that is, that H be no more put in to Italian vvordes (as vvee do pronounce very fevve of them) for a ſigne of a more groſſe ſpirit. And notvvithſtanding that the vſe of this aſpiration ſeemeth to me, to be coupled to fevve vvordes, yet ſuerly it is chiefly to be retained in this vvorde Huomo, to hide the fouleneſſe, that this dipthonge VO, (being placed as it vvere in the head) ſeemeth to bring vnto this noume. Further, it is not to be remoued from this verbe Ho, I haue: and that for a difference to be

had, betvvene that Ho and O, an aduerbe of calling, and O, a voice of ſeparation. Againe, betvvene Ha, (he hathe) and A, the prepoſition ſeruing to the Datiue caſe. Laſtly, to thende it maye be preſerued in theſe ſyllables, Che, Chi, Ghe, Ghi, in the vvhich aſſuredly there is a ſigne of a more groſſe ſpirit, vvherby theſe ſyllables do differ from them vvhich haue Ce, Ci, Ge, Gi. For vvhat the difference is, vvhether vvaye thou ſhalt pronovvnce: they rightlye knovve, that haue the Italian manner of pronouncing.
            Touching that vvhich doth belonge to the vouelles, it is to be knovvne hovve they do cleaue togeather in dipthonges: vvhich are AV: as Aura, Làura, Màuro.
            
            
               EV, as Eúro, theſt vvinde: Scèuro, deuided or ſeperated:
            
               IE, as Viène, he cometh: Brièue, Brief: Tiéne, he holdeth: Iéri, yeſterdaye: Pièno full: Fieno heye.
            
               IA, as Cianciàre, to babble: Ciànce, bablinges or trifles: Biànco, vvhite: Caccia, hunting.
            
               IO, as Fióre, a flovver: Sciocco, folyſhe: Sciolgo, I looſe: Scioperàto, vnoccupied.
            
               IV, as Ciùrma, a company: Schiuma, frothe or ſkume: Più, more: Giù, doune.
            
               IVO, as Figliuolo, a ſonne: Giuoco, playe or ſporte.
            
               VO, as Huòmo, a man: Vòpo, neede: Vòuo, an egge: Buòno, good: Cuoco, a cooke.
            
               
               VI, as Guida, a guide: Piacqui, I haue pleaſed: Acquiſto, I geat: Quinto, fiue.
            
               VE, as Piacque, It hathe pleaſed: Acque vvaters: Adunque, Then or therefore, Lingue, tonges.
            
               VA, as Acqua, vvater: Lingua, a tonge: Guadàgno, gaine.
            
               AI, as Fài, thovv makeſt: Stài, thovv ſtandeſt: Amài, I haue loued: Lài, lamentacions: Farài, thovv ſhalt make.
            
               VAI, as Guái, vvooſe, or ſorrovves.
            
               IEI, as Miéi, myne.
            
               EI, as Lèi, ſhee: Coſtei, this vvomā: Sèi, be thovv.
            
               VOI, as Tuói, thyne: Suói, thers: Buòi, oxen: Vuòi, vvylt thovv.
            Here is to be remembred, that althoughe Tuò, Suò, Io, Lèi, Lùi, Nòi, Vòi, Tuòi, Sùoi, Mièi, Vuòi, Buòi, for the moſt parte be of one ſyllable, aſvvell in proſe as in verſe, yet tovvching verſe, they are alvvayes in thende tvvo ſyllables.
            Neither vvill I omyt hovv farre the pronounciation of vouelles, is to be obſerued: O and E are pronounced ſomtymes more darkely, and ſomtymes more clearly. And moſt darkely in theſe vvordes Amòre, Colòre, Ardòre, and ſuche like. But E is pronounced more clearly in this vvorde Erba: and O, in this vvorde Ottima. Neuertheleſſe the manner of pronouncing, cannot be ſhevved by vvriting: vvherfore it is to be learned of him, that hath th' Italian tonge.
            TH'Italian ſpeache hath certaine articles, vvhich

are ſet before noumes improper: vvherof ſome be maſculine, and ſome feminine: and that, aſvvel in the ſingular: as in the plurall nomber, as herafter appereth.
            
               Articles.

                     Maſculine

                           Singular nomber.

                                 Il, lo: the, him, it.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Plurall nomber.

                                 i, li, gli: the, them.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Feminine

                           Sing. nom.

                                 La: the, her, it.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Plur. nom.

                                 Le: the, them.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            It lacketh caſes: vvherin as it is like vnto the Hebrue tonge, ſo is it vnlike, either to the Greke, or Latine tonges. VVerfore in varying of the articles, by ſundry caſes, it taketh theſe prepoſitions: De for the genitiue: A for the datiue, and Da for the ablatiue. In the vocatiue, it vſeth for a ſigne of that caſe O, an aduerbe of calling. In the nominatiue and accuſatiue, Articles are alſo vſed: as hereafter it may appere.
            
               Articles.

                     Maſculine.

                           Singular nomber.

                                 Nominatiue: Il, lo: the, it.
                                 
                                 Genitiue: Del, dello: of the, him, it.
                                 
                                 Datiue: Al, allo: to the, hym, it.
                                 
                                 Accuſatiue: il, lo: him, it
                                 
                                 Vocatiue: ô, o.
                                 
                                 Ablatiue, Dal, dallo: from the, him, it.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
Plur. nomb.

                                 
                                    Nomi. i, li, gli: the.
                                 
                                 
                                    Geni. de i, de'delli, degli: of the, the.
                                 
                                 
                                    Dati. a i, a', alli, à gli: to the, the.
                                 
                                 
                                    Accu. i, li. gli: the, them.
                                 
                                 
                                    Voca. ò, o.
                                 
                                 
                                    Abla. da i, da', dalli, dagli: from the, them.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Feminine.

                           Sing. nomb.

                                 
                                    Nomin. la: the, it.
                                 
                                 
                                    Geni. della, or de la: of the, her, it.
                                 
                                 
                                    Dati. àlla, or à la: to the, her, it.
                                 
                                 
                                    Accu. la: the, her, it.
                                 
                                 
                                    Voca. o: o.
                                 
                                 
                                    Ab. dalla, or da la: from the, her, it.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Plur. nomb.

                                 
                                    Nomi. le: the.
                                 
                                 
                                    Gen. dèlle, or de le: of the, them.
                                 
                                 
                                    Dati. àlle, or à le: to the, them.
                                 
                                 
                                    Accu. le: the, them.
                                 
                                 
                                    Voc. o: o.
                                 
                                 
                                    Ab. dalle, or da le: from the, them.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Articles ioined to other prepoſitions.
                        
                           Ne, in
                              
                                 Néllo, Nel: in the, it.
                                 
                                 Nèlli, Ne gli, Ne i. Ne': in the.
                                 
                                 Nella: in the, it.
                                 
                                 Nelle: in the.
                                 
                              
                           
                           Per, for, by, or thorough
                              
                                 Per lo, Pel, Pèllo: for by, or thorough the, it.
                                 
                                 Per li, Per gli, Pèlli, Pèr i, Pe i, Pe', for, by, or thorough the.
                                 
                                 Per la

                                       
                                          for, by, or thorough the, it
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Per le
                                 
                                    
Con: vvith
                                    
                                       Con lo, Col, Còllo: vvith the, vvith it.
                                       
                                       Con li, Con gli, Còlli, Co i, Co': vvith the.
                                       
                                       Con la, Còlla

                                             
                                                vvith the.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       Con le, Còlle
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of th' vſe of th' Articles.
            All articles almoſt, are vſually placed before noumes cōmon. I ſaye almoſt, bycauſe ſomtymes th'article la, is placed before noumes proper: as in his place ſhalbe ſhevved.
            
               LO.
               Th'article lo, is to go before vvordes begynning vvith a vouel: but the letter O is cut of, & an Apoſtropha ſet in the place, after this ſorte: l'Amòre, l'Onòre: And therfore they are pronounced as though they vvere vvritten Lamòre, Lonòre.
               
               But here is to be noted, that the Thuſcan Italians are accuſtomed to take avvaye I, from theſe vvordes vvhich are compound vvith this prepoſition In, and to adde an Apoſtropha to the vouell of the article: thus, Lo'mperatore in the ſingular nomber: and Gli'mperatori in the plurall: and ſo of others like. Hovvbeit, I vvold not haue thē (though Boccace be theire author) to be imytated in this: ſince it is an affected kinde of ſpeach. Further, ſince an Apoſtropha is a ſigne of a vouell miſſing, to vvhat ende is it ſet to the article, to vvhome there is nothing miſſing? Beſides, the ſigne of ſuch

a lacke doth rather appertaine to the letters conſonantes depriued of theire vouelles, then to the ſelfe vouelles. To conclude, thoſe vvordes Imperatòre and Imperatòri may ſeeme (as me thinketh vniuſtly beheaded, in taking from them the letter I, from vvhence they do begyn.
               And novv to our matter: Lo is alſo to go before vvordes that do begyn vvith tvvo ſundry conſonantes, vvherof the firſt ſhalbe S: in this vviſe: Lo Spirito, lo Stòmaco, lo Scacciàto a caſt of: lo Stàto, lo Stràle a ſhafte or arrovve.
               In like ſorte it is to be vſed, being ioyned vvith a prepoſition: as Dello Spirito, of the ſpirite: Allo Spirito, to the ſpirite: Dallo Spirito, from the ſpirite: Per lo ſpirito, for, by, or thorough the ſpirit: Con lo Spirito, vvith the ſpirite: Nello Spirito, in the ſpirite.
               In fine, this article Lo is ſet before this noume Il Quale, & that in the begynning of a verſe: vvherfore vvee ſaye, lo Quale.
               
            
            
               IL.
               TH' article Il is to be placed before vvordes that do begyn vvith a conſonant: as Il Re, il Prèncipe, il Cièlo, &c.
               
               And bothe Lo and Il, do go before verbes of the infinitiue mode, obſeruing th' affore ſaid ordre in the begynning of the letters: as l'Amàre, il dire, lo Scriuere.
               
               The vvhich order is to be obſerued vvith thes maſculin articles in the plurall nomber: for I, is ſet

before vvordes begynning vvith a conſonant: as i Principi, i Re, i Cieli.
               
               But Li and Gli, do go before vvordes begynning vvith a vouell: as li or gli Amóri, li or gli Onòri, li or gli Esèrciti.
               
               Hovvbeit vvhen the vouel ſhalbe I, vvher vvith the vvorde follovving the article doth begyn, then ſhall th' article Gli, be placed before it: and notvvithſtanding forgo his vouell, in this ſorte: Gl' Iniqui, Gl' Impij, Gl' Ingiùſti, &c.
               
               
                  Li and Gli, are alſo placed before vvordes, that do begyn vvith tvvo diuerſe conſonantes: vvherof the firſt ſhalbe S: as Gli Spiriti, Gli Strali, Gli Stènti the tormētes: Gli Scòmmodi, the diſcōmodities, &c.
               The ſame is to be donne vvhen they are ioyned to prepoſitions: for vvee ſaye De i Re, and not De gli Re, and ſo by the other caſes.
               But here is to be noted, that th' article I, for the moſt parte is taken avvay, and an Apoſtropha ſet in place therof, in this ſorte, De' fatti tuòi for De i fattituèi: So is A alſo vſed for A i, Da' for Da i, Co' for Co i, Ne' for Ne i, and Pe' for Pe i. And it behoueth that this be donne vvith iudgement, the vvhich, (vvho that ſo can) is rather attained by reading of approued aucthors, then by any arte.
               Beſides vve ſay Dèlli Spiriti, and not De i Spiriti, A gli or Alli Spiriti. But not A i Spiriti, &c.
               
               Further, the prepoſition Per, vvill alvvaies requier the articles Lo, Li, or Gli, vvithout obſeruing any rule of the letters, vvher vvith the vvordes

follovving do begyn: as Per lo petto, Per gli fianchi, And many tymes they ſay, Pe' monti, Pe' piani: in ſtedde of thoſe formes of ſpeach that haue Per li monti, Per li piani: that is, by the mountaines, by the plaines.
               Theſe forſaide articles being ioyned vvith prepoſitions are none othervvayes vſed, then if they vvere vvithout them: vvherfore vvee ſay, Dell' Amòre, De gli Amori, All' ingiuſto, A gl' ingiuſti: and after the ſame manner, thoroughout all th'other caſes, aſvvell of the ſingular, as of the plurall nomber.
            
            
               LA.
               Tovvching the feminine article, La, it is for the moſt parte geuen to noumes common: as vvhen vvee ſay La tàuola, La bàrca, La ſcuòla: and ſomtymes to noumes proper: as Roccace dyd in ſayng, La Belcolore, La Fiammètta, &c.
               
               VVhere it behoueth to note, hovv this article is ſet vvhole and perfect, before vvordes that begin vvith a conſonant: as next before it appereth: and as aften as it is ſet before vvordes beginning vvith a vouell, it is depriued of the letter A, & an Apoſtropha added in this vviſe, l' Anima, l' Oneſtà, l' Amicitia.
               
               In like ſorte is Le to be vſed, being the plurall nomber to the article La: Sauing it is not geuen to noumes proper. So that vvee ſay, Le ſtelle, Le donne, likevviſe: L'ànime, L'amicittie, L'iniquita, L'impreſe.
               
               
                  
Theſame ordre is to be obſerued, vvhen this article is coupled to prepoſitions: For vvee ſay in the ſingular nomber: Della ſtèlla, Alla ſtèlla, Dalla ſtèlla, Per la ſtèlla, Con la ſtèlla, Nella ſtèlla: Dell'ànima, All' ànima, &c. But in the plurall nomber. Delle ſtèlle, Alle ſtèlle, &c. Dell' anime, All' anime: &c.
               
            
         
         
            Of a Noume.
            Euery Italian noume doth end in ſome vouell, as Dio, Angelo, Cièlo, Huòmo, and others almoſt innumerable.
            But yet ſomtymes they do forgo it, chieflye in vvordes, vvhere thoſe letters that the latines do call liquides, videlicet L, N, and R, do preceede the laſt vouell: as Dèbil, Fel, Mel, Fedel, Van, Penſiér, for Dèbile, Fèle, Mèle, Fedèle, Vàno, Penſièro.
            
            And this is vſually donne, vvhen the vvorde follovving ſhall begyn vvith a conſonant: as Van deſio, Penſièr canuto: that is, a vaine deſier, a graue thought: Alſo Fedel compàgno, Mel dolce: vvhere no Apoſtropha is added, bycauſe they do not forgo theire vouelles for others follovving: and therfore vvee ſay, Gran còſa, Buòn Ghriſtiàno, San Pàolo: for Grande Coſa, Buòno Cristiàno, Santo Pàolo: vvhich laſt manner of ſpeaches are muche more improper, then the former.
            But from this rule are excepted theſe noumes, Còllo a neck, Apòllo, Vòlo a flight, Affànno griefe, Ingànno deceipt, Oſcùro, Dùro, & Chiàro. For hardly vvee ſay Col, Apol, Vol, Affan, Ingan, Oſcur,

Dur, Chiar: although Petrarke (and that very ſeldome) hath vſed theſe tvvo laſt.
            Neyther do theſe vvordes Animo, Abiſſo, Pègno, Soſtègno, and ſuch like: ſuffer any abridging.
            Further th' Italian noumes, do vſe to let ſlip the laſt vouell, vvhen the vvorde that follovveth doth begyn vvith a vouell, and for the vouell omitted, to vvrite an Apoſtropha, thus: Voſtr' òcchi, Molt ànni, &c. Whervpon, it doth appeare to be chiefly in vſe in noumes adiectiues.
            Laſtly, the Italian poetes do depriue many noumes, not of theire vouelles onely, but of theire laſt ſyllables: or at leaſt do take from thoſe ſyllables L: for to obſerue number in verſe: vvhervpon it is, that they ſay ſomtymes, Anima' and Amài for Animàli: Lacciuo' for Lacciuoli: Caua' & Cauai for Caualli: Be' and Bei for Bèlli: Que' and Quèi for Quèlli: Ta' and Tài for Tali: Quà and Quai for Quàli.
            
            Hovv beit this is nothing at all vſed, vhen the vvorde that follovveth doth begyn vvith a vouell: as the vvritinges of approued aucthors in ſundry places beare vvitneſſe.
         
         
            Of the ending of Noumes.
            
               Proper names of men and the ſingular nōber do end in.
               
                  
                     
                        A, Auèa, Pitàgora, Lucà, Andrèa, Porsèna.
                     
                        E, Céſare, Ariſtòtile, Scipiòne, Platòne.
                     
                        I, Giouànni, Luigi, Dionigi.
                     
                        O. Aleſsàndro, Piètro, Pàolo.
                     
                        V. Gieſù, Artù.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Proper names of Citties, the maſcul gender do end in.
               
                  
                     
                        E, Liòne.
                     
                        I, Parigi, Brindiſi, Ragùſi.
                     
                        O, Milàno, Còmo, Pèſaro.
                     
                        V, Corfù, Cefalù, Perù.
                  
               
            
            
               Proper names of families ending in.
               
                  
                     
                        A, Colònna, Carràfa, Gonzàga, Còſſa Aùſtria, Aragòna.
                     
                        E, Dèntice, Pònte, Eſte.
                     
                        I, Medici, Gritti, Piccolòmini, Vènti, Tornaquinci, Doni, &c.
                     
                        I, or O, Quirini & Quirino, Soderini and Soderino, &c.
                     
                        I, or E, Caualcànti or Coualcànte,
                     
                        O, Auolo, Tolèdo.
                  
               
            
            Further, theſe ſurnames are not vſed after one ſelfe manner and therfore it ſhall not be amyſſe to ſhevv you hovv they are vſed in ſpeach: for vve ſay Pompèo Colònna, Pompey Colūna, Maria Colonna, Mary Columna. I Colonneſi: thoſe of Columna.
            VVee ſay further Càrlo d'Auſtria: Quei della caſa d'Auſtria Ferrànte, d'Aragòna: Quei d'Aragona: for Aragoneſi doth ſignifie thoſe that are affected to that familie.
            Tovvching the ſeconde ſorte: vvee ſay Camillo, Dèntice, Diàna, Dèntice, Il Dèntice, I Dèntici, le Dentici. Againe Andrèa Pònte, or da Ponte: Caterina Pònte, Il Ponte, or da caſa Ponte, Quel, or Quei da caſa ponte. Alſo Ercole da Eſte, Caterina da Eſte, Quei da Eſte.
            
            The ſurnames of the third ſort are thus vſed: for

vvee ſay: Còſmo Mèdici, or Còſmo de'Medici: Lucrètia Mèdici or de'Medici: Il Mèdici, I Medici:
            
            So Francèſco Dòni, Giouànna Dòni, Il Dòni: likevviſe Aleſsàndro Piccolòmini, Il Piccolòmini, Portia Piccolomini, la Piccolomini.
            
            VVee ſay further Piètro Quirini, or Quirino: Camilla de' Quirini, or Quirina, but not Camilla Quirini: vvhich is not in vſe. Againe it is rightly ſayde il Quirino, but not il Quirini. But if any ſhall obiecte, vvhy is it rightly ſayde? il Mèdici, il Doni: I anſvver, that the ſurnames of Medici and Dòni haue none other termination that is in vſe. But the ſurname Quirini hath bothe Quirino for the men, and Quirina for the vvomen. By this means vvee ſay Antonia Quirina, and not Quirini, but de' Quirini: vvhere, notvvithſtanding vvee may ſay Caterina Medici, and not Mèdica.
            
            Likevviſe the examples of the fifte ſorte ſhalbe, Guido Caualcànte or Caualcànti: Il Caualcànte, I Caualcànti: Giùlia Caualcànte.
            
            And tovvching thoſe of the laſte ſorte, vve ſay Alfónſo d'Aualo, Pietro di Tolèdo.
            
            
               Noumes appellatiues of the maſc. gēder and ſingular number do end in.
               
                  
                     A, Sofista, Poèta, Proféta, Podestà, Piàneta.
                     
                     E, Onore, Amòre, Colòre, and Fànte, vvhich is of the fe. gēder, alſo Signòre.
                     
                     O, & E, Caualièro (vvith the Poetes, or Caualière (vvith thoſe that vvrite in proſe) of the vvhich ſorte there are many other like noumes.
                  
               
            
            
               
This noume Pàri doth belonge to bothe genders: vvherfore vvee ſay I Pàri tuoi, I Pàri vòſtri, Le pàritùe, Le pàrivòſtre: that is, thyne, or your like, and this onely in the plurall nomber. For in the ſingular vvee ſay Tùo pàri, and Tuà pari, that is thy like.
            VVee ſay further, vn Pàio di Calze: duc pàia, tre pàia, quattro pàia, &c. Di polli: by the vvhich forme of ſpeaches, it is apparant vvhat difference there is betvvne Pàri, Paio, and Pàia: for Pari declareth ſimilitude, Paio and Paia, fellovvſhip.
            But the reader is here to be admoniſhed, that theſe vvordes Pàio, Pari, and Paia, do belong alſo vnto the verbe Parere, to ſeeme. In this ſorte
            
               Indicatiue.
               
                  Io Pàio I ſeeme
               
                  Tu Pàri Thovv ſeemeſt.
            
            
               Subiunctiue.
               
                  Io Paia He ſeeme.
               
                  Tu Pàia Thovv ſeemeſt
               
                  Colui Pàia I ſeemeth.
            
            
               Noumes adiect. of the ſingular nōber and maſ. gēder do ende in.
               
                  
                     
                        O, Diuino, Bèllo, Vmàno, Fiero, Altièro, Orrendo, Ornato, &c.
                     
                        E, Celèſte, Fedèle, Dòlce, Vmile, &c. vvhich are alſo of the femin. gēder.
                     
                  
               
            
            Tovvching theſe noumes, vvhen they are of the plurall nomber, they do ende all in I, as do Huomini, Cieli, Angeli, &c. And that aſvvell vvhen they

ende in O, in the ſingular nomber: as vvhen they ende in E.
            
            Notvvithſtanding ſuch are excepted as in the plurall nomber haue double terminations: that is, in I, and are of the maſculine gender: and in A, chaunging the maſculine gēder in to the feminine as here follovving doth appeare.
            
               Noumes in the plurall nomber ending in.
               
                  
                     
                        A, Dita, Làbbra, & Labbia, Ginòcchia, Bràccia, Lègna, Veſtigia, Riſa, &c.
                     
                        I, Diti, Labbri, Ginocchi, Bràcci, Legni, Veſtigij, Riſi.
                  
               
            
            But thoſe that ende in A, are moſt in vſe vvith ſuch as vvrite in proſe.
            And ſuerly, noumes of the femi. gender do not ende after that māner: as it may here after appeare.
            
               Proper names of women the ſingular nōber do ende in.

                     
                        A, Cornèlia, Làura, Tùllia, Lucrètia, Mària, &c.
                     
                        E, Beatrice, Rachèle, Berenice, Penèlope, &c.
                     
                        O, Glicèrio, Caliſto, Dido, Sàfo, Calippo, Ino, &c.
                  
               
               Proper names of Citties of the feminine gender ending in.

                     
                        A, Ròma, Venètia, Pàdoua, Veròna, Fiorènza, &c.
                     
                        E, Auignòne, Cartagine, Atène.
                     
                        I, Nàpoli, Coſtantinòpoli.
                     
                        O, Corinto, Sèſto, Abido, Effeſo, Argo.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        A, Anima, Amicitia, Dònna, Signòra.
                     
                        E, Opinione, Lettione, Affettiòne.
                     
                        O, Màno.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Nomes appellatiues of the feminine gender and ſingular number ending in.
                  
                     
                        A & E
                        
                           
                              A, Onestà, Arma, Lòda, Fròda, Frònda, àla.
                           
                              E, Oneſtate, Arme, Lòde, Frode, Frònde, àle.
                        
                     
                     
                        V & E
                        
                           
                              E, Virtùte, Seruitùte, Grùe:
                           
                              V. Virtù, Seruitù, Grù.
                        
                     
                     
                        A & O
                        
                           
                              A, Orècchia, Foglia, Cèrchia, Chiòſtra, G'elſa:
                           
                              O, Orècchio, Fòglio, Cèrchio, Chiòſtro, Gelſo.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            But vvhen they ende in O, they are of the maſculine gender Orècchia, and Fòglia are often in vſe, as are Cèrchio, Chiòſtro, and Gelſo: but the reſt not ſo.
            
               Noumes adiectiues of the feminine gender and ſingular number ending in.
               
                  
                     
                        A, Biànca, Bèlla, Diuina, Ornàta, Fièra, Rèa, &c.
                     
                        E, Fedèle, Crudèle, Fòrte: the vvhich are alſo of the maſculine gender.
                     
                  
               
            
            Further, ſuch noumes ſhall haue I, in the plurall number, as in the laſt place haue E in the ſingular: But if in the ſingular they haue A, they ſhall haue E in the plurall. VVhere vpon it is, that thoſe that haue double terminatiōs in the ſingular number, haue them alſo double in the plurall: as here follovving it maye appere.
            
               
               Sing. nom.

                     
                        A, Fontàna

                           
                              Plu. nomb.
                              
                                 
                                    E, Fontàne
                                 
                                    I, Fonti
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        E, Fònte
                  
               
               
                  Sing. nom.
                  
                     
                        A, Arma

                           
                              Plu. nomb.
                              
                                 
                                    E, àrme
                                 
                                    I, àrmi
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        E, Arme
                  
               
               
                  Sing. nom.
                  
                     
                        V, Virtù

                           
                              Plu. nomb.
                              
                                 
                                    V, Virtù
                                 
                                    I, Virtùti
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        E, Virtùte
                  
               
               
                  Sing. nom.
                  
                     
                        A, Bontà

                           
                              Plu. nomb.
                              
                                 
                                    A, Bontà
                                 
                                    I, Bontàti
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        E, Bontàte
                  
               
               
                  Sing. nom.
                  
                     
                        A, Orècchia

                           
                              Plu. nomb.
                              
                                 
                                    E, Orècchie
                                 
                                    I, Orècchi
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        O, Orecchio
                  
               
            
            But Manò, thorough a certaine vſe of ſpeach, though it be of the feminine gender, doth end (in the ſingular nomber) in O, as Mano: vvhervpon it follovveth, that in the plurall it doth end in I, as Mani.
            
         
         
            Of the declining of Noumes.
            Although th' Italian tonge (as vvee haue before declared in the declining of the articles) hath neither caſes, nor declenſion of noumes as are in the Latin, and Greke tonges: yet doth it receiue all manner of variation: vvhich is ſuch, as doth depende

vpon prepoſitions, either by them ſelues alone, orioyned vvith th' articles.
            
               
                  The 1. Example vvith th' articles ioyned to prepoſitions.
                  
                     
                        Nomin. ſingul.
                     
                     
                        L' Amico
                     
                     The frende
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        Dell' Amico
                     
                     Of the frende
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        All' Amico
                     
                     To the frende
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        L' Amico
                     
                     The frende
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        O Amico
                     
                     O frende
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        Dall' Amico
                     
                     From the frende.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plur.
                     
                     
                        Gli Amici
                     
                     The frendes
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        De gli Amici
                     
                     Of the frendes
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        A gli Amici
                     
                     To the frendes
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Gli Amici
                     
                     The frendes
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        O Amici
                     
                     O frendes
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        Da gli Amici
                     
                     From the frēdes.
                  
               
            
            
               The vſe of the 1. Example thorough all the Caſes and Numbers.
               
                  Nom. ſing. L' Amico vènne: A frend hath come.
               Gen. Mi ricòrdo dell' amico: I do remember me of a frende.
               Dat. Compiàccio all' amico: I pleaſe (or content) a frende.
               Accuſ. Amo l' amico: I loue a frende.
               Vocat. O amico vièni: Oh frende come.
               Ablat. Mi pàrto dall' amico: I departe from a frēde.
               
                  
                  Nom. plu. Gli amici vènnero: the frēdes haue come.
               Gen. Mi ricòrdo de gli amici: I do remember me of the frendes.
               Dat. Compiàccio à gli amici: I pleaſe (or content) the frendes.
               Accuſ. Amo gli amici: I loue the frendes.
               Vocat. O amici venite: Oh frendes come.
               Ablat. Mi parto da gli amici: I departe from the frendes.
            
            
               
                  The 2. example vvith prepoſitions onely.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        Amico
                     
                     Frende
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di amico
                     
                     of a frende
                  
                  
                     Dati.
                     
                        ad amico
                     
                     to a frende
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        amico
                     
                     frende
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        amico
                     
                     frende
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da amico
                     
                     from a frende.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plur.
                     
                     
                        Amici
                     
                     Frendes.
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di amici
                     
                     of frendes
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        ad amici
                     
                     to frendes
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        amici
                     
                     frendes
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        amici
                     
                     frendes
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da amici
                     
                     from frendes.
                  
               
            
            
               The vſe of the 2. example thorough all the Caſes.
               
                  Nom. ſing. Fù amico vero. He vvas a tru frende.
               Genit. Non è vfficio di amico. It is not the office (or duty) of a frende.
               
                  
Dat. Io ne parlài ad amico fidàto. I haue ſpokē therof to a truſty frende.
               Acc. Mai non viſit ài amico à me più caro di te: I dyd neuer viſit a frende more deare to me thē thou.
               Vocat. Amico vieni. Frende come.
               Ablat. Da amico, còme sèi tu, ricèuo ogni coſa in buòna parte: From a frende as thou art, I receiue euery thing in good parte.
               
                  Nom. plu. Furono amici veri: They vvere tru frēdes.
               Cenit. Non è vfficio di amici: It is not the office (or dutie) of frendes.
               Dat. Io ne parlài ad amici fidati: I haue ſpokē therof to truſty frendes.
               Accu. Mai non viſitài amici à me piu cari di voi: I did neuer viſit frendes more deare to me thē you.
               Vocat. Amici venite: Frendes come.
               Ablat. Da amici come ſete voi, ricèuo ogni coſa in buona parte: From frendes as you are, I receiue euery thing in good parte.
            
            
               
                  The 3. example vvith the article IL.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſingul.
                     
                     
                        Il maèſtro
                     
                     the maiſter
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        del maèſtro
                     
                     of the maiſter
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        al maèſtro
                     
                     to the maiſter
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        il maèſtro
                     
                     the maiſter
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô maèſtro
                     
                     ô maiſter
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        dal maèſtro
                     
                     from the maiſter.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plur.
                     
                     
                        I maèſtri
                     
                     the maiſters
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        De i maèſtri
                     
                     of the maiſters
                  
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        á i maèstri
                     
                     to the maiſters
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        i maèstri
                     
                     the maiſters
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô maèstri
                     
                     ô maiſters
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da i maèstri
                     
                     from the maiſters.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 4. example: is of a Noume of the feminine gender, vvhich taketh the article L A, depriued of the vouell.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        L'ànima
                     
                     the ſole
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        dell' ànima
                     
                     of the ſole
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        all' anima
                     
                     to the ſole
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        l'ànima
                     
                     the ſole
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô ànima
                     
                     ô ſole
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        dall' ànima
                     
                     from the ſole.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plur.
                     
                     
                        L'ànime
                     
                     the ſoles
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        dell' ànime
                     
                     of the ſoles
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        all' ànime
                     
                     to the ſoles
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        l' ànime
                     
                     the ſoles
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô ànime
                     
                     ô ſoles
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        dall' ànime
                     
                     from the ſoles.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 5. examples is of a Noume of the ſame gender vvith the article L A, vvholye.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        La mènte
                     
                     the minde
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        della mènte
                     
                     of the minde
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        alla mènte
                     
                     to the minde
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        la mènte
                     
                     the minde
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô mènte
                     
                     ô minde
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        dalla mènte
                     
                     from the minde.
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plur.
                     
                     
                        Le mènti
                     
                     the mindes
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        delle mènti
                     
                     of the mindes
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        alle mènti
                     
                     to the mindes
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        le mènti
                     
                     the mindes
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        ô mènti
                     
                     ô mindes
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        dalle menti
                     
                     from the mindes.
                  
               
            
            I vvill adde here, in vvhat ſorte moſt of the noumes that vvee do vſe, are deriued vnto vs from all the declenſions of the latin noumes. But I vvilbe more briefe herein, then peraduenture the matter ſhall ſeeme able to ſome: bothe bycauſe I deſier breuity: as to thende the reader inſtructed in the latin, vvhen by theſe, that I ſhal novv tovvche he ſhall as it vvere in ſearching take holde, he may by hym ſelfe call more to remembrance.
            
               
                  Of the 1. noumes maſc▪ and femi. ending in.
                  
                     
                        A, Poèta, Proféta, Pitàgora, Euangeliſta, Fèmina, Erba, Tàuola, Càrta, Fenestra.
                     
                        E, Anchiſe, Penèlope.
                  
               
               
                  Of the 2. noumes of bothe genders ending in.
                  
                     
                        O, Antònio, Virgilio, Milàno, Cauàllo, Libro, Làuro, &c.
                     
                        I, Dionigi, Parigi, Luigi.
                  
               
               
                  Of the 3. ending in.
                  
                     
                        A, Poèma, Stratagèma, Dogma, &c.
                     
                        E, Cèſare, Lettiòne, Pàllade, Rachèle, Nièue, Scùre, &c.
                     
                        I, Filli, Mèri, Cariddi, Tifi, &c.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the 4. vvhich end in.
                  
                     
                        O, Màno, Còrno, Effétto, Affétto, Difétto, Riſpétto, Sénſo, Gústo, Intellétto, Vdito.
                     
                        A, Vista or Vedúta, Vdita.
                  
               
               
                  Of the 5. which end in.
                  
                     
                        E, Spècie, Effigie, Tempèrie, Congèrie.
                     
                        I, Di, Mezodi.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of Noumes comparatiues and Superlatiues.
            Th' Italian ſpeache doth lack noumes comparatiues: But in ſtedde therof they vſe the poſitiue, vvith the aduerbe Più, more: thus, Più dotto, Più bèlle, Più fórte. VVhoſe ſignification is increaſed by adding of the aduerbes, Molto, and Aſſai: as Aſsài più or Mòlto più, or Aſſai molto più, or Molto Aſſai più Dotto: euery one of theſe vvayes is rightly ſaide.
            But tovvching their vſe, they do requier a genitiue caſe, in this ſorte: Io ſo no più dòtto di te, I am better learned then thou. Alſo, Ciceròne fu più eloquente di Ortènſio, Cicero vvas more cloquent then Hortenſius. VVee haue alſo theſe manner of ſpeaches in the comparatiue degrees: Tu non sèi il più dòtto del mòndo: Tu sèi il più ricco della compagnia: Io sòno amico de i più dòtti: Tu sèi de i più dotti: Tu sèi ſtimàto tra i più dotti: Tu ti puòi paragonàre à i più dòtti.
            
            The ſuperlatiue is not ſo vſed, as it can declare compariſon, but vvorthynes: For vve ſaye not, Ciceròne fu eloquentiſſimo de' Romàni, ſince ſuch a

phraſe of ſpeache is all together latin: But vvee ſay Ciceròne fù eloquentiſsimo: vvithout addition of any other perſon, in compariſon of vvhome Cicero may be.
         
         
            Of Noumes Numerall.
            
               Vno, is of the ſingular nomber, Vni of the plurall, and bothe of the maſculine gender. Vna, is of the ſingular nomber, Vne of the plurall, and both of the feminine gender. And vvee do vſe Vno, and Vna, vvhen vvee nomber: But Vni and Vne, in this ſorte: as L'ùne e l'àltre: Gli ùni e gli àltri, bothe thone and thother none othervvayes then the latines do vſe Vtrique and vtraeque.
            
            
               Due, and in verſe (vvho that vvill) Duò: neuer Dùa, or Duoi, though many do vſe them. Further they do belong to either gender: the vvhich is likevviſe to be vnderſtode of all the other numbers that follovve. VVee ſay alſo Ambidùe: vvhich is vnderſtode of tvvo males, or at leaſt th'one of the tvvo being a male: and Ambedùe of tvvo females. But Ambodùe, Amendùe, Amendùne, and Amēdùni: although approued auctors do vſe them: yet vvold not I vvillingly vſe them.
            VVee ſaye further Ambo: in the ſame fignification that the latines doo.
            
               
                  Trè: three, Quàttro: fovver,
               
                  Cinque: fiue, Sèi: ſix.
               
                  Sètte: ſeuen, Otto: eight,
               
                  
                  Nòue: nyne, Diece: ten,
               
                  Vndici: eleuen, Dòdici: tvvelue,
               
                  Trèdici: thertene, Quartòrdici: ſovvertene,
               
                  Quindici: fiuetene, Sèdeci: ſixtene,
               
                  Diceſsètte: ſeuentene, Diciòtto: eitghtene,
               
                  Dicennòue: nynetene, Vènti: tvventy,
               
                  Vent'ùno or vna: tvventy one,
               
                  Venti dùe: tvventytvvo, Vèntitre: tvventythree,
               
                  Venti quattro: tvventyfovver,
               
                  Vènti cinque: tvventyfiue, and ſo forvvardes,
               
                  Trènta: therty, Quarànta: forty.
               
                  Cinquànta: fiuety, Seſsànta: ſixty, or three ſkore,
               
                  Sett ànta: ſeuenty, or three ſkore and ten,
               
                  Ottànta: eighty, or fovver ſkore,
               
                  Nouànta: nynety, or fovver ſkore and ten,
               
                  Cènto: An hundred,
               
                  Cènto & vno, or vna: an hundred and one,
               
                  Cènto & due: an hundred and tvvo,
               
                  Cènto & tre: an hundred and three,
               
                  Cènto & quàttro: an hundred and fovver. And ſo forvvardes.
               
                  Dugènto: tvvo hundred,
               
                  Trècento: three hundred,
               
                  Quàttrocènto: fovver hundred,
               
                  Cinquecènto: fiue hundred,
               
                  Seicènto: ſix hundred, Settècento: ſeuen hundred,
               
                  Ottocènto: eight hundred, Nouecènto: nyne hūdred.

                     
                        Mille: A thouſand, Due mila: tvvo thouſand,
                  
               
               
                  Tre mila: three thouſand,
               
                  Quattro mila: fovver thouſand.
               
                  
                  Cinque mila: fiue thouſand,
               
                  Sei mila: ſix thouſand,
               
                  Sette mila: ſeuen thouſand,
               
                  Otto mila: eight thouſand,
               
                  Noue mila: nyne thouſand,
               
                  Diece mila: ten thouſand.
               
                  Vndici mila: eleuen thouſand,
               
                  Dodici mila: tvvelue thouſand,
               
                  Tredici mila: thertene thouſand, & ſo forvvardes.

                     
                        Cento mila: an hundred thouſand,
                  
               
               
                  Dugento mila: tvvo hundred thouſand.
               
                  Trecento mila: three hūdred thouſand, & ſo vnto.

                     
                        Vn miliòni: a million, or ten thouſand thouſand.
                  
               
               
                  Due miliòni: tvvo millions,
               
                  Tre milioni: three millions, And ſo in like ſorte infinitely.
            
            Further, vve ſay Vn pàio, due paia, a couple, tvvo couple: Vn centinàio, due centinàia, one hundred: tvvo hundredes: Vn migliàio, due migliaia: one thouſand, tvvo thouſandes, &c.
            Alſo: Vna decina, due decine: one tenthe tvvo tenthes, &c. Vna dozina, due dozine: one doſen, tvvo doſen, &c. Vna ventina, due ventine, one ſkore tvvo ſkore, &c. Vna trentina, due trentine: one therty, tvvo thertyes, &c.
         
         
            Of Noumes ſignifying ordre.
            
               
                  Primo and Primiero: the firſt.
               
                  Secondo: the ſecond, Tèrzo: the therde,
               
                  Quarto: the fourthe, Quinto: the fifte,
               
                  
                  Sèſto: the ſixte, Settimo: the ſeuenthe,
               
                  Ottàuo: the eight, Nòno: the nynthe,
               
                  Dècimo: the tenthe, Vndecimo: the eleuenthe.
               
                  Duodècimo: the tvvelf, Decimo tèrzo & Terzodecimo,
               
               
                  Decimo quarto and Quarto dècimo,
               
               
                  Decimo quinto and Quarto dècimo,
               
               
                  Decimo ſesto and Sesto dècimo,
               
               
                  Decimo sèttimo and Diciſettèſimo,
               
               
                  Decimo ottàuo and Deciottèſimo,
               
               
                  Decimo nono, and vigeſimo, and ventèſimo,
                  
                     
                        Vigeſimo primo: Vigeſimo ſecundo. And ſo vnto.
                  
               
               
                  Trigèſimo, and Trentèſimo: the thertithe,
               
                  Quatrageſimo, and Quarantèſimo: the fortythe,
               
                  Quinquageſimo, and Cinquantèſimo: the fiuetithe,
               
                  Seſſagèſimo, and Seſſantèſimo: the ſixtithe,
               
                  Ottuagèſimo, and Ottantèſimo: the eightithe,
               
                  Nonagèſimo, and Nouanteſimo: the ninetithe,
               
                  Cētèſimo the hūdreth, Dugēteſimo: the tvvo hūdreth.
               
                  Trecenteſimo, Quattrocentèſimo,
               
               
                  Cinquecenteſimo, Seicentèſimo,
               
               
                  Settecentèſimo, Ottocentèſimo,
               
               
                  Nouecentèſimo, Milleſimo: the thouſanthe, &c.
            
         
         
            Noumes Relatiues.
            
               Il Quàle & la Quale, are noumes that are moſt often placed in ſpeache, and alvvayes are referred to ſomthing that vvent before: and therfore of the Grammarians are called relatiues. They are alvvayes ioyned vvith an article: for Quale vvithout

an article, is rather a noume of quality, then a relatiue. Further it maye be declined, in ſuche ſorte, as is ſet out by the example follovving.
         
         
            The declenſion of a Noume relatiue.
            
               Nom. ſing. Il Quàle, la Quàle, the vvhich.
               
               
                  Genit. Del Quàle, della Quàle, of the vvhich.
               
               
                  Dat. Al Quàle, alla Quàle, to the vvhich.
               
               
                  Accuſ. Il Quale, la Quàle, the vvhich.
               
               
                  Ablat. Dal Quàle, dalla Quàle, from the vvhich.
               
               Nom. plu. I Quàli, le Quàli, the vvhich.
               
               
                  Genit. Dei Quàli, delle Quàli, of the vvhich.
               
               
                  Dat. Ai Quàli, alle Quàli, to the vvhich.
               
               
                  Accuſ. I Quàli, le Quàli, the vvhich.
               
               
                  Ablat. Dai Quàli, dalle Quàli, from the vvhich.
               
            
            But in the oblique caſes there is alſo Cùi: that dothe belonge to bothe genders, and nombers. And maye be declined in this vvyſe.
            
               
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        Di Cùi,
                     
                     of vvhome, vvhoſe.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        A Cùi,
                     
                     to vvhome.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Cùi,
                     
                     vvhome.
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        Da Cùi,
                     
                     from vvhome.
                  
               
            
            
               The vſe of this Noume Cùi is ſuche, as vvee maye ſpeake it thorough out all the oblique caſes and numbers.
               
                  
Genit. Mi parlò tuo pàdre, di cùi è il cauallo: thy father hath ſpokē to me, vvhoſe horſe it is.
               Dat. Io vidi il tùo fratèllo, à cùi dièdi il libro: I haue ſeene thy brother, to vvhome I haue geuē the booke.
               Accuſ. Io hauèua familiarità col tùo amico cùi morde il cane arrabbiàto: I had familiarity vvith thy frend, vvhome a mad dog did bite.
               Ablat. Andài à trouàre Antònio, da cui riceuèi le tùe lettère: I haue gon to finde out anthony, from vvhome, I haue receiued thy letters.
            
            And although this noume dothe lacke his nominatiue caſe, and is declined onely in the oblique caſes by adding of prepoſitions, as vvee haue before ſhevved: yet you ſhall here and there finde emongeſt good aucthors theſe formes of ſpeache: Il cùi valore: la cùi bontà: I cùi amòri: le cùi ricchezze: And thus it is needeful to declare them: as, Il valòr di cùi, the vvorthyneſſe of vvhome, La bontà di cùi, the goodneſſe of vvhome, Gli amòri di cui, the loues of vvhome: Le ricchèzze di cùi, the riches of vvhome.
            It may alſo be rightly ſaid by the oblique caſes: as, Del' cui valore, for Del valore di cui, vvhoſe vvorthineſſe, Della cùi bontà, for Della bontà di cùi, vvhoſe goodneſſe, Dei cui amòri, for De gli amòri di cui, vvhoſe loues: Delle cùi ricchèzze, for Delle ricchezze di cui, vvhoſe riches, &c.
            For by vvhome that vvill, it maye be runne thorough all the caſes in like ſorte, vvhich I do

omit for breuities ſake: but hereby it may eaſly be ſeene that the articles Il, La, I, and Le, do not in thoſe phraſes of ſpeache properly belong to the noumes Cùi, but to the noumes Valóre, Bontà, Amòri, and Ricchezze.
            
            Further, it is vſed in the datiue caſe vvithout a prepoſition, in this ſorte: Cùi non bàſta for a cùi non bàſta, to vvhome it ſuffiſethe not: cùi diède il Re poteſtà, &c. for a cùi diède, &c, to vvhome the king gaue povver.
            But touching the vſe of the noume Il Quale, there is no cauſe vvhy I ſholde curiouſly endeuour my ſelfe to alleadge many thinges: ſince it is al one vvith the latin relatiue. Therfore I vvill here note hovv that, Che, for the moſt parte is put in place therof: And that in the nominatiue and accuſatiue caſes of bothe the numbers, in this ſorte: L'huòmo, che pènſa èſſer ſàuio, mòlte vòlte è ſciòcco, the man that thinkethe hym ſelfe vvyſe, many tymes is a foole. Againe L'huòmo, ch'io àmo, è dòtto, the man that I loue, is learned. The like examples may be brought of the plurall number.
            But ſithence vvee haue made mention of Che, it is to be noted, that theſame may ſomtymes be ioyned vvith prepoſitions in this vvyſe: di Che, à Che, da Che, in Che, con Che, per Che. It is alſo ioyned vvith articles, thus: Ilche, Delche, Alche, Nelche: But vve do not ſay Colche, ſo neither Per il che, bycauſe the firſt is not in vſe; & the later is vſed but thus, Il perche. And no bodie, but ſuch as lack iudgement

of the eare, vvill confeſſe that Per il Che, is more rightly ſaid, then Il perche: hovvbeit Boccace doth vſe this often tymes, in his manner of ſpeach, but th' other neuer.
            Somtymes Che is doubled in this ſorte Che che, and ſignifyeth Qualúnque coſa, as Che che ſià, vvhat ſoeuer it be, Che che hàbbia détto, vvhat ſoeuer he hath ſaid.
            Againe, therof is made Chiúnque, vvho ſoeuer: and is of three ſyllables. But betvvene Chiunque and Qualunque, this is the difference, that thone is not ioyned to a ſubſtātiue, but the other is: and yet, that alſo ſomtymes is ſeperated from it. For Petrarke ſpeaketh thus, Chiúnque albérga, vvhoſoeuer hoſteth: vvhere Chiunque is of it ſelfe vvithout adding of any noume ſubſtantiue. Againe, he ſaiethe aftervvardes, Qualúnque animàle, vvhat ſoeuer liuing creature: vvhere Animàle, a noume ſubſtātiue is ioyned to the noume Qualúnque. Yet he ſaid ſomtymes, and that but once: Gióir di qualunque, the gladding of vvhat ſoeuer.
            From this Che taking E, and adding I, is made chi: the vvhich is put often tymes for Colui, Quéllo, Coléi, Quella, Coloro, Quélli, & Quèlle pronoumes: in this vviſe: Chi ha ſmarrita la ſtràda, tórni indiètro: for Colúi, or Quello, il quàle ha ſmarrúa, &c. vvho that hath myſſed his vvay, let hym retourne back.
            Further Chi doth many tymes ſignifie, vvho? an interrogation, and that thoroughout all the caſes: as.
            
               
               By the
               
                  
                     Nom. Chifu? vvho vvas it? chiilféce? vvho hathe donne it?
                     Geni. Di chiſeitu figliuòlo? vvhoſe ſonne art thou?
                     Dat. A chi l'hài dàto? to vvhome haſt thou geuen it.
                     Accuſ. Chi battèſti? vvhome haſt thou beaten?
                     Ablat. Da chi l'hài vdito? from vvhome haſt thou harde it?
                  
               
            
            Beſides vvee ſay: Chi qua e Chi là, ſome here, & ſome there: Chiſpogliàua quèſto, e chi quèllo: ſome did ſpoile this man, and ſome that man.
            Laſtly vvee ſay Chi cheſia, vvho ſoeuer it be.
         
         
            Of Noumes vvhich are called Partitiues, Infinitiues, Diſtributiues and Negatiues.
            Firſt the noume Altri, that vvith this voyce is onely content, and doth belong to euery number, and gender, is thus vſed: Ma quàndo àltri volèſſe oppòrſi, But vvhen an other vvolde be contrary. Alſo, Altridice, an other ſayth.
            But in the oblique caſes, it hath, Altrùi: vvherfore vvee ſay: Io pòrto la pèna dell' altrui colpa, It may alſo be ſaide, della còlpa altrui: that is, I ſuffer the punyſhement of an others fault. All' altrùi valòre, or al valòre altrui, to an others vvorthyneſſe. Dall' altrui forza, or Dalla forza altrui: By an others ſtrength.
            
               
But the noume Altro, hath in the plurall Altri, and is of the maſculine gender: as Altra, vvhich is of the feminine hath in the plurall nomber Altre. the vvhich noume doth differ from the noume Altri: in this that it is neuer coupled to a ſubſtantiue: But Altro is often, & alvvayes referred to the afore named perſonnes. For vvee ſay: Làltro tùo amico, gli àltri tuòi amici, l'àltra tùa amica, l'altre tùe amiche: And in like ſorte thorough out all the caſes, the vocatiue except. It is vſed alſo in the neuter gender, and vvee ſay: Altro domàndo, I requier an other thing. Auzi àltro, rather ſome other thing. But then it doth forſake the article, as by example, apperethe.
            
               Alcuno, ſome bodie, hath in the plurall Alcùni, ſome: as Alcùna, ſome bodie, hath Alcune, in the plurall, ſome. And that thorough out all the caſes: and they are of the feminine gender.
            But the noume Ogniùno, Ciaſcùno: that is, euery one, eache one: Alſo Niùno, Verùno, Neſſúno, Nullo: that is, none, no one, no bodie: do vvant the plurall nomber: vvhich doth alſo fayle them, vvhē they be of the feminine gender, as Ogniúna, Ciaſcúna, Niúna, Verùna, Neſſúna, Nulla.
            
            And although this noume Nulla, be many tymes vſed in the neuter gender, and ſignifieth, nothing: as Núlla pòſſe leuàr, (ſaieth the Poet); I can take nothing avvaye: yet doth it ſignify alſo ſom thing: as Vuòitu nulla? vvil you any thing?
            
               
Laſtly it is to be knovvne, hovv that all theſe noumes do refuſe the articles: for vve do not ſay, l' Alcùno, l'Ogniuno, il Ciaſcùno, il Neſſuno, &c.
            
         
         
            Of Pronoumes.
            A Pronoume vve call that vvorde, that is vſed in the ſtedde of a noume: ſuch as is alſo a pronoume bothe vvith the Greckes & latines. VVherfor ſome are primatiues, and ſome deriuatiues: they haue alſo nombers, genders, and perſonnes, as haue the Grecke & Latin pronoumes. But vvhat they haue that is either like, or vnlike vnto them, the diligent reader may eaſly perceiue, aſvvell by the handling novv of them, as by the types here follovving.
            
               
               
                  Certaine Pronoumes.
                  
                     Primitiues.

                           
                              Maſ. gen.
                              
                                 Sing. nom.

                                       Io, I: Tu, thou: Se, hym: Egli, Ei, E', Quèllo, colúi, he: Eſſo, he there: Quèſto, Coſtui, this man: Cio, that: Cotèſto, that man.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Plu. nom.

                                       Noi, vve: Voi, you: Eglino, Quelli, Lòro, Colóro, they: Eſſi, theſe there: Quèſti, coſtóro, thes men: Cotèsti, thoſe men.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Femi. gen.
                              
                                 Sing. nom.

                                       Ella, Lei, Quèlla, Colei, ſhe: Eſſa, ſhe there: Quèſta, Coſtéi, this vvoman: Cotesta, that vvhoman.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Plu. nom.

                                       Elleno, Elle, Quelle, they: Eſſe, thoſe there: Queſte, thes vvomen: Cotéſte, thoſe vvomen.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Deriuatiues.

                           
                              Maſ. gen.
                              
                                 Sing. nom.

                                       Mio, myne: Tuo, thyne: Suo, his: Nóſtro, ours: Voſtro, yours.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Plu. nom.

                                       Miéi, myne: Tuoi, thyne: Suòi, thers: Noſtri, ours: Voſtri, yours.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Femi. gen.
                              
                                 Sing. nom.

                                       Mia, myne: Túa, thyne: Sua, hers: Noſtra, ours: Voſtra, yours.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Plu. 
                                       •
                                    om.

                                       Mie, myne: Tue, thyne: Sue, hers: Noſtre, ours: Voſtre, yours.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Pronoumes belonging to bothe genders.
                  
                     Io,
                     Tu,
                     Colóro,
                     Costóro,
                     Lóro,
                     Se.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of the declining of a Pronoume.
            
               
                  The 1. example.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        Io,
                     
                     I,
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di me,
                     
                     of me,
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à me,
                     
                     to me,
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        me,
                     
                     me,
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da me,
                     
                     from me,
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plu.
                     
                     
                        Nói,
                     
                     VVee,
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di nói,
                     
                     of vs,
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à nói,
                     
                     to vs,
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        nói,
                     
                     vs,
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da nói,
                     
                     from vs.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 2. example.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        Tu,
                     
                     Thovv,
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di te,
                     
                     of thee,
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à te,
                     
                     to thee,
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        te,
                     
                     thee,
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        tu,
                     
                     thovv,
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da te,
                     
                     from thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plu.
                     
                     
                        Vói,
                     
                     You,
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di vói,
                     
                     of you, or yours,
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à vói,
                     
                     to you,
                  
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        vói,
                     
                     you,
                  
                  
                     Vocat.
                     
                        vói,
                     
                     you,
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da vói,
                     
                     from you.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 3. example.
                  
                     Genit. Sing. and Plu.
                     
                     
                        di Se,
                     
                     Of hym, or his; of them, or theirs.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à Se,
                     
                     To hym, to them.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Se,
                     
                     Hym, them.
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da Se,
                     
                     From hym, from them.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 4. example.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        Egli, Ei, E', Quéllo Colúi,
                     
                     He.
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        Di lúi, colúi, quello,
                     
                     of hym, or his.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à lúi, colúi, quello,
                     
                     to hym.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        lúi, colúi, quéllo,
                     
                     hym.
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da lúi, colúi, quéllo,
                     
                     from hym.
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plu.
                     
                     
                        Eglino, Quélli, coloro,
                     
                     They.
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di Loro, coléro, Quélli,
                     
                     of them, or thers.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à Lóro, colòro, Quèlli,
                     
                     to them.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Lòro, colòro, Quelli,
                     
                     them.
                  
                  
                     Ablat,
                     
                        da Lòro, coloro, Quelli.
                     
                     from them.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The 5. example.
                  
                     
                        Nom. ſing.
                     
                     
                        Ella, Colèi, Quèlla,
                     
                     Shee.
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di Lèi, colèi, quèlla,
                     
                     hers, or of her.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        a Lèi, colèi, quèlla,
                     
                     to her.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Lèi, colèi, quella,
                     
                     her.
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da Lèi, colèi, quella,
                     
                     from her.
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        Nom. plu.
                     
                     
                        Elleno, Colòro, Quelle,
                     
                     They,
                  
                  
                     Genit.
                     
                        di Lòro, coloro, quelle,
                     
                     of them, or thers.
                  
                  
                     Dat.
                     
                        à Lòro, colòro, quelle,
                     
                     to them.
                  
                  
                     Accuſ.
                     
                        Loro, colòro, quelle,
                     
                     them.
                  
                  
                     Ablat.
                     
                        da Lòro, colòro, quelle,
                     
                     from them.
                  
               
            
            
               The 6. example.
               
                  Nom. ſin. Quèſto, Coſtùi, this man.
               Genit. di Quèſto, coſtúi, of this man, or this mans.
               Dat. à Quèsto, coſtúi, to this man.
               Accuſ. Quèſto, coſtúi, this man.
               Ablat. da Quèſto, coſtúi, from this man.
               
                  Nom. plu. Quèſti, Costoro, theſe men.
               Genit. di quèſti, coſtòro, of theſe men, or theſe mēs.
               Dat. à quèſti, coſtòro, to theſe men.
               Accuſ. Quèſti, coſtòro, theſe men.
               Ablat. da quèſti, coſtòro, from theſe men.
            
            
               The 7. example.
               
                  Nom. ſing. Quésta, Coſtèi, this vvoman.
               Geni. di queſta, coſtéi, of this womā, or this vvomās.
               Dat. a quèſta, coſtei, to this vvoman.
               Accuſ. Queſta, coſtei, this vvoman.
               Ablat. da queſta, coſtei, from this vvoman.
               
                  Nom. plu. Quéſte, Costòro, theſe vvomen.
               Genit. di quèſte, costòro, of theſe vvomen, or theſe vvomens.
               Dat. á quèste, costòro, to theſe vvomen.
               Accuſ. Quèste, costòro, theſe vvomen.
               Ablat. da quèste, costòro, from theſe vvomen.
            
            
               
Touching th'other pronoumes, that is, the deriuatiues, they follovve altogeather the declenſiō of thoſe noumes, that do ende in O, if they be of the maſculine gender, or in A, if they be of the feminine gender.
            But the pronoume Ciò, is alvvayes of the ſingular number, and neuter gender.
         
         
            Of th' vſe of Pronoumes.
            Theſe Pronoumes Egli, Ei, E', and Ella do alvvayes ſarue to the nominatiue caſe: as Egli diſſe, he hath ſaid: Ella volſe, ſhe hath torned.
            The like is of theſe pronoumes Eglino, & Elleno, (vvhich Orators & ſuch as vvrite in proſe do vſe) for they alſo ſarue to the nominatiue caſe: and vve ſay Eglino diſſero, they haue ſaid: Elleno vòlſero, they haue torned.
            Againe: theſe pronoumes Egli, and E, ſomtymes are filling vvordes, and are rather vſed for a grace in ſpeach, then of any neceſſity: as Egli non ha guàri di tempo, for Non ha guàri di tempo, it is no longe tyme: Againe, Eparrà mēzògna, for Parrà menzògna, it ſhall ſeeme a lye.
            
               
               Pronoumes.

                     Lui
                     Lei

                           Do ſarue to the
                        
                     
                     Loro
                  
                  
                     Genit. Ci ſiàmo ricordàti di Lúi, Léi, Lòro, VVe haue remembred vs, of hym, her, them.
                     Dat. Diſſi à Lúi, Léi, Lòro, I haue tolde hym, her, them.
                     Accuſ. Vidi Lúi, Léi, Lòro, I haue ſeene hym, her, them.
                     Ablat. Horiccuúto cio da lui, Léi. Lòro: I haue receiued that from hym, her, them.
                     Nom. Costúi, Costéi; Colúi, Coléi diſſe, this man, this vvoman; he, ſhe hath ſaid. Costòro, Colòro, diſſero, thes, they haue ſaid.
                  
               
            
            
               Pronoumes.

                     Coſtúi
                     Colúi
                     Coſtéi

                           do ſarue to the
                        
                     
                     Col
                           •
                        i
                     Coſtoro
                     Coloro
                  
                  
                     Gen. Mi ricòrdo di Coſtúi, coſtéi, colúi, coléi, coſtòro, coloro: I do remember me of this mā, this vvoman, hym, her, theſe, them.
                     Dat. Io diſſi à costúi, coſtei, colúi, coléi, coſtoro, colòro: I haue tolde to this man, this vvoman, hym, her, theſe, them.
                     Accuſ. Io àmo coſtúi, coſtéi, colúi, coléi, coſtòro, colòro: I loue this man, this vvvoman, hym, her, theſe, them.
                     Abl. Io l'ho vdito da coſtúi, coſtèi, colúi, coléi, coſtòro, colòro, I haue harde it f
                           •
                        om this man, this vvoman, hym, her, theſe, them.
                  
               
            
            
               
Further the articles, Li, gli, and Le, are often tymes vſed for theſe pronoumes, Lúi and Léi: And that onelye in the datiue caſe, in this vviſe: Le di, or dille, for di à Léi, tell her: Dà gli or Dàlli, for Dà à Lúi, guie hym: and remember that theſe articles Gli, and Le, vvhich are of the plurall number, are vſed for Lúi and Léi: pronoumes of the ſingular nomber.
            Againe the articles Lo, La, Gli, and Le are vſed for theſe pronoumes Lúi, Léi, and Loro: and that in the accuſatiue caſe onelye, thus: Lo batté, and Battéllo, for Batté lúi or Quéllo, he hath beaten hym: La Baciò, & Baciòlla, for Baciò Lei or Quella: he hath kiſſed her: Gli percoſſe, and Percòſſegli, for Percoſſe Loro, or Quelli, he hath ſtriken them: Le baciò, and Baciòlle, for Baciò loro or Quelle: he hath kiſſed them.
            
               Pronoume.

                     
                        Se
                        
                           ſerueth to the
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Genit. Neſſuno ſi diſmentica di ſe: no body is forgeatfull of hym ſelfe.
                     Dat. Catòne diéde à ſe la mèrte: Cato hath geuen to hym ſelfe the deathe.
                     Accuſ. Ciaſcùno ama più ſe, che gli àltri: Eache one louethe hym ſelfe, more then others.
                     Ablat. Quèsto lo diſſe da ſe, he hathe tolde hym this of hym ſelfe.
                  
               
            
            But this Pronoume Se, is often ioyned vvith

               Stéſſo, in the ſingular nomber, and maſculine gender: and Stèſſi, in the plurall nomber, the ſame gen der. Alſo Steſſa in the feminine gender, and ſing. nom. and steſſe, in the plurall nomber, and the ſame gender: the vvhich is done thorough out all the oblique caſes, except the vocatiue, in this vvyſe.
            
               Di Se steſſo, of hym ſelfe: Di ſe steſta, of her ſelfe: Di ſe ſteſſi, of them ſelues: Di ſe ſteſſe, of them ſelues. Alſo Aſe ſtèſſo, to hym ſelfe: A ſe ſteſſa, to her ſelfe: A ſe ſteſſi and A ſe ſteſſe, to them ſelues. Againe, Se ſtèſſo, hym ſelfe: Se ſteſſa, her ſelfe: Se ſteſſi and Se ſteſſe, them ſelues. To conclude, Da ſe ſteſſo, by hym ſelue: Da ſe ſteſſa, by her ſelfe: Da ſe ſteſſi, and Da ſe ſteſſe, by them ſelues. The ſame is to be vnderſtode of Medèſimo, Medèſima, Medèſimi, Medèſime:
            
            Theſe are alſo ioyned to all other pronoumes: for vve ſay: Io steſſo or medeſimo, I my ſelfe: Di me ſtèſſo, or medeſimo, of my ſelfe: And ſo in like ſorte thorough out all the caſes, the vocatiue except. In the plurall number vve ſay, Noi ſtèſſi or medeſimi, vve our ſelues: Di noi ſtèſſi, or medèſimi, of vs our ſelues: &c. Alſo Tu ſteſſo, Tu ſteſſa, thovv thy ſelfe: Io ſteſſà, I my ſelfe. Nòi ſtèſſe, vve our ſelues: Di nòi ſtèſſe, of vs our ſelues: Di vòi ſtèſſe, of you your ſelues.
            
               Egli ſteſſo, he hym ſelfe: Di lùi ſtèſſo, of hym ſelfe: Ella ſtèſſa, ſhe her ſelfe: Di lei stèſſa, of her ſelfe: &c. Eglino ſtèſſi, they them ſelues: Di lòro

ſtèſſi, of them ſelues, &c. Elleno ſteſſe, they them ſelues: Di lòro ſteſſe, of them ſelues, &c.
            But to vvhat ende do I ſtaye vpō ſomany examples: ſince theſe vvordes do not onely accompanye all the Pronoumes, but Noumes alſo? For many tymes vve ſpeake in this vviſe, il Re ſteſſo, or medèſimo, the king hym ſelfe: La Regina ſteſſa, or medeſima, the Queene her ſelfe: i Cieli ſtèſſi or medeſimi, the ſelfe heauens: Le ſtèlle ſteſſe, or medeſſime, the ſelfe ſtarres.
            Neither is it to be omitted hovv that Steſſo doth receiue in the beginning the letter I, vvhen an article goeth before it, that doth ende in a vouell, the vvhich article doth forſake his vouell, and taketh an Apoſtropha.
            
               Pronoumes.

                     Eſſo
                     Eſſa

                           do ſarue to the
                        
                     
                     Eſſi
                     Eſſe
                  
                  
                     Nomi. Eſſo or Eſſa fú, diſſe, fece: he or ſhee hathe ben, hathe ſaid, hathe donne: Alſo, Eſſi or Eſſe fúrono: they haue ben.
                     Gen. Miricorderò di Eſſo or Eſſa, Eſſi, Eſſe: I ſhalbe myndefull of hym, or her, them.
                     Dat. Il diède ad eſſo, &c: he hathe geuen it to hym, &c.
                     Ablat. L'ho vdito da Eſſo, &c: I haue harde it from hym, &c.
                  
               
            
            Hovvbeit all theſe, except the Nominatiue caſe vvere better explained by the Pronoumes Lúi, Léi, and Lóro: ſo that one ſholde ſpeake more rightly

in this ſorte: Lo mi ricòrdo di lúi, Léi, Lóro: L'ho dáto à lúi, Léi, Lóro: Ho vedúto Lúi, Léi, Lóro: L'ho riceuúto da lúi, léi, lóro.
            
            Further thoſe Pronoumes, are ioyned to certaine Noumes thoroughout all the caſes, the vocatiue except: as appereth by this tipe follovving.
            
               the Pronoume Eſſo, is ioyned to certaine noumes in the

                     Nom. Eſſo Re diſſe, the Kinge hath ſaide.
                     Genit. Vàgo di Eſſe giouani, deſirous of the yonge vvomen.
                     Dat. Dièdi il libro ad eſſo giùdice, I gaue the booke to the iudge.
                     Accuſ. Percòſſe Eſſi nemici, he did ſtrike th' enemies.
                     Ablat. Il riccuci da Eſſi amici, I haue receiued it from frendes.
                  
               
            
            Laſtly, thus th' Italians do ſay, Con eſſo Lùi, Lèi, Lèro: for con Lùi, Lèi, Lòro, vvith hym, her, them. Alſo, Con éſſo téco, for Con tèco or Téco, vvith thee: Con èſſo mèco, for Con mèco or meco, vvith me: Con èſſo ſéco, for Con ſéco or Seco, vvith hym. Againe, Con èſſo nói, vvith vs: Con èſſo voi, vvith you.
            They ſay alſo Con èſſo le màni, vvith the handes. Con èſſo vn còlpo, vvith one blovve. And not a fevv of theſe kinde of ſpeaches, do th' Italians vſe, they chiefly that inhabit Tuſcane: Hovvbeit, I vvolde not haue them to be generally vſed.
            Theſe Pronoumes Quèſti, Quèi or Quègli, are accuſtomed for the moſt parte to be put in ſtedde

of the Pronoumes, Quèſto, Quèllo; or Costui, and Colui: & that many times in the Nominatiue caſe, and by it ſelfe, vvithout the adding of any ſubſtantiue: Hovvbeit they are alvvayes referred to ſome man, that a little before hathe ben mencioned: as by a fevv examples ſhall plainely appeare. For vve ſay, Ciceròne fu non ſólo Oratòr ſ
                     •
                  mmo, ma anchòra óttino cittadino: Questi giouò mòlta alla ſua patria: Cicero vvas not onely an excellent Orator, but a very good Citizen: this man hathe greatly profited his contry. Alſo, Quégli parlo, he hathe ſpoken. And ſuche like almoſte inumerable, thovv ſhall finde, in the Tuſcane vvriters. But (to ſpeake frely vvhat thinke) I can ſkarſe be brought to allovv of it: For to me it ſeemethe a kinde of ſpeache to greatly affected.
            Therfore Quésto and Quéllo, vvhen they are of the maſculine gender, do requier a noume ſubſtā
               tiue: as Quésto Re, this King, Quéllo préncipe, that prince. But vvhen they are of the neuter gender, they put avvay the noume ſubſtantiue, and therfore vve ſay Quèsto che io dico, è coſi this vvhich I do tell, is thus. Againe Quéllo non è cosi, that is not ſo.
            Touching the vvhich Pronoumes, this is not to be forgotten, that vvhen they are expreſſed by the genitiue plurall, they are vvont to be depriued of theire helpes: that is (vvith the Tuſcanes) of the prepoſition Di, in this ſorte: A càſa quésti vſurài, for à càſa di questi vſurài: to the houſe of theſe vſurers.
            
               
The Pronoume Cio, the vvhich vve haue ſaid before to be the neuter gēder: is vſed in theſe ſortes of ſpeache: as Cioè, that is: Sopra ciò, thervpon: Oltre à ciò, beſides that: Ciòche, vvhatſoeuer: Acciòche, to thende that: Perciòche, bycauſe that: Perciò, therfore.
            But in vvhat belongethe to the Pronoume Cotèsto, it is geuen to thinges and perſonnes, that are out of the pronouncer, vverfore vve ſay to hym, vvith vvhome vve ſpeake: Cotéſto libro, il quale tu hai nelle màni, è bello, that booke, vvhich thovv haſt in thy handes, is a faire booke. VVee vſe this Pronoume alſo in the neuter gender, in this vviſe, Cotésto, che tu dici, é véro, that that thovv ſaieſt, is tru.
            To conclude, it ſemeth behouefull to ſpeake not a little of Ci and Ne, vvich are vſed for Noi, Mi for Me, Vi for Voi, and Ti for Te. But bycauſe they are for the moſt parte fixed to verbes, as it often happeneth in the Hebrue tonge: therſore vve do referre them to that place vvhere vve ſhall entreat of thoſe verbes.
         
         
            Of the Verbe.
            There are fovver cōiugations of Verbes, vvhich are chiefly knovvne bytheire infinitiue modes.
            The firſt cōiugation is of Verbes that in th'infinitiue mode haue A, long before RE: as Amare, to loue: Cantare, to ſing: Volare, to fly: Mangiare, to eate, &c.
            The ſecōde is of Verbes that haue E, lōg before

               RE: as Valére, to be vvorthe: Hauére, to haue, Teuére, to holde, &c.
            The thirde is of Verbes that haue E, ſhorte before RE: as Léggere, to reade: Scriuere, to vvrite: Viuere, to liue: Ridere, to laugh, &c.
            The fourthe is of Verbes that haue I, longe before RE: as Vdire, to heare: Morire, to dye: Finire, to ende. &c.
            
               The firſt Coniugation.
               
                  Th'indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Amo, I loue.
                        
                           Tu Ami, thovv loueſt.
                        
                           Colui Ama, he loueth.
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        
                           Nói Amiàmo, vve loue.
                        
                           Vói Amate, you loue.
                        
                           Coloro Amano, they loue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preter imperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Amàua,
                        Tu Amàui,
                        Colui Amàua,

                              I
                              thovv
                              he

                                    Loued, or did loue.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Amauàmo,
                        Voi Amauàte,
                        Coloro Amauàno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Amài, and ho amàto,
                        Tu Amàsti, and hai amato,
                        Colui Amò: and ha amato,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       Haue loued
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi amāmo, & habbiàmo amato
                        Voi Amàste, and hauete amato,
                        Coloro Amàrono, Amaron, Amàro, Amàr, & hanno amato.
                     
                  
               
               It is to be remembred that Amaron and Amar, in the third perſon plural of this preterperſectenſe, are to be vſed vvhen the vvorde that follovveth doth begin vvith a conſonant. And this you ſhall finde obſerued in ſundry places by good aucthors.
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io hauéua amato,
                        Tu hauéui amàto,
                        Colui hauéua amàto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       Had loued.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói haueuàmo amato,
                        Vói hauéuate amato,
                        Coloro haueuàno amato,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Amerò,
                        Tu Amerài,
                        Colui Amerà,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhall, or vvill loue.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Ameremo,
                        Vói Amerete,
                        Coloro Ameranno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
Note that in ſtedde of Amerò, and the like future tenſe generally of all other Verbes, th'Italian vſeth the infinitiue mode vvith this Verbe Voglio before it: as,
               
                  Sing.

                        Io Voglio amare,
                        Tu Vuoi amare,
                        Colui Vuole amare,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       vvill loue.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Vogliamo amare,
                        Voi Volete amare,
                        Coloro Vogliono amare,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Likevviſe

                        
                           Io Voglio tenère, I vvill holde.
                        
                           Io Voglio leggere, I vvill reade.
                        
                           Io Voglio vdire, I vvill heare.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'imparatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Singul.

                        
                           Ama tu, loue thou.
                        
                           Ami colùi, let hym loue.
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        
                           Amiamo noi, Let vs loue.
                        
                           Amate voi, loue you.
                        
                           Amino coloro, let them loue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Non amare: Loue not thou: for in forbidding they vſe euer more th'infinitiue mode vvith Non: in ſtedde of the ſingular number.
               
                  
                     Th'optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio Voglia, or Dio Voglia, or O che, or O Dio che.
                  
                     
Sing.

                        Io Ami,
                        Tu Ami,
                        Colui Ami,

                              
                                 god graunt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             loue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Amiamo,
                        Voi Amiàte,
                        Coloro Amino,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Diò volèſſe, or Dio voleſſe, or O Dio che, or O che.
                  Sing.

                        Io Amàſſi,
                        Tu Amàſſi,
                        Colúi Amàſſe,

                              
                                 vvolde to god that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             loued or did loue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Amàſſimo,
                        Voi Amàste,
                        Coloro Amàſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio vóglia, Dio vóglia, O Dio'che, O che.
                  Sin.

                        Io hàbbia amàto,
                        Tu hàbbi amato,
                        Colui hàbbia amato,

                              
                                 god graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue loued
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói habbiàmo amàto,
                        Vói hàbbiate amato,
                        Colóro habbiàno amato
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio volèſſe, Dio volèſſe, ò Diò che, ô che.
                  
                     
Sin.

                        Io haueſſi amàto,
                        Tu hauèſſi amato,
                        Colùi hauèſſe amato,

                              
                                 I vvold to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had loued
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi hauèſſimo amato,
                        Voi hauèste amàto,
                        coloro hauèſſero amato
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. Dio voglia che.
                  Sing.

                        Io Ami da qua innanzi,
                        Tu Ami da qua innanzi,
                        Colui Ami da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                       
                                          
                                             loue herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Amiàmo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi Amiate da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro Amino da qua innanzi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſubiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Ami,
                        Tu Ami,
                        Colui Ami,

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             loue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Amiamo,
                        Voi Amiate,
                        Coloro Amino,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterimperfectenſe. Auegnache.
                  
                  
                     Io Amaſſi: Although I loued or did loue.
                  
                     Tu Amaſſi: Although thou louedeſt or dideſt loue, &c. as in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Amerèi, & Ameria,
                        Tu Amaresti,
                        Colùi Amarèbbe, and Ameria,

                              
                                 if
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde loue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Amarèmmo,
                        Voi Amareste,
                        Coloro Amarebbono, and Ameriano.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe. Quando.
                  
                  
                     Io hàbbia amato, vvhen I haue loued.
                  
                     Tu hàbbi amato, vvhen thou haſt loued, &c. as in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io hauerèi and Haueria amato,
                        Tu hauerèſti amato,
                        Colui hauerèbbe & Haueria amato:

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde haue loued.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi hauerèmmo amato,
                        Voi hauerèſte amato,
                        Coloro hauerébbono & Haueriano amato.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                  
                     Io hauèſſi amato, Since I had loued.
                  
                     Tu haueſſi amato, Since thou haddeſt loued, &c. as in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io hauerò amàto,
                        Tu hauerài amato,
                        Colui hauerà amato,

                              
                                 vhē
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue loued.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi hauerèmo amato,
                        Voi hauerète amato,
                        Coloro hauerāno amato,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Amare, to loue.
               
               
                  Preter perfectenſe.
                  
                     Hauere amato, to haue loued.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  
                     Douere amare
                  
                  
                     Eſſere per amare
                     
                        To be to loue, or to loue herafter.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hauere ad amare
                  
               
               
                  
                  Participles

                        
                           Amante, louing: Amato loued.
                        
                           Amanti louing: Amati loued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Gerūdes
                     
                        Preſent tenſe.
                        Amando Io, Tu, Colui, Noi, Voi, Coloro: I, thou, he, vvee, you, they louing.
                        
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        Hauendo amato Io, Tu, Colui, Noi, Voi, Coloro: I, thou, he, vvee, you, they hauing loued.
                        
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        Douendo amàre
                        Eſſendo per amàre

                              Io, tu, colui, noi, voi, coloro: I, thou, he, vvee, you, they being, or hauing to loue.
                              
                           
                        
                        Hauendo amare
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The ſeconde Coniugation.
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Téngo: I holde.
                        
                        Tu tiéni: thou holdeſt.
                        
                        Colui tiéne: he holdeth.
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói Teniàmo: vvee holde.
                        
                        Vói tenete: you holde.
                        
                        Coloro tengono: they holde.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preter imperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Tenéua, and Tenea,
                        Tu tenéui,
                        Colúi tenèua and tenea,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       hilde or did holde.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói teneuàmo:
                        Voi teneuàte,
                        Colòro teneuàno & teneano
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Ténni, and ho tenùto:
                        Tu tenèsti, & hài tenùto,
                        Colùi ténne, & ha tenúto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       haue hilde.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói tenèmmo, and habbiàmo tenúto,
                        Vòi tenèſte, & hauète tenuto,
                        Coloro tènnero, and hanno tenuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Hauèua tenùto,
                        Tu hauèui tenùto,
                        Colùi hauèua tenúto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had hilde
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi haueuàmo tenùto,
                        Voi haueuàte tenùto,
                        Coloro haueuàno tenuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Tenerò and Terrò,
                        Tu tenerài, and terrai,
                        Colúi tenerà, and terra,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhall, or vvill holde.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi tenerèmo, and terremo,
                        Voi tenerète, and terrete,
                        Coloro tenerànno, & terrāno
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Io voglio tenere, I vvill holde,
                  
                     Tu voi tenere, thou vvill holde, &c. as in the indicatiue mode.
               
               
                  Th'imparatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Sing.
                     
                        
                           Tièni tu: holde thou.
                        
                           Tenga colui, let hym holde.
                        
                           Non Tenere, holde not thou.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Teniàmo nòi, let vs holde.
                        
                           Teniàte vòi, holde you.
                        
                           Tengano coloro, let them holde,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th' optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Ténga,
                        Tu ténga,
                        Colúi ténga,

                              
                                 god graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             holde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi teniàmo,
                        Voi teniàte,
                        Colòro tèngano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Tenèſſi,
                        Tu tenèſſi,
                        Colùi teneſſe,

                              
                                 I vvolde to god that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             hilde or did holde
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi tenèſſimo.
                        Vói tenèste,
                        Coloro tenèſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hàbbia tenuto,
                        Tu hàbbi tenuto,
                        Colùi hàbbia tenùto,

                              
                                 god graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue hilde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi habbiamo tenuto,
                        Voi habbiate tenuto,
                        Coloro habbiano tenuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſo che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauéſſi tenúto,
                        Tu haueſſi tenuto,
                        Colúi haueſſe tenuto,

                              
                                 I wolde to god that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had hilde
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Haueſſimo tenuto,
                        Voi haueſte tenuto,
                        Coloro haueſſero tenuto
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sing.

                        Io Ténga da qua innanzi,
                        Tu Tenga da qua innanzi,
                        Colúi tenga da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             holde herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Teniamo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi teniate da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro tengano da qua innanzi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſubiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Tenga,
                        Tu tenga,
                        Colui tenga,

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             holde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Teniamo,
                        Voi teniate,
                        Coloro tengano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                     Io Teneſſi, Although I hilde or did holde.
                  
                     Tu teneſſi, Although thou hildeſt or dideſt holde, &c. As in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Teneréi, Terréi, Teneria, and Terria.
                        Tu tenerèſti & terrèſti,
                        Colui tenerèbbe, terrèbbe, teneria, & terria,

                              
                                 if
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde holde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Pl.

                        Noi Teneremmo & terremmo,
                        Voi tenerèſte & terreſte,
                        coloro tenerebbono, terrebbono, teneriano, and terriano.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe. Quando.
                  
                  
                     Io Hàbbia tenuto: vvhen I haue hilde.
                  
                     Tu hàbbi tenuto, vvhen thou haſt hilde, &c. As in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerèi, and Haueria tenuto,
                        Tu hauereſti tenuto,
                        Colui hauerèbbe & haueria tenuto,

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             holde haue hilde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi haueremmo tenuto,
                        Voi hauereſte tenuto,
                        Coloro hauerebbono, & haueriano tenuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poiche.
                  
                  
                     Iò Haueſſi tenuto, Since I had hilde.
                  
                     Tu Haueſſi tenuto, Since thou haddeſt hilde, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerò tenuto,
                        Tu hauerài tenuto,
                        Colui hauerà tenuto,

                              
                                 vvhē
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue hilde.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói haueremo tenuto,
                        Voi hauerete tenuto,
                        Coloro hauerāno tenuto
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Tenére, To holde.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Hauèr tenuto, To haue hilde.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  
                     Douér tenere
                  
                  
                     Eſſer per tenere
                     
                        To be to holde, or to holde herafter.
                     
                  
                  
                     Hauere a tenere
                  
               
               
                  Participles

                        
                           Tenénte, holding. Tenùto, hilde.
                        
                           Tenenti, holding. Tenuti, hilde.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Gerūdes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Tenèndo, Holding.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        
                           Hauèndo tenuto, hauing hilde.
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        
                           Douèndo tenere
                        
                        
                           Hauèndo à tenere
                           
                              Being, or hauing to holde.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eſſéndo per tenère
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The thirde Coniugation.
               
                  Th'Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Singul.

                        Io Lèggo, I reade.
                        
                        Tu Lèggi, thou readeſt.
                        
                        Colui Lègge, he readeth.
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Leggiàmo, vvee reade.
                        
                        Voi Leggete, you reade.
                        
                        Coloro Leggono, they reade.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Leggèua, and Leggèa,
                        Tu Leggeui.
                        Colui Leggeua and Leggea,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       did reade.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Leggeuàmo,
                        Voi Leggeuate,
                        coloro Leggeuano & leggeano
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Leſſi, and Ho letto,
                        Tu leggéſti, & hài letto,
                        Colùi leſſe, & ha letto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                                 
                                    
                                       haue reade.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói Leggémmo, and habbiamo letto,
                        Voi leggèste, and hauete letto,
                        Colóro leſſero, and hā
                           no letto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Hauéua letto,
                        Tu hauèui letto,
                        Colui hauèua letto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had reade.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói Haueuàmo letto,
                        Vói haueuàte letto,
                        Coloro haueuàno letto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Leggerò,
                        Tu leggerài,
                        Colúi leggerà,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhall or vvill reade.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Leggerèmo,
                        Voi leggeréte,
                        Coloro leggerànno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Io Voglio leggere, I vvill reade.
                  
                     Tu Voi leggere, thou vvill read, &c. as in the Indicatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                  Th'imparatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Singul.
                     
                        
                           Lèggi tu, Reade thou.
                        
                           Lègga colui, let hym reade.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Leggiamo noi, let vs reade.
                        
                           Leggète vói, reade you.
                        
                           Lèggano coloro, let them reade.
                        
                           Non Leggere, reade not thou.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio Vòglia che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Légga,
                        Tu Légga,
                        Colui Légga,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói Leggiamo,
                        Vói Leggiáte,
                        Colòro Leggano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Leggéſſi,
                        Tu Leggeſſi,
                        Colúi Leggeſſe,

                              
                                 I vvolde to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             reade, or did reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Leggeſſimo,
                        Voi Leggeſte,
                        Coloro leggeſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hàbbia letto,
                        Tu hàbbi letto,
                        Colui hàbbia letto,

                              
                                 god graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nòi habbiàmo letto,
                        Vói habbiàte letto,
                        Coloro hàbbiano letto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Haueſſi letto,
                        Tu haueſſi letto,
                        Colui hauèſſe letto,

                              
                                 I vvolde to god that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauèſſimo letto,
                        Voi haueſte letto,
                        Coloro haueſſero letto
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sing.

                        Io Legga da qua innanzi.
                        Tu Legga da qua innanzi,
                        Colui Legga da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 god graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             reade herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Leggiamo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi Leggiate da qua innanzi.
                        Coloro leggano da qua innanzi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The ſubiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Legga,
                        Tu Legga,
                        Colui Legga,

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Leggiamo,
                        Voi Leggiate,
                        Coloro Leggano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                     Io Leggeſſi, Although I reade or did reade.
                  
                     Tu leggeſſi, although thou readeſt or dideſt reade, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Leggerei, & Leggeria,
                        Tu Leggeresti,
                        Colui Leggerebbe, and Leggeria,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſholde reade.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Leggeremmo,
                        Voi Leggereste,
                        Coloro Leggerèbbono, and Leggeriano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe. Quando.
                  
                  
                     Io Habbia letto, vvhen I haue reade.
                  
                     Tu Habbi letto, vvhen thou haſt reade, &c. as in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                  Othervvayes, Che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerèi, and Haueria letto,
                        Tu haueresti letto,
                        Colui hauerebbe, and haueria letto,

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde haue reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi haueremmo letto,
                        Voi hauereſte letto,
                        Coloro hauerèbbono & haueriano letto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                     Io Haueſſi letto, Since I had reade.
                  
                     Tu Haueſſi letto, Since thou haddeſt reade, &c. as in the optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerò létto,
                        Tu hauerài letto,
                        Colui hauerà letto,

                              
                                 vvhē
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue reade.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi hauerèmo letto,
                        Voi hauerète letto,
                        Coloro hauerāno letto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Leggere, to reade.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Hauér letto, to haue reade.
               
               
                  
                  Future tenſe.
                  
                     Douér Leggère
                  
                  
                     Hauer a Leggére
                     
                        To be to reade, or to reade herafter.
                     
                  
                  
                     Eſſer per Leggére
                  
               
               
                  Participles

                        
                           Leggente, reading. Letto, reade.
                        
                           Legenti, reading, Letti, reade.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gerūdes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Leggéndo, reading.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        
                           Hauèndo letto, hauing reade.
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        
                           Douèndo leggère
                        
                        
                           Hauèndo da leggère
                           
                              Being, or hauing to reade.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eſſéndo per leggère
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The forthe Coniugation.
               
                  Th' Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Singul.
                     
                        
                           Io Odo, I heare.
                        
                           Tu Odi, thou heareſt.
                        
                           Colui Ode, he heareth.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Noi Vdiàmo, vvee heare.
                        
                           Voi Vdite, you heare.
                        
                           Coloro Odono, they heare.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Vdiua,
                        Tu vdiui,
                        Colui vdiua,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       heard or did heare
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi vdiuàmo,
                        Voi vdiuate,
                        Coloro vdiuano & vdiano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Vdi, vdij, and ho vdito,
                        Tu vdisti, and hài vdito,
                        Colui vdi, and ha vdito,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       haue heard.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nòi Vdimmo, and Habbiamo vdito,
                        Voi vdiste & hauete vdito,
                        Colòro vdirono, vdiron, vdiro, vdir, and hanno vdito.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Haueua Vdito,
                        Tu hauéui vdito,
                        Colui haueua vdito,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had heard
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi haueuàmo vdito,
                        Voi haueuate vdito,
                        Coloro haueuano vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Ʋdiro,
                        Tu vdirài,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhal or vvill heare.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall or vvil heare.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Colui vdirà,
                  
                     
Plur.

                        Noi Vdiremo,
                        Voi vdirete,
                        Coloro vdirànno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Io Voglio vdire, I vvill heare.
                  
                     Tu Voi vdire, thou vvill heare, &c.
               
               
                  Th'imperatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Sing.
                     
                        
                           Odi tu: heare thou.
                        
                           Oda colui, let hym heare.
                        
                           Non Vdire, heare not thou.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Vdiàmo nòi, let vs heare.
                        
                           Vdite vòi, heare you.
                        
                           Odano coloro, let them heare,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th' optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Oda,
                        Tu Oda,
                        Colúi Oda,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             heare.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Odiàmo,
                        Voi Odiàte,
                        Colòro Odano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſe che, &c.
                  
                     Sin.
                     
                        
                           Io Vdiſſi,
                        
                        
                           Tu vdiſſi,
                        
                        
                           Colùi vdiſſe,
                           
                              I vvolde to god that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          heard or did heare
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Plu.
                     
                        
                           Noi vdiſſimo.
                        
                        
                           Vói vdiste,
                        
                        
                           Coloro vdiſſero,
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hàbbia vdito,
                        Tu hàbbia vdito,
                        Coli i hàbbia vdito,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue heard.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi habbiamo vdito,
                        Voi habbiate vdito,
                        Coloro habbiano vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauéſſi vdito,
                        Tu haueſſi vdito,
                        Colúi haueſſe vdito,

                              
                                 I wolde to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had heard
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Haueſſimo vdito,
                        Voi haueſte vdito,
                        Coloro haueſſero vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Oda da qua innāzi,
                        Tu Oda da qua innāzi
                        Colui Oda da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                       
                                          
                                             heare herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Vdiamo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi Vdiate da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro Odano da qua innanzi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The ſubiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Oda,
                        Tu Oda,
                        Colui Oda,

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             heare.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Vdiamo,
                        Voi Vdiate,
                        Coloro Odano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Vdiſſi,
                        Tu vdiſſi,
                        Colui vdiſſe,

                              
                                 Although
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             harde or did heare
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Vdiſſimo,
                        Voi vdiste,
                        Coloro vdiſſero
                     
                  
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Vdirèi, and vdiria,
                        Tu vdiresti,
                        Colùi vdirèbbe, and vdiria,

                              
                                 if
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde heare.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi vdirèmmo,
                        Voi vdireste,
                        Coloro vdirebbono, & vdiriano.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterperfectenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Habbia vdito,
                        Tu habbia vdito,
                        Colui habbia vdito,

                              
                                 vvhē
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue heard.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói habbiàmo vdito,
                        Voi habbiate vdito,
                        Coloro habbiano vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Hauerei and Haueria vdito,
                        Tu hauereſti vdito,
                        Colui hauerebbe and baueria vdito,

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhold haue heard
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Hauerēmo vdito,
                        Voi hauereſte vdito,
                        Coloro hauerebbono & haueriano vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Haueſſi vdito,
                        Tu haueſſi vdito,
                        Colui hauèſſe vdito,

                              
                                 Since that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had heard.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauèſſimo vdito,
                        Voi haueſte vdito,
                        Coloro haueſſero vdito.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io hauerò Vdito,
                        Tu hauerài vdito,
                        Colui hauerà vdito,

                              vvhē
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue heard.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu

                        Noi hauerèmo vdito,
                        Voi hauerète vdito,
                        Coloro haueranno vdito,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Vdire, to heare.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Hauére vdito, to haue heard.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  
                     Douère vdire
                  
                  
                     Hauère ad vdire
                     
                        To be to heare, or to heare herafter.
                     
                  
                  
                     Eſſere per vdire
                  
               
               
                  Participles

                        
                           Vdiente, hearing: vdito heard.
                        
                           Vdienti hearing: vditi heard.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gerundes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Odendo, Hearing.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        
                           Hauendo vdito, Hauing heard.
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        
                           Douendo Vdire
                        
                        
                           Eſſendo per vdire
                           
                              Being or hauing to heare
                           
                        
                        
                           Hauendo ad vdire
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
And bycauſe th' Italian tonge dothe lacke a Verbe paſſiue: & cannot expreſſe the paſſiue voice, vvithout the helpe of this verbe Sono: therfore vvee muſt firſt declyne this verbe before vvee can procede to th' other.
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Sing.
                     
                        
                           Io Sòno: I am.
                        
                           Tu Séi: thou arte.
                        
                           Colui E: he is.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Nói Siàmo: vvee are or be.
                        
                           Véi Séte: you are or be.
                        
                           Coloro Sono: they are or be.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preter imperfectenſe.
                  
                     Sing.
                     
                        
                           Io Era, Ivvas,
                        
                           Tu Eri, thou vvaſt.
                        
                           Colùi Era, he vvas.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Noi Erauámo and Eramo, vvee vvere,
                        
                           Voi Erauate, you vvere.
                        
                           Coloro Erano, they vvee.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Fui, and Sono ſtato,
                        Tu Fòſti, and Sei stato,
                        Colui Fu, and E ſtato,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       haue ben.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Fummo, & Siàmo ſtati,
                        Voi Foſte, and Sete ſtati,
                        Coloro Fúrono, Furo, Furo, and Sono ſtati.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Era ſtàto,
                        Tu Eri ſtato,
                        Colùi Era ſtato,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had ben.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Erauàmo ſtati,
                        Voi Erauàte ſtati,
                        Coloro Erano ſtati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Sarò, and Fia,
                        Tu Sarài,
                        Colúi Sarà, Fia, and Fié,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhal be.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Sarèmo,
                        Voi Saréte,
                        Coloro Sarànno, & Fiano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th' imperatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Singul.
                     
                        
                           Sij, Sia, and Siè tu, Be thou.
                        
                           Sia, and Siè colúi, Let hym be.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Siamo nói, Let vs be.
                        
                           Siàte vói, Be you.
                        
                           Siano colòro, Let them be.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The Optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio vòglia, Diò voglia, ô Dio che, ô che.
                  Sin.

                        Io Sia,
                        Tu Sij, Sia, and sie,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             be.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Nói Siamo,
                        Vói Siáte,
                        Colòro Siano, & Sieno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio Voleſſe, Dio voleſſe, ô Dio che, ô che,
                  Sin.

                        Io Fóſſi, & Fúſſi,
                        Tu Foſſi, & Fuſſi,
                        Colúi foſſe, & fuſſe

                              
                                 VVolde to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                       
                                          
                                             vvere.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Foſſimo, and fuſſimo,
                        Voi foſte, & fuſte,
                        Coloro foſſero, and fuſſero.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Sia ſtato,
                        Tu Sij ſtato,
                        Colui Sia ſtato,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue ben.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Siamo ſtati,
                        Voi Siàte ſtati,
                        Coloro Siano ſtati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Fóſſi stàto,
                        Tu Foſſi stato,
                        Colùi Foſſe stato,

                              
                                 I vvold to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had ben.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Foſſimo stati,
                        Voi Fóste stati,
                        coloro Foſſero stati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Sia da qua innanzi,
                        Tu Sij da qua innanzi,
                        Colui Sia da qua innāzi
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Siamo da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                       
                                          
                                             be herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Voi Siate da qua innāzi,
                        Coloro Siano da qua innanzi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The ſubiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Sia,
                        Tu Sij,
                        Colui Sia,

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I am.
                                    
                                    
                                       thou art.
                                    
                                    
                                       he is.
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee are.
                                    
                                    
                                       you are.
                                    
                                    
                                       they are.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Siamo,
                        Voi Siate,
                        Coloro Siano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Fúſſi,
                        Tu Fúſſi,
                        Colui Fúſſe,

                              
                                 Although
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             vvere.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Fuſſimo,
                        Voi Fúſte,
                        Coloro fuſſero
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Singu.

                        Io Sarèi and Saria,
                        Tu Sarèſti,
                        Colui Sarèbbe, and Saria,

                              
                                 if
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde be.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Sarèmmo,
                        Voi Sareste,
                        Coloro Sarèbbono, & ſariano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Sia stato,
                        Tu Sij stato,
                        Colúi Sia stato,

                              
                                 vvhen
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue bē.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Siamo stati,
                        Voi Siate stati,
                        Coloro Siano ſtati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Other vvyſe, Che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Sarèi, & Saria ſtato
                        Tu Saresti stato,
                        Colui Sarèbbe & Saria stato,

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde haue ben.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Saremmo stati,
                        Voi Sareſte stati,
                        Coloro ſarebbono and ſariano stati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Fuſſi stato,
                        Tu Fuſſi stato,
                        Colui Fuſſe stato,

                              
                                 Since that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had ben.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Fuſſimo stati,
                        Voi Fuste stati,
                        Coloro fuſſero stati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Saro stato,
                        Tu ſarai stato,
                        Colui ſara stato,

                              
                                 vvhen
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue ben.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Sarémo stati,
                        Voi ſaréte stati,
                        Coloro ſaránno stati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Eſſere, to be.
               
               
                  Preter perfectenſe.
                  
                     Eſſere stato, to haue ben.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Douèr' Eſſere,
                  Hauére ad Eſſere,

                        
                           To be to be, or to haue to be.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Participles
                     
                        Stàto, stàta: and ſuto, ſuta, ben.
                        
                        Stati, state: and ſuti, ſute, ben.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Gerundes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Eſſendo, Being.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        Eſſéndo ſtáto, ſtata, ſtati, ſtate: Hauing ben.
                        
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        Douendo eſſere
                        Hauendo ad eſſere

                              Being, or hauing to be.
                           
                        
                        Eſſendo per eſſere
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The declining of a Verbe paſsiue of the firſt Coniugation.
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Sono amato, I am loued.
                        
                           Tu Séi amato, thou art loued.
                        Colúi E amato: ſi àma, amaſi, he is loued.
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        
                           Noi Siàmo amati, vvee are loued.
                        
                           Voi Séte amàti, you are loued.
                        Coloro Sóno amati: ſi àmano, àmonoſi, and àmanſi, they are loued.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Era amato,
                        Tu Eria amato,

                              I
                              thou

                                    vvas loued.
                                 
                              
                              he
                           
                        
                        Colui Era amato, ſi amàua, amauaſi.
                     
                  
                  
                     
Plur.

                        Noi Erauàmo amàti,
                        Voi Erauàte amàti,

                              vvee
                              you

                                    vvere loued.
                                 
                              
                              they
                           
                        
                        Coloro Erano amati, ſi amàuano, amàuanoſi, and amàuanſi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Sono ſtato, & Fúi amato,
                        Tu Séi ſtàto, & Foſti amato,
                        Colui Eſtato, and Fu amàto: ſi amò, amoſſi.

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    haue ben loued.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Siamo ſtati, and Fúmmo amàti,
                        Voi ſéte ſtati, & Foſte amati
                        Coloro Sòno stati and Furono amati: ſi amàrono, Amaron, amàro, amar, & amàronoſi, amaronſi, amaroſi, amarſi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Era ſtato amato,
                        Tu Eristato amato,
                        Colui Erastato amato,

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    had ben loued.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi erauàmo stati amati,
                        Voierauàte stati amati,
                        Coloro érano ſtati amati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Singu.

                        Io Sarò amáto,
                        Tu Sarái amato,
                        Colui Sara amato: ſi amerà, ameràſſi.

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    ſhalbe loued.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Sarèmo amati,
                        Voi ſarete amati,
                        Coloro ſarànno amati: ſi Amerànno, amerannoſi, and amerànſi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'Imparatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Sij amàto tu, Be thou loued.
                        Sia amato colui, ſi ami, àmiſi, Let hym be loued.
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        
                           Siàmo amàti nói, Let vs be loued.
                        Siate amati voi, be you loued.
                        
                        Siano amati coloro, ſi amino, aminoſi, and aminſi, let them be loued.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The Optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  Sing.

                        Io Sia amato,
                        Tu sij amato,
                        Coluisia amàto, ſi àmi, amiſi,

                              God graūt that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          be loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Nói Siàmo amati,
                        Voi siàte amati,
                        Colóro siàno amati, ſi amino, aminoſi, and aminſi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  
                     
Sin.

                        Io Foſſi amàto,
                        Tu foſſi amato,
                        Colui foſſe amato, ſi amàſſe, amaſſeſi,

                              I vvolde to god that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          vvere loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Foſſimo amati,
                        Voi foſte amati,
                        Coloro foſſero amati, ſi amaſſero, amàſſeroſi, and amaſſerſi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Sia ſtato amato,
                        Tu Sij ſtato amato,
                        Colui Sia ſtato amato,

                              God graūt that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          haue ben loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Siàmo ſtati amati,
                        Voi Siate ſtati amati,
                        Coloro ſiano ſtati amati
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Foſſi ſtato amato,
                        Tu foſſi stato amato
                        Colui foſſe stato amato,

                              I vvolde to God that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          had ben loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi foſſimo stàti amàti,
                        Voi foſte ſtati amati,
                        Colòro foſſero ſtati amati.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  Sing.

                        Io Sia amato da qua innanzi,
                        Tu ſy amato da qua innanzi,
                        colúi ſia amato da qua innanzi,

                              God graūt that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          be loued herafter.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Siamo amati da qua innanzi,
                        Voi ſiàte amati da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro ſiano amati da qua innanzi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Subiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  
                     Io Sia amato, For aſmuche as I am loued.
                  
                     Tu ſy amato, For aſmuche as thou art loued, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                  
                     Io Foſſi amato, Although I vvere loued.
                  
                     Tu Foſſi amato, Although thou vvere loued, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Saréi & ſaria amàto
                        Tu ſareſti amato,

                              If

                                    I
                                    thou

                                          ſhold be loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    he
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Colui ſarebbe & ſaria amato: ſi amerébbe, amerebbeſi, ſi ameria, ameriaſi.
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Seremmo amati,
                        Voi ſareſte amati,

                              If

                                    vvee
                                    you

                                          ſhold be loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Coloro Sarebbono and ſariano amati: ſi amerèbbono, amerèbbonoſi, amerebbonſi, ſi ameriano, amerianoſi, & amerianſi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                     Io Sia ſtato amato: For aſmuche as I haue ben loued.
                  
                     Tu Sy ſtato amato: For aſmuche as thou haſt ben loued, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Sarei, and ſaria ſtato amato,
                        Tu ſareſti ſtato amato,
                        Colui ſarebbe, and ſaria ſtato amato,

                              If

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          ſholde haue bē loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Sarēmo ſtati amati,
                        Voi ſareſte ſtati amati,
                        Coloro ſarebbono, and ſariano ſtati amati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                  
                     Io Foſſi ſtato amato, Since I had ben loued,
                  
                     Tu foſſi ſtato amato, Since thou haddeſt ben loued, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sī.

                        Io Sarò ſtato amato,
                        Tu Sarài ſtato amato,
                        Colui Sarà ſtato amato,

                              whē
                                 
                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          ſhall haue ben loued.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Pl.

                        Noi Sarémo ſtati amati,
                        Voi Sarete ſtati amati,
                        Coloro Sarāno ſtati amati
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th' Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Eſſere amato, or Amarſi, to be loued.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Eſſere stato amato, or Eſſerſi amato, to haue ben loued.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Douère éſſere amàto, Douèrſi amare, Douere amárſi,
                  Hauère ad éſſere amato, Hauére ad amarſi, hauèrſi ad amare,
                  
                     Eſſere per amàrſi, Eſſerſi per amare, to be, to be loued: to haue to be loued.
               
               
                  
                  Participles

                        
                           Amato, loued. Amati, loued.
                        
                           Amata, loued. Amate, loued.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gerundes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Eſsēdo amato: & Amādoſi: Being loued.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        
                           Eſsēdo ſtáto amato: Hauing ben loued.
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        Eſſendo per eſſere amato: Eſſéndo ſi per amàre: and Eſſendo per amarſi,
                        Douendo eſſere amato, Douendoſi amare, and Douendo amàrſi,
                        Hauéndo ad éſſere amato, Hauéndoſi ad amare, and Hauendo ad amarſi: Being to be loued.
                        
                     
                  
               
               And bycauſe this Verbe Ho (I haue) cometh often in vſe: as may be ſeene in the declining of the former Verbes: Therfore I haue thought good not t'omit the declining of it.
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Ho, and Hággio poeticall: I haue.
                        
                           Tu Hái: thou haſte.
                        
                           Colùi Ha, and Hàue poeticall: he hathe.
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        
                           Noi Habbiamo: vvee haue.
                        
                           Voi hauéte: you haue.
                        
                           Colóro hánno: they haue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauéua, and Hauéa,
                        Tu hauéui,
                        Colui hauéua and hauéa,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauéuamo,
                        Voi haueuàte,
                        Colóro hauéuano, and haueano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Singu.

                        Io Hébbi; and Ho hauúto,
                        Tu hauéſti, and hái hauúto,
                        Colui hébbe, and ha hauúto

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       haue had.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Hauemmo, and habbiámo hauúto,
                        Voi hauèſte, & hauete hauuto
                        Coloro hébbero, and hanno hauúto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Hauèua hauùto,
                        Tu hauèui hauùto,
                        Colui haueua hauuto,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       had had.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Haueuàmo hauùto,
                        Voi haueuàte hauúto,
                        Coloro haueuano hauuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Hauerò, haurò, and Harrò,
                        Tu hauerài, haurài, and harrài
                        Colui hauerà, haurà, & harrà,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhall
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 haue.
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
Plur.

                        Noi Hauerémo, haurèmo, & harrèmo,
                        Voi haueréte, hauréte, and harréte,
                        Coloro hauerànno, haurano, and harrànno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'Imperatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Sing.
                     
                        
                           Hàbbia tu, haue thou,
                        
                           Hábbia colui, let hym haue.
                     
                  
                  
                     Plur.
                     
                        
                           Habbiámo noi, let vs haue.
                        
                           Habbiàte vòi, haue you.
                        
                           Hàbbiano coloro, let them haue.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio vòglia che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Hábbia,
                        Tu hábbia,
                        Colui habbia,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Habbiamo,
                        Voi habbiate,
                        Coloro habbiano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauèſſi,
                        Tu haueſſi,
                        Colui hauèſſe,

                              
                                 I vvold to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Haueſſimo,
                        Voi haueſte,
                        Coloro haueſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hábbia hauuto
                        Tu habbia hauúto,
                        Colui hábbia hauúto,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue had.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Habbiamo hauúto,
                        Voi habbiáte hauúto,
                        Coloro hábbiano hauúto
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauèſſi hauúto,
                        Tu hauèſſi hauúto,
                        Colui hauèſſe hauúto,

                              
                                 I vvolde to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had had
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauèſſimo hauúto,
                        Voi hauèſie hauúto,
                        Coloro hauéſſero hauúto
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Habbia da qua innāzi
                        Tu hábbia da qua innāzi
                        Colúi habbia da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Habbiámo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi habbiate da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro hábbiano da qua innanzi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Subiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  
                     Io Hábbia, For aſmuche as I haue.
                  
                     Tu habbia, For aſmuche as thou haſt, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Preter imperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                  
                     Io Haueſſi, Although I had.
                  
                     Tu haueſſi, Although thou haddeſt, &c. as in th'Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerèi, haurèi, & harréi: Haueria, hauria, and harria,
                        Tu hauereſti, haureſti, and harrèſti,
                        Colui hauerébbe haurèbbe, and harrèbbe: Haueria, hauria, and harria,

                              
                                 If
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhold haue.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauerèmmo, haurèmmo, and harrémmo,
                        Voi hauerèſte, haurèſte, and harrèſte,
                        Coloro hauerèbbono, haurèbbono, and harrèbbono: Haueriano, hauriano, and harriano.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preter perfectenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  
                     Io Hábbia hauúto: For aſmuche as I haue had.
                  
                     Tu hábbia huúto: For aſmuche as thou haſt had, &c, as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Othervvyſe, O Che.
                  
                  Si.

                        Io Hauerèi, and Haueria hauuto.
                        Tu hauerésti hauuto,
                        Colùi hauerèbbe and haueria hauuto,

                              
                                 ô that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhold haue had.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Pl.

                        Noi Hauerémmo hauúto,
                        Voi hauerèſte hauúto,
                        Colòro hauerébbono, and haueriano hauuto,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                  
                     Io Hauèſſi hauúto: Since I had had.
                  
                     Tu hauèſſi hauúto, Since thou haddeſt had, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. Quando.
                  Sin.

                        Io Hauerò hauúto,
                        Tu hauer ài hauúto,
                        Colúi hauera hauuto,

                              
                                 vvhen
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhall haue had.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Hauerèmo hauuto,
                        Voi hauerèſte hauuto,
                        Coloro houerāno hauuto
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Th'Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Hauère, to haue.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Hauére hauuto, to haue had.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  
                     Douère hauere,
                     
                        To be to haue.
                     
                  
                  
                     Eſſere per hauere,
                  
               
               
                  Participles

                        
                           Hauente, hauing. Hauuto, ta, hadde.
                        
                           Hauenti, hauing. Hauuti, te, had.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Gerūdes

                        Preſent tenſe.
                        
                           Hauéndo, hauing.
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        
                           Hauèndo hauuto, hauing had.
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        
                           Douèndo hauère
                        
                        
                           Hauèndo ad hauère
                           
                              Hauing, or being to haue.
                           
                        
                        
                           Eſſéndo per hauère
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The declining of the Verbe
                  
                     Andare: To go.
               
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Vo, and Vádo, I go.
                        
                           Tu vai: thou goeſt.
                        
                           Colui va, he goeth.
                     
                  
                  
                     
Plur.

                        
                           Noi Andiamo, vvee go.
                        
                           Voi andate, you go.
                        
                           Coloro vanno, they go.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Andàua,
                        
                        
                           Tu andàui,
                        
                        
                           Colui andàua,
                           
                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    vvent or did go.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Andauàmo,
                        Voi andauàte,
                        Coloro andauànno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Andài, and Sòno andàto,
                        Tu andàſti, and Sèi andàto,
                        Colui andò, and E andàto,

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    haue gon.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Andàmmo, & Siàmo andàti,
                        Voi andàste, and Séte andàti,
                        Coloro andàrono, & Sono andati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterpluperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Era andàto,
                        Tu Eri andàto,
                        Colui Era andàto,

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    had gone, or vvas gone.
                                 
                              
                              vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Erauàmo andàti,
                        Voi erauàte andati,
                        Coloro érano andàti,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sin.

                        Io Anderò, and Andrò,
                        Tu anderài, and andrài,
                        Colui anderà, and andrà,

                              I
                              thou
                              he

                                    ſhall go.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
vvee
                              you
                              they
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Anderèmo, & andrémo,
                        Voi anderéte, and andréte,
                        Coloro anderāno, & andrāno
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'imperatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        
                           Vatu, go thou.
                        
                           Vàda, and vàdi colui, let hym go.
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        
                           Andiàmo noi, let vs go.
                        
                           Andàte voi, go you.
                        
                           Vàdano, and vadino colóro, let them go.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Optatiue mode: Preſent tenſe. O Dio voglia che, &c.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Vada, and vadi,
                        Tu vàda, and vadi,
                        Colui vàda, and vàdi,

                              God graūt that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          go.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Andiàmo,
                        Voi andiàte,
                        Coloro vàdano, & vadino
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe. O Dio voleſſe che, &c.
                  
                  Sing.

                        
                           Io Andàſſi,
                        
                        
                           Tu andàſſi,
                        
                        
                           Colui andàſſe,
                           
                              I vvolde to god that

                                    I
                                    thou
                                    he

                                          vvent, or did go.
                                       
                                    
                                    vvee
                                    you
                                    they
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Andàſſimo,
                        Voi andàste,
                        Coloro andàſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sing.

                        Io Sia andáto,
                        Tu Sij andato,
                        Colui Sia andato,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             haue gone.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Siàmo andati,
                        Voi Siate andati,
                        Coloro Siàno andati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. O. Dio Voleſſe che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Fóſſi andato,
                        Tu fóſſi andato,
                        Colui foſſe' andato,

                              
                                 I wolde to God that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             had gone.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Foſſimo andati,
                        Voi foſte andati,
                        Coloro foſſero andati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Future tenſe. O Dio Voglia che, &c.
                  Sin.

                        Io Váda da qua innanzi,
                        Tu vada da qua innāzi,
                        Colui vada da qua innanzi,

                              
                                 God graūt that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             go herafter.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Andiamo da qua innanzi,
                        Voi Andiate da qua innanzi,
                        Coloro vadano da qua innanzi,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Subiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Vada & Vadi,
                        Tu vada & vadi,
                        Colui vada & vadi

                              
                                 for aſmuche as
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             go.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Andiàmo,
                        Voi Andiate,
                        Coloro vadano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                     Io Andaſſi, Although I vvent or did go.
                  
                     Tu andaſſi, Although thou vventeſt, or dideſt go, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                     Othervviſe, Se.
                  Sin.

                        Io Anderéi, Andrèi, Anderia, and Andria,
                        Tu anderèſti, & Andrèſti,
                        Colui anderèbbe, andrèbbe, Anderia, & andria.

                              
                                 If
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhold go.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Anderémmo, & Andrémmo,
                        Voi anderèſte, & andrèſte,
                        Coloro anderébbono, andrebbono, anderiano, and andriano.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Preterperfectenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                     Io Sia andato, For aſmuche sa I haue gone.
                  
                     Tu Sij andato, For aſmuche as thou haſt gone, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  
                     Othervviſe, Che.
                  Sin.

                        Io Saréi, & Saria andàto
                        Tu Sarèſti andato,
                        Colúi Sarebbe, and Saria andato,

                              
                                 that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhold haue gone.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Sarèmmo andati,
                        Voi Sarèſte andàti,
                        Coloro Sarèbbono, & Sariano andati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Preterpluperfectenſe. Poi che.
                  
                     Io Fóſſi andáto, Since I had gone.
                  
                     Tu fóſſi andáto, Since thou haddeſt gone, &c. as in the Optatiue mode.
               
               
                  Future tenſe. Quando.
                  
                  Sin.

                        Io Sarò andàto,
                        Tu Sarài andato,
                        Colúi Sarà andato,

                              
                                 vvhē
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſhalbe gone.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plu.

                        Noi Sarémo andati,
                        Voi Saréte andàti,
                        Coloro Sarāno andati,
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Th'Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  
                     Andare, To go.
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  
                     Eſſere andato, To be gonne.
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Eſſere per andàre,
                  Douère andàre,

                        
                           To be, or to haue to go.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hauère ad andàre,
               
               
                  
                     Participles
                     
                        Andāte, going. Andato, ta: I to ta, gone.
                        
                        Andāti, going. Andati, te: I ti, I te, gone.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Gerundes
                     
                        Preſent tenſe.
                        Andàndo, Going.
                        
                     
                     
                        Preterperfectenſe.
                        Eſſendo andáto, Being gone.
                        
                     
                     
                        Future tenſe.
                        Douéndo andàre,
                        Eſſéndo per andàre,

                              
                                 Being, or hauing to go.
                              
                           
                        
                        Hauendo andare,
                     
                  
               
               I do thinke good not to omit certaine vvordes vſed by Poëtes in the declining in this Verbe: As in
               
                  The Indicatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Plu. Noi Gimo, vvee go. Voi Gite, you go.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Preterimperfectenſe.
                  ng.

                        Io Giua,
                        Tu Giui,
                        Colúi Giua,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       vvent, or did go.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  lur.

                        Noi Giuamo,
                        Voi Giuate,
                        Coloro Giuano,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterperfectenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Gij,
                        Tu Giſti,
                        Colui Gio,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       haue gonne.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Gimmo,
                        Voi Gisti,
                        Coloro Girono,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Future tenſe.
                  Sing.

                        Io Giro,
                        Tu Girai, or Irai,
                        Colui Gira,

                              
                                 I
                              
                              
                                 thou
                              
                              
                                 he
                                 
                                    
                                       ſhall go.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 vvee
                              
                              
                                 you
                              
                              
                                 they
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Giremo,
                        Voi Girete, or Irete,
                        Colóro Giranno,
                     
                  
               
               
                  Th'Imperatiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Plur.

                        Gite or Ite voi, Go you.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Optatiue mode: Preterimperfectenſe. O che.
                  
                  
                     
Sing.

                        Io Giſſi,
                        Tu Giſſi,
                        Colui Giſſe,

                              
                                 ô that
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             vvent, or did go.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                    
                                       they
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Giſſimo,
                        Voi Giste,
                        Coloro Giſſero,
                     
                  
               
               
                  The Subiunctiue mode: Preſent tenſe. Concio ſia coſa che.
                  
                  Plur.

                        Voi Giàte, For aſmuche as you go.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Preterimperfectenſe. Auegna che.
                  
                  Io Giſſi, Tu Giſſi, &c. as in the Optatiue.
                  
               
               
                  Othervviſe, Se.
                  
                  Sing.

                        Io Girei,
                        Tu Giresti,
                        Colui Girebbe,

                              
                                 If
                                 
                                    
                                       I
                                    
                                    
                                       thou
                                    
                                    
                                       he
                                       
                                          
                                             ſholde go.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       vvee
                                    
                                    
                                       you
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Plur.

                        Noi Giremmo,
                        Voi Giſte and Gireste,
                     
                  
               
               The other tenſes are declined vvith theſe participles Gito, and Ito, ta: Giti and Iti, te: (gonne): vvith Io Sono; Io era; Io ſia; Io foſſi; &c. as before in the declining of the Verbe Andare.
               
               
                  Th' Infinitiue mode: Preſent tenſe.
                  Gire and Ire, To go.
                  
               
               
                  
Bycauſe there is ſomvvhat more to doe, in forming of the Preterperfectenſes, then of the other tēſes, I haue thought good to ſay ſom thing briefly therof:
               Therfore all Preterperfectēſes of th' Indicatiue mode, of Verbes of the firſt Coniugation, do ende in Ai: as Amài, of the verbe Amo: Cantai of Canto: Parlài of Pàrlo: Mangiài of Mangio: and Pagài of the Verbe Pago.
               
               There are excepted certaine Verbes vvhich in the Preſent tenſe are of one ſyllable: For Sto hath stéi, and stétti: Do hath Déi, Détti, and Diédi: Fo or Fáccio hath Fei, and Féci.
               
               All Verbes of the ſecond Cōiugatiō, that haue C as it vvere a proper and peculiar letter, Do make their Preterperfectenſes in cqui: as of Piàccio Piacqui: the firſt perſon Singular; and cque, as Piacque the thirde. So of Taccio, Tàcqui, and Tàcque: of Giáccio, Giácqui and Giacque.
               
               But ſuch as haue L, in the Preſent tenſe, do adde S in the Preterperfectenſe, as of Vaglio, is made Válſi: of Dóglio, Dólſi: But Vóglio hath in verſe Valſi, and in proſe Volli: Hovvbeit, I vvolde more vvillingly vſe the former in proſe, as (in my iudgemēt) the leaſt affected.
               Againe certaine Verbes Do double the ſame proper & peculiar letter: as of Cado, Caddi: vvhich alſo hath Cadéi and Cadétti. Againe of Téngo is Ténni: Béuo, Beuui.
               
               And the Verbe So, hath Séppi, Ho, Hébbi. Gódo,

Godéi, and Godétti. Póſſo, Potéi, and Potétti. Véggo or Véggio, Vidi. Prouéggo, Prouidi. Páio, Parui and Parſi.
               
               Further toutching the preterperfectenſes of the thirde Coniugation: this is the rule, that vvhoſe participles do ende in Vto, the Preterperfectenſe do ende in Ei, and in Etti. vvherupon the Verbe Pérdo, vvhen it hath in the participle Perdúto, it hath in the Preterperfectenſe, Perdéi and Perdétti. Cómpio, hath Compiúto; Compici, and Compietti. Ricéuo, Riceuúto; Riceuei and Riceuétti. But the Verbe Concédo, hath Concedúto in proſe, and Conceſſo in verſe, ſo that after his Participle it hath in the Preterperfectenſe. Concedéi, Concedetti, and conceſſi. Mórdo hath Mordúto or Mórſo, in the Participle; & Mordéi, Mordetti, and Morſi in the Preterperfectenſe. But Conóſco, notvvithſtanding it hath in the Participle Conoſciúto, it hath in the Preterperf. Conobbi.
               
               Alſo Verbes of the ſame Coniugation, vvhen they haue in their participles a double T, they haue alſo in theire Preterimperfectenſes a double S, as of Léggo is Letto; and Leſſi: of Scriuo is Scritto, and Scriſſi: of Eléggo is Elétto, and Eleſſi.
               
               There is excepted Stringo, that hath in the participle Strétto: but in the Preterperfectēſe Strinſi: ſo are likevviſe his compoundes, Aſtringo & Coſtringo. Hovvbeit, I thinke that to happen, either, bycauſe it vvere elſe to be ſaide in the Participle Strinto, if any vvolde looke for the raiſon, raither then for the vſe of the tonge: or elſe, bycauſe the

latin Preterperfectenſe hath Strinxi, from vvhence it ſemeth that Strinſi is deriued: as of Pinxi, Pinſi: of Cinxi, Cinſi: of Finxi, Finſi: of Planxi, Piánſi: and of Extinxi, Eſtinſi.
               
               To conclude, the Verbe Ardo hath Arſo in the Participle, and Arſi in the Preterperfectenſe. Rido hath Riſo, and Riſi. Tóglio Tolto and Tolſi. Muóuo Móſſo, and Moſſi. Offéndo Offéſſo, and Offéſi. Spàrgo Spàrſo, and Spàrſi. Métto Méſſo, and Miſi. Pòngo Póſto, and Póſi. Náſco Náto, and Nacqui. Nuóco Nociuto, and Nocqui. Sono Súto, and Fui. Rómpo Rótto, and Rúppi. Piouo Piouúto, and Piouui. Diuido Diuiſo, and Diuiſi. Vccido Vcciſo, and Vcciſi. Spèndo Spéſo, and Spéſi.
               
               Laſtly, Verbes of the fourth Coniugation haue theire Preterperfectenſes ending in ſingle I, vvith the accent: as Vdi, Sénti, of the Verbes Oido and Sénto: Hovvbeit many tymes (as in proſe) they haue a double I: as Vdij, Sentij. But Dico hath Diſſi. Offero, Offérſi. Véngo, Vénni.
               
            
         
         
            Of vvordes, vvhich commonly are fixed vnto Verbes.
            Theſe they are Mi, Ti, Si, Ci, Ne, Vi: The vvhich, vvith vvhat elegancy they cleaue vnto Verbes, and vvhat theire ſignificatiōs are, ſhall clearly appeare by that, vvhich ſhalbe ſaid of the vſe of them.
            Firſt, they are comonly ſet before and after Verbes: as Mi àma, amami, Ti àma, àmati, Si àma, àmaſi, Ci àma, àmaci, Ne àma, àmane, Vi àma, amaui.
               
But this ought to be donne vvith iudgement: For it is not allvvayes, nor in euery place vvell ſytting. For this manner of ſpeache ſhalbe leſſe affected, Che ti diſſe colui? then Che diſſeti colui? vvhat hath he ſaid vnto thee? Alſo vvee ſhall ſpeake vvith leſſe curioſity, to ſay, Se tu mi àmi non ti nuocerà, then Se àmimi non noceràtti: If thovv loue me it ſhall not hurte thee. But ſuche à iudgement can hardly be taught, or not at all by preceptes, ſince it ought to be compared vvith the often reading of Aucthors, and vſe of the tonge. And yet this is to be maked, that ſo oftē as theſe vvordes do follovve the verbe, they do depende on the accent, as if they vvere all one vvorde: as Amami, Amati, Amaſi, Amaci, Amane, Amaui.
            
            Further they do double the conſonant, vvhen they are ſet after Verbes, hauing the accent in the laſt ſyllable: as Amommi, Amòtti, Amòſſi, Amòcci, Amònne, Amònni: of the Preterperfectenſe Amò, he hath loued. And ſo likevvyſe Ameràmmi, Ameràtti, Ameràſſi, Ameràcci, Amerànne, Amerànni: of the Future tenſe Amerà, he ſhall loue.
            Beſides, Mi, Ti, and Si, do allvvayes retaine the letter I, vvhen they cleaue to a verbe hauing none other vvorde ſet betvvene them: as by th'examples follovving may appeare. But if any other vvorde come betvvene them, the then change I, into E, vvherof this is an example: Me non battèſti tu, thovv haſt not beaten me. The like dothe happen in comparing of perſonnes togeather: vvhervpon

vvee ſay, Tu conòſci me & lui, thovv haſt knovvne me and hym. Tu vedi me & io vèggio te, thovv ſeeſt me, & I ſee thee. Tu feriſti me, & quello non toccaſti, thovv haſt vvounded me, and haſt not toutched hym.
            In like ſorte they are vſed, vvhen a verbe of the Infinitiue mode doth follovv them: For vvee ſay, Ragionàſi, Me hauèr prèſo mòglie, It is reported that I haue takē a vvife. còrre fàma, Me eſſere inamoràto, the rumor is, that I am in loue. But theſe ſpeaches ſholde be more rightly expreſſed thus: Ragiònaſi, che io ho prèſo moglie. And Còrre fama che io ſòno inamorato.
            
            Laſtly, they chaunge I into E, vvhen the Adverbe Come, goeth before them, In this ſorte: Io non ſóno auàro come te, I am not couetous, as thovv art. Tu non ſéi liberále, come me, thou art not liberall, as I am.
            Toutching their ſignification and the vſe of them: it ſhalbe more plainely ſhevved by theſe types follovving.
            
               
                  Mi
                  
                     Me: mi batte, or Battèmmi, he hath beaten me.
                     To me: Mi diede, and Diedemi, he hath geuen me, or to me.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ti
                  
                     Thee: Ti battè, and Battèti: He hath beaten thee.
                     To thee: Ti diede, & Diedèti: He hath geuen thee or to thee.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Si
                  
                     Hym ſelfe: Si vcciſe, and Vcciſeſi: He hath kylde hym ſelfe.
                     To hym ſelfe: Si diéde, & Diedeſila mòrte, He hath geuen hym ſelfe the death: or to hym ſelfe.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ci
                  
                     Vs: Ci percòſſe, & Percòſſeci, He hath ſtrykē vs.
                     To vs: Ci diéde, and Diedeci, He hath geuen vs, or to vs.
                     Here or thether: Ci fu, fúcci, He hath ben here.
                     
                        Ci andò, andocci, He hathe gone thether.
                  
               
            
            Here is to be remembred hovv that theſe a forſaide vvordes are many tymes vſed for ornamēt ſake: as Io mi crèdo, for Io crèdo. Tu ti penſi, for Tu pènſi. Egli ſi crède, for Egli crede. And Boccace doth thus ſpeake: Natural còſa, è di ciaſcuno, che ci nàſce, for che nàſce.
            
            
               
                  Ne
                  
                     Vs: Ne abbracciò, Abracciónne: He hath imbraſed vs.
                     To vs: Ne diède, Dièdene, He hath geuen to vs.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Vi
                  
                     You: Vipercòſſe, Percòſſeui, He hath ſtriken you.
                     To you: Vi diéde, Dièdeui, He hath geuen to you.
                     There or thether: Vifu, Fúuui, he hath ben there.
                     
                        Vi Andò, Andòuui: He hath gon thether.
                  
               
            
            
               
Theſe vvordes follovving do linke togeather, and are many vvayes vttred in ſpeach: & that vvith no meane elegancy. And therfore hovv that is to be donne, may eaſly be perceiued by theſe types that follovve.
            
               
                  Mi Ti
                  
                     Me to thee: Io miti racommàndo, and Raccomandomiti, I do recommende me vnto thee.
                     Thee to me: Tu miti raccomàdàſti, and Raccomàndaſti miti: thou haſt recommēded thee vnto me.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Mi Si
                  
                     Me to hym: Egli mi ſieléſſe; Eleſſe miſi per grandiſſimo amico, he hath choſen me vnto hym for a moſt great frende.
                     Hym to me: Eg li miſi raccomandò, and Raccomandò miſi, he hath Recommēded hym vnto me.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Mi ci
                  
                     Me there or thether: Mi ci fermái, and fermáimici due giórni, I haue ſtaied there tovv dayes: Mi ci fé andare, Fémmici andare, he cauſed me to go thether.
                     To me here: Mici diède, Diède mici mog lie, he gaue vnto me here a vvyfe.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Mi vi
                  
                     Me to you: Io miui raccomàndo, Raccommàndomiui, I recommende me vnto you.
                     You to me: Voi miui raccomandàſte, Raccomandàſte miui, you haue you recommended vnto me.
                     
                        
Me there or thether: Miui veſti, veſtimmiui, he hath apparelled me there.
                     
                        Miui menò, Menòmmiui: he hath brought me thether.
                     To me there: Miui comprò; Comprommiui, vn giardino: he hath there bought vnto me a gardyne.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ti ci
                  
                     Thee to vs: Dio tici diéde, diédetici per Padre, God hath geuen thee vnto vs for a father.
                     Vs to thee: Dio tici diède, dieditici per compagni: God hath geuen vs vnto thee for compagnions.
                     Thee here or thether: Io tici vidi, viditici: I haue ſeene thee here.
                     
                        Io tici menài, Menàitici, I haue brought thee thether.
                     To thee here: Dio tici diède, diedetici mo glie: God hath here geuen to thee a vvyfe.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ti ſi
                  
                     Thee to hym: Dio tiſi elèſſe, Eleſſetiſi per figliolo: God hath choſen thee to hym for his childe.
                     Hym to thee: Egli ti ſi raccomànda, Raccomandatiſi: He doth recommande hym vnto thee.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ci ſi
                  
                     Hym to vs: Eg li ci ſi offérſe, Offerſeciſi: He hath offred hym ſelfe vnto vs.
                     
                        
Vs to hym: Ci ſi prèſſe, Prèſſeciſi per compagni: He hath taken vs vnto hym for compagnions.
                     Hym here or hether: Ci ſi vcciſe, Vcciſeciſi: He hath here ſlaine hym ſelfe.
                     
                        Ci ſi laſciò condúrre, Laſciòcciſi condúrre: He hath ſuffred hym ſelfe to be brought hether.
                     Here to hym: Ci ſi diéde, Diédeciſi la mòrte: He hath geuen hym ſelfe here the death.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Vi ſi
                  
                     Hym to you: Vi ſi raccomanda, Raccomandauiſi, he doth recōmēde hym vnto you.
                     You to hym: Vi ſi eléſſe, Eléſſeuiſi Dio per ſigliuoli: God hath choſen you vnto hym for his children.
                     Hym there or thether: Vi ſi vcciſe, Vcciſeuiſi. He hath there ſlayne hym ſelfe.
                     
                        Vi ſi laſciò, Laſciòuiſi condúrre. He hath ſuffred hym ſelfe to be brought thether.
                     There to hym: Viſicomprò, Comproúuiſi vna vigna: He hath there bought to him ſelfe a vigne.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Vi ci
                  
                     You to vs, or vs to you: Dio vicidiède, Dièdeuici per compagni: God hath geuen vs vnto you, or you to vs for compagnions.
                     You here: Vi ci battérono, Battérouuici, they haue beaten you here.
                     
                        
You hether: Vi ci menàrono, Menàronuici, they haue brought you hether.
                     To you here: Vici compràſte, Compràſteuici vna càſa: You haue bought vnto you here a houſe.
                  
               
            
            But vvhen theſe vvordes are ioined vvith Ne, they do forgo I and take E, in this ſorte: Mene, tene, ſene, cene, vene, or a vouel follovving Men', ten', ſen', cen', ven' vvith an Apoſtropha. Hovvbeit a conſonant follovving, they may be vſed vvholy, or abridged, but vvithout the Apoſtropha. Theire ſignification and vſe, as hether to vvee haue donne, vvee vvill ſhevv here follovving.
            
               
                  Me ne
                  
                     To me of hym, her, them, or therof: Mene parlàſti, Parlaſtimene: thou haſt ſpoke to me, of hym, her, them, or therof.
                     Me hence, thence, Mene ſcacciò, Scacciómmene: He hath driuen me, hence, thence.
                     I hence, thence: Mene vò, Vommene, I go hence, thence.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Te ne
                  
                     To thee of hym, her, them, or therof: Io tene parlài, Parlàitene: I haue ſpoken to thee of hym, her, them, or therof.
                     Thee hēce, thēce: Tene ſcacciò, ſcacciòttene: He hath driuen thee hence, thence.
                     Thou hence, thence, Tu tene partisti, Partistirene: thou haſt departed hence, thence.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Se Ne
                  
                     To hym ſelfe of hym, her, them, or therof: Sene promiſe, Promiſeſene gran coſe, He hath promiſed to him ſelfe great thinges of hym, her, them or therof.
                     He hence, thence: Sene parti, Partiſſene, He hath departed hence, thence.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ve Ne
                  
                     To you of hym, her, them, or therof: Ei vene parlo, Parlóuuene: He hath ſpoken to you of hym, her, them or therof.
                     You hence, thence: Voi vene andàſte, Andàsteuene: you haue gon you hence, thence.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ce Ne
                  
                     To vs of hym, her, them or therof: Ei ce ne parlò, Parlòecene: He hath ſpoken to vs of hym, her, them, or therof.
                     VVee hence, thence: Noi cene partimmo, Partimmocene: vvee haue heparted vs hence, thence.
                  
               
            
            Theſe vvordes are alſo ioined vvith Articles, as herafter may appeare: wher theyre vſe and ſignification is eaſy to by knovvne.
            
               Gli Mi, or Me Gli.
               Them to me: Gli mi, or me gli raccomandò: and Raccomando gli mi, or Raccomādómmegli. He hath recommended them vnto me.
               Me to hym: Gli mi, or me gli raccomandài: and Raccomandàiglimi, or Raccommandàimegli: I haue me recommended vnto hym.
            
            
               
               Gli Ti or Te gli.
               Them to thee: Gli ti, or Te gli raccomandài, & Raccomandáigliti, or Raccomandàitegli: I haue recommended them vnto thee.
               Thee to hym: Gliti, or Tegliraccomandàsti, & Raccomandaſtegliti, or Raccomàdaſtetegli: thou haſt recommended thee vnto hym.
            
            
               Gli ſe, or Se gli.
               Them to hym: Gli ſi, or Se gli féce, and Fécegliſi, or Féceſegli amici: He made them frendes vnto hym, or his frendes.
               Hym to hym: Gli ſi, or Segli raccomandò, and Raccomandogliſi, or Raccomandoſſegli: He hath hym recommended vnto hym.
            
            
               Gli vi, or Ve gli.
               Them to you: Gli vi, or Vegli raccomandài, & Raccomandàigliui, or Raccomandàiuegli: I haue them recommended vnto you.
               You to hym: Gliui, or Vegli raccomandàſte, and Raccomandàſtegliui, or Raccomandaſteuegli: you haue you recommended vnto hym.
               Them there or thether: Gliui, or Vegli vidi, and Vidigliui, or Vidiuegli: I haue ſeene them there.
               
                  Gliui, or Vegli conduſi, and Conduſſigliui, or Conduſſiuegli: I haue brought them thether.
               Hym there: Gliui, or Vegli dièdi, and Diedigliui, or Diediuegli il viuere, I haue geuen hym there a lyning.
            
            
               
               Glici, or Ce gli.
               Them to vs: Gli ci, or Ce gli raccomandàſti, & Raccomandàſtiglici, or Raccomandaſticegli: you haue them recommended vnto vs.
               Vs to hym: Gli ci, or Ce gli raccomandámmo and Raccomandàmmoglici, or Raccomandámmocegli: vvee haue vs commended vnto hym.
               Them here, or hether, Gli ci, or Ce gli vidi, and vidiglici, or vidicegli: I haue ſeene them here. Againe Glici, or Ce gli condúſſi, and Conduſſiglici: or Conduſſicegli: I haue brought them hether.
               To hym here: Gli ci, or Ce gli diedi, and Diedeglici, or Diedecegli mòglie: I haue here geuen to hym a vvyfe.
            
            
               Lo mi, or Me lo.
               Hym to me, Lo mi, or Me lo raccomandò, and Raccomandòllomi, or Raccommandòmmelò: He hath hym recommended vnto me.
            
            
               Lo ti, or Te lo.
               Hym to thee: Io lo ti, or Te lo raccomando, & Raccomandóloti, or Raccomandotelo: I do recommende hym vnto thee.
            
            
               Lo ſi, or Se lo.
               Hym to hym: Lo ſi, or Se lo eléſſe: Elèſſéloſi, or Eleſſeſelo per cōpàgno: He hath choſen hym vnto hym for a compagnion.
            
            
               
               Lo vi, or Ve lo.
               Hym to you: Lo vi, or Ve lo raccomandài: and Raccomandàiloui, or Raccomandàiuelo, I haue recommended hym vnto you.
               Hym there: Lo vi, or Ve lo vidi, and vidiloui, or vidiuelo: I haue ſeene hym there.
               Hym thether: Lo vi, Ve lo menài, Menàiloui, or Menàiuelo: I haue brought hym thether.
            
            
               Lo ci, or Ce lo.
               Hym to vs: Lo ci, or Ce lo raccomandò, and Raccomandólloci, or Raccomandòccelo: He hath recommended hym vnto vs.
               Hym here: Lo ci, or Ce lo vidi, and vidiloci, or vidicelo: I haue ſeene hym here.
               Hym hether: Lo ci, or Ce lo menài, and Menailoci, or Menaicelo: I haue brought hym hether.
            
            
               Lo ne, or Ne lo.
               Hym from vs: Lo ne, or Ne lo tólſe, and Tolſelone, or Tolſenelo: He hath taken hym from vs.
               Hym hence, thence, here avvay: Lo ne, Ne lo menò, and Menòllone, or Menònnelo: He hath brought hym hence, thence, or here avvay.
            
            
               La mi, or Me la.
               Her to me: La mi, or Me la raccomandàsti: and Raccomandàstilami, or Raccomandaſtimela: Thou haſt recommended her vnto me.
            
            
               
               La ti, or Te la.
               Her to thee: La ti, or Te la, raccomandài, and Raccomandàilati, or Raccomandàitela: I haue recō
                  mended her vnto thee.
            
            
               La ſi, or Se la.
               Her to hym: La ſi, or Sela prèſe, and Prèſelaſi, or Prèſeſela per mòglie: He hath taken her vnto hym for his vvyfe.
            
            
               La ci, or Ce la.
               Her to vs: La ci, or Ce la raccomandò, and Raccomandóllaci, or Raccomandóccela: He hath recommended her vnto vs.
               Her here: La ci, or Ce la vidi, and Vidilàci, or Vidicela: I haue ſeene her here.
               Her hether: La ci, or Ce la menài, and Menailaci, or Menàicela: I haue brought her hether.
            
            
               La vi, or Ve la.
               Her to you: La vi, or Vela raccomàndo, and Raccomandolaui, or Raccomàndouela: I do recommend her vnto you.
               Her there: La vi, or Ve la vidi: and Vidilaui, or vidiuela: I haue ſeene her there.
               Her thether: La vi, or Ve la menài: and Menailaui, or Menàiuela: I haue brought her thether.
            
            
               
               Ne la, or La ne.
               Her to vs: La ne, or Ne la raccomàndò, and Raccomandóllane, or Raccomandònnela: He hath recommended her vnto vs.
               Her hence, thence, here avvaye: La ne, or Ne la menò, and Menòllane, or Menònnela: He hath brought her hence, thence, heravvay.
            
            
               Le mi, or Me le.
               Them to me: Le mi, or Me le raccomandò, & Raccomandóllemi, Raccomandómmele: He hath recommended them vnto me.
            
            
               Le ti, or Te le.
               Them to thee: Le ti, or Te le raccomandò: and Raccomandólleti, or Raccomandòttele: He hath recō
                  mended them vnto thee.
            
            
               Le ſi, or Se le.
               Them to hym: Le ſi, or Se le prèſe, and Prèſeleſi, or Prèſeſele per compágne: He hath taken them vnto hym for compagnions.
            
            
               Le ne, or Ne le.
               Them to vs: Le ne, or Ne le raccomandò: and Raccomandóllene, or Raccomandónnele: He hath recommended them vnto vs.
               Them hēce, thēce, heravvay: Le ne, or Ne le menò: &

                  Menòllene, or Menònnele: He hath brought them hence, thence, heravvay.
            
            
               Le ci, or Ce le.
               Them to vs: Le ci, or Ce le raccomandò: and Raccomandòlleci, or Raccomandòccele: He hath recommended them vnto vs.
               Them here: Le ci, or Ce le vidi: and vidileci, or vidicele: I haue ſeene them here.
               Them hether: Le ci, or Cele menài, and Menàileci, or Menàicele: I haue brought them hether.
               To her here: Le ci, or Ce le dièdi: and Dièdeleci, or Dièdecele marito: I haue here geuen to her an huſbande.
            
            
               Le vi, or Ve le.
               Them to you: Le vi, or Ve le raccomàndo: and Raccomandoleui: or Raccomàndouele: I recommende them vnto you.
               Them here: Le vi, or Ve le vidi, and vidileui, or vidiuele: I haue ſeene them here.
               Them thether: Le vi, or Vele menài, and Menaileui, Menàiuele: I haue brought them thether.
               To her there: Le vi, or Vele dièdi, and Diédileui, or Diédiuele marito: I haue there geuen vnto her a huſbande.
            
            Hetherto toutching theſe: in the handling vvherof: if vvee haue ben ſomvvhat more long,

then to ſome maye ſeeme neadfull: yet the knoledge therof is of greater effecte to the ſtudentes of this tōge: thē at the firſt ſight they vvolde thinke for. And ſo I doubt not but you vvill eſteeme of them, though you haue but meane ſkill in the tonge.
         
         
            Of Verbes Imperſonalles.
            They, after the manner of the latin Verbes Imperſonalles, do vvant both nombers, and perſonnes, ſauing the Singular nomber & thirde perſon: and alſo, there is neuer geuen them Caſes of noumes, vvhich either ſilently, or expreſly are alvvayes ſet before other Verbes.
            Of theſe Imperſonalles, certaine are ſo called of them ſelues, and are of the actiue ſignification: as Piòue, it raineth: Tuòna, it thundreth: Folgora, it lightneth: Lampèggia, it glitterith: Verna, it vvaxeth vvinter. Hovvbeit they are very often vſed of the Poetes, as though they vvere perſonalles, that is vvith a nominatiue caſe adioined.
            There are alſo certaine, vvhich are deriued from other Verbes, and are of the paſſiue ſignification, hauing Si, either before or after them: as ſi Ama, Amaſi, it is loued: ſi Legge, Leggeſi, it is redde. Si Còrre, Còrreſi, it is runne. Si stà, staſſi, ſtandeth, Si và, vàſſi, it is gone: and not a fevv ſuch like.
         
         
            
            Of Participles.
            Th'Italian ſpeach hath certaine vvordes, vvhich ſeeme to be like vnto the latin Participles: as Amànte, Leggènte, Tenènte, vbidiente: Alſo, Amato, Letto, Tenùto, vbidito: Further, Reuerendo, Tremendo, Oſſeruàndo, Orréndo, and certaine other like. But I do ſkarſly beleue, that they may of right be called Participles, ſince vvith Verbes they haue nothing in common (that is of thoſe thing vvhich the latin Participles do borrovv from Verbes) and as plainely Noumes are vvonte to be vſed.
            For th'Italian tonge doth all together refuſe theſe formes of ſpeach: Io àmo l'amànte la virtù, for Io àmo colúi, che àma, &c: Neither yet do vvee ſay, Io ho promèſſo vn dòno al legénte Ciceròne, for Io ho promeſſo, &c. à colúi, che légge, &c. But it is not vnknone to me, how Boccace doth many times vſe the like Participles: yet, I thinke none doth doubt, vvhiche doth ſomtymes reade his vvritinges, but that is donne very ſeldome. VVher vpō vvhen vvee ſay, Io fúi, or ſono, or ſarò dolente: Againe, Il giórno ſeguente: la veguente, or venènte nótte: that is, I haue ben, or am, or ſhalbe ſorrovvfull: the daye follovving: the night coming: euery body ſeeth all theſe to be rather Noumes, then Participles: Neither according to thoſe formes, may theſame be draune from all Italians Verbes, but from the latin Verbes it may be donne.
            Further there is altogether lacking in the Italiā
               
ſpeach the Participle in R Ʋ S: for vvee do not ſay for Amaturus, Amatúro: Lecturus, Letturo, and ſuch like: But Do vèndo io, tu, colúi, nòi, vòi, coloro amàre, or Hauèndo ad amàre, or Eſſendo per amàre: I, thou, he, vvee, you, they being abovvt to loue: or hauing to loue herafter: The vvhich gerundes are in vſe vvith the Italians. Alſo vvee do expreſſe Lecturꝰ, in this ſorte, Io, il quale Léggero, Tu il quale Leggerài, Colui il quale Leggerà, Noi i quali Leggerèmo, Vói i quali Leggeréte, Coloro i quali Leggerànno.
            
            Th'Italian ſpeach doth admit a Participle of the Preterperfectenſe, and of the paſſiue ſignification: as from Amatus it reteineth Amàto, from Lectus, Letto, and ſo of others. But Amato, vvill not ſignifie the Preterperfectenſe, vvithout you adde stato: as Io ſóno stato amàto, Tu ſéi státo amáto, &c. Bycauſe if I ſhall ſay, Io ſono amàto: Tu ſéi amàto, there is none but ſeeth, that it doth declare the ſignification of the Preſent tenſe. Hovvbeit vvee ſay, Pòſtomi, or Mèſſomi l'àrme indòſſo andái contra nemici: vvhich is as much as if thou ſaideſt Hauendomi (the vvhich gerund is of the Preſent tenſe) Pòſto, or Méſſo l'arme, &c. But no bodie ſpeaketh rightly Gli amati dame, ſon dotti, or Io amo gli amati da i buóni: but vvee are to ſay Quelli, che io amo, ſon dotti, and Io amo quelli, che ſono amàti da i buóni. Although here is to be ſeene by theſe formes of ſpeach rather the Preſent tenſe then the Preterperfectenſe to be ſignified.
            
               
Toutching the participle paſſiue, and of the Future tenſe, although vvee haue theſes vvordes Riuerèndo, Onorándo, and yet they are rather of the Preſent tenſe then of the Future. For Riuerèndo is not he ſaide to be and Oſſeruàndo, vvhome vvee ought ſomtymes to reuerence and to vvaite vpon, but vvhome vvee do novve reuerence and vvayte vpon.
            Laſtly the declining of them doth nothing differ from the declining of Noumes. For Amànte (vvhich is of the ſingular number, and of either gender) hath in the plurall number Amànti, Amàto, Amati, Amàta, Amate, Onoràndo, Onorandi, Onorànda, Onorande.
            
            By theſe thinges that wee haue geuen out herof before, vvhen vvee intreated of the declining of Verbes, may eaſly be ſeeme vvhich are Gerundes vvith the Italians, and vvhat theire vſe is: vvee ſay, Leggèndo diuènto dotto: by reading I become learned: beholde a gerūde of the Preſent tēſe. Againe, hauéndo let tò ho imparàto, hauing read, I haue learned: beholde a gerund of the Preterperfectenſe. Further, Douéndo leggere, Hauendo à léggere, Eſſendo per léggere, apro il libro: being to reade: or hauing to reade, I do open the booke. Novv for breuities ſake I ſpeake nothing of examples toutching the verbe paſſiue, ſince it ſemeth of no neceſſitie (after theſe, that are diſperpledlye geuen out before) to giue any more. This I vvill remember, that the Italian tonge hath this more then the

latin, that in the gerunde it doth admit no tenſes, but th'other doth. To conclude, it is alſo to be obſerued, that the Italian gerundes of the Future tēſe, are expreſſed by the latin Participles of the ſame tenſe, aſvvell of the actiue, as paſſiue ſignification.
         
         
            Of Aduerbes.
            VVhoſe ſignifications I vvill only ſhevv here: for the reſt they are either theſame or little differing from the latin.
            
               Of place

                     Qui,
                     Qua,

                           Here, or hether.
                        
                     
                     Ci,
                     Per qui,

                           Here avvay.
                        
                     
                     Per qua,
                     Di qui,

                           Hens.
                        
                     
                     Di qua,
                     
                        Qua giu, doune here, or hether.
                     
                        Qua ſu, vp here, or hether.
                     
                        Di qua e di la, here & there, hens & thēs.
                     
                        Ʋi,
                     Iui,

                           There, or thether.
                        
                     
                     Quiui,
                     
                        La, there, or thether.
                     
                        Di la, thens.
                     
                        Per la, there avvay.
                     
                        La ſu, vp there, or thether.
                     
                        La giu, doune there, or thether.
                     
                        
                        La e qui, there and here.
                     
                        Cola, thether.
                     
                        Per cola, that vvay, or there aboute.
                     
                        Li, in verſe, there or thether.
                     
                        Di li, thens.
                     
                        Per li, that vvaye.
                     
                        Li ſu, vp there, or thether.
                     
                        Li gui, doune there, or thether.
                     
                        Costà,
                        
                           There vvhere thou art, in that place. Thether.
                        
                     
                     
                        Costi,
                     
                     
                        Costi gui, doune thether.
                     
                        Costi ſu, vp thether.
                     
                        Costà ſu, vp there, or thether.
                     
                        Costa gui, dovvne there, or thether.
                     
                        Per Costa, that vvay.
                     
                        Di costa, thence.
                     
                        Oue,
                     
                     
                        Doue,
                        
                           vvhere, vvhether.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Ʋ, poeticall
                     
                     
                        Onde,
                        
                           from vvhence.
                        
                     
                     
                        Donde,
                     
                     
                        Altroue, elſe vvere, othervvhere.
                     
                        Altronde, from ſome other place.
                     
                        La oue,
                     
                     
                        La doue,
                        
                           There vvhere, vvheras.
                        
                     
                     
                        La onde,
                        
                           vvhervpon.
                        
                     
                     
                        Quinci,
                        
                           from hence.
                        
                     
                     
                        Di quinci,
                     
                     
                        Indi,
                        
                           from thence.
                        
                     
                     
                        Quindi,
                     
                     
                        
                        Di quindi,
                        
                           from thence.
                        
                     
                     
                        Di quiui,
                     
                     
                        Costiuci, from thence, vvhere thou art.
                     
                        Dattòrno,
                     
                     
                        Dintòrno,
                        
                           Aboute.
                        
                     
                     
                        In giro,
                     
                     
                        Ouunque,
                     
                     
                        Douunque,
                        
                           vvhere ſo euer.
                        
                     
                     
                        Oueche,
                     
                     
                        Quantunque,
                     
                     
                        Quantunque volte,
                        
                           Although, as often tymes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Dentro,
                        
                           vvith in.
                        
                     
                     
                        Entro,
                     
                     
                        Fúori,
                     
                     
                        Di fuori,
                        
                           vvithout.
                        
                     
                     
                        Fuóra,
                     
                     
                        Fuóre,
                     
                     
                        Su, vp, or vpon.
                     
                        Suſo, vpvvarde.
                     
                        Giu, doune.
                     
                        Giuſo, dounevvardes.
                     
                        Da lungi,
                     
                     
                        Da lunge,
                        
                           in verſe

                                 A farre of.
                              
                           
                           in proſe
                        
                     
                     
                        Di lungi,
                     
                     
                        Di luntàno,
                     
                     
                        Sòpra,
                     
                     
                        Di ſopra,
                        
                           Aboue.
                        
                     
                     
                        Sòtto,
                     
                     
                        Di ſotto,
                        
                           Vnder.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of tyme

                     
                        Oggi, To daye.
                     
                        Oggidi,
                     
                     
                        Hoggimai,
                        
                           Novv adayes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Hora mai,
                     
                     
                        Hor mai,
                        
                           Already, or more thē tyme
                        
                     
                     
                        Ho mai,
                     
                     
                        Ora, or Hora,
                     
                     
                        Teste,
                        
                           Novv.
                        
                     
                     
                        Adeſſo,
                     
                     
                        Di preſente, preſently: novv.
                     
                        Ieri, or Hieri, yeſterdaye.
                     
                        Di meriggio, noonetyde, middaye.
                     
                        Stamàne, this morning.
                     
                        Di mattina, in the morning.
                     
                        Sta ſera, this euening.
                     
                        Di notte, by night.
                     
                        Digiorno, by daye.
                     
                        Do mani, to morrovve.
                     
                        Do mattina, to morrovve morning.
                     
                        Or' óra,
                        
                           By & by, euē novve.
                        
                     
                     
                        Adhora ad horo,
                     
                     
                        Pur ora,
                     
                     
                        Póco fa,
                        
                           A vvhile ſithence, of late.
                        
                     
                     
                        Dianzi,
                     
                     
                        Ogni hora, alvvayes.
                     
                        Innánzi, before.
                     
                        Addiétro,
                        
                           Behinde.
                        
                     
                     
                        Diétro,
                     
                     
                        Perloaddiétro,
                     
                     
                        Perlopaſſato,
                        
                           hertofore, in tyme paſt
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Perloinnánzi, here after.
                     
                        Perloauenire, herafter, for the tyme to come.
                     
                        Per tempo, in tyme.
                     
                        Il ſéguente giórno, the daye follovving.
                     
                        Da indi in qua,
                        
                           Hethervnto.
                        
                     
                     
                        Fin qui,
                     
                     
                        Da indi innāzi,
                        
                           From thēce forvvard.
                        
                     
                     
                        Indi,
                     
                     
                        Guari, long tyme.
                     
                        Di gran pézzo,
                        
                           A good vvhile ſince.
                        
                     
                     
                        Gran tempofa,
                     
                     
                        Colá, about: as Colà dall'ſtate, about ſommer.
                     
                        Colà doppo il veſpero, about after the euening.
                     
                        Presto,
                        
                           Quickly.
                        
                     
                     
                        Tosto,
                     
                     
                        Ràtto,
                     
                     
                        Velócemente,
                        
                           Svvyftly.
                        
                     
                     
                        Di fatto, out of hande.
                     
                        Repente,
                     
                     
                        Direpente,
                        
                           On a ſuddaine: forthvvith.
                        
                     
                     
                        Subbito,
                     
                     
                        Di ſubbito,
                     
                     
                        Incontinente,
                        
                           Incontinent.
                        
                     
                     
                        Immantinēte,
                     
                     
                        Speſſo,
                        
                           Often tymes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Souente,
                     
                     
                        Tardo: Tardi, To late.
                     
                        Rado: Dirado, Seldome.
                     
                        
Mai,

                           Euer: novv euer.
                        
                     
                     Gia mài,
                     Non mai, Neuer.
                     
                     Alhora, then.
                     
                     Quando,

                           vvhen.
                        
                     
                     Quando mai,
                     Mentre, vvhileſt.
                     
                     
                        Ʋnque,
                     Vnqua,
                     Alcuna vòlta,
                     Alcuna fiáta,

                           Somtymes.
                        
                     
                     Quàlche volta,
                     Qualche fiáta,
                     Tal vòlta,
                     Talòra, talhora,
                     Qualòra, at vvhat tyme: as often as.
                     
                     Quando che ſia, vvhen ſoeuer it be.
                     
                     Alle vòlte, At tymes.
                     
                     Il piu delle volte, for the moſt parte.
                     
                     Gia, Novv, already.
                     
                     Sèmpre, Alvvayes.
                     
                     Sempremay,

                           Continually: euermore.
                        
                     
                     Di continuo,
                  
               
            
            
               Of qualitie

                     Bene, vvell.
                     
                     Male, euill.
                     
                     Ottimamánte, moſt vvell.
                     
                     Peſſimamente, moſt euill.
                     
                     Fidelmente, faithfully.
                     
                     Ornatamente, trimly, deckedly.
                     
                     
                        
                        Ʋoluntiermente,
                     
                        Ʋolontièri,

                           vvillingly.
                        
                     
                     Dibuòna vòglia,
                     Dicuóre,

                           Hartely.
                        
                     
                     Dibuon cuòre,
                     Sauiamente, vviſely.
                     
                     Dottamente, Learnedly.
                     
                     
                        Ʋeramente, Truely.
                     
                     Falſamente, Falcely.
                     
                     Molto, Much.
                     
                     
                        Ʋiapui, Much more.
                     
                     Aſſai, Enough, vvell.
                     
                     Poco, A litle.
                     
                     Souente,

                           Often.
                        
                     
                     Speſſo,
                     Ràdo,
                     Diràdo,

                           Seldom.
                        
                     
                     Tanto,

                           So much.
                        
                     
                     Cotanto,
                     Quanto, as much: hovv much.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of deniall

                     Non, No, Not, no.
                     
                     Non già, Not novv.
                     
                     Non mica, Not a crome.
                     
                     Ne, Neither.
                     
                     Signor nò, Seir no.
                     
                     Meſſer nò, Maiſter no.
                     
                     Madònna nò, Myſtres no, &c.
                     
                     Nulla,

                           Nothing.
                        
                     
                     Niente,
                     Appunto, Fully. As Appúnto il pòpolo non ha altro penſiero.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of Affirming

                     Si, yea, I: as Miſſerſi, Madonnaſi,
                     Certo,
                     Percèrto,
                     Certaménte,

                           For certaine, Aſſuredly.
                        
                     
                     Dicerto,
                     
                        Ʋeramènte,
                     Inuèro,

                           Truly.
                        
                     
                     Di verò,
                     In verita,
                  
               
            
            
               Of Increaſing

                     Più, more.
                     
                     Mòlto,

                           Much.
                        
                     
                     Aſſái,
                     Abbaſtanza, enough.
                     
                     Troppo, to much.
                     
                     Di ſouèrchio, ſuperfluous.
                     
                     Del tutto,

                           VVholy: altogether, vtterly.
                        
                     
                     Affatto,
                     Maggior mente, more, rather.
                     
                     Maſſimamente, chiefly eſpecially.
                     
                     Potiſſimamente, chiefly.
                     
                     Dottiſſimamènte, moſte learnedly.
                     
                     Beniſſimo, moſt vvell.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of Diminiſhing

                     Meno; leſſe.
                     
                     Póco méno, a little leſſe.
                     
                     A póco, a póco, by little and little.
                     
                     Pián piáno, faire and ſoftly.
                     
                     Alquanto, ſomvvhat.
                     
                     Poco, a little.
                     
                     Pochetto, very little.
                     
                     Pie innanzi pie, fote before fote or ſtalkingly.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of diſcretion

                     Altrimente, Othervviſe.
                     
                     Senza, vvithout.
                     
                     Seperatamente, ſeuerally.
                     
                     Pūtalmēte, pointemeale or by pointes.
                     
                     Secretamente, ſecretly.
                     
                     Apertamente, openly.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of correcting

                     Appena, Skarſe.
                     
                     Quaſi, Almoſt: as though.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of ſvvearing

                     Per Dio, By god.
                     
                     Alla fede, a fe, in faith.
                     
                     Per l'anima mia, by my ſole.
                     
                     A fededio, by the faith of god.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of vvyſhing

                     O ſe, O ſi: O if.
                     
                     O Dio voglia, God graunt.
                     
                     O Dio voleſſe, I vvolde to God.
                     
                     O che, O that.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of forbidding

                     Guarda,

                           Take hede.
                        
                     
                     Guardati,
                     Deh non, fy no.
                     
                     Vedi, ſee.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of incouraging

                     Fa, Doe.
                     
                     Su, vp.
                     
                     Or ſu, novv goto.
                     
                     Corrággio, courage.
                     
                     Spediſcila, diſpatch it.
                     
                     Forniſcila, furniſ he it.
                     
                     Or oltre: an further.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of Aſſembling

                     
                        Inſiéme,
                        
                           Together.
                        
                     
                     
                        Inſiememènte,
                     
                     
                        Parimènte,
                        
                           In like ſorte.
                        
                     
                     
                        Similmènte,
                     
                     
                        Dipari,
                     
                     
                        Appari,
                        
                           By couples.
                        
                     
                     
                        Alpari,
                     
                     
                        A ſchiera, by troupes or companies.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Of comparing
                  
                     Piú, more: Méno, leſſe, Via piú, Molto piú. Aſſai più, much more.
                     
                     Via mèno,
                     Molto meno,

                           
                              Much leſſe.
                           
                        
                     
                     Aſſai meno,
                     Poco più, a little more.
                     
                     Poco meno, a little leſſe.
                     
                     Mègliore,

                           
                              Better.
                           
                        
                     
                     Meglio,
                     Pèggiore,

                           
                              VVorſe.
                           
                        
                     
                     Pèggio,
                     Tanto,
                     Cotanto,

                           
                              Aſmuch.
                           
                        
                     
                     Altre tanto,
                     Dúe cotanti,

                           
                              Aſmuch more.
                           
                        
                     
                     Il dóppio,
                     Trecotanti, three folde.
                     
                     Più del mondo, the moſt in the worlde.
                     
                     A Riſpètto,
                     Ampetto,

                           
                              In reſpect, in compariſon.
                           
                        
                     
                     Allàto,
                     Accànto,
                     A comparàtione,
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the greateſt cōpariſon.

                     
                        Sauiſſimamènte, moſt vvyſely.
                     
                        Veriſſimamènte, moſt truly.
                     
                        Gratioſiſſimamente, moſt gratiouſly.
                     
                        Rigoroſiſſimamente, moſt rigorouſly.
                  
               
            
            
               Of excepting

                     
                        Saluo,
                     
                     
                        Eccètto,
                        
                           Sauing, except.
                        
                     
                     
                        Fuòrche,
                     
                     
                        Infuòri,
                     
                     
                        Se non, If not, ſauing, but.
                  
               
            
            
               Of ſimilitude

                     
                        Cóme, As.
                     
                        Sicome, ſo as.
                     
                        Coſi, ſo, or thus.
                     
                        Aguiſa, in ſuch vviſe.
                     
                        Quaſi, as though.
                     
                        In modò,
                     
                     
                        In maniera,
                        
                           In ſuch manner or vviſe.
                        
                     
                     
                        In guiſa,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of doubting

                     
                        Forſe, Perhaps.
                     
                        Perauentúra, paraduenture.
                     
                        Per caſo,
                        
                           In caſe: par chaunce, or it may happen.
                        
                     
                     
                        Accàſo,
                     
                     
                        A ſorte,
                        
                           In ſorte.
                        
                     
                     
                        Per ſorte,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               of ſhevvig

                     
                        Ecco, behold.
                     
                        Eccolo, behold hym or it.
                     
                        Eccola, behold her, or it:
                     And ſo forth, Mi, ti, vi, li, le.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of choyſe

                     
                        Meglio, Better.
                     
                        Piu tòsto, rather.
                     
                        Anzi, But, rather.
                  
               
            
            
               of geſtures of the bodie

                     
                        Tentóne, Gropingly.
                     
                        Bóccone, groueling.
                     
                        Carpóne,
                        
                           Creping on all fovver.
                        
                     
                     
                        Brancolóne,
                     
                     
                        Ginocchione, on the knees.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Of calling
                  
                     O, ô la, è Oh.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Of order
                  
                     Innanzi, Auanti, Dauanti, Before.
                     
                     Dietro, behinde.
                     
                     Poi, poſcia, dapói, dopoi, dipoi, doppo, after.
                     
                     Fratanto, tratanto, intanto, in the meane vvhile.
                     
                     Oltre à ciò, beſides that.
                     
                     Oltre à quèsto, beſides this.
                     
                     Súbito, diſubito, on a ſuddaine, quickly.
                     
                     Alla fine, in thende, at laſt.
                     
                     Peró, percio, pertanto, therfore.
                     
                     Onde, La onde, vvhervpon.
                     
                     Prima,
                     Primamente,

                           
                              Firſt, firſt of all.
                           
                        
                     
                     Primieramente,
                     Secondo,

                           
                              Seconde, or ſecondarily.
                           
                        
                     
                     Secondariamente,
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of deuiding

                     
                        Separatamente, Seuerally.
                     
                        Partitamente, perticularly.
                     
                        Avicènda,
                        
                           By tornes.
                        
                     
                     
                        Vicendeuolmente,
                     
                     
                        A gara, for the mayſtry.
                  
               
            
            
               Of proceding

                     
                        
                           Ʋia, On avvay.
                     
                        Hor ſuſo, novv vp.
                     
                        Hor oltre,
                        
                           Novv forth.
                        
                     
                     
                        Hor oltra,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of good, or euill vviſhing

                     
                        Benaggia, vvell be it.
                     
                        Malaggia, euill mought it fare.
                  
               
            
            
               Of aſking

                     
                        Onde auiéne? Hovv doth it happen?
                     
                        Onde è, from vvhence is it?
                     
                        Perche, vvherfore?
                     
                        Per qual cagióne? by vvhat occaſion?
                     
                        A che modo? hovv? or in vvhat ſorte?
                     
                        A che guiſa? hovv? or in vvhat vvyſe?
                     
                        Oue? vvhere?
                     
                        Quando? vvhen?
                  
               
            
            
               Of vnion

                     
                        Inſieme, Togeather.
                     
                        Inſiemamente,
                        
                           To geather like▪
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Vnitamente,
                     
                     
                        Giuntamente, Ioyntly.
                     
                        Parimente, in like ſorte: alſo.
                  
               
            
            
               Of declaration

                     
                        Cio è, That is.
                     
                        Verbigratia, as for example.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of ſorrovve
                  
                     Ha,
                     Ohi,
                     Ohime,

                           
                              He las.
                           
                        
                     
                     Oime,
                     Hei,
                  
               
            
            
               Of abhorring

                     
                        Oibò,
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of a Coniunction.
            
               Of coupling

                     
                        Et, (a vouell follovving)
                     
                        E, (a cōſonant follovving)

                           And.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ancho, Anche, Anchora,
                        
                           Alſo.
                        
                     
                     
                        Etiandio,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of continuing the ſence,

                     
                        In modo che, In ſuch ſorte as.
                     
                        In guiſa che, In ſuch vviſe as.
                     
                        Dimanièra che, In ſuch manner as.
                     
                        Per ſifattamaniera che
                        
                           In ſuch manner of ſorte as,
                        
                     
                     
                        Sifattamente che,
                     
                     
                        La onde, vvhervpon.
                     
                        Se, if.
                     
                        Per che, vvherforc: bycauſe.
                     
                        Poi che, Since that.
                     
                        Che, for, that, as.
                     
                        Peroche,
                     
                     
                        Percioche,
                        
                           For bycauſe: bycauſe that: therfore.
                        
                     
                     
                        Imperoche,
                     
                     
                        Impercioche,
                     
                     
                        Come, as.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of diſtinction

                     
                        O, or, other.
                     
                        O verò, or elſe.
                     
                        O pure, or yet.
                     
                        Ma, but.
                     
                        Ne, nother.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Of contrarietie
                  
                     Nondimèno,
                     Nientedimeno,

                           
                              Neuertheleſſe.
                           
                        
                     
                     Nondimanco,
                     Nientedimanco,
                     Tuttauia,

                           
                              Notvvithſtanding.
                           
                        
                     
                     Tuttauolta,
                     Benche, although.
                     
                     Comeche, albeit.
                     
                     Anchorche,
                     Anchorache,
                     Auengache,

                           
                              Hovvbeit, although.
                           
                        
                     
                     Quantunque,
                     Etiamdioche,
                     Contutto che,
                  
               
            
            
               Of vvithdravving

                     
                        Almeno,
                        
                           At the leaſt.
                        
                     
                     
                        Almanco,
                     
                     
                        Pur che, ſo that: as Purche non vegga, ſo that I may not ſee.
                     
                        Tanto, ſo much.
                     
                        Solo, onely.
                  
               
            
            
               of yelding a cauſe

                     
                        Percioche, Bycauſe that.
                     
                        Accioche, to thende that.
                     
                        Concioſia, for aſmuch.
                     
                        Concioſia coſa,
                        
                           For aſmuch as.
                        
                     
                     
                        Concioſia coſa che,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of cōcluding

                     
                        Dunque,
                        
                           Then.
                        
                     
                     
                        Adúnque,
                     
                     
                        In ſumma, in ſumme: to conclude.
                     
                        Però, (poeticall)
                     
                        Percio,
                        
                           Therfore.
                        
                     
                     
                        Impero,
                     
                     
                        La onde, vvherupon.
                     
                        Il perche, The cauſe vvhy.
                     
                        Altrimente,
                        
                           Othervvaies.
                        
                     
                     
                        Altrimenti,
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Of doubt.

                     
                        O ſi, o'ther yea.
                     
                        O Nó, or no.
                  
               
            
            
               Vſed for ornamētes ſake

                     
                        Ora, Novv.
                     
                        Púre, yet.
                     
                        Ben, vvell, &c.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of a Prepoſition.
            
               In, as In cielo, & in terra,

                     
                        In, &c.
                     
                  
               
               Ne, as Nel cielo, & nella terra,
               A

                     
                        To.
                     
                  
               
               Ad
               Di,

                     
                        Of.
                     
                  
               
               De,
               Da, from, or of.
               
               Per, for, by, or thorough.
               
               Con, vvith.
               
               Sénza, vvithout: as Senza lui.
               
                  
Ver,

                     
                        Tovvardes: as Verte, Verſo, and in verſo il cielo: or del cielo.
                  
               
               Verſo,
               In verſo,
               Dóppo, after: as Doppo lui.
               Intra,

                     
                        VVithin: as Infra te.
                  
               
               Infra,
               Tra,

                     
                        Emongeſt: as Tra gli amici.
                  
               
               Fra,
               Sopra, vpon: as Sopra il monte: or del monte.
               Diſopra, aboue.
               
               Sotto,

                     
                        Vnder: as Sotto il monte: or del monte.
                  
               
               Diſotto,
               Contra,
               Contro,

                     
                        Againſt: as Contrai tuói: and de i tuoi.
                  
               
               Incontro,
               Allincontro: ouer againeſt: as Allincontro del muro.
               Oltre, Beyonde: as Oltre il mare: Alſo Beſides: as Oltre ciò, and oltre il Prencipe.
               Dietro, Behinde: as Dietro il monte.
               Accànto,

                     
                        Neare: as Accanto, or allato alla Città.
                  
               
               Allato,
               Preſſo, Neare.
               
               Appreſſo, At, or vvith: as Appreſſo di me. Alſo after: as Appreſſo à te, or di te.
               Appetto, in compariſon: as Appetto a lui.
               Rimpetto,

                     
                        Ouer againſt: as Rimpetto, or Dirimpetto almonte.
                  
               
               Dirimpetto,
               Fin,
               Sino,

                     
                        Vntil.
                     
                  
               
               Infino,
               
                  
Sino,

                     
                        Vnto: as Inſino al cielo.
                  
               
               Inſino,
               Di naſcósto, pryuely: vnvvares: as Di naſcósto al padre.
               Auànti,
               Dinanzi,

                     
                        Before: as, Dinanzi al Giudice.
                  
               
               Innanzi,
               Dietro, behinde: as, Dietro a cui,
               Intorno,
               Attorno,

                     
                        Aboutes: as, Intorno a cui.
                  
               
               Circa,
               Fuori, vvithout: as, Fuóri della Citta,
               Dentro, vvithin: as, Dentro della Città.
               Su, vpon: as, Su del colle.
               Giu, vnder: as, Giú del monte.
               Di la, on th'other ſide: as, Di la del Castello,
               Di qua, on this ſide: as, Di qua del Castello.
               Lungi,

                     
                        Farre of.
                     
                  
               
               Lunge,
            
            To conclude are there certaine Prepoſitiōs that are not vſed but in compounding of verbes. As, Di, in Diffido, I myſtruſt. Dis, in Diſióngo, I do vnioyne. Ra, in Raccòglio, I do gather. Ri, in Ripiglio, I do take againe. Es, in Eſalto, I do exalt. Inter, in Interrompo, I do interrupte. Tra, in Tramètto, I do put betvvene. Tras, in Traſporto, I do tranſporte. Fra, in Fraſtaglio, I do hacke, or chope, a ridiculous verbe: vvherof there is this ridiculous Aduerbe. Frastagliatamente, hackinglye, or choplogikelike: as, tu parli frastagliat amente.
            
         
         
            
            Of an Interiection.
            
               Of ioye: Oh.
               
               Of laughing: Ah, Ah.
               
               Of vvondring: O, vh, vh.
               
               Of ſorrovve: Aih, Ah, Oyme.
               
               Of Deſier: Deh.
               
               Of dreade: Bàco Bàco: Oh Oh Dio.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
         
      
   