
      
         
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            A
DISCOVRSE
OF THE VSAGE OF
the English Fugitiues, by
the Spaniard.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Scarlet for Iohn Drawater, and
are to be solde at his shop in Pater noster
row, at the signe of the Swan.
1595.
         
         
            
            
            THE COPIE OF A
Letter sent out of the Low countries
by a Gentleman entertained
by the King of Spaine in
pension:
            To a yong Gentleman his Kinsman in
ENGLAND.
            
               MY very good Cosin,
vnderstanding
as well by
your Letters, as
by the message
lately done vnto me by the mouth
of A. T. of the great longing and
desire you haue to draw your self
into these parts, & to imploy your
selfe here in seruice of the Spanish
king: & perceiuing also as well by
your sayd Letters, as by the Gentleman

that brought the same;
and by the reporte of diuerse other,
young Gentlemen of our
Countrie there bee manye that
are of your minde in that point:
Some thereunto, as I doo gesse,
moued of a youthfull and vaine
tickling humour, to bee wandering
abroade in strange and
forreine Countries: Others in
hope there to growe to greate
preferment, aduancement, imployment,
and wealth: Other
some pretending matter of conscienee,
seeme to haue sure confidence,
that there they maye
liue with more libertie and ease
of minde, then that within our
Countrie they inioye. I haue
thought good for the particular

loue which I beare, and
alwayes haue borne towardes
you, vnto whome I wish as to
my selfe, but chiefely in respecte
of the sincere, faythfull, reuerent,
and loyall fidelitye and regarde
I haue to the person of our
sacred, renowmed, and most gracious
Soueraigne, the QVEENES
most excellent Maiestie, and to
my natlue Countrie and Countrye-men,
to sette downe some
notes and obseruations, vvhich
by long and painefull troubles and
experience in this place I haue
gathered: by which I hope I
shall make manifest not onelye
to you, but also to all others
my most deare Countrye men, if
I maye haue the fauour to haue

it published: in which point I
mean to labor by my best friends,
to such of the greatest persons as
may permit the same, how greatly
you and they that desire to repaire
hether by any of the motions
before expressed, or in anye
hope of good to be receiued from
the sayde King, doo erre and are
deceiued. I hartely and most earnestly
desire you, & all other that
shall reade the same, deepelye to
iudge & consider of these points
which I shall set downe, which
(God willing) I will do with such
fidelitie, true meaning, and sinceritie,
as that no parte of the same
shall bee truly to bee gaynsayd or
refelled, and my selfe by the persons,
times, and places, and other

circumstances shall make most
manyfest and plaine, to anie that
shal doubt of the truth of the same
or any part thereof, & I shal take
great ioy & comfort, if my self hauing
vndertaken an vntowardlye
& dangerous course, though with
better successe then hath happened
to many hundreds, may be as
a caueat to all the young Gentlemen
of our Nation, how they hazard
themselues so dangerouslie.
And that my painfull experience
may be to you as a looking Glas,
wherein they maye beholde the
spots & errours of theyr conceyued
fansies, or as markes sette vp
for them, whereby they maye
auoide the perilles & most daungerous
rockes and shelfes, to

them yet vnknowen, & lying hidden
vnder the smooth, fayre, and
delightful conceiued and fantasied
pleasures forged in
their imaginations.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE METHOD OF
the insuing Discourse.
            
               THE method and
manner that I intend
to vse in this
Discourse, shall bee
after this sort, First,
I will directe my
speeches to the vnexperienced
Gentlemen,
desirous to
serue here in Spaine,
shewing them in what point of their hope and expectations
they doo faile, and are deceiued.
            Secondly, to our credulous Papistes at home,
vpon whose grosenes and simplicitie, our rebellyous
traitors heere abroade doo build their chiefest
foundations of all their villanies, whom while they
entertaine with vaine expectations, in the meane
time with spies, Priests, and traitours, which they
daily send ouer, they abuse with trecherous practises,
to the irrepiable ruine and ouerthrow of them
and theirs. Thirdly, because many of our countrie

men liuing in great happinesse at home, doo yet in
their conceits mislike, surfetting with ease, the blessed
estate they liue in, and what withall, the maner
of her Maiesties most gracious and mercifull gouernment,
I haue thought it my dutie somewhat to
expresse these few things which haue come to my
knowledge, touching the innumerable benefits &
blessings with which it hath pleased God to adorn
her royall Maiestie, together with the flourishing
estate of that noble soile since the time of her Maiesties
raigne, so flourishing with peace, prosperity,
and abundance, in glorie of warres, so renowmed
and victorious in arts, so curious and excellent in
iustice, euen to the verie enemie, so admirable, and
(which surpasseth all the rest) in the free, sweet, and
comfortable vse of the true religion, so aboue all others
blessed and fortunate, that I haue hearde the
verie Spaniardes themselues saie, they feare Iesus
Christ is become a protestant. Withal, I make some
comparison betweene this and the tyrannicall gouernment
of the Spanish tyrant, his cruell and inhumane
vsage of his miserable subiects, their abolition
of their priuiledges, and in fine, the vnspeakable
bondage, slauerie, and desolate despaire in
which they liue languishing. A matter though farre
vnfit for me to handle or treate, but worthie of the
most graue and experienced men of qualitie and
highest degree, yet considering I shall not presume
to treate of matters of high state or secrets, but such
as euerie good subiect may find and pick out of the
heroicall actions of the one, and the tyrannicall insolence

of the other, both don in the appearance of
the world, I hope and so with all lowlynesse most
humbly desire her most gracious and benigne Maiestie
to pardon me, if I come farre short of that
which men fitter for the handling therof could say
or intreat. And so most humbly also make petition,
that I may therein bee censured according to the
loyall zeale I beare to her most princely Maiestie,
and not to the basenes and simplicitie of my stile or
the handling thereof.
            But to come to my Discourse, to the end that
you and the rest of your opinion, may cleerly and
plainly discerne those things which hetherto your
eies blinded with the vaile of partialitie, haue not
bin able to view. I will begin with the good vsage,
honor & aduancement that you and other Gentlemen
addicted to this seruice are heere to expect,
bringing vnto you for example sundrie braue and
worthie Gentlemen, Captaines and souldiers, that
haue taken the like course before you, wherby you
shal perceiue it is not all gold that glistreth, but that
whatsoeuer shew the Spaniarde make vnto vs, yet
in his hart he mortally abhorreth vs, & by al means
possible seeketh our destruction, ruine & subuertion,
as it euidently appeareth by his vsage of troups
& companies of our nations that haue serued him.
For example: at the siege of Antwarpe there came
vnto him vnder the conduct of Norris and Cornish, a
troup of six thousand, the tallest and best appointed
souldiers, that euer I remember to haue seene in all
my life, their comming beeing the onelie cause

that the towne was so soone deliuered vnto him as
it was. For whereas the Duke of Aniou laie vnder
the wals of Gaunt, with sufficient force and most
deliberate resolution to succour the sayd towne of
Antwarp vpon his mutinie, fearing further inconuenience,
he marched away with his whole camp,
leauing the enemie now battering the towne, who
seeing themselues frustrate of their expected hope,
presently rendered the same to the duke of Parma.
But how were they recompenced? Within one
yeere they were let all to famish for hunger, which
some of them seeking to releeue, by foreranging
out vpon the Countrie, foure and twentie of them
were taken and carried to Antwarp, of whose beginning
they were the chiefest, and there openlye
hanged in the market place. Whereas all other nations
had libertie to rob and steale, and doo what
they list. Another troupe of them of thirtye,
beeing foorth, and lying in a village neere Poppering
in Flanders, a companie of Spaniardes hearing
of them, came into the village where they were, &
after friendly and soldierly salutation of each side,
as they were all making merrie together, on a sodaine
the Spaniards tooke them at aduauntage vnarmed,
and most trecherously and inhumanelye
murthered them euerie one. Sundrie complaint
                  •
               s
were made to the Duke, by the friends of those that
were thus murthered, and by the Captaines of the
Regiment, but there could bee no remedie nor iustice
obtained. But to make amendes, because they
would bee the cleanlier ridde of the residue of this

poore miserable troupe, the campe being then before
Winockberghen, they made them two litle forts
of purpose, in which they willingly placed them in
the vtmost quarter of the whole camp, and neerest
confining to the town, to the end they might haue
all their throates cut, as in deede they had verie few
nights after. At which time the enemie assaulting
them with great furie, and they defending themselues
most manfully aboue the space of an houre,
in such sort, as the alarum passed through the whol
campe, yet they were neuer releeued with any succour
at all, insomuch that the greatest part of them
being slaine in defence, the enemie at last entered
and put the residue to the swoord.
            To rehearse vnto you the sundrie and seuerall
calamities that these poore men, as well Captaines
as souldiers endured, during the small time of that
their vnfortunate seruice, especiallye at Ganskecke,
Aske. and Grauer, would seeme (I am sure) vnto you
for the vnspeakable strangenesse thereof, scarcelye
credible, for they neuer receiued all the time of
their seruice anie one moneths paie. I haue seene
Lieutenants and Ensignes of them go vp & downe
the campe begging their bread, couered only with
olde mantles about their shoulders, and haue my
selfe releeued some of them. Shortly after came Pigot,
who brought with him Sir Iohn Norris his regiment,
being well neere a thousand, as tall and well
appointed men as were in Europe, whose seruice,
how meritorious and beneficiall it was vnto the
Spaniards, I leaue to their iudgements that knowe

the Countrie. For by rendering of Alost vnto him,
they were the occasion that hee got Darmounde the
Sasse, the fortes of Leiskins hooke, Saint Anthonies, &
Saint Margarets, the best part of the land of Wast, &
in manner Gaunt it selfe, as the sequel shewed. Notwithstanding
all which seruice, they were within
two yeeres space, what with hunger, the gallowes,
& rigorous dealing, consumed and brought to nothing.
And last at Stalbrooke, even against the yeelding
vp of Antwarp, when all other Nations were to
receiue their count and reckoning, they only were
infamously cashierd without anie one moneths
paie. And which of all others is most monstrous &
scarce credible, whereas some of the Captains, not
long before had made them of their owne purses
new and faire Ensignes, those Ensignes were violently
taken awaie from those that bare them and
deteined. Which abuse and wrong though captain
Tresham and the other Captaines complained off
to the duke with great protestations, yet they could
neuer obtaine anie restitution.
            Somewhat before this time, when the whole
campe was at the siege of Dermound paide two moneths,
they onely though of all others most trauelled
in the trenches, wading euerie night bosome
high to their wast, and hauing had more men slain
in that siege than anie other regiment in the whole
campe, could not receiue one pennie, notwithstanding
they had passed in muster with he rest, and
some of the Captaines bribed the C
                  •
               ommissarie,
thinking thereby to make a great hand. But in sted

of mony, when they shewed the Duke, they were
scornfully by him turned of, to the Contadores, of
whom they receiued the most base & opprobrious
speeches that euer were giuen soldiers, & were in
fine reiected without euer receiuing one halfpeny.
And lastly, when the Regiment was cast, whereas
the paie of a reformed Captaine amongst them, of
what Nation so euer he be, is fortie crownes, they
giue onely to our English captaines fiue and twentie
a moneth. Not long before it chanced that one
of the Captains, whose name was Edward Vincent,
was taken in a skirmish by the enemie at Pernence,
and set at ransome at a hundred and fifty poundes,
to make which raunsome, his father beeing then in
Flanders, a poore olde man of seuenty yeres of age,
fell vpon his knees before the Duke, weeping and
imploring his helpe. But in sted of yelding him releefe,
the Duke badde take awaie the olde dronken
foole: the griefe whereof strake the old man so to
the heart, that he went home and dyed within sixe
dayes, and his sonne for lacke of his raunsome was
shortly after hanged at Perges. Pigot himselfe being
some three yeeres since taken, and Barne, betweene
Gaunt and Bruges, were neuer releeued with anie
one pennie towardes theyr charges or raunsomes,
Pigot was suffered miserably to end his daies in prison,
and so had Barne also, but that his wife, by her
solicitation, found such fauour among his priuate
friends, that he got as much as paide his raunsome,
but neuer could obtaine one pennie of the Duke,
though shee were an importunate sutor vnto him.
            
               
Lastly, came sir W. Standley and R. Yorke rendering
vnto the King the Towne of Deuenter, & fort
of Sutphen, the one with a Regiment of foote, the
other with a companie of Lances. Let vs see howe
the one and the other was vsed. First, sir William
Standley was confirmed gouernour of the Towne
hee rendered, and his Regiment lefte there in garrison
with the receite of two moneths paie. For a
while he liued in the greatest applause that might
bee: Cardinall Allen was written vnto to set down
Priests to instruct this religious regiment: he informed
the Pope thereof, who both wrote ioyntlie
to the King to be good vnto this regiment. Which
beeing well and liberally intreated, as they had alreadie
at Rhemes and Rome, a Seminarie of schollers
to praie and write for the Catholyke cause of our
Countrie: So this conducted by so worthie and
Catholike a Gentleman as sir William Standley was,
might bee a continuall nurserie and seminarie of
souldiers to fight for the same. Downe came
Priestes thicke and three-folde, from France and Italy,
many masses and much preaching there was:
Gentlemen from all parts drew downe thether, in
hope of this good paiment, and golden world that
then was talked of. But what followed within short
space, to weaken their number, three of their companies
vnder colour of seruice, were cunninglye
drawen out of the Towne by Verdugo Haaltephen,
neuer from that time after being suffered to return
to it again: and within a while after sir, William him
selfe with the remnant, was commanded vnder the

lyke colour of seruice, to come foorth, being tolde
that hee shoulde presently returne into it againe.
And by this fine meanes was eased of his gouernment,
and such goods as hee and his souldiers lefte,
were spoiled & made bootie of. And sithence that
time his seminarie souldiers, with all their religion,
were neuer trusted in anie towne, nor neuer shalbe
I warrant them. From thence they were presently
drawen downe into Brabant, where they wintered
in the field without monie, and in such great miserie
and pouertie, that tenne weekes together theyr
chiefest foode and sustenaunce in Turnolt, was vnpoudered
acornes, which they founde in cellers:
which dyet the Priests not liking of, came to theyr
Coronell to Antwarp, who to auoide the lamentations
and complaints of his souldiers, had gotten
him there a lodging, where you should neuer haue
found his table without a squadron of priests. Some
did wonder, so worthy a souldier could suffer their
indignities, which to auoide, some yeeres since hee
went into Spaine: partlye to secure vnto himselfe
some estate of liuing, of which he now considering
this dealing, began to doubt: partly by the inuitation
of the Iesuites, with which order hee is exceedingly
inchanted, & to them wholy subiected: who
dealt for him in such sorte with the Cardinall, that
he presently sent Parsons awaie into Spaine, to informe
the King of his worthinesse, vertue, and experience
of the sea coastes of England, but especially
of his intelligence about Irelande, which in
truth hee presumeth to bee verie greate. Parsons
               
plaide his part in such sort, that sir William was presently
sent for: who vpon his ariuall, did what hee
could, to perswade the king to send forces for Ireland:
but belyke there was not such credite giuen
him as hee expected, insomuch that he wrote Letters
to H. Holt the Iesuite in Brusels (which is one of
those on whom he chiefly relyeth) of great discontentment,
signifieng, that his entertainment was far
colder than he expected. Within short space after,
he was sent downe to the kings Nauie, lying at Coconia,
whereas yet he remaineth. In the meane time
his regiment began to drop and droupe awaie, in
such sort, that what for lacke of sustenance, & what
for ill vsage, the number of them was melted to an
hundred and fiftie: which base and villanous vsage
the grauest and wisest of his Captaines seeing, especially
abhorring the trecherous practises of theyr
Coronell, made by secrete meanes humble intercession
to her most gracious MAISTIE, to pardon
theyr offences committed, and to grant them
libertie to liue in their Country: which of her most
princely and royall benignitie shee graunted, so as
now they liue here in honest and good sort, & can
testifie all this which I haue sayd to be true.
            Hauing gotten sir William out of Deuenter, yet
Yorke still remained a blemish in their eie, who alwais,
notwithstanding theyr base vsage, stil flourished
& bare his head aloft, ranging ouer the whole
coun
                  •
               rie with his Companie, bringing in daylye
many great and rich booties: Him therefore fairly
on a daie at dinner, they caused to bee poysoned,

where likewise were poisoned with him yong Richard
Souch, & Robert Fen priest: but hee belike hauing
swalowed the best Boncon, they only met with the
drams, so that he dyed miserablie, and they fell sick
and brake out into many pustles & biles, yet afterwardes
recouered, and did giue this testimony. His
breath was no sooner out of his bodie, but Fiorias a
Spaniard, and Vandenberg, the newe gouernour of
Deuenter, rushte into his lodging to breake vp his
coffers, in which beeing withstoode by Yorkes lieutenant
Edward Boncer, and 
                  •
               is brother, they caused
their gards at no one dayes to enter in vpon them,
and to murther them both in theyr own presence:
which done, they brake vp his coffers, tooke out his
iewels, plate, and mony, of which they found great
store, appropriating the same to theyr townes vse,
which he by Testament had giuen to a little youth
his nephew, being nowe at this present in England.
Lastly, they chased his whole companie out of the
towne, and spoiled theyr baggage at the gates. The
poore souldiers beeing thus inhumanely depriued
of their Captaine and Lieutenant, and seeing them
selues so vilely dealt with, repaired to Verslugo for
releefe, who for recompence presentlye cashierd
them all without the receit of one pennie.
            Afterwardes they gaue out and published, that
Yorke was poisoned by subornation of the counsell
of England, but, if there had bene no other proofes
(as there were infinite) yet the sequele of their doings,
their murthering of his friends, and their robbing
of his treasure, shewed by whom it was done,

and whereat they aimed.
            If these examples bee not inough▪ to serue the
turne, but that perchance you wil saie, he hath delt
better with priuate men. If you can name mee but
anie one that he hath raised or aduanced to honor,
or that liueth richly or wealthily in his seruice, I wil
name you an hundred, that beeing Gentlemen of
good houses and of worthie merite, haue consumed,
languished, and beene brought to nothing in
his seruice, some of them perished & died for lacke
of sustenance. You perchance will name Hugh Owen,
and in good faith hee is the onely man that euer
I knew aduanced, credited, or graced in his seruice.
And yet (God wot) all that hee getteth, is no more
than to maintain him in a meane estate and shew,
with a man onely or two to serue him. Where on
the other side I will reckon you vp of those that are
onely for want of thinges necessarie, and of pure
pouertie consumed and dead, M. Copley, L. Dacers,
Michael Tempest, olde Norton, Tremaine, Stradling,
Henrie Carew, Edward Allen, Southwell, with sundrie
others of good race and credite in their Countrie:
Copley being sicke at Beuere, and in vnspeakable distresse
and calamitie, desired a Gentleman his kinsman,
one Lo. Lewkner, to beeseech Pedro de Olane,
who then was Treasurer, to paie him vpon an assignation
which hee had, onely fiue pounds, protesting
that at that present his lyfe might there with be
saued. The Gentleman performed his request with
all instance and fidelitie, as he hath often times told
me, but coulde not obtaine one pennie. Wherevpon

hee mooued the Duke, but nothing woulde
come, so that without finding anie man that tooke
compassion of his distresse, his owne Countriemen
beeing vnable to helpe him, he ended his lyfe,
though with patience vertuously and well, yet the
state of so honourable a Gentleman considered,
most pittifully, and in great miserie.
            To recite vnto you the names of those that
doo yet liue so poorely and vncomfortably in his
pension, woulde bee too long, and therefore take
them all in generall (Charles Paget onely excepted)
and examine them one from another, from my
Lord of Westmerland downward, euen to the verie
lowest: and if there bee in the whole worlde a
more miserable and discontented troupe of Gentlemen
than they are, let mee neuer bee credited in
anie thing else that I shall tell you. And because
you shall your selfe the better iudge, I wyll tell
you what paiment they haue, of such pensions as
the king hath giuen them.
            They had granted them at Bruges the first daie
of August, in the yeere one thousand fiue hundred
eightie and eight, a generall Liberanca, to receyue
three moneths paie a peece of their pensions, since
that time they haue followed the Duke from
Towne to Towne, making vnto him sundrye
requestes for the payment thereof. But if they
haue vntill this present daie obtayned the same,
then let mee not be credited in anie parte of the
rest which I shall heere intreate of. In deede
some small time past, Cosimo beeing wearyed

with their importunities and lamentations, addressed
them to Baptista Spinola, a baker dwelling it Antwarpe,
giuing them his Letter, and sending the same
by one H. Haselwood, requesting him to relieue those
distressed English Gentlemen, and to buy their Liberanca,
which he doubted not but they would sell
good cheap, greatly to his profit: the whole summe
was ten thousand crownes, which Cosimo promised
him should be allowed, and paid in the reckoning
he had with the king. Haselwood in the name of the
rest, offered him the sayd summe for sixe hundred.
But Spinola vtterly refused the same, saying he wold
not take it for two hundred, and withall hee desired
that hee might not medldle anie more with the
king, wishing that hee had not medled with him so
much. So that they were fain to returne pennilesse,
and doo at this instant liue in so poore and pittyfull
sort, that truly my heart grieueth to see it, insomuch
that I knew a Gentleman that solde his parte there,
being foure and twentie pounds, for three pounds.
But perchance you will saie, he giueth great pensisions,
and entertaineth manye of our Nation: it is
true in deede, in shew hee doth so, and therewyth
doth bleare the worldes eyes with a shew of greate
liberalitie. But his paiment and vsage considered,
(God is my iudge and witnesse) I speake vnfainedly,
I account it a farre happier estate to bee a doorekeeper
in that your blessed soile, than to be heere a
pensioner to the king of Spaine, I leaue the iudgement
of the truth thereof, to those that haue tryed
it: you haue many amongst you, confer with them,

and examine them vppon their consciences: as for
my part, in good faith I cannot imagine cause why
he entertaineth vs, vnlesse it be to vse vs as stales, to
allure others, considering the hatred that he and his
beare vs, and so vnder the dissembled colour of a
false affection, to ouerthrow vs all at last.
            Thus much I dare boldly saie, because through
the conference I haue had with them, I doo know
assuredly, that euen those of our nation which doo
most serue his turne, howsoeuer in outward apparance
they seem for some particular causes to magnifie
and extoll his liberalitie, yet in their owne secret
conceits they do imagine & know nothing in
the world to be more reprochfull, base, and contemptible,
than to be an Entertain do in the king of
Spaines seruice. As for example: you shall easilie
see what account is made of them. At such time as
preparation was made at Brussels for the voyage of
Englande, when they all expected to bee made
knights, coronels, captaines, and conducters of the
armie, and to be filled with crownes, they were so
farre from those matters with which they flattered
themselues, that in stead of being honored and aduaunced,
they were the onelye reiected and contemned
people that followed the Courte, all men
beeing releeued with some moneths paie (they
onely excepted) and which is more, whereas they
mooued the Duke sundry times to knowe his pleasure,
how hee woulde dispose of them in this iourney,
telling him besides, that vpon the well vsage of
them, depended much matter of importaunce, as

the alluring & drawing vnto them other gentlemen
of theyr kinsmen and friendes, who vppon hope of
the lyke good vsage, honour, and aduauncement,
woulde bee able to doo greate seruice vppon their
landing: where contrariwise, in seeing them come
ouer so poore in shew, without credite, monie, or
armes, lyke lackies, for so were the wordes of theyr
request, it woulde bee a cause to terrifie them from
vndertaking anie such course. They were by the
Duke scornefully and with derision reiected, neither
did he vouchsafe to giue them anie other aunswere,
than onely that hee woulde thinke vppon it.
But on the night that they thought to embarke,
he departed, leauing them all behind, not thinking
them anie waie worthie to bee called vppon, or to
bee taken with him. Wherevpon the Lord Westmerland
and Paget, and sundrie others, layd their heads
together, and made their complaint to the Duke of
Pastraua, by whome they were as basely and scornfully
handled as by the other, insomuch that a great
Spaniarde standing by, asked them whether they
thought the king of Spaine not puisant inough to
winne England, without them and theyr friendes.
Vppon which answere the Lord Paget, that verily
thought hee shoulde haue beene made one of the
priuie Councell, and now finding himselfe to bee
had in so small account, conceiued such an inward
griefe, that from that time forward hee neuer ioyed
tyll his dying daie. Sir William Standley also
tooke it in such heauie and disdainefull sorte, that
he was not called to the counsell of warres, whereas

hee presumed, and so gaue out, that no man in
the army knew more, or was better able in this voiage
than himselfe, that he sequestred himselfe from
the Country, and came malecontent, and hired an
house in Antwarpe, where hee liued a most melancholy
lyfe foure or fiue moneths, and oftentimes
would burst out into such impassionate speeches,
that the world verily imagined he wold haue professed
himselfe into a cloister.
            Besides, the loue the Spaniarde beareth vs, appeareth
by the speeches hee dayly vseth in publyke
assemblies concerning vs. Once seeing certayne
Englysh-men passe by, as they stood a great manie
of them in a ring, (as they vse) together vppon the
bridge in Antwarpe, they sayde, They wondered
what the king made with such vermine in his countrie,
one of them swearing a greate oath, that looke
how many English-men there were in the Lowe
countries, there were so many spies and traitours.
Another sayd, it were an almes deede to put them
all in sackes, and throw them into the riuer. I could
recite a thousand more such speeches, but that they
are not worth the remembring. They are so ielous
and suspitious of vs, that if anie thing proue vntowardly
in their seruice, they thinke it straight to be
done by our especiall meanes and intelligence.
As vpon the taking of Axhil by that braue and worthie
souldyer Sir Phillip Sidney, of worthie memorie,
Mondragon presently imprisoned Paget within
the Castle, tooke awaie all things whatsoeuer
that hee had woorth anie thing, and the rest

he caused his men to rifle and steale, saying openly
that we are all traitors and spies. To confirme the
confidence they haue in vs, tell mee what companies
of English they haue trusted within these ten
yeeres in garison? I am sure you cannot name one.
And whereas sundrie Gentlemen amongst vs haue
instantly sued to haue their pensions granted them
in the castle of Antwarpe or Gaunt, because the payment
is there somewhat better: No one hath hetherto
bene able to attaine the same: so vile & base
is the reckoning they make of vs. I coulde alleadge
vnto you many other examples, of sundry disgraces
offered vnto our Nation, whereby we might (if we
list) easily discouer the hatred they beare vs, the suspition
they haue of vs, and the danger wherein we
stande, to haue one daie our throats cut. But this I
hope, which I haue alreadie rehearsed, shall suffice
fully to assure and persuade you, that here is no aduancement,
wealth, or reputation to be gotten, but
pouertie, perill, iealousie, and disgrace.
            Now let vs see, touching the point of conscience,
and repose in religion, if the same bee to bee found
here, such as you expect. In matter of religion, I wil
not take it vppon mee to dispute, because it were to
digresse from my purpose, and besides, I neuer studied
diuinitie: onely making comparison between
the comfortable freedome of the one, and the dispayring
slauery of the other, laying on the one side
indulgences, pilgrimages, forged relikes, fabulous
deuises, and auricular confessions: on the other
side, the merites and passion of our Sauiour Iesus

Christ, the inuocation of his holye name, and true
penitence proceeding from a contrite heart: on the
one side mens traditions, and on the other side, the
sincere and holy word of our sauiour. I thinke the
choice is not harde to make for him whose heart is
not hindered with obstinacle and selfe-will opinion.
But leauing this, and allowing your religion to
be good, let vs com
                  •
                to the cōten
                  •
               ment which you
might heere receiue in free vsage of the same, together
with the conseruatiō of such other your countrie
men which here do professe the same religion.
First, I thinke you are not ignorant of the broyles,
diuisions, seditions, and factions, which are heere among
them, some they call Patriots, some Iesuites,
some ouer negligent & carelesse in religion, other
some ouer pure and hypocriticall, some dunces
state men; but the notablest of all these factions, is
that betweene our Cardinall Doctor Allen, and
D. Lewes Bishop of Casane: on these two parties are
all dependant, and so must you be also, if you were
here, or otherwise cleauing to neither of them, you
shoulde bee counted enemie to them both, and so
within short space might put vp your pipes, for you
shuld be sure to be put vp for a spye, or at the least so
to be crossed in all your matters & pretences, that
you wold quickly, I warrant you, be weary of such
entertainment: on the other side, imbracing the
one, what enuie, what defamation, what slaunder
should you not be subiect vnto? On the other side
what oathes and solempne depositions must you
make? Finally, you woulde thinke there were no

greater purgatorie than to liue among these discentions,
iarres, and tumults. These two factions I tell
you off, haue sought to ouerthrowe one anothers
credite in the chiefest courtes in Christendome,
tossing to and fro such foule and filthie defamations,
that all men almost cryed out agaynst them
both. On the other side of the Cardinall, are dependant
Hugh Owen, with the Iesuites and their retinue
of fauorites. On the other side the Bishop
of Dunglane a Scottish-man, the Lorde Paget whilest
hee liued, Charles Paget, Thomas Morgan, the
two Throgmortons, Ra. Liggins, &c. The beginning
heereof arose about the Cardinalshippe, to which
both Allen and Lewes were comptitours: each one
for the obtaining thereof applyed his friendes to
the vttermost, but at length thorough the instant
pursuite of the Iesuites, and of theyr faction, were
for euer after mortally hated, all those that had bin
wayes or fautors to Doctor Lewes, but chiefely and
among the rest Thomas Throgmorton, who had bene
one of the earnestest in that pursuite. The Iesuites
since haue had many a plu
                  •
               ke at him, but Morgan
beeing wise, strengthened himselfe alwayes wyth
such friendes, that they coulde neuer doo him anie
hurt, but rather secretly hee galled them: the
which they seeing, and perceiuing that that was
not the waie to bee reuenged of him, they tooke
another course, and that was this: One euening as
hee came from the Church, they caused him to be
assaulted by a young man called Gage, who giuing
him on the sodayne a grieuous blowe vppon the

face, presently made hast awaie, and so for that time
escaped, but was afterwardes by my Lorde Pagets
meanes and earnest pursuite apprehended. The
Iesuites and their parte seemed at the first to denie
that they had beene the causers of that fact, but the
sequele of theyr proceedinges made it most apparant
vnto the whole world. For when Morgan, my
Lorde Paget, and diuerse of their parte, laboured
verie instantlye and with often petitions vnto the
Duke, to haue the rigour and seueritie of iustice to
proceede against him, of whome they had receiued
this greate iniurie, they to stoppe theyr
mouthes, and to preuent the mischiefe that might
insue, found no better meanes than to accuse Morgan
of treason, laying to his charge sundrie pointes
of trecherie touching the Queene of Scotland. Besides,
they accused him to haue beene a setter on of
Gifford & his assistances, in such practises as hee had
vndertaken by sir Franc
                     •
                  s Walsinghams warrant, and
to that end sent Chryton the Scottish Iesuite, to Paris,
to take Gyffords examination. And withall, they
made some of their adherents to take theyr oth before
their Auditour generall, that in theyr conscience
they thought Morgan to bee a traitour and
a spie: vnto the taking of which oath also, they
laboured earnestlie with sundrie others, which
(they not hauing theyr consciences so saleable as
some of them) had refused and vtterlye denyed to
doo: yet in the meane time while these thinges
were in hand, with their forged accusations they
wrought so, that Morgan was apprehended & clapt

vp in close prison, whereas yet hee remaineth. But
this broile hath opened such foule matters, both of
the one side and of the other, that the whole Nation
is therewith infamed, and held to be tra
                  •
               tors &
spies, and in good faith, in my iudgement, not vnworthily.
            Good sir, take it not in ill parte, that I write thus
boldly vnto you: for as neere as I can, my indeuor
is to let you knowe what hell, torment, and vexation
it is to liue heere, among this vnquiet, troublesome,
& traiterous crew. I meane not this by them
all, for there are among them some well disposed
and honest gentlemen, whom they vse in such malitious
and wicked sorte, that they make them in a
manner wearie of theyr liues. But the pretiest of
all is, to see how smoothly they handle the matter
with you in England, and how they do abuse your
simplicitie. They make you and other Catholykes
of England beleeue, that what practises and driftes
so euer they take in hand, are all 
                  •
               or the zeale of religion
and aduancement of the Catholike cause, &
the seely souls thinke all they saie is Gospell, wheras
(God wot) religion is the least matter of an hundred
they thinke vpon. The only point they shoot
at, being lost Companies at home; is to make them
selues great heere, and to make you hazarde your
liues, reputation, and credit: and therefore they are
alwais breeding of practises and conspiracies both
within and without the realme, caring not what
successe they take: if they proue wel, then they wil
haue the praise, merite, honor, and reward thereof:

if otherwis
                  •
               , then they saie their good will must be
accepted, and therewith they thinke to winne the
reputation to be counted great state-men, and contriuers
of waighty matters, not caring in the meane
time, for the securitie of them by whome they
worke, as appeareth by the example and fall of many
braue Gentlemen of England, whome they by
theyr trecherous practises haue brought to ruine
and destruction. They verie well knew, that when
they first began to set abroach the matter of Babington
and his disloyall confederates, that the effectation
thereof was altogether vnpossible, as Mendoza
the Spanish embassador told Ballard the priest, their
instrument in contriuing the same, when hee was
first brought vnto him in Paris by C. Paget, to desire
him with all speed to informe the Kings his master
of their intention, & withall, that at a daie appointed
they might haue some force and assistaunce of
men readie to corespond with them: but that was
all one, so they might bee counted men of greate
reach, and dealers in such high state matters, they
spared not to proceede in inchanting those poore
vnexperienced young Gentlemen, in such sorte, as
to the whole world is manifest, and need not to be
recited. Let all Gentlemen in England, especiallye
papists, take heed and beware of their mischieuous
broode of caterpillers, for they speake so deuoutly,
looke so smoothly, and write with such counterfeited
grauitie and holines, that it is hard for any man
to eschue their deadly baits; vnlesse he thoroughly
doo first know their trechery, vnder which they do

colour and shroude them. What hath brought
master shellie into these his extreame troubles and
perill of lyfe, if her gracious Maiestie of her greate
clemency & merciful disposition had not regarded
him with the eyes of pittie? Likewise, what hath
brought the late Earle of Northumberland into trouble
and calamitie, and finally to that desperate and
miserable end, but onely these outlandish practises,
& their conference with counterfeit Mopo, I meane
C. Paget, who was sent out of France by this seditious
troupe, to vndermine and ouerthrowe both
the one and the other? What besides hath beene
the cause of bringing so many other Gentlemen to
the losse of their liues and liuings, that liued before
in ease, repose, and securitie of conscience: and
which is more, were it not that that plot contriued
the death of the Queene of Scotland, by setting her
in continuall practise one vppon another, agaynst
the sacred person and royall state of our most gracious
soueraigne Queene, so that of violent necessitie,
her Maiestie though vnwilling and with great
griefe, at the generall and instant petition of all her
Graces most louing and faithfull subiectes, whose
onely weale and comfort dependeth vppon her
long lyfe and prosperitie, to satisfie them, and to
preserue the state of her noble & florishing realme
in quyet, was constrained by cutting off that rankled
and infected parte, to yeelde ease, remedie and
comfort to the rest of the whole bodie. I saye not
this onely of my selfe, though I and all the worlde
else doo knowe it to bee verie true: but these their

dealings haue made them hatefull and destable euen
to those of their owne religion. For that a fresh
Iesuite tearmeth them all in generall in a Booke,
which hee hath written touching the Queene of
Scotlandes death, a viperous, mischieuous, and
faithlesse kinde of people, trecherous to those they
deale withall, disdainfull, arrogant, ambitious, and
worthy to be extermined out of the vtmost bounds
of the worlde. Besides many other such goodly
epethites, with which hee beautifies them in their
colours, his whole booke beeing nothing else but
railing against English papistes, wishing all princes,
noble men and Gentlemen whatsoeuer, to beware
and take heed of them: and that in such earnest,
vehement, and inuectiue manner, that it is not
possible to be more.
            But some man perchance may demaund of me
what theyr meaning heerein maye bee, or what
credite, commoditie or gayne might haue allured
them to enter into these before sayd, so wicked and
detestable imaginations.
            For aunswere heereunto: first I tolde you,
that so they might bee accounted and reputed for
greate state-men, high spirited, and greate of
action, to procure that reputation and estimation
they care not whose estate they indaunger. But
besides all this which wee haue alreadie spoken
of, they haue also further meaninges and driftes,
as those that doo looke deeplyest and dilygentest
into theyr actions, doo verilye imagine, and
haue bene by sundrie their procedinges euidently

discouerd, amongest which, the chiefest is, that as
they are of all people liuing the most ambitious, so
seeing this beggerly seruice dooth not fit theyr humour,
they doo feed themselues with an imagination
of the time to come, I meane a Spanish or popish
world in this our countrie, at which time then
they doubt not, the long time of their exile, sufferance,
and lacke of liuing considered (for so is their
phrase and manner of speech) to become mightye
and great men, and to haue the principall rule, sway
dignitie, and great authoritie in our countrie. Marrie
againe on the other side, considering that they
are but base companions of births and liuing, and
that there are in England many gentlemen of great
qualitie and houses of the same religion, that wold
disdain to haue such mates preferred before thē in
race, quality or degree: they 
                  •
               aue gon (by al means
possible they can) aboute by practise or colourable
deuises to roote them out, so seruing their turnes
two waies: the one to winne reputation of men of
seruice: the other, to rid themselues of other competitours.
But (God be thanked) the chiefest harme
their conspiracies haue done hetherto, hath ben to
themselues, and they confounded in their own deuises.
And yet for all this, so many tragicall endes
of their so many traiterous proceedinges, are they
not moued with any sparke of repentaunce. Neyther
hath the ruine of so many of you their countrie-men
wrought and contriued by their practise,
allurement, and perswasion, bred in them anie feeling
of remorse of conscience, but rather are thereby

animated & incouraged to set new deuises abroch,
with meaning in deed by sowing seditions among
you, & by opposing you against the state, to make
you the onely instruments of the others ruine, and
so to make the waie open to the Spanish tyrant, to
which end there is no weeke but they receiue spies
and spials from you. Insomuch that (I speake vpon
good assuraunce) there are at this instant among
you aboue three hundred seditious beggerlye
priests, sent ouer by them to no other purpose. A
little before the comming of the Spanish fleet, they
sent foure priests and two Iesuites, in disguised apparell,
throughly instructed to sound the meaning
of such Gentlemen, as they thought to be of theyr
religion, and to incline their minds to the Spanish
cause, incouraging them to take Armes against her
MAIESTY, to which end they printed in English
many hundreds of bookes in Antwarpe, barrelling
them vp vntill such time as the Armie should haue
bene landed, and then their meaning was to haue
dispersed them, full of the most blasphemous speeches
and proud traiterous menaces, as well agaynst
her Maiestie, as against you all in generall, as neuer
(I thinke) the like was heard of.
            Besides, they haue obtained of the Pope, and of
the king, that as many as had their voices in the parliament
house, at such time as the Queene of Scotland
was adiudged to die, of what degree so euer
they were, should be depriued not onely of theyr
liues and liuings, but that their posteritie also shuld
be for euer dis-inherited and disanulled. The lyke

also they threatned in their bookes to all such, as
well noble men as others, that should after the landing
of the Spaniards armie, persist in arms against
the same. But all this by the goodnesse of God hath
but serued to discouer their wicked intentions, and
to animate all true Christian Englishmen, to persist
with the greater loue, vnitie and courage in their obedience
to her Maiestie.
            But returning againe my speeches to you, (O
vnnatural English-men) to those whom you should
obey trecherous and vnfaithfull, and of those that
you doo obey contemned and made slaues! how
can you indure to thirst after the destruction of so
sweete a countrie, in which you receiued your being,
and that gaue you nuriture being yong? What
religion must that be, that animateth you to seeke
subuersion of so benigne a princesse and of so
glorious an estate? The olde worthie Romanes
thought it the most heroycall thing that might
bee, to vowe themselues sometimes to death for
their countrie, and euen to spend their liues in defence
of their alters, temples, and monumentes of
their Elders: and you seeke to see your Countrie
bathing in the bloud of your parents, kindred, and
friendes, to see your cities, temples, and auncient
monuments flaming in the fire, to see your virgines
defloured, and further, to bring the noblest nations
to perpetuall slauerie and seruitude, yea, and that
of the most base, wicked, proude and cruellest nation
that liueth, a nation not yet fully an hundred
yeeres since wholie they receiued Christianitie,

and as yet are in their heartes a greate number of
them, pagans & moores, from profession of which,
they are onelye helde by the seuere bridle of the
sanguinarye and most cruell Heathen Inquisition.
            But that Paganisme of theirs, which in theyr
profession they dare not shew, they do in theyr tyranie,
blasphemie, sodomie, crueltie, murther, adulterie,
and other abhominations sufficiently discouer.
If the Nunamantines, Saquntines, and Nessatiagis
burnte their townes, slewe theyr wiues and
children, and familie themselues, rather than they
woulde receiue the yoake of worthie and vertuous
Nations that inuaded them, What should we
then doo, whome our vertuous auncestours haue
lefte honoured with the innumerable trophies of
many victories, rather than to indure the insolent,
wicked, and tyrannous gouernment of that Nation,
whome all Europe hath in horrour, leauing
to our posteritie after vs a perpetuall seruitude
and bondage, and an euerlasting memorie of our
cowardise.
            But leauing this vntill a fitter time, I hope
this that is alreadie sayde shall bee sufficient to
make you cleerely and plainely vnderstande, that
there is not to bee obtayned the sweetnesse, lybertie,
and tranquilitie of conscience which you
expecte and looke for, but rather turmoile and
griefe of minde, with a perpetuall grudging and
remorse of conscience, scandalized with infinite
and innumerable examples of ill lyfe, impietie,

sodomie, blasphemie, defamation, and periurie.
On the other side, towardes her Maiestie and the
state of your country, you shall be helde & reputed
as a traitor, and of those whom you shal here serue,
no better, who make no further reckning of any of
vs, than as of base people, fugitiues out of our cuntrie
for debt, theeuerie, or some one hainous crime
or other, thinking it a matter impossible (howsoeuer
we disguise the same vnder pretext of religion)
that anie man beeing in his countrie of honest calling
or meanes to liue, should be so senselesse as to
exchange the same for a condition so base, beggerly,
and infamous, as that which wee doo heere indure:
And so did a Spanish Captaine in playne
tearms signifie 
                  •
               o sir William Standley, as they passed
in the ordinarie boote betweene Antwarp and Brussels.
            
            But now to the third point of my Discourse,
concerning the mislike which sundrie of you haue
of her Maiesties gouernment, and the state of your
countrie at this present, to seeke to transport your
selues hether as into a hauen of blis & securitie. I
will by comparing the one with the other, as neere
as I cā, let you see the difference between thē both,
and so consequently, your errour, as neere as I can
gesse, & by report of sundrie cōming thence informed,
this your disliking proceedeth of two points:
The one, that your lawes are too rigorously and seuerely
executed against such as professe the catholike
religion: The other, that the aduersarie hath
buzzed a feare into your heades, making you beleeue

that the fortes of your state are too feeble
to resist so mightie and puisant an enemie as the
Spanish king, whose mightie treasures, many dominions,
& armies of men they magnifie to the skies,
and therefore perchaunce you couet to ioyne betimes,
with the partie which you doo thinke most
aduantagious for your future securitie & aduancement.
            First, touching the persecutions of Catholikes,
which our traitors heere so much exclaime vpon,
filling whole volumes therewith, and aggreuating
the same in tearmes most bitter and lamentable to
foraine Nations. Let vs see what reason they haue.
I would faine demand one question, If euer they
dyd reade, heare, or knowe of anie one King or
Queene, that dyd with greater mildnesse of lenitie
tollerate or suffer within his or her dominion a sect
of religion opposite to the lawes by him or her establyshed,
especiallye the same hauing sundrye
times rebelliously attempted against their crown,
state, and dignitie.
            Let them looke (if there be men of iudgement)
into the ages passed, euen amongest the Heathen,
and into the present time among all the Princes of
Europe, and if there bee not anie to be found that
hath dealt with the lyke lenitie as her Maiestie hath
done, why then doo they so falselye slaunder her?
Doe they not knowe that shee is the sacred and annointed
Queene appointed by God to gouerne
them? If they doo, why doo they not then with
all penitencie and humilitie, loue, honor, and obey

her, and praying to God to conuerther (seeing such
is theyr desire) and not by traiterous mischiefe seek
to murther and depriue her. They learned not that
of the ancient Christians in the primitiue church.
But they will saie, she hath executed many seminary
priestes: I confesse she hath in deed by cutting
them off preserued her realme from many diseases
that rankled within the same. But yet hath shee
proceeded therein in so gracious and mercyfull a
sorte, that shee hath witnessed sufficientlye to the
worlde, howe loth shee is to come vnto bloud, so
long as there is anie other remedie in the world to
bee vsed. For her MAIESTY knoweth, her councell
knoweth, you and I, and the whole worlde
knoweth, that the comming of these Seminaryes,
priestes, and Iesuites, to reconcile men, as they
tearme it, to the obedience of the Romane church,
is directlye and absolutely to alienate and diuerte
their minds from her Maiestie, and to incline them
to bee readie to assist anie enemie eyther within or
without the Realme, that shall colour his cause vnder
the pretext of religion. Her Maiestie, I saie, and
Councell, and all good subiectes knowing this and
foreseeing the daunger that might thereof insue,
forbadde by Act of Parliament these Seminaryes
to enter into her Realme, or to vse or exercise anye
such seditious doctrine, limiting there withal a time
to such as were within the Realme, to departe out
of the same. But this sufficed not, these good fellowes
thinke no lawes good or to bee obeyed, but
such as they make themselues.
            
               
In they came as fast as before, greate numbers
of them were taken and imprisoned, whom though
her Maiestie deseruedly and with great iustice, (especially
the daylye mischiefe stirred vp within the
Realme by theyr seditious practises considered)
might haue executed as traitours and rebelles, yet
the greatnesse of her princely clemencie and compassion
was so loth to come vnto bloud, that shee
caused them all once more to bee pardoned, and
to bee put out of the Realme, but with expresse
commaundement neuer to returne in lyke sorte: in
dooing otherwise they should bee sure to finde no
fauour. All this woulde not serue theyr turnes, but
in despight of her Maiestie and contempt of her
lawes, sundrie of them returned, of which some of
them beeing taken, haue receiued the hire of theyr
gracelesse disobedience and rebellious attempte.
            But that her Maiestie seeketh not bloud, as they
most falsely giue out, appeareth by her clemencie
vsed to sundrie of them, taken by her souldiers in
the Lowe Countries, who though they were of sir
William Standley his crewe and adherents, her most
professed enemies, yet seeing they were not taken
within England, shee graciously pardoned them,
and caused to be set at libertie, in giuing some litle
recompence to those souldiers that had taken them
prisoners. Where is then her rigour you speake of?
I hope the king of Spaine keepeth another manner
of rule in his Countries, ouer all Spaine, Portugall,
Lombardie, Naples, and Cicilia, whosoeuer speaketh a
word, or maketh the lest sign in the world to mislike

his religion there established, or anie one pointe or
ceremonie thereof, his cruell ministers the Inquisitours,
cause without remission to bee burnt aliue:
as for example, There was this last yeere a Citizen
in Antwarpe, one Gyles Rat a shoomaker, that going
into Spaine about some busines, was apprehended
for smiling at the Image of our Ladie, brought
before the Inquisitours, and by them presentlye
condemned to fire, and with him an English-man
for the lyke cause, whose name the Gentleman that
sawe them burned knew not: but hee tolde mee
that at the time of their execution, there mounted
on a scaffolde thereby two Iesuites, forbidding the
people vpon paine of Excommunication to praie
for them, saying that they had deliuered them both
ouer in bodie and soule to the deuill, as those that
died obstinate and wilful heretikes. I woulde faine
knowe how hee would doo with Ministers, if hee
shoulde catch them in Spaine, as the Queene hath
done priests in England. As for his Lowe Countries,
I neuer heard but of two taken, and that was at
the siege of Dermond, and they were both put in
to sackes by the Spaniardes, and throwen into the
riuer.
            This is in deede tyrannie, and not that which
her Maiestie doth, who is alwaies readie to receiue
into grace and fauour those of whome shee hath anie
hope that they will become good subiects, and
hath (as I haue heard) offered euen at the houre of
their death her princely mercy and fauour to some
of them, if they woulde haue promised to become

good subiects.
            Oh how different from this is their proceeding
heere which you see so highly commended! But it
is the nature of men, especiallye of those, whose
iudgements are not setled as they shoulde bee, alwaies
to mislike and loath those thinges to which
they are accustomed, thinking other to them vnknowen
far better. If you did but once see the tyranous
vsage & explication that is vsed in matter of
religion to the poore people vnder the Spanish gouernment
in this Countrie, I doubte not but you
would be of another opinion, especially the woful
slauerie considered in which the cleargie, or rather
the rauening multitude of Iesuites, Friers, Monkes
and priests doo keepe their minde subiected. It is
not sufficient that they holde their mindes in a perpetuall
despaire, pronouncing vppon euerie friuolous
point damnation vnto them: but withal, they
compell them perforce to offeringes, to buying of
pardons and indulgences, to giue them money towardes
the reparation of their Churches, pictures,
images, and waxe candles, alwaies hauing one deuice
or other in hand to robbe them, and to drawe
from them their substance: for whosoeuer yeeldeth
not to euerie of these demands, is presentlie an
heretike.
            The best houses in the Towne they take violently
from the true owners, and appropriate vnto
themselues, saying it is meete that God should first
be serued before man. There is no one daie but the
poore citizens are punished and pestered with one

or other of their orders of Friers, Monkes, Mendicants,
Capuchines, Candles, and monie towardes
the reparation of their Churches, and which they
must not bee denied, vnlesse you will bee presently
accused for an heretike.
            But the best is, to see how busie and diligent they
are when they heare of a wealthie man that lyeth
sicke, and is in danger of death▪ This is their chiefest
haruest and most optima praeda: then they commend
vnto him the pouertie of their cloister, and the merite
that hee shoulde gaine, as beeing for euer to be
remembred in theyr masses, as one of theyr benefactors:
the Iesuits and Cordelleres are at this present
in processe in Spaine about this matter of visitation
of sicke men, in articulo mortis. The Iesuites
saie that it appertaines vnto them, because theyr
profession is actiue, and alwaies stirring among the
flocke, and to doo good in the worlde abroade,
whereas that of the Cordelleres is contemplatiue,
and so by consequence, most decent that they
shoulde containe themselues within theyr cloysters.
            The Cordelleres on the other side replie, that
theyr profession is meeknesse, innocencie, and pouertie,
and to doo good vnto all men. As for the
Iesuites, that they are proude, ambitious, aspiring,
medlers in matters of state, men of great riches, and
couetous of more, and therefore by no meanes to
bee admitted to such as lye at the article of death,
The matter hath beene much argued of, and greatly
debated in Spaine, and besides, the Iesuites haue

openly inueighed agaynst them in the publyke
schooles of Louaine: yet notwithstanding how euer
the crie goeth agaynst them, they holde theyr
owne. But this by the waie, seeing it comes so well
to our purpose, I cannot choose but tell you a pretie
ieast that happened this last Summer in these
partes.
            A Marchant of Antwarpe, whose name was
Hamiel, beeing sicke of a consumption or feauer ethike,
the Iesuites knowing him to bee a man of
great possessions, and without children, presentlye
repayred vnto him vnder colour of spirituall consolation,
laying before him the vanitie of this lyfe,
and the certaintie of the worlde to come: wyth
sundrie other perswasions, as of all men lyuing
they haue their tongues most at will, withall, commending
vnto him their order, as of all other the
most meritorious, perfect, and acceptable to God,
and to which our holye father the Pope and his
predecessors haue granted more indulgences than
to anie other order whatsoeuer: they brought the
poore man, being of himselfe simple, into their societie,
thinking that there was no other waie to bee
saued, and withall, before hand infeoffed their college
with his land, which was two hundred pound
a yeere, giuing them besides, much goods and riche
moueables, and when he had so done, died within
three moneths after the same: his next heires, by
counsell of their friends, put the Iesuites in sute, agaynst
which, though they opposed themselues
withall vehemencie, yet to their great shame and

reprehension, sentence was giuen agaynst them.
Notwithstanding they woulde not giue ouer, but
by the meanes, aid, and support of president Pameley,
who is one of theyr best children, they appealed
from thence to the councell of Brussels, getting
the cause after sentence giuen to bee remooued, a
thing vnusuall or scarcely euer heard off before, as
yet there the processe hangeth, by hooke or by
crooke it is thought they will haue it in the ende.
Another time a riche and wealthie Marchaunt of
Antwarp, but one in that point whose deuotion and
scrupulocitie ouer-went his wisdome, comming to
them in confession, and telling them of some vniust
gaine with which he felt his conscience touched,
they presently with sundrie terrifieng speeches,
tolde him that hee was in the state of damnation,
out of which hee coulde not bee deliuered, vntyll
such time as hee had made restitution as well of
that confessed, as of all other monie and goods that
hee had by vsurie vnlawfully gotten, laying before
him, Quod non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum:
with sundrie other such sentences, of which
they had store: in fine, they put the poore man into
such feare of conscience, that he yelded to make
restitution, if so the same might bee done without
his vndooing, discredite, or shame. Whereupon to
comfort him againe, but in deede fearing least that
if they dealt too rigorouslie with him they shoulde
get nothing, they tolde him, that if in stead of all
such interest and iniuries, with which hee felte his
conscience burdened, hee would onely be content

to deliuer vnto them some such summe of monie,
as without his vndooing, he thought conueniently
he might spare, they woulde take it vppon their
soules to see the said summe imployed vpon good,
vertuous, and charitable vses, to the greater benefite
and merite of his soule, and as a thing more acceptable
to God, and lesse scandelous to the world
than if he should make restitution to whome it appertained,
and that were by that his vsurie interessed.
Whereupon the Marchant beeing well satisfied
in conscience, gaue them the monie, and they
him their absolution.
            But I will holde you no longer with the recitall
of these things, of which, if I would intreate, theyr
impietie would yeeld mee too much matter. My
principall meaning and intention onely, beeing to
let you see, that vnder heauen there is no state so
wickedly, impiously, and deuouringly gouerned in
matter of religion and conscience, as these here vnder
the Spaniard. I thinke the recitall of their miseries
woulde rather breede in you admiration than
beleefe, so farre doth the same exceed the compasse
of all other tyrannies that euer were vsed, there being
no calamitie in the worlde of which they haue
not tasted of. Their noble men & rulers, in whose
vertue and courage consisted their chiefest refuge
in times past, when they were wronged and tyrannized,
haue bene murthered, strangled, poysoned,
and slaine by the bloudie ministers of theyr cruell
king: they are taxed in great summes, and numbers
of men sent violently into France and forren wars,

and the relikes of their nobilitie forced to go wyth
them in person, to their apparant slaughter, leauing
in the meane time theyr countries in praie to the enemie,
theyr villages flaming in fire, & theyr towns
battered about theyr eares with the Cannon, theyr
priuiledges are by wrong and tyrannie taken from
them, their cities that sometimes striued with oppulencie
and glorie with the goodliest and greatest
of the world, are gouerned by base and barbarous
Spaniardes, bridled with theyr garrisons and castles,
and forraged and spoiled by them, at such time
as their payment faileth. No face of iustice in theyr
common-wealth, but the same is pliable to the wil
of such strangers as are gouernors of their towns, &
captaines of their castles, theyr goodly hauens, harbouring
sometimes with innumerable shippes laden
with marchandise from all partes of the world,
are now frequented euen of the fisher-boates, their
trafficke ceased, and theyr townes almost desarte:
in the most of which, of tenne houses together,
there are scarse three inhabited, theyr villages abroade
burned and ouergrowen with bushes, their
goodlye meddowes and fruitefull pastures drowned
many miles wide and longe, by letting in of
sluses, and cutting downe ditches. The mansion
houses and castelles of theyr Nobilitie abused and
throwen downe, they errable grounde waste and
vntilled, insomuch that there a man maye haue as
much lande as hee will, and thankes withall, for the
onely manuring thereof. As for the poore labouring
people of the countrie, for the most parte they

are al starued and consumed with hunger, of which
disease, I my selfe haue knowen two thousand die
in one summer, so that you may ride in some places
an hundred miles without seeing of a man, woman,
or childe, vnlesse it be some poore silly soule
that commeth creeping out of the woodes hunger
starued, more lyke confusitated ghostes, than a lyuing
christian creature. And yet all these in a maner
happier, because they are at an ende of theyr
miseries, than such as doo liue within the inhabited
places of the countrie, as Cempine and the land
of Wast: and these of all the people in the worlde I
take to be the most wretchedst. Ouer euerie village
of these are appointed certain horsemen, to whom
they are all to paie monethly contribution, some
ten poundes, some twentie, and some thirtie, some
more and some lesse, I knew one village that paide
an hundred poundes euerie moneth, called Turnolt:
but they paide it so long, till all the dwellers
ranne awaie, and haue now in a manner left it void
of inhabitauntes. Ouer this village and the whole
Countrie is appointed a Comissarie called Sygonio,
for the payment of theyr contributions, of all
tyrantes liuing the most cruellest, and of least conscience.
Who if they faile, and doo not bring in
theyr moneie at the last daie of the moneth, hee
sendes foorth troupes of horse-men to take the best
of them prisoners, and withall, to driue home to
their quarters or garrisons such sheepe, oxen, or
cattell whatsoeuer as they finde in those villages,
which hee causeth, if the money followe not

within fiue or sixe daies at the furthest, to be sold at
the drum or Trumpet, and with
                  •••
                forceth them to
paie a great fine, the one halfe 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               hich he retayneth
to himselfe, and the other to the souldiers, for
their out-roades and forberance of the monie. But
the miserie of these poore people endeth not here,
for besides all this, they are forced many times to
lodge soldiers in their houses, as they march along
the countrie vpon seruice, at which time it is incredible
what outrages they receiue, theyr cattell killed,
their corne threshed out and giuen to horse,
their chests broken vp, their goods euen to the very
sheetes and tikes of beds, stollen and carried awaie
by the soldiers when they march, themselues beaten,
and their wiues and their daughters abused:
and in fine, what else is to the nature of man grieuous
and intollerable, they are constrained to indure.
Neither is the condition of the poore citizens
or townes-men any better, who being forced to receiue
garrison, and to lodge souldiers in their houses,
imparting to them the best chambers and commodities
of the same, neuer hearing from them anie
other word, especiallie if they please not them
in all their exhorbitant demands, than Perhamengo,
Lutherano, Borchio, &c. Yet besides, they are daylye
wearyed out with continuall exactions and taxations,
as the hundreth pennie, the tenth pennie, and
once a yeere without faile, the fifthly pennie of all
their goods and landes, besides infinite other pillages
and gatherings towardes the making of rampires,
bulwarkes, ballasadowes, countercerpes, and

the reparation of theyr wals, and to giuing of munition,
bread, beere, and cheese, to such souldyers as
shall passe by theyr townes distressed of victualles,
with infinite such like. I haue knowen (I speake it of
my faith) poore people of Antwarpe forced to sell
their beddes they lie vppon, to satisfie their tyrannous
exactions, which if they should not doo, execution
of their goods, attachment of their persons,
shoulde presentlye followe. But which is most beyond
reason, whereas within the townes the most
part of their houses are vacant and vnhired, yet the
owners of them are taxed according to the value
in which they were wont to bee hired. Insomuch,
that in Antwarpe and other townes, it is a matter verie
vsuall for men to disclaime, and quit their owne
houses, thereby to be exempted of such payment as
otherwise by reason of thē they are charged with,
and that they do iurisdicially before the magistrate,
at which time the Ainan entereth in, aud ceaizeth
vpon them to the kings vse. Besides, when as sundrie
Gentlemen and other the inhabitants of this
countrie, hauing certaine annuall rents issuing out
and charged vpon the kings demaines in the Dutchie
of Brabant, at least to the yeerelye value of ten
thousand poundes, some of the which rents haue
bene by themselues bought of the states generall,
some left vnto them by their parents and predecessours.
The king vniustlye and by tyrannie disanulling
the said rents, hath, and doth, without forme of
iustice, take into his owne hands the sayd demains,
appropriating the vse, commoditie, and reuenue

thereof to the maintenance of his troupes of horse
men. But what shall I trouble you anie longer with
recounting vnto you the assize, impositions, taxes,
extortions, pillages, and heauie intollerable burthens
laid vpon this afflicted poore people, by their
vniust and cruell king. Compare now (I praie you)
heerewith, your estate of gouernment at home,
and tell mee which of them two you thinke to bee
most fortunate. Doth her MAIESTY deale in this
order with you, whose gouernment you so much
mislike? Oh God, how can you be so peruerse, seeing
the blessednesse wherein shee maintaines you,
as not to acknowledge the same? How gentle are
the helpes and subsidies which she exacteth of you,
without the vndooing or hinderance of anie man
of whom they are exacted? And on the otherside,
how profusely spendeth shee her owne treasure for
the maintenance of your wiues, and children, and
parents, in repose, iustice and securitie. Oh praie to
God for her long life and prosperous estate, for in
her consisteth the tipe of your felicitie!
            But nowe to the other pointe of your mislike.
Whereas the aduersarie hath beaten into your
heads, that the state standes daungerous, as beeing
farre to feeble and not sufficient to withstande and
resist so mightie and opposed an enemie as is the
king of Spaine, terrifieng with millions of gold and
innumerable nations ouer whome hee commandeth,
I hope by the cleere and euident reasons I shal
shew you, to make you vnderstand that the same of
him is farre greater than his force, and that there is

no prince this daie in the world whose estate standeth
more tickle and readie to ruine than his, and
that there is no cause why we should feare him, but
many why he should feare vs, First, that hee is the
most mightie and oppulent prince of Europe, I doo
not denie, if hee had vsed moderation in his greatnesse,
and acknowledged the benefites which God
hath bestowed vpon him with thankfulnesse. But
such is the state whereunto his ambitious aspiring
hath at this present brought him, or rather the reuengefull
hande of God which hangeth ouer his
head for his horrible tyrannies and odious offences,
especiallye for his wicked pariacide and murther
committed vppon the person of his wife, his
sonne, and sundrie others of his best and truest subiects:
that he is in the middest of these his riches, indigent,
poore, and indebted, vnable to giue satisfaction
to such souldiers as he maintaineth, to which
end he is forced to extort vpon his poore subiectes,
and tyranize ouer them. Of this his indigency and
beggerie, we see euerie daie experience here before
our eies, his owne naturall subiects, the Spaniards,
being the best disciplined souldiers he hath, and of
whom he maketh greatest account, are forced for
want of their paiment, which is now three yeres behind,
to cease his townes and artillery, to contemne
his commandements and proclamations, & finally,
to bend their armes & display their Ensignes vpon
the wals against the Duke. To remedie which mutinie,
there was post vpon post sent into Spaine, yet
in seuen moneths there could no monie be found.

Notwithstanding many and most important detriments,
he receiued by occasion of this mutinie, as
the losse of Breda, the retardaunce of the Frenche
succours, the danger of Numigen, &c. whereas the
whole summe they demaunded was not much aboue
fifteene thousand. Besides, doo but looke into
the manner of his proceedings in these Low countries
with his souldiers, (of which because I haue
best experience I will chieflie speake) and you shall
finde nothing in the world more beggerly and indigent.
Neither (as I heare) is it better in his other
prouinces, which verily I beleeue, seeing of all others
it importeth him to vse them best, as being his
eldest, perfectest in discipline, and best experienced
troupes, and in fine, those vnto whom he chiefliest
reposeth, as the onely vpholders and maintaynance
of him in his tyrannie. Yet was there neuer
in the worlde, I dare vndertake, king nor prince,
how base, banquerout, or needie so euer, in whose
seruice so many braue souldiers haue died of hunger,
or that haue vsed such coosning trickes & shifts
to stoppe necessities, and to deceiue his souldiers as
he hath done.
            First, the countrie not beeing yet fully consumed,
wasted, and destroyed, he authorized his soldiers
to spoyle and steale the goods and cattell of
the poore pesants, forcing them to raunsome theyr
houses from fire, and their persons from murther,
by which meanes the souldiers lingered in such
sort, that I haue knowen them remaine three yeres
together without one moneths paie. But afterward

               Antwarpe being rendered, and by reason of the generall
deuastation of the countrie, the souldiers failing
to finde their wonted reliefe and praie, grewe
into so great and miserable extremitie, that it was a
great matter to finde twentie souldiers vnder anie
Ensigne. The Spaniardes mutined vpon the Staunda,
whome they founde meanes to appease wyth
some few moneths payment. The Wallounds mutined
in Laiskine, Hou
                     •
                  ke, and the lande of the Wast,
the Almaines went by hundreds begging vp and
downe the streets of Antwarpe bare legged and bare
footed, or in manner naked, the Italians starued in
their quarters, and diuerse of them being in garison
in Breda, ranne thence to Huisd
                     •
                  n, & to other towns
of the enemie. To remedie all which inconueniences,
he found meanes to deale with the Italian Bakers
of Antwarpe for cloth and silke, as Northerne
kersies, pack clothes, baies, refuse Italian silkes, taking
vp the same vpon excessiue interest yeerely to
a certaine summe: for receit of which, and deliuerie
out againe, he appointed a Spaniard, one Christopher
Cras
                     •
                  , a man of most wicked conscience, to
be his Treasurer. Then he began to grant paiments
to the whole campe, horse and foot, and vnto such
Gentlemen and pensioners as were in great extremitie,
and had ben long sutors: which they hauing
receiued, were forced for want of monie presently
to make sale thereof for the thirde of that value in
which they receiued it: so that a souldier hauing
foureteene shillings a moneths paie, receiued only

foure shillings and sixe pence. And he hath his factors
and broakers abroad to buy those sayd clothes
and silkes again, which he deliuereth presently out
of the first price to the next that comes, and so styll
foorth deliuering and buying the same againe for
the third parte of the price, insomuch that with an
hundred pounds he maketh ten thousand poundes
in a yeere, and yet sometimes he maketh them stay
foure or fiue moneths before he will deliuer them
cloth, or anie contentment at all. And sometimes
hee neuer troubleth himselfe with the deliuerie of
the cloth, but causeth their assignation to be boght,
as now at this instant sir William Standley before his
departure had obtained a Liberanc
                     •
                  
                for two moneths
for his Regiment, amounting to an hundred
and fiftie poundes, the payment thereof hath bene
deferred till this present, and is nowe solde in Antwarpe
to one of his factors for three score poundes,
and yet hee that solde it made a good bargaine. I
haue knowen diuerse that haue solde diuerse such
Liberancas for thirtie poundes, and eight and twentie
pounds in the hundred. Yet this payment how
bad so euer hath somewhat con
                  •
               ented the souldyers
foure or fiue yeeres, rather hauing that than nothing.
But now also the same is dryed vp and come
to nothing. Paymentes haue bene this halfe yeere
verie scarse and with much difficultie, for the marchants haue at this instant vtterly refused to furnish him with anie more wares, both because the same wherein he standeth alreadie indebted vnto them

amounteth to an excessiue matter, as also he beginneth
to wrangle with them, aboute the interest of
which hee craueth moderation: seeing besides before
their eies so many presidents of men ruined,
vndone, and dishonored, such as he hath delt withall,
of which, what more apparaunt example maye
there be than that of S. Siueres a Portugal marchant,
and one of the chifest & best respected marchant of
Antwarpe, both for the wealth and credit which he
possessed, as also for the securitie and vprightnesse
which he handled: the Duke of Parma reducted of
Antwarpe, the passage of the riuer shut vp, and the
countries and townes afflicted with great dearth &
scarcitie of corn, at which time rie was at 44. S. sterling
the virendell in Antwarpe, & withall being daily
cried vpon by the generall of Vibres for munition
& come to victual the camp, the old store being
cleane consumed: knewe no other meanes than to
deale earnestly with this S. Siueres, and other marchants
that had trade with Hanborough, Lubeck, and
the Easterlings, which countries were replenished
with corne, to make some aduenture thether for the
releefe of the countrie: he amongst the rest shewed
not himselfe vnwilling to enter into an action so
charitable and vertuous, if so be his pains might be
requited, and hee sufficiently warranted and kept
free from such danger as might insue, either by peril
of sea, taking of the enemies, or losse in the same:
when it came to this end, the duke sent into Spaine,
and procured him the kings Letters of assurance in

the most ample manner possible, incouraging him
with much thanks and many promises to proceed,
which hee did with the aduenture of most part of
his credite and goods, insomuch, that hee laded
three shippes, of which one was scattered by tempest,
and cast awaie vpon the coast of Scotlande, the
other two came safely home to Callice, but at that
time such was either the ill luck of him, or the good
lucke of the countrie, that vpon a new plentie haruest
which they had, corne was abated from fortie
foure shillinges the Virendell, to sixe shillinges, at
which price the Duke, by the kings appointment,
bought his prouision and munition, vtterlye refusing
that of Syueres, so that hee was faine, whilest he
made his sute to the king, to keepe the same so long
vpon his owne hands, that it venowed and waxed
mustie, in such sorte, that he was faine to throw the
greatest parte awaie, without euer to this daie beeing
able to receiue of the king one pennie of recompence,
insomuch that hee was forced, to the
wonderfull griefe, shame and confusion of him, his
wife, his children and friends, hauing before time
liued in the greatest honour and magnificence of
anie Marchant in the Towne, to breake banquerout,
and is at this present suing to the Duke, and
the priuie Councell at Brussels, for a protection to
keepe his bodie from attachment.
            These are the rewardes and recompence that
this mightie Monarch giueth to those that imploie
their indeuours in his seruice. Of which if you doo

desire to haue better experience, looke but into the
office of his Treasurer at Brussels, and there you shal
dayly and hourely see a token sufficient of his oppulencie
and great magnificencie, there shall you
finde a miserable troupe of sutours, with assignations
for monie, graunted them by the Duke, some
of which haue lost a legge or an arme, eyther thorough
age or infirmitie, that hath gotten their Lisence
and Pasport to depart into theyr Countries,
some pretending one cause and some another, but
no one man able in two yeeres folowing to get one
pennie: so that there is no yeere but a greate number
of them die in the pursuite for hunger, yea, and
some of them euen at his gates. Of my sauation I
speake it, I haue knowen some poore people, that
for the some of sixe poundes haue followed him
three yeeres: when eyther hee goeth out or commeth
into his house, hee is faine to goe thorough
gardens and buy-wayes, to deceiue his poore sutors,
who otherwise assayed him, though in vaine,
with such ruthfull cryes, that it would pearse anie
mans heart to heare them. Which beggerlynesse
and miserie, sundrie worthie souldiers of straunge
nations seeing, especially the base and vnworthie
vsage which they themselues receiued, haue abandoned
that banquerout seruice, as Iohn Baptista de
Monte, and Camillo de Monte, two warlike Captaines,
but now retained vnder two mightie States,
the one Generall to the Duke of Florence, the other
to the Venetians, who both lie in waite to crie

quittance with him, and by Gods grace shall one
daie haue meanes to accomplish their desire. Then
sir Martine Skinke, of whose iust discontentment
and valerous reuenge, you your selues in England
are witnesse. Where are then the mountains of treasure
that the mightie king possesseth? Or if yee saie
he spareth them to some other end, I praie you tell
me to what, and when he will vse them? If not now
the danger of the losse of his countrie, fame, & religion,
and the greatnesse of the causes hee hath vndertaken
and considered. No, no, it is pure want &
extreame indigences that forceth him to deale so,
though he be rich, yet the greatnesse of the cause he
is entered into, doth farre exceede the meanes hee
hath to maintaine the same. Vppon the comming
downe of this last fleete hee set vp his rest, and lost
it, not onelie his owne, but that also of his friendes,
the pope, the Duke of Sauoy, the Geneoises, &c. which
set him into such arrerages, that I thinke hee wyll
not easily come out of them.
            As for the treasure of his Indians, where in
deede consisteth the verie marrowe, strength, and
substance of all his puissance, I confesse the same
to bee greate, yet his charges considered, making
an estimate betweene the one and the other, it can
no waie bee able to aunswere and counteruayle
them. And yet the same hath beene reasonable
well impayred also, since such time as sir Fraunces
Drake and other of your worthie English captaines
by sea, haue begunne to firke him in those. For

whereas before hee was woont vsually to waite his
Indyan fleete home-warde with a Gallyasse or
two, onelye theyr returne accustomed to bee euerie
sixe moneths, hee is nowe forced to mayntayne
a great and mightie Nauie of many shippes
and gallyes, to his inestimable and continuall charges.
Notwithstanding all which, his returne is seldome
aboue once a yeere, and that oftentimes
minglingly as may bee, and yet they are sometimes
met withall, some of them scattered, some sunke,
and some of them also taken by our Englyshe
shippes.
            If you will knowe what these his great charges
are, on which hee is inforced to imploye them.
First, consider that he scarcely holdeth anie countrie
in which hee is not constrayned to holde garrisons
of souldyers. As for these Lowe countries,
I knowe it vppon good and assured grounds, there
hath beene no yeere these twentie yeeres, but they
haue cost him one with another two millyons and
more yeerely aboue the reuenewe and other commodities
receyued thereout, and yet howe beggerlie
his souldyers are vsed, you haue heard before.
            The rest, for Naples, Cicilia, Portugall maiorque,
minorque, the frontires of Arragon and Nauarre,
and Lombardie; hee is fayne to bee at charge of
many strong and mightie garrisons by lande, and
in the most of them manye Gallyes or other
shipping in the Hauens, and all along the Seacoasts,

none of which hee can for his life diminish,
for his gouerment is so hatefull, that none of these
prouinces are his anie longer than hee hath their
heades in the bridle. And besides, his prouinces
stande so seuered and disunited, that the transporting
of his Nauie from one to another is infinite
chargeable vnto him, insomuch that I haue heard
some of his Commissioners here sweare, that there
is no crowne of his that commeth from Spaine into
these Countries by lande, but standeth them in
fiue roialles, so infinite is the charge of carriages,
conuoyes, and commissaries, to deliuer and receiue
the same.
            Besides all this, hee disburseth yeerely mightie
summes of monie to the Presian, to the end to keep
the Turke occupied, of whome hee standeth mightily
in feare: and truely he hath reason, if her Maiestie
would condescend to such conditions as haue
beene by this Turke to her proposed. But she lyke
a christian princesse, how greatly so euer to her aduantage
the same might be, will not doo anie thing
whereby Christianine might heereafter seeme to
receiue anie detriment.
            As for Polonia, the same hath beene incredible
chargeable vnto him, as well for the mightie bribes
bestowed vpon the nobles of the countrie, as also
the charges of a great armie of Rewtiers: hee sent his
kinsman Maximilian of Austria, what by force and
what by helpe of the parte which he had gained, &
with his treasures, thought to inuest him in the

kingdome. The successe of which enterprise I wold
not write, being to the whole world notorious and
knowen. In the consistorie of Rome hee is faine to
entertaine a great number of those hungrie Cardidinals
in pension and fee, therby to gaine their voices
when need requireth, which liberalitie of his he
cannot by anie meanes withdrawe, for in so dooing
he should be assured to haue them his enemies, and
contrarie to his proceedings.
            Lastly, for conclusion, he maketh at this instant
open warres with France, England, and the Lowe
countries: What deme you then hereof? Hath he
not (trow you) vent for his treasures? His father was
a better souldier and a greater man of warre than
he is, and as mightie a prince euerie deale (his Portugall
Indians only excepted) in place of which he
quietly inioyed these his Lowe countries, which in
respect of their great oppulencie, abundance of riches,
& conuenientnes of scituation, were to them
accounted nothing inferior. And yet he neuer dared
attempt to make warres vpon France alone, but
he first sought by all possible meanes to assure himselfe
in friendship with England, giuing to that end
great and mightie presents to Cardinal Wolsey, and
others of the councel, that in those daies were with
her Maiesties father of worthie memorie K. Henrie
the eight: whereas his sonne makes war with all the
world carelesly at once, but the Italians haue a true
prouerbe, Cum tutto abracci
                     •
                  nes iun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   string. And so I
hope it shall fare with him.
            Now as touching those his mightie and puisant

numbers of men, which they say he is able to make,
I take vpon me to know the state of his forces aswel
as other, and I herein of all other men know him to
be most needie and wanting. For as for Spain, Naples,
and Lombardie, of which his only force consisteth,
and which are his chiefest store-houses of
men, it is sufficiently knowen, that his drums haue
gone a whole yeere beating vp and downe, according
as their maner is, to get together six thousand
men, and those all shepheardes, hedgebreakers,
and such idle trewantly rogues, the most parte of
which he is forced to put in garrison for a yeere or
two to fashion them, before he send thē to seruice.
I saw about two yeres agone a fresh leuie that came
out of Pastrauia, who put them presently in the castle
of Antwarp, drawing out the olde garrison, the
most silly naked snakes that euer I sawe in my lyfe,
such, as in my conscience, a man in deed wold beat
ten of them.
            As for Germanie, out of the which heeretofore
he hath drawen greate numbers, and by theyr
helpe done great matters before Mastrig in Freisland
and those places, his vsage hath bene so base and miserable
vnto them, that the old souldiers are all starued
and consumed in his seruice, whose calamitie
hath so terrified the rest at home, that no prince in
Europe hath lesse credite to raise men there than
hee. And though there were no such matter, yet
they are no waie bound vnto him more than to an
other, theyr profession beeing to serue onely him
that will best paie them best, and yet if hee shoulde

raise anie of the alliaunces of her Maiestie, and the
scituation of their Countrie considered, it shoulde
be a matter of great difficultie to ioyne them wyth
his other troups. Where are then his innumerable
legions with which hee meanes to ouercome the
world? Alliance he hath none, vnlesse it bee wyth
the rebellious league of France: of them he can receiue
no aide nor comfort, themselues being miserable
and distressed, by reason wherof most burdenous
vnto him, & yet there is no man liuing in the
world lesse beholden vnto them than he. For notwithstanding
all his assistance, they woulde neuer
yeeld to receiue his forces into their townes or fortresses,
seruing onely their turns on him for the present
time.
            As for the pope and the Princes of Italye,
what fayre weather so euer they doo beare him, he
both trusteth them, and they him, and great reason
they haue so to doo. And withall, this malediction
hangeth vpon him, that as hee is of all forraine nations
distrusted, doubted, and abhorred, so both he
and the very name of a Spaniard, is most loathsome
and hatefull to the rest of his owne subiectes. Insomuch,
that in Millaine the young Gentlemen haue
a pastime by night, which they call Caccia Marran,
that is, putting on a visard on theyr face by night,
they goe with theyr long rapiers or picked bastinadoes
vnder they cloakes out in the Towne to
seeke Spaniardes in the stewes or anie other place
where they thinke they are lykely to finde anie of
them, vnto whome they giue as manye stabbes

and blowes that they can laie vpon them, insomuch
that the Spaniards dare not for their eares abide out
of the castle after shutting in of the gates. As for his
dealing in Portugall, who knowes not his cruell tyranie,
and the hatred they beare him?
            But now come to her MAIESTY, and you shal
find another manner of state of matters: her realme
plentifully abounding in men of warlike disposition,
of whom she is loued & adored: her warres are
iust, charitable, godly, & defensiue, for maintenance
of which, besides the trust that she reposeth in God,
who hath hetherto mightily and miraculously defended
her, she is alied in straight league, friendship
& confederation with the most victorious & christian
king of France, with the kings of Denmarke &
Scotland, with the Switzers, and with sundrie princes
and states of the Empire, al being her neighbors
dominions, vnited with hers, and thereby ready to
assist, aid, & succor one another in all such occasions
as shall or may happen. Al this then considered, tell
me, I praie you, what occasion of feare or misdoubt
you haue. If you thinke the English valor not to be
compared with that of the Spaniard, reade but the
Chronicles, and you shall finde how much you are
deceiued: you shall finde that a smal armie of English-men,
vnder the conduct of that worthie prince
of Wales, eldest sonne to Edward the third, passed
in despight of them thorough Cauarre into Spaine,
and there in the middest and bowels of their owne
countrie, ouerthrew at Nadres their vsurping king,
Henry the bastard (of whose rase this man is descended

by his grandmother) being accompanied with
the nobilitie of the countrie, and 60000. of the brauest
fighting men in Spaine, & so vtterly ouerthrew
him, that they erected king in his place Don Pedro,
their iust & lawfull prince of that kingdome, whom
by maine force they constrained all their cities and
noble men of the country to receiue. Read besides
the valerous conquestes atchieued by Iohn Duke of
Lancaster, brother vnto the sayd prince, in Gallicia,
against Don Iohn, sonne of the sayd Henrie the vsurping
bastard: besides, the chronicles of Portugal are
full of the materiall prowesse of the English & glorious
victories obtained in seruice of their king, to
whose aide they were called against the saide king
of Castile
            
            But what need I run backe into the passed ages
to seeke examples? Looke but into the incounters
that haue bene of late daies betweene them and vs
either by sea or land, and you shall finde that they
haue alwaies carried the blowes. As by land, at the
encountering of Grane and that of Sutphen, where
the honor of the world and ornament of England,
sir P. Sidney by his aduenturous valor was slaine, besides
many other bickerings and skirmishes of lesse
moment needles to recite. Of sea matters I account
it bootlesse to speake, so greatly and aboue measure
glorious is the same, & bruited through the world,
of the worthie voiages of sir F. Drake, sir I. Haukins,
sir M. Frobisher, C. Raiman, and the rest of the braue
and couragious Gentlemen, who for the benefit of
their countrie haue not spared to make aduenture

of their liues and fortunes.
            But if you desire one example of all, let that then
serue of his huge late fleet, with which, Golyas like,
hee threatned heauen and earth, & with which he
thought to haue circumuented and surprised at vnawares
her Maiestie, whilest falsely, wickedly, and abusiuely,
hee entertained her Graces Commissioners
in Flanders with a treatie of peace. To which
her Highnesse lyke a Christian princesse, and for to
auoide the effussion of Christian bloud, was verie
vnclinable. But God, as he hath alwaies done, so at
this time did hee miraculously protect her Maiesty
in such sort, that through the great, careful, and exceeding
valorous resolution of that most worthie
and renowmed Gentleman the Lorde Admirall of
England, of whose couragious behauiour and terrour,
with which he amazed them, the verie enemy
himselfe, though agaynst his will, makes worthie
mention. They were with a small number of English
so fiercely and vigorously encountered, that
their resistance not preuailing them, they were scattered,
chased, and vtterly discomfited, in such sorte
as the whole world knoweth, so that Lucans verse,
me thinkes, may verie fitly bee applyed vnto them,
Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis.
            
            Besides, what better triall can you haue of the
valour of their nation than this, being thirtie thousand,
the creame of all theyr forces, and aboute the
assembling of which he had bene three yares busied,
yet when they came vpon the coast of England,
dared not to lande a man: whereas wee the nexte

yeere following, with a little Nauie, containing not
aboue eleuen thousand men, vnder the conduct of
the two most renowmed Captaines, sir Iohn Norris
and sir Frances Drake, landed in Spaine, burnt his
shipping, put his people to the sword, & his townes
to the fire, and coasted thence along into Portugal,
and there landing, marched in his countrie, euen to
his gates of Leisbone, with drums sounding, and ensignes
displayed: from whence wee returned vnfought
withall by anie of his forces either by sea or
land.
            These things well considered, me thinkes you
haue greater reason to hope one daie to see English
Ensignes displayed in Madrill, together wyth
the vtter ruine of that proude tyrant of Spaine and
his holy Father the pope, with all their rabble, than
anie waie to feare him or his proceedings. And yet
there is one point besides all the aboue rehearsed,
out of which we may receiue singular comfort, as
that of which all other most deepelye vexeth and
afflicteth his cogitations, and which, no doubt before
it be long, wil giue vs a great aduantage against
him, and that is, the contention which hee seeth to
spring vp in his owne house, of which I will briefly
discourse vnto you the occasions, because you shall
vnderstand the same the better.
            Hee hath by seuerall wiues three children liuing,
two Daughters and one sonne, the Sonne
young of yeeres, sicklie of bodie, pale and weake
of complexion, of wit poore and vnfurnished, in a
manner a very idiot.
            
               
His eldest daughter, whom they cal La Infante of
Spaine, a woman as by birth great, so proud exceedingly,
haughtie minded, and aboue measure aspiring,
prudent, in her speeches maiesticall, in her
countenance and actions couragious: her he hath
alwaies norished vnder his own wing, acquainting
her euen from her cradle with matters of state and
gouernment. In which now, by reason of her long
traine and experience therein, shee is exceedinglye
practised and ripe. With her, what waightie matter
so euer hee vndertaketh, hee participateth the same
before, demanding her aduice and counsell, spending
sometimes whole halfe daies they two in communication
together. Vpon her (the youths weaknesse
& simplicitie of the yong prince considered)
are the eies of all men throwen, vppon her depend
the nobilitie, gentilitie and commons, and innumerable
troupes of sutors, into whose harts she hath so
insinuated her selfe, that they doo beare an exceeding
loue and reuerence towards her, many mighty
men haue bin offered her in mariage, as the Empe
               
                  •
               our
Rodolph, the king of Scotland, and diuers other,
but she vntil she see what wil become of her father,
whom shee seeth olde, oppressed with infinit cares,
and not likely long to liue, vpon whose death, her
actions and manner of life doth assuredly shew, that
shee is not of mettall sufficient to giue place to the
yong idiot her brother, but at least shee meanes to
part stakes with him.
            In Spaine she knowes there is no lawe Salike, to
bridle her ambitious thoughtes, but women maye

succeed as men, for so grandmother Iouina did Ferdinando
her father. Hauing these examples before
her eyes, she feedeth her minde with high & ambitious
desires, of which she hath made so cleere and
euident demonstrations, that her Father to preuent
this mischiefe that hee feareth, was forced this last
yeere to assemble the whole estates of Spaine, & to
make them sweare to be true vnto his sonne, whom
he presently caused to keepe his Court apart, sending
him sundrie of his councell, and commanding
the nobilitie to be attendant on him, acquainting
him, as much as in them lyeth, with ma
                  •
               aging of
matters of waight, estate, and gouernment. Besides
it is heere bruited for certaine among vs, that the
president of Artois Richardol, whō the Duke of Parma
had sent into Spaine, to make his excuses and iustifications
against certaine pointes of treason, of
which he was by the Duke of Pastrauia and prince
of Ascoly accused to the king, is now returned with
commission to assemble the nobles & states of these
Countries, and to cause them to take the like oath
to his sonne, therby to preuent as well his daughter
as the Duke of Parma of their conceiued hopes.
            But now to come to his second daughter, whom
he hath long sithence bestowed in marriage vpon
the Duke of Sauoy, with absolute promise & solemn
vow between him and her, to leaue her a kingdome
for her dowrie. She is a princesse in ambition and
high desire nothing vnequal to her sister, but in wit
& courage far her inferior, she & her husband both
alreadie take vppon them in their manner, stile, and

vsage, a state and title far beyond their dignitie, conuenient
onelye vnto kinges. Altessa is the meanest
phrase they will be spoken in vnto, refusing any letters
that are not so intituled, for such is the will and
pleasure of the king her father. Naples & the Dutchie
of Millaine they haue alreadie deuoured in
their hopes, which if her Father at his death leaue
not quietly vnto them, they will be so bold as strain
curtesie with his son, to get them perforce if he can.
On the other side, the states of Italy like not such a
mightie neighbor amongst them, and therefore to
preuent both him and his father in lawes desseignment,
haue made a most straight secret league & alliance
among themselues, tearming the same Ragoyne
de Stato: in which are comprised the pope, the
Venetians, the Duke of Florence, the Duke of Parma,
the Dukes of Vrbin, Mantua, and Ferrara: the
duke of Parma dared not to enter in among them,
but is forced, though none more agreed to dissemble
and temporize than he for a while, he knoweth
that the king hath bene exceeding ielous, and seeketh,
though slily and dissemblingly, his life, honour,
& reputation. But aboue all, the dissention of Portugall,
to which hee perswadeth himselfe to haue
right, as in truth his title is better than that of the
king of Spaines, sticketh deep in his stomacke, Manet
alta monte repostum, and wee doubte not but one
daie when occasion shall serue, hee will make the
worlde witnesse of his discontentment, which the
king well knoweth, and greatly feareth, but he must
haue patience, for he can hardly remedie it, vnlesse

the duke will wittingly ouerthrow himselfe, especially
hauing these meanes in his handes which hee
hath, not onely to worke his owne securitie, but to
crie quittance also when time shall serue.
            But hauing now exceeded the limits of a letter,
it is time I refraine my pen, hoping that these alledged
demonstrations shall, if not to worke the good
effect which I desire in you & other Gentlemen of
my countrie, yet at the least to manifest the dutifull
zeale & loue I beare vnto the state of my Country,
as to all faithfull members thereof, in participating
vnto them such things as by painfull and dangerous
experience I haue gathered, and do thinke necessarie
to be knowen, wherein I haue vsed such truth,
that I hope no man liuing shall be able to disproue
me, though I doubte not but the same shall bee by
some malitiously censured, and my selfe subiect to
abide the brunt of their mallice, being assured that
I shall not auoid the poisoned rancor of their infamous
defaming tongues and pens. For seeing they
spare not in their traiterous speeches & infamous
pamphlets, princes, noble men, & counsellors, men
of great authoritie & vertue, it were folly for me to
looke to scape scot-free. But such is the ioye I conceiue
in my good meaning, that I shal receiue comfort
thereof, as a thing greatly redounding to my
credit, of such men as they are to bee ill spoken of.
            Now lastly for conclusion, whereas you write
that if there were no other benefite to be gotten in
these partes, but attaining the languages of foreine
nations, with the knowledge of militarie discipline

and affaires of matter of state, wherein you heare
my selfe & others your country-men haue in these
parts greatly profited themselues, it were a motion
sufficient not onely to make you leaue your countrie
for a time, but to hazard your selfe to any dangers
in forain parts, I haue thought good therein to
let you vnderstand, that albeit I must confesse, that
I haue in those thinges profited more perchaunce,
(without ostentatiō be it spoken) than others of our
nation, for the most part haue done: yet as the time
now serueth, and the case now standeth at this present,
there is no possibilitie that you or anie other
may in farre longer time than I haue spent, attaine
to the like: and if you could, yet the dangers that in
aduenturing the same you shoulde indure, were
farre greater than the benefites you could possibly
reape might in any wise counteruaile, were they
such as might answere you expectation. In which
respect, I praie you first consider, that when I came
first ouer hether, the wars then here vndertaken seemed
& were in apparance to all the manner sort of
men in the worlde. But intestine warres betweene
the prince and his subiects, such as no other foraine
prince, and most especially our most noble Queene
& Soueraigne was then nothing interessed: whereas
since it hath ben made manifest to the world that
these wars and iniuries offered by the king of Spaine
to those of the Low countries, whose laws, customs
and priuiledges he hath most violently, tyranously,
wrongfully and periuredly broken, whereby hee
hath freed them from his subiection, yoake, and tyranie,

and iustly and deseruedly for euer lost al such
preheminences, prerogatiues, authoritie, and iurisdiction
as he pretended ouer them, as more amply
appeareth in the ancient records of the priuiledges
of these nations, which both he & his predecessors
at their entrie of gouernment into these prouinces
haue solemnly vowed and sworne to maintaine all
in generall, and euerie in particular inuiolate, & vppon
that couenant and condition they haue reciprocally
sworn to him due fidelitie and obeisance,
he fayling in the one, they to be exempted from the
other. Noreouer, her Maiestie seeing the lamentable
and most pittifull cause of her distressed neighbours
and allies, finding no other possible meanes
by laborers, sutes, messages, & sundrie Embassadors
which she most honorably sent to the king of Spain
for pacifieng the sayd troubles, and reconciling the
sayd king and those: sometimes his sayd subiectes
haue bene inforced to take pittie and commiseration
of their most miserable and afflicted estate and
distresse, and for their reliefe, to her excessiue & almost
importable charges, to vndertake a most iust,
godly, and charitable defensiue warre against those
that daily seeke the bloud, liues, goods, lands and liberties
of the inhabitants of the sayd distressed nations.
Since which being published, I thinke it not
onely vnlawful, but also a most hainous and capital
crime and offence for any her Maiesties subiectes
to serue on the contrarie part.
            Besides, it shal be good for you & all other good
subiects of her Maiesties, to remember that consideration
being had by her Maiestie and her most

honorable prudent councell, of the loosenes of many
of her subiects, and small respect they had to her
Highnes & countrie, & as litle to their owne safety,
hir Maiesty hath caused to be published & set forth
diuerse lawes, ordinances, proclamations, and inhibitions,
whereby all her subiectes (except knowen
marchants and strangers) are straightly forbidden
to passe the seas into anie forraine partes without especiall
lisence of her Maiestie at this time. Therefore
if you or anie other her Graces subiects, shall
nowe attempt to passe the seas without lawfull lisence,
there is no reason why you shuld expect anie
other than the rigor of the lawes & iustice, & to be
holden guiltie of cases capitall, especiallye such as
shall serue vnder so open and professed an enemie
to the crowne and state.
            Further, I praye you to haue in consideration,
that when I came ouer hether, the case so stoode as
all Gentlemen of anie quality or merit, were gratefully
receiued, and emploied in good & honorable
seruices: whereas since the Spaniard hath professed
himselfe open enemie to her Maiestie and the state
of her realme, he hath had all English-men in verie
base account, beeing ielous & extremely suspitious
of those that be most inwarde with him, & who for
his sake haue made shipwrack not only of their honor
and credit, but also of their loialty, dutie and alleageance
to her Maiestie and their natiue Countrie.
Examples whereof are infinit, and partly touched
in my Discourse before set dowue.
            Besides, there is of late crept into that nation a viperous
brood of Iesuits and priests, most dangerous &

malitious enemies to her Maiestie, and to their owne
countrie vile and pernitious, instruments of the pope
and his adherents, who daily (as it is manifest to them
that haue knowledge and experience of them & their
actions) seeke nothing more than the vtter ruine, pulling
downe, and destruction of her Maiestie and theyr
countrie, which bred and nourished in them, & al true
professors of the Gospell and christian religion thoroughout
christendome, he therefore that thinketh to
liue amongst these pernitious people in anie credit or
account, let him, as he worthily doth deserue, bee accounted
besides his wits, or els disobedient and traiterous
to God, her Maiestie, & his countrie.
            As for my part, seeing the impietie of this place and
the wicked and detestable end whereto their drifts &
practises are directed, I haue long since retired my self,
liuing aloofe from them, abandoning and vtterly reiecting
the merit of my long seruice, & all such hopes
and prefermentes, which I might as well as anie man
else of my qualitie of my nation haue pretended and
should haue as soone obtained. And haue euer since
by all possible meanes, as well by my selfe as by my
friends, laboured with her Maiesties most honourable
priuie councel about my returne, which by the speciall
grace & benignity of my Soueraigne, I am in comfort
shortly to obtaine, desiring to spend my poore talent,
and the residue of my life in the seruice of her
Maiestie, my most honorable princesse & soueraigne
Ladie, whom God of his euerlasting goodnesse blesse
with many yeres, & endles prosperity, to the ioy of hir
subiects, and all faithfull christians dispersed throughout
the whole world.
            Finis.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   