
      
         
            
            
               
A True Relation of the Fleete which went vnder the Admirall Jaquis Le Hermite through the Straights of Magellane towards the Coaſts of Peru, and the Towne of Lima in the Weſt-Indies.
            With a Letter, Containing the preſent State of Caſtile in Peru.
            
            
               Herevnto is annexed an excellent Diſcourſe which ſheweth by cleare and ſtrong Arguments how that it was both neceſſary and profitable for the Vnited Prouinces to erect a Weſt-India Company, and euery true ſubiect of the ſame ought to aduance it according to his power.
            Written by a Well-willer of the Common-wealth.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1625.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
A TRVE RELATION of the ſucceſſe of the Fleet which went vnder the Admirall Iaquis L' Hermite through the Staights of Magellane, towards the Coaſt of Peru, and the Towne of Lima in the Weſt-Indies.
            
            THE Lord Inquiſitor Iohn de Manneza, hauing very earneſtly vrged the Vice-Roy of the Weſt-Indies, that hee would procure and take care that this yeare the ſiluer ſhould bee ſent ſooner downe then was done in the former yeare, ſeeing that he had letters from the Generall Thomas de Larraſperu, by which hee receiued order to doe it, and ſhewed what damage were cauſed in Spaine in the former yeare, namely in the yeare 1622. the ſiluer then beeing to late carried from Harana, and in the yeare 1623. Don Antonio de Oquendo tarrying then there in the Winter time, ſeeing that the ſiluer was not ſent timely away: Wherefore hee did his beſt endeauor to mooue the Vice-Roy to the ſame effect according to his Commiſſion which he had. The ſiluer of the ſmall Nauy beeing ſhipped, they of Lima were ſtill of opinion that it ſhould not be carried before the 7. or 10. day of May, and although diuers perſons intreated the Vice-Roy that it might not ſooner be ſent away, he cauſed neuertheleſſe the Fleet to depart with the ſilue
                  •
                from the port of Callao, on the 3 day of May, to th
                  •
               
               
intent that it might in good time bee ſent to the appointed places, and gaue afterwards notice that ſuch as had not beene ready with their ſiluer to ſend it with the Fleete, they ſhould carry to another Ship which is called the Ship of the Recago, which was within the ſpace of few dayes afterwards to put to Sea. And it fell very happily out by the Prouidence of God, that a Chinchorro (beeing a certaine manner of a Barke) which went to Sea in the ſeauenth day of May, found it ſelfe on the next morning to be amongſt the Fleete of the Enemies, which demaunded them which were in it, whether the Fleete with the ſiluer ſhould put to Sea on the ſeauenth of May, as was reported vnto them by one that was but halfe blacke (on that was gotten perhaps by a Spaniard and a blacke-Indian woman) and was taken by them in a Barke: Seeing that they were reſolued to attend vppon it, or to purſue it if it was gone to Sea: And without doubt (if God had not preuented it) and they had followed the Fleet, they could eaſily haue taken it, for it conſiſted but in two Ships that went very careleſſe and ill-prouided; and the Enemies had twelue great Ships beſides their Shaloups.
            But the Pilote that was vppon the aforementioned Chinchorro or Barke, deceiued the Generall of the Hollanders, by not telling the truth, for hee ſpake vnto him in this manner.
            Signior, you ſhall not neede to trouble your ſelfe about the ſmall Fleete, ſeeing that there are already eight dayes paſt ſince it went to Sea, and it is not poſſible that your Fleete can ouertake it: The report

which is made vnto you of the ſeauenth of May, is of nothing elſe then of the Ship of the Recago which lyeth yet vntill this day in the Hauen of Callao, and is ready to put to Sea beeing loaden with two Millions of ſiluer which could not bee ſent with the Fleete, ſeeing the ſiluer was not ready by reaſon that went to ſoone to Sea.
            The Enemies were mightely diſpleaſed vppon theſe tydings, and reſolued thereupon to caſt anchor againſt the next night before the Hauen of Callao, which they did alſo afterwards, and ſet yet in the euening 18▪ of their Shaloupes in Sea, which were of the bigneſſe almoſt of a Barke, and were not onely furniſhed with Oares, but alſo wirh Maſtes and Sayles to vſe them when the Winde will ſerue: They came with 14 of them betwixt the Ordinance of the Hauen, notwithſtanding that 130. peeces were mounted vpon it, and fiered 9. of our Ships which lay in the Port; but they could not goe further to take the Ship with the ſiluer, and to fire a Gallion of the King of Spaine which layde neere it: For our Gunners could ſee them very eaſily by the meanes of the great light which proceeded from the Ships that were ſet on fire (as is aforementioned) and played ſo fiercely vppon them with the Ordinance that they were forced to forſake againe the Hauen, and to flye thence, leauying there yet 40 Ships which they could neuer touch although wee were vnprouided and lookt not for ſuch an enterprize
            When the afore-mencioned ſhipps were burning at Callao, there were great moanes and lamentations made at Lima (ſeeing that there was a rumor ſpread

abroad that the enemies had taken and fierd Callao, and they were directly marching towards Lima) and they laſted vntill ſuch time they learned the truth of the matter.
            One of our Captaines tooke the ſame night a Low-Countryman who was diſcended from Germain Parents, and was a gunner of the enemies, and a very ſkilfull man, and rare Inginer to make fire-workes: Being brought before the Vice-Roy, hee charged him to declare vppon his oath the truth of ſuch things as ſhould bee propouded vnto him, if hee would ſaue his life, and on the other ſide, he threatned to hang him in caſe he would not reueale the truth, the Priſoner anſwering therevppon ſayd, that the Fleete was on the twenty nine day of Aprill departed from Holland, being ſet forth by the rebells that dwell there, and that it conſiſted in eleuen gallions, of which there were ſeauen that were newly built, and other fower that had ben vſed in former time by priuate Merchants: and were very well furniſhed with Ordinance, and all other manner of neceſſaryes, which might be required both to fight at ſea and to ſayle through the ſtreigh of Magelane.
            
            Moreouer hee ſayd that beſides them there were yet fower pinnaſſes, in the ſame Fleete: he was likewiſe aſked what Ordinance, armes, munition, and victualls were in the Fleete: Item who was the Generall, what courſe they had kept in their voyage, how long agoe it was they had taken any prizes, and what prizes they had taken during the time of their voyage what the fleete intendeth to do, whatſtore of victualls

were daily allowed to the men and marriners, how many there were deceaſed, from whence they had fetcht their water, and where they had refreſhed themſelues with victualls, and what aduiſes they had receiued o the ſea.
            Moreouer, he was commanded to declare al ſuch things as hee knew concerning the voyage, for wee knew many things that happened in the ſame voyage, and asked him onely theſe queſtions to try whether hee ſpake the truth; that wee might punniſh him with the afore-mentioned payne if he went aſtray from the truth.
            Wherevppon hee declared that there were fower moneths paſt ſince the fleete departed from their country, and were within the ſpace of the ſame time come in the Zouth-Sea: that the ſhipps which they had brought with them, were the ſame which hee named or deſcribed in the beginning of his examination, that both the Admirall, Vice-Admirall, and the Schout, by night were great ſhipps, and that euery one of them was furniſhed with thirty peeces of ordinance, of which ſome twenty or thereabouts were braſſe peeces, that the leaſt Gallion of all the reſt, was furniſhed with one hundred barrells with powder; that the Fleete is likewiſe very well prouided with bullets, muſkets, and all other manner of warre-like prouiſion, that whereſoeuer they met with the Indians, and Black-mores, they cauſed a rumor to bee ſpread amongſt them that they came to recouer their liberty and ſettle them in it: that the Fleete brought prouiſion enough with it for the ſpace of two yeares: that both the ſouldiers

and marriners amounted all together, to the number of two thouſand and fiue hundered men.
            That ſome of them were diſcontented by reaſon that they could not get Biskit, and other victualls, that the Admirall was loath to land his men, fearing that many of them would runne away.
            That the Admirall was named Iacques L' Hermite, Item that hee was a man of great experience, hauing in former times bin in the Eaſt-Indies, that his Leggs were very thicke being ſwolne: that it was thought that hee ſhould dye by reaſon of the greife and vexation which hee conceiued in his minde in regard that hee tooke not the ſiluer which was eſcaped.
            That Iohn Hugen the Vice-Admirall (who was to ſucceede the Admirall if hee ſhould dye) was a luſty and high-minded young man, but very cruell, that ſince they paſt Guiena, many of the Fleete fell ſicke, and ſome of them dyed: that they ſayled along the Coaſtes of Affrica.
            
            Tranſlated out of the Spanniſh Coppy.
         
         
            
            Laus Deo. In Siuill the 4. of Ianuary. Anno 1625.
               
            
            Here come daily many heauy tydings, the Fleete of Lisbon is aboue a month agoe departed, but it is vncertaine whether it is gone towards the Baye of Todos los Santos or not.
            The Spaniſh Fleet is ready to depart, & tarrieth but for a good wind: Some are of opinion that it is not bound for Braſill, ſeeing that the wind hath a good while bene good to goe thitherwards, and that it putteth not to Sea: it is a verie ſtrong Nauie.
            About eight dayes agoe arriued here a Barke that came from the Weſt Indies, and brought letters that were written in the Towne of Lima and diuers other places of Peru, to giue vs to vnderſtand how the Hollanders had fired and taken many ſhippes, both in the Callao de Lima and in diuers other Ports and places that lye in the South ſea, and that they haue fortified themſelues in an Iland which lyeth directly oppoſite againſt the Port of Lima, from whence it is but a league diſtant, by meanes of which fortification and their ſhippes, they hinder that none of our ſhippes can either come in the Port of Lima, or goe out of it.
            All the goods and marchandiſes that went laſt hence with the Fleete of Terra Ferma, lye as yet at Panama, by reaſon of which we ſtand here in great feare, that we ſhall not in this Summer-time receaue any ſiluer from Peru. Many Trades-men cannot paye their debtes, by reaſon that their goods lye yet by them, ſeing they could not ſend them to Lima, where they thought to ſell them: To be brief, the Hollanders ſpoile there all our traficke. By the ſame letters we learne likewiſe theſe

following tydings, namely, that the Hollanders haue hanged about Lima diuers of our men, and that we haue taken ſome of them.
            That in the Towne of Lima, there was a Hollander who was a ſhippe-Carpenter accuſed of treaſon, and condemned to be torne in peeces with hotte tongues, by reaſon that he (as was alledged againſt him) had giuen aduiſe to the Hollanders, and wiſht them to come in the South ſea.
            There are two ſhippes periſhed of the laſt Fleete that went towards Noua Hiſpania, and we cannot heare any thing of another that was comming from Hauana.
            It is here a miſerable time, and we haue no hope that it will mend, by reaſon of the heauy warres by ſea.
            Here at Siuill is a Iudge arriued, with a Commiſſion that he brought from Madrill, to puniſh all ſuch as had carried out of Spaine without licence, gold, ſiluer, or Ryalles of eight, and had brought falſe Ryalles in it. And he hath already taken diuers vpon ſuſpition oraccuſation, but whither iuſtly or vniuſtly God knoweth. The firſt that were taken were theſe following, Bernard Dores, Henrique Vander Borg, Iuan Vermuelen, Lorenzo Bultiau, beſides ſome French men, and one amongſt them being put to the torture, hath reuealed many things. Molernaer Cortoys, Vanden Buyr, haue likewiſe beene taken, but they got looſe againe, hauing put in Bayle, by fauour of friends. Afterwards were likewiſe taken Franciſeo and Antonio Sandier, Pedro de la Farſe, Iuan Gutier: but they are releaſed againe of their impriſonment: Cornelis de Groot retyred into a Church with Oliuer Leffe, and Guilliam Gutier. Many of them are put in priſon, and know not what the cauſe

is of their impr iſonment.
            About eight dayes agoe was at St. Lucar, found in a veſſell that was drownd in the ſea, as many Ryalles and wedges of gold and ſiluer, as amounted to the value of 15. thouſand Duckets.
            The Flemings haue here erected an Admiraltie with the permiſſion of the King: the Preſident of it is Signieur Hendricke vande Raet, and his Aſſiſtantes Nicolaes Anthoine, Franciſco de Smit, Pedro Francoys, Iuan Courtois, Guilliam Clent: they are to buy many ſhippes, to fetch booties from the Pyrates Turkes, Hollanders, and Zealanders.
            And it is reported that they are to make ready in the Port of St. Lucar about 34. ſhippes: they put themſelues in great troubles, and God knoweth how they ſhall ſpeed.
         
         
            To the Worſhipfull the Maiors or Maiſters of the Weſt India Companie, which is graunted by the High and Mightie Lords, the States Generall of the Vnited Prouinces.
            SIRS, Many haue longed a great while for a Weſt India Company, and the matter is at laſt brought ſo farre, that the High and Mightie Lords the States Generall haue granted one, and that your Worſhips are choſen to be Maiſters of the ſame. Neuertheleſſe

this good worke goeth not forth in ſuch a manner as is required: and there are many welwillers of theſe lands, which were very ſory therefore, and ſome of them doe likewiſe their beſt endeauours, not onely to aduance this worke by their owne meanes, but exhort alſo others both with word of mouth and by writing, to doe the like, that it may come to full perfection. And among others the Author of this Diſcourſe is one of them, and a Participant or Venturer of this Company. He vſeth not onely great diligence to exhort euery one to the maintaining of this worke, but goeth likewiſe about to perſwade them by ſtrong reaſons to venture their monyes in this Company, to the intent that the Capitall may be the greater before it be ſhut vp, both for the good of the Company, and for the generall welfare of the Common-wealth: And ſeing that this came to my hands, and was iudged to deſerue Printing, that it might be made common to be read by others, I haue willingly bene at the coſt of the Printing of it, to ſhew my good will to the Company, and haue emboldened my ſelfe to preſent this Diſcourſe vnto your Worſhips, which takes great paines to aduance this worke, and that it may be the better commended by your approbations: and deſire therefore, that your Worſhips will be pleaſed to take my ſmall labour in good part. And eſpecially I with the Author will pray the Almighty, that it may pleaſe his Diuine Maieſtie, to proſper your adminiſtration, and to ſend his rich bleſſings one the Company.
         
         
            
            To all the Inhabitants of the vnited Prouinces, the Author wiſheth a true and right conſideration and care of the Common-welfare.
            
            IT is ſtrange that ſo much paines are taken to moue men to their owne welfare and good; for it ſeemeth that euery one ought to care for his owne welfare: There are dayly complaints made, that the Children haue too little care of their own welfare: We attribute this to the fooliſhneſſe and vnaduiſedneſſe of Youth, ſo that their Parents are compelled to take great paines to exhort, moue, and compell them therunto. But that men which are come to their yeares, and haue their wit, muſt be brought thereunto with great paines and labour, that is a thing no leſſe to be wondred at then to be complained for. The like hapneth in Spirituall matters. What endeauours I pray you are taken to make men apprehend and embrace that good which leadeth them to the euerlaſting ſalvation? In the ſame manner it goeth in temporall matters.
            I will now paſſe by the lazie, vnaduiſed, ſtrong, and vnthriftie Drunkards, Gameſters, Players, and ſuch

like, which neglect their owne particular welfare, and that of their Families, &c. I will ſpeake now onely of the Common welfare of our deare beloued Country: What endeauors muſt be vſed to make men which are Inhabitants of theſe Countries, and whom the generall welfare concerneth in the higheſt degree, aſwell in generall as in particular, to embrace and vſe ſuch meanes by which it may be procured.
            For the Defence of theſe Lands, there are neceſſary generall contributions, and reuenues. Euery one is very ſparing and ſloathfull (except ſome few honeſt men) to raiſe and pay them.
            It is neceſſarie that ſuch moneis as are raiſed be well managed. But where is any that taketh ſuch care of theſe thinges as he ought? But I doe not intend to treate at this time of all that which is neceſſarie for the preſeruation of theſe Lands. For if I ſhould ſpeake of it, I muſt firſt of all treate of the true ſeruice of God, who is to be worſhipped with a pure Conſcience: and then of the vſing of Charity and Iuſtice amongſt vs.
            For without theſe things, there isneither any bleſſing of the Almighty to be expected, nor likelyhood to preſerue any Common-wealth in welfare and proſperity. But I will leaue theſe points to the Teachers of Gods Word (which may ſpeake of them in their Sermons; and will wiſh that one amongſt them, would out of a godly zeale, deduce into a ſmall Treaty, how neceſſary they be; and I ſhall reioyce mightily, if both by the high & lowe degrees they ſhould be embraced) and intend onely to ſpeake of a maine meane which hath long beene expected and wiſhed; and is at laſt,

through great labour and paines brought ſo farre, that it is granted: namely, the Weſt India Company.
            And ſeeing that it goeth yet ſlowly forth, and that men muſt be perſwaded, and as it were compelled in a manner to doe themſelues good, I will vſe the beſt meanes I can, according to my capacity, for the good of the Common-wealth.
            It is certaine, that many yeares before the Truce of twelue yeares was concluded, this Company was wiſht for: and that by reaſon of the ſame Truce it could not be graunted. This was one of the hurtfull effects which the Truce produced, and one of the aduantages which the Enemies receaued by the Truce. And beſides them, they had many other of no leſſe importāce, which are all clearely demonſtrated in a ſmall Booke, which was preſently after the Truce publiſhed by a well-willer of his Country, who inſtiled it THE COMPANION OF THE FAR-LOOKING WARNING-GIVER, and ſhewed briefly, with cleare and ſtrong arguments, how that for the preſeruation of the State of theſe Lands, the Warre was more profitable and ſafe then the Truce. But we neede not at this time to debate the matter, ſeeing that our Enemie is not now of that minde.
            He did his beſt endeauour in the time of the deceitfull Truce, not onely to take breath and to ſtrengthen himſelfe, but to ruine vs by ciuill Warres, and diſſentions amongſt vs. He hauing miſt▪ his marke (God be thanked) he renewed the warre againe; and that the rather, ſeeing that he is become of a high minde, through the Victories which he hath obtained in

Germany, more through deceit, and by the meanes of the negligence and diſſentions of the Germaines, then through his owne valiantneſſe.
            He hath theſe two laſt yeares ſet very fiercely vppon vs, and cauſed theſe Lands to be at very great and ſuch exceſſiue charges, which theſe Lands ſhould not be able to beare for many yeares.
            Therefore it is neceſſary that we deuiſe other meanes, by which we may ſupport and beare the common charges, weaken the enemie, by deminiſhing his means, and giuing him elſewhere worke.
            The Weſt-India Company (as I take it) is one of the beſt meanes to effect this. But becauſe I may treate more orderly of this buſines, I will put to the conſideration of the Reader, and all the Inhabitants of theſe vnited Prouinces, theſe following points.
            1 That this Company is neceſſary.
            2 Feaſible and poſſible to be effected.
            3 The profit which is receaued from it.
            4 The good conduct & adminiſtration of the ſame.
            Concerning the firſt point: It ſeemeth that it will be needles to take much paines to proue it: For there is hardly a well-willer of theſe Countries, but eſteemeth this Company to be very neceſſary. But I would wiſh that each one ſaid this, not onely with his heart, but ſhewed his minde likewiſe by the deed: For words and wiſhes onely, without deedes, cannot aduance it. Not faire ſpeeches but money will helpe vs herein: For we want no aduiſers and Counſellers, but Disburſers, as the Prouerbe ſaith.
            
               
But ſeeing that there are many which contribute yet verie little to this Company, by reaſon that they are not well informed of the neceſſity of it: It ſeemeth then to be neceſſarie, which otherwiſe might bee accompted ſuperfluous, to ſhew with few, cleare, and ſtrong reaſons, the neceſſity of it.
            Firſt of all it is to be conſidered, that wee haue an irreconciliable enemie, who thirſted after the good and blood of vs and of our children. The high mind which the Spaniard beareth is well enough knowne. It is not yet forgotten, or at leaſt it ought not to be, what cruelty he hath vſed in America, and other Lands among the poore Heathens which had not giuen him any occaſion of offence.
            Who knoweth not what cruelties, bloodſheds, deflowrings of Virgins, pillages, and ranſackages of the Townes and Villages of the Low-countries the Spaniard hath vſed in them: but ſuch as know not this, let them reade the Hiſtorie of Emanuel van Metren, or if this Hiſtory be too long for them, let them peruſe a Booke which is called in Dutch, Den Nederlantſchen Morgen-wecker: that is to ſay, The Netherlandiſh morning-waker: and looke vpon the obſeruations which are made vpon the propoſition of Peckius, and hee ſhall find this to be true. Then were the offences not ſo great; and are now ſince growne irreconciliable by the meanes of the warre which hath continued the ſpace of fiftie yeares▪
            
            He neither ſhall, can, or will forget the ſpire which he accounteth that theſe Lands haue done vnto him,

and it will continually ſticke in his ſtomacke, that he hath ſpilt ſo much money and ſo many men to recouer them.
            Hee accounteth vs all as Rebells, and as if wee had committed Crimen laeſae Maieſtatis, treaſon in the higheſt degree, and maketh reckoning that wee haue forfeited both life and goods.
            I know that ſome Romiſh Catholikes which dwell amongſt vs, thinke that they are excepted: but they are much miſtaken. For it is fault enough for them that they haue tarried here, and haue ſtrengthned the power of the Heretikes (as hee calleth vs) by their meanes.
            In regard of the Reformed Religion hee accounteth vs to be damned perſons, that are fit to be burnt. So that the Spaniard maketh reckoning that our liues and goods are for the King of Spaine, and our ſoules for the Deuill.
            Conſider now by your ſelues what wee ought to expect of ſuch an enemie. And therefore it is certaine that wee haue no reaſon to conceiue any hope of a Peace or Truce to liue in with a tranquill and ſetled minde.
            To obtaine peace is impoſſible, vnleſſe wee would ſurrender our ſelues whollie into his hands, with ſoule and bodie, goods and blood.
            If you like ſuch a peace, accept of it. Truce is but deceit, and is onely concluded by him to make afterwards his owne vantage. Then it is certaine, that wee haue no other remedie then to keepe our armes in

hand, and truſt to the aid and protection of the Almightie. This foundation muſt firſt bee laid. This you muſt know and hold firme in your hearts, that you may looke to your ſelues.
            And therefore we haue reaſon to deuiſe meanes to increaſe our power with the bleſſing of the Almightie, and to diminiſh the might of the enemie. And to effect this, there is nothing more fit then the Weſt India Company, for thereby ſhall our trafficke augment, and the enemies decreaſe, yea his meanes ſhall bee taken from him, to make with the ſame warre vpon himſelfe. It is very well knowne that the Spaniard ſhould not be very well if he had not the Weſt Indies. From thence he gets great ſtore of ſiluer and gold to maintaine his warres. We muſt annoy him there, if we will make him weake, and not onely goe about that he get none or few thence, but doe likewiſe our beſt endeauors that wee get ſome part of them. For otherwiſe it is impoſſible that euer wee ſhould liue in reſt of him. The Spaniard himſelfe knoweth this very well, and was there chiefly beſides ſome other conſiderations moued to make a truce with us, fearing we ſhould otherwiſe erect a Weſt India Companie.
            Secondly, the preſent ſtate of theſe Lands require it, for they are ſmall, and full of inhabitants, which for the moſt part liue by manufactours, trafficke, and by the Sea. Now then to get meanes for this great number of inhabitants to entertaine them withall, and to imploy our ſhips and Mariners▪ it is neceſſary to haue many Nauigations on the Sea.
            
               
We muſt look that the Merchants and Handicraftsmen, which nouriſh themſelues by hand labour get no occaſion to depart. And wee muſt eſpecially finde out worke for our Mariners, for feare that they might become deſperate, and goe to ſerue our enemies againſt vs, or ſhould goe againe towards Algiex and turne Pyrates.
            The King of Spaine hath forbidden the Inhabitants of theſe Lands to trafficke in the Lands which are vnder his Dominions, and are very many, for ſome of them border on the North, Spaniſh, and the Mediterranean Seas. So that we are compelled to try our fortune el ewhere.
            Many yeares agoe when the King of Spaine barred vs from the trafficke which we had in Spaine, we began in theſe Vnited Prouinces to ſayle towards the Eaſt Indies, and haue ſtill had good ſucceſſe, as is knowne to all the world.
            Let vs then follow this example, and in conſideration that that voyage is long, and that we cannot haue our ſhips which goe thither, at hand when we will, and it requireth not ſo many ſhips and Mariners as we haue to imploy, take ſome neere voyages in hand, to ſet our Mariners and ſhips at worke.
            Theſe two reaſons ſeeme vnto mee ſufficient and ſtrong enough.
            Looke vpon the power of our enemie: Looke vpon the preſent ſtate of theſe Lands, and the inhabitants of them, and you ſhall eaſily perceiue how neceſſarie i the erecting of this Company.
            
               
But ſome heauy head ſhall perhaps ſay: Although this Company be very neceſſary, but not likely to haue any good ſucceſſe, it were better not to begin it, then to diſſolue it afterwards with damage and ſhame.
            Our Sauiour Chriſt himſelfe teacheth vs this prouidence, that whoſoeuer will build a ſteeple that he muſt firſt forecaſt what the charges will be to finiſh it. But this hath beene already, euen before the reſolution was taken to erect this Company.
            If this were yet now firſt to be done, it were too late: And it is to be conſidered, that it ſhould be a great diſcredit and ſhame for vs, at which our enemies would laugh, if we ſhould now giue ouer this Company, the reſolution of which hath beene taken ſo ſolemnly and at ſeuerall times iteratiuely: And thereupon the Octroy or Patent being granted and publiſhed, the Maſters of it were likewiſe choſen.
            If it were not poſſible and feaſable, bee aſſured that the States would not haue troubled themſelues ſo long with the conſideration of it, nor haue taken ſo many aduices.
            Wherefore I pray ye may the Weſt India Companie not haue as good ſucceſſe as the Eaſt India, which was at the beginning onely by the ſmall meanes of few perſons vndertaken, and is now growne ſo rich and ſtrong?
            Certainly the voyage is not ſo great, but halfe ſo big onely as that of the Eaſt Indies.
            The coaſts are not vnknowne to our Mariners, for

by the meanes of the traffique which ſome particular perſons haue vſed in diuers parts and places thereabouts, they are as skilfull, and as well acquainted with them, as with any other in the world: yea they are as skilfull of thoſe parts, as they are of our owne coaſts.
            Could particular perſons traffique and trade thither in former times, what ſhould bee the reaſon I wonder, why a ſetled Company ſhall not bee able to doe it.
            The Traffique of Guinea, Puncto del Rey, and diuers other places, are already in daily vſe and practice.
            I pray you what may hinder vs, not onely to continue them, but alſo to increaſe them with the traffiques vpon many other places which lye at large about them?
            Shall wee want ſhips? Where is there a Country vader the Sunne, that is richer in ſhipping then this Land? or in which there may yet daily ſo many luſty and ſtrong ſhipps bee built, in leſſe time and with leſſer charges?
            Shall wee bee deſtitute of Mariners? Wee haue already farre more of them then wee know how to imploy: ſo that this point is one of the chiefeſt reaſons which may and indeed ought to moue vs to the aduancement and furthering of this Company, to the intent that they may haue imployment and not bee idle.
            
               
But ſome miſerable Hollanders, which would faine lay their thumbs vpon all that they haue, ſhall bee afraid for loſſe at Sea, and will therefore rather buy and purchaſe lands, rents, and Leaſes in theſe countries.
            O poore fooliſh men, who looke onely vnto the Hennes egge (as the prouerbe is) and in the meane time loſe the Gooſes neſt.
            Haue you then all gotten when you peſerue your owne particular goods, and ſo ſuffer the Commonwealth to receiue damage and loſſe in the meane while?
            But if doe well conſider euen your owne particular good, is thereby not your money in danger which you haue beſtowed on lands and rents in theſe Vnited Prouinces?
            Doth there not daily happen Bankrupts and other damages, and is it not all vncertaine whatſoeuer wee poſſeſſe in this world?
            Seeing then that all is to be ventured, is it not beſt to hazard it in ſuch maner and places that it may yeeld both particular and generall profit.
            But ſome ſhall perhaps ſay, the danger is too great in this trafficke: For there is both perill at Sea, and of a mighty Potentate, the King of Spaine.
            His power is not vnknowne vnto vs, his riches which hee getteth out of the Weſt Indies are almoſt vnualuable, and he ſhall employ them to his vttermoſt power to keepe vs out of the Weſt Indies. For this is

the beſt Pearle which he hath on his Crowne, and his onely meanes and pillar which vpholdeth him in his Chaire.
            Hee will vſe all meanes hee can to bereaue vs of the trade which we haue through the Strait of Gibraltar in Italy, where he hath no command, what ſhall hee then doe in this caſe.
            Certainly this is a point of great conſideration: but it will both the difficultie and the neceſſitie ſet before our eyes.
            For if the Weſt Indies bee ſo deare vnto him that will venture all that he hath before he will loſe it, wee haue the more reaſon to venture for them a blew eye.
            And if we become Maſter of all, or of ſome part, as wee are now in the Eaſt Indies, wee ſhall ſhorten his wings in ſuch a manner, that hee ſhall not eaſily trouble vs nor our good friends ſo much as hee hath done.
            Moreouer, I ſay, that the danger is not ſo great that it ought to diſcourage vs, and to make vs conceiue that theſe voyages will not bee made with good ſucceſſe.
            Looke vpon the former times, and you ſhall perceiue that our honeſt Predeceſſors haue not onely reſiſted the power of the King of Spaine in theſe Countries, but haue likewiſe beene ſo bold as to wage battell with him, when he was more powerfull then hee is now, and haue beene the occaſion that we liue now in liberty, and enioy the fruits of their labour.
            
               
But conſider once if we might not rightly be blamed if we liuing now at eaſe, ſhould looſe that which they haue gotten (with the loſſe of their owne bloud, and by the deaths of ſo many braue ſouldiers which were ſent to aid them, by ſeuerall Princes and States of Europe, but eſpecially by her Maieſtie of England of happie memorie) and that onely through a baſe feare, imprudencie, couetouſneſſe, or through any other ill paſſions. If our Anceſtors had had ſuch heauy heads, in what caſe ſhould wee now bee? where were our libertie, and welfare? The enemie hath now ſo many yeeres made a heauie warre vpon theſe lands, but they with their power and the aid of their confederates, rereſiſted him brauely through the fauor and grace of the Almightie.
            Theſe two laſt yeeres hath the enemie ſet verie fiercely vpon theſe vnited Prouinces, but what hath hee gotten in a manner to ſpeake, but damage and ſhame? Can we doe ſo much by land? we may do much more by water. This may appeare by the Sea fight which was in the ſtrait of Gibaltar betwixt our Fleet that was commanded by the valiant Admirall Heemskerke, and the Spaniſh Nauie, which tried there what the Marriners of Holland could doe. I will not boaſt idly, knowing that all things happen according to Gods bleſſing. But I ſpeake onely in manner of diſcourſe, according to nature, to ſhew what meanes the Almightie hath granted vs for our defence. We haue ſhips enow, and wee want neither Marriners, Souldiers, Munition, and Victuals. But you will ſay, wee want mony. This is the maine point I intend to ſpeake of, and will ſhew that this ſhall neither want, if euerie one will doe his beſt to

bring a good Capitall or ſtocke in the Company.
            And therefore let euerie one goe on with a good reſolution, and he ſhall finde this matter eaſily to be performed. But ſome ſhall perhaps reply there is daily ſo much to be giuen to the maintenance of the warres, as pole-money for euery ones head, and other taxations and impoſitions according to the ſeuerall eſtates of the inhabitants, &c. This is giuen, but the other is laid in to get profit. That which is giuen is gone, ſaith the Prouerbe, although there is nothing loſt that is giuen for the defence of the Country, and to remoue the enemies from our frontiers, as hath beene done at Bergen vp Zoom: But this which is required is no giuing, but laying in a Company of trafficke vpon hope of great gaine. You ſet daily ſhips forth, and ſend abroad, and receiue dayly Merchandizes, and buy and ſell wares to get a penny. But what is the reaſon that you will not venture your monies in this Company to annoy the enemies, by which meanes it is likely to happen that henceforth you ſhall not bee charged with ſuch great taxations as you are now for the maintenance of war. You complaine that there is nothing to be gotten, that the trades and traffickes are very dead: and now when there are meanes ſhewne vnto you, where to trafficke with profit, and how to reviue the negotiation, you will not giue eare and lend your helping hand.
            In former times the Lord gaue vs this aduantage, that our enemies had now and then warres with England, France, and other States of Chriſtendome. But the enemie hath hitherto liued in peace with them, and made himſelfe maiſter in a manner of Germanie, ſo

that all aide which we might get thence is cut from vs, and we haue almoſt no meanes to defend our ſelues but our owne power, and the aid of the Almightie. If wee will not vſe thoſe meanes of our owne which his diuine Maieſtie hath yet left vnto vs, what will become of vs? If it be impoſſible for vs to erect this Company as it ſhould be done, how ſhall we then hereafter bee able to reſiſt our enemies, if we neglect this, and other ſuch like meanes? But it is certaine that there can want no money, if the richer ſort of the inhabitants of thoſe vnited Prouinces will ſpare but ſome of their monies. The common ſort of people haue quitted themſelues verie well, and haue according to their abilities ventured great ſome of money, and raiſed thereby a good Capitall. But if it could be made higher, it would be more ſufficient to bring the matter to a good effect. Let but the rich follow their example, and aſſiſt the Company likewiſe, according to their abilitie, all the difficulties will preſently be taken away. Diuers rich perſons which haue either ſubſcribed for ſmall ſums, or haue not done it at all, they excuſed themſelues, ſaying, that they did it for feare they might be choſen Maſters of the Company: which charge they would not accept of for many reaſons. Let them then now yet ſigne for as much or more then the Maſters muſt needs participate in the Company, otherwiſe we ſhall haue reaſon to think that they ſeeke but friuolous euaſions.
            Thoſe which obiect that the Weſt-Indies are in many places inhabited by the Spaniard, and fortified with Forts in ſuch a manner, that wee ſhall hardly be able to ſettle our ſelues there: they ſcant deſerue any anſwer.

For the Weſt-Indies are ſo large and great, that the Spaniard cannot beſet the hundreth part of it, and we ſhall haue opportunitie enough to trafficke in ſuch places which lie from his Forts.
            But it is all for Profit that the Merchant looketh: and where there is any hope of gaine, there hee ventureth willingly. Therefore if we can make apparant that this Company is to yeeld profit, it is likely that there will be many that will reſolue themſelues to venture their monies in it.
            Firſt of all, then ought euerie good ſubiect, and well-willer of his Country, to haue regard to the generall good of theſe Lands. It is to be hoped that by the meanes of this Company we ſhall diminiſh the traffick of the Spaniards in the Weſt-Indies, euen in the ſame manner as we haue done with our Eaſt-India Company in the Eaſt-Indies. Hereby ſhall the reuenues of the King of Spaine be defalked and leſſeued, his cuſtomes decreaſed, and his treaſure ſometimes exhauſted.
            If ſome heauy head would ſay, that we ſhall not continually haue good ſucceſſe; I would anſwer, that it is as much to bee hoped that wee ſhall continually lie vnder and haue the worſt. And although there were not any thing elſe effected by this Company, but to make the Spaniard elſewhere to imploy his power, and to beſtow ſome of his meanes to warre by water where we haue more vantage then by land, (by which meanes the warre which hee maketh vpon theſe lands would be

partly diuerted) our Common-wealth ſhould receiue great benefit by it.
            Moreouer, it is no ſmall matter, that by reaſon of this Companie, there are not onely many Carpenters and Smiths, beſides other workemen, and other poore men which doe now hardly know how to liue, ſhal get good imployments both here and in the Weſt-Indies.
            And it is likewiſe to be conſidered, that diuers Manufactures, as Linnen, Saye, Bombaſin, Ribban, Looking-Glaſſes, Kniues, and other wares (which the Spaniard vſed to get out of the Low-Countries, and other parts, to ſell them there) ſhall by the Companie be vented in the Weſt-Indies, to the great good of our handicrafts men.
            But all this is yet nothing to the participants which lay their moneyes in the Companie; for euery one looketh commonly what profit he may make with his owne money, notwithſtanding that the common good is to be preferred before the particular.
            Therefore comming now to the particular profit; I ſay, that by all likelyhood (if the Almightie will be pleaſed to ſend his bleſſing to this Companie, without which, no good ſucceſſe is to be had) they that ſhall venture in the ſame▪ are likely to make more profit of their moneyes, then they could get by any other traffique.
            It is knowne what profit the Eaſt-India Companie hath yeelded to the participants of it, namely, in the time of ſeuen yeeres, viz. from the yeere 1595. to the yeere 1602. they haue receiued for one hundred Gilders Capitall, three hundred Gilders.
            
               
And afterwards when the Eaſt-India Companies were vnited by the Octroy, or priuiledge of the States Generall, the participants of the ſame, which ſold their Actions, haue in the time of ſixteene yeeres, namely, from the yeere 1604. vntill the yeere 1602. gotten foure hundred Gilders, for euery one a hundred Gilders Capitall: ſo that they profited ſome twentie foure Gilders yearely in the hundreth: and thoſe which haue not ſold their Actions, haue receiued about fiue hundred and fiftie Gilders for each hundreth Gilders of their ſtocke. That this be true, is not onely confeſſed by the Maſters of the Eaſt-India Company, but likewiſe by thoſe participants themſelues, which complaine againſt the Gouernment and dealing of the Maiſters of the Companie.
            And it is to be obſerued, that notwithſtanding the heauy warres which this Company hath had, the Participants haue profited ſo much. Conferre now theſe profits with other traffickes and imployments, and beſtowings of moneys, and you ſhall finde that they exceed all other gaines which are made with money. If you buy land with your money, you cannot commonly get aboue three in the hundred by the yeere, and by buying of houſes, you ſhall get but little more. If you buy rents you ſhall out get aboue 4. 5. or 5. and a halfe at moſt. If you put your monies at vſe, you receiue no more then 5. 6. and 6. and a halfe in the hundreth yeerly. The beſt traffickes which are now vſed yeeld ſeldome aboue ten in the hundred cleere gaine. The Chap keepers I muſt confeſſe may ſometimes get 18. or 20. in the hundreth: but they looſe againe much by bankrupts

and ſlow payments. It is then manifeſt, that the Eaſt-India Companie yeeldeth more profit then any other traffique or dealing; and it is apparant, that the Weſt-India Companie is likely to giue yet once as much profit: and we may eaſily be induced to beleeue this by theſe following conſiderations.
            For firſt of all, wee may ſayle hence into the Weſt-Indies within the ſpace of ſeuen weekes, whereas an Eaſt-India ſhippe that goeth but for Bantam, is commonly thirtie or fortie weekes by the way; and thoſe ſhippes which goe to the Moluccaes, are for the moſt part a whole yeere by the way.
            Secondly, I gather hereout, that the Weſt-India Companie, by reaſon of the ſhort Voyages, ſhall nothing neere be at ſuch charges as the Eaſt-India Companie is, which giue great wages both to the Mariners and Souldiers.
            Thirdly, a Weſt-India ſhip may make two returnes in a yeere, whereas an Eaſt-India ſhip can make but one returne in a yeere and a halfe, or in two yeeres.
            Fourthly, an Eaſt-India ſhippe is to be caſt off, after that it hath made three Voyages in the Eaſt Indies, and a Weſt-India ſhippe may make twelue or more Voyages in the Weſt-Indies.
            Fiftly, the Voyage for Gold vpon Guinea, and the Voyage for Salt vpon Printo del Rey, which coſt nothing but the fraught, are alreadie in vſe, and haue continually yeelded great profit, and are likely to yeeld yet more, through good directions and gouernment.
            Sixtly, there are almoſt no wares, or marchandizes, but onely moneyes ſent into the Eaſt-Indies; but in the

Weſt Indies there may many wares and other commodities be ſold (as wee ſaid before) to the great profit both of the Companie and of the other Inhabitants of thoſe vnited Prouinces.
            And laſt of all it is to be conſidered, how that the States aſſiſt this Companie with ten Tunnes of Gold, which amount to an hundred thouſand ſterling, and twentie ſhippes, being altogether well furniſhed with all manner of neceſſaries, and haue promiſed to giue yet more aid to this Companie, as ſoone as the ſtate of theſe Lands will bee able to beare it, and the occaſions and imployments of the Companie ſhall require it.
            So that I may conclude very well, that it is to bee hoped, that the Weſt-India Companie ſhall yeeld more profit then euer the Eaſt-India Companie yeelded vnto the Inhabitants of thoſe Lands. And there is no doubt to be made, but there will be many that ſhall repent that they haue not ventured their moneyes in this Companie, when they ſhall learne the good ſucceſſe of it, and ſhall reſolue to buy ſome Actions of other, that they may likewiſe enioy the benefit of it. And it is likely, that there will be many that will vpon this hope, That they ſhall be able to ſell their Actions afterwards with great profit, ſubſcribe for greater ſummes of money then they would haue done otherwiſe. Therefore let euery houſe-keeper, that will enrich himſelfe and his familie, venture his moneyes in this Companie, and he ſhall in time, by the grace of the Almightie, learne that he hath done the part of a prudent and wiſe houſe-keeper.
            
               
Now concerning the fourth and laſt point of the orders and Gouernment of the Company, we muſt a like treate of them a little: for euery one will the rather put his mony in the Company, when they ſhall be poſſeſſed and aſſured that it ſhall bee well gouerned. But ſeeing that theſe orders are already concluded by the States, and the Articles of them in Print, that euery one may reade them, and vnderſtand how the monies of the Companies ſhall be adminiſtred, I ſhal not need to talke much of them. They are ſuch, that many honeſt & vnderſtanding Merchants take great liking in them. There are alſo ſome which refuſe to venter their monies in the Company, and alledge for their excuſe, that they miſlike the Orders and Articles of the Company. It were to be wiſhed that men would not in theſe daies be too curious and nice. For there is not any man that can pleaſe euery one. And there is nothing in the world ſo well done, but ſome that will looke with curious eies vpon it, ſhall ſay that it hath the one or the other fault. Therefore let vs hold with our common Prouerbe, which ſaith: That wee muſt commend thoſe things which are reaſonable well done. But they ſhall perhaps ſay, If they were tollerable we ſhould commend them: But they are too ſtrange. I will not diſpute againſt ſuch for feare that I ſhould do nothing elſe but looſe my labour. What their drift or deſigne is I cannot tell. But it is to be admired, that ſo many other vnderſtanding Merchants cannot as well as they perceiue the faults & imperfections of theſe orders. They ſhall perhaps ſay out of their malice: that the other haue perceiued them as well as they, but would not finde fault with them,

and lay thereupon ſo much in the Company, as the Maſters of it muſt bring in, the Company hoping to get ſuch places, and to come to the handling or receit of the monies. But let vs baniſh out of our hearts all ſuch malitious and peſtiferous conceits which hinder all good affaires. Who is it (I pray you) amongſt vs that knoweth the heart of another? None ſurely, but onely the Almightie knoweth the heart of man, and the experience ſhall ſhew what their intentions haue beene. And this I dare aſſure you, that if theſe Articles be but well obſerued that the Company ſhall by the grace of God yeeld great profit, according to the calculations which haue beene made. You know that the Eaſt-India Company hath much enriched the participants of the ſame, notwithſtanding that many haue found fault with the orders and adminiſtration of it.
            But I will wiſh that if any one could propound any better order or directions for the good of the Company, that they would yet ſhew them to the States, and I make no queſtion or the Company will be very willing to embrace them whiles it is yet time.
            Therefore ſeeing that this Company is ſo neceſſarie and profitable, both for the State of theſe vnited Prouinces, and the particular good of the inhabitants, and eaſily to be erected and maintained, and that no exceptions can be taken againſt it, I will exhort euery one but eſpecially the Magiſtrates, and the richer ſort of the Commons, to lay great ſums of monies in this Company, hat they may bee preſidents to others. For there ought great Fleets to bee ſent into the Weſt-Indies: And it is apparant that how the Capitall of the Company

will bee the greater, the traffike will be ſurer, and yeeld more profite. Herewith ending, I will pray the Almightie, who is the onely fountaine of all goodneſſe that he will ſend his bleſſing to this Company, and that it may tend to the welfare of theſe vnited Prouinces, the weakning of our enemies, & eſpecially to the exaltion of his Holy Name, and the propagation of the Goſpell, that it may bee preached amongſt the blinde Indians which haue no knowledge of the right way to ſaluation.
            FINIS.
         
      
   