
      
         
            
            
            
            
            SIXE BOOKES OF
POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE,
WRITTEN IN LATINE
by Iuſtus Lipſius: which doe eſpecially concerne
Principalitie.
            Done into Engliſh by William Iones Gentleman.
            
               Omne opus difficile videtur antequam tentes, at nihil eſt quod
non aſſidua meditatio, facillimum reddat.
               
                  Vegetius.
               
            
            
               AT LONDON,
Printed by Richard Field for William Ponſonby.
1594.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
HIS SINGVLAR
GOOD LORD AND MAISTER, SIR
Iohn Puckering Knight, Lord keeper of the great ſeale
of England, and of her Maieſties moſt honorable
Priuie Counſell.
            
               MOST Honorable, all Eſtates
haue euer fauored
thoſe, who with their labour,
and induſtrie, and
the aduenture of their
liues, haue from other
coūtreys, brought thoſe
things, which haue bene of vſe, and for the
good, and profite, of the Common-wealth.
VVith like trauell, and paine, I haue transferred
from the ancient Grecians and Romains,
into England, the moſt precious of their treaſors.
And albeit the danger hath bene leſſened,
the ſame being firſt by LIPSIVS, ſet to
the viewe of all the world in Germanie: yet
haue I hazarded my credit (more deere then

life) in fetching them from thence. VVhich I
moſt humbly beſeech your good Lordſhip to
protect and to accept of them, as a pledge of
that loue, and moſt bounden dutie I do owe,
and will be alwayes moſt readie to performe
with my moſt humble ſeruice. And although
in regard of your Lordſhips wiſedome, theſe
treaſors may ſeeme (as they are in deed) but
borrowed: yet in comparing them together
with your own, your Lordſhip may the better
diſcerne, in the ballance of your Honourable
iudgement, and by the touchſtone of your experience,
which of them deſerue, the greateſt
price, and praiſe. For others, who are to reape
profit, & commoditie by them, they are in all
humbleneſſe to acknowledge the benefit, to
proceed from your Lordſhip, & to be thankfull
to your Honor therfore, for whom eſpecially
they were brought to light. For my ſelfe,
I wil euer pray, that your yeares may increaſe
your Honour, to the glorie of God, and the
good of her Maieſtie, and this Eſtate. At
Newington Buts the firſt of Ianuarie, 1594.
            
               Your good Lordships moſt
bounden ſeruant,
VVILLIAM IONES.
            
         
         
            
            To the courteous Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, I may well doubt how this my
firſt labour ſhall be accepted of, or gaine credit
with thee and I did long hang in ſuspence, whether
I ſhould as an abortiſe, burie it, or as a darling,
cheriſh it. The firſt ſure had beſt pleaſèd
me, if therein I ſhould not haue diſpleaſed others,
and bene commanded by the power they haue ouer me, and
perſwaded by their learned reaſons, not onely to nouriſh it, but
to bring it vp to full growth and ſtrength: aſſuring me, there
would be as much pleaſure, and profit taken therein in publicke,
as I had taken paines therewith in priuate. And although I
had at the beginning, great reaſons to diſſwade me from the enterpriſe
(as a matter ouer-difficult, the ſame hauing bene attempted
by two or three, and periſhed, with one, in the bud, with another
in the bloſſome, and with the third, being no ſooner ripe,
but foorthwith it was rotten.) Neuertheleſſe, I was ſtill, vnder
this aſſurance, prouoked to go forward, and did euery day, gather
more force, and in the end, by the warmth and heate, of a
fauourable ſunne, brought it to the best perfection I could, and
the change of the ſoile would giue me leaue. In which estate I do
freely offer it vnto thee: deſiring thee, not ſiniſterly to interpret,
if there be any thing not agreeing to thy minde, but friendly to amend,
that thou ſhalt find amiſſe. And before thou do pronoūce
full ſentence againſt me, I beſeech thee with a ſound iudgement to
enter into conſideration of the ſence, and ſubſtance of the author,
and not of euery particular word: (albeit euen therein likewiſe
(as neare as the matter would giue me leaue) I haue ſought to
ſatisfie thee.
            Touching the ſubstance of the booke, it contàineth matter of
pollicie, and eſpecially concerneth the eſtabliſhment of Principalitie.
It is deuided into ſixe ſeuerall bookes, in the foure former, he

ſheweth what the Prince ſhould be, what vertues he is eſpecially
to be endued withall, how he ſhould make choiſe of good Counſellers,
and officers: and to be ſhort, after what ſort he ſhould behaue,
and eſtabliſh him ſelfe in time of peace.
            The fifth booke ſetteth downe, in what maner he ſhould begin,
vndertake, and execute, foraine warre: how the ſame ſhould be
finiſhed, and peace eſtabliſhed thereby, which is the true ende of
warre. A worke ſo neceſſarie for Captains, and thoſe that ſerue
their prince in the field, that in many things it ſurpaſſeth all thoſe
diſcourſes of warre, I could yet come to the ſight of. In the ſixth
booke, he treateth of ciuill warre.
            Concerning the order I haue kept in this worke, I haue nothing
at all diſſented from the Author (though at the firſt blush
the contrarie may appeare.) For whereas he hath distinguiſhed
the ſentences, and it may ſeeme I haue not: yet are they (in my
opinion) as well ſeuered by this marke *, as if they were farther
diſtant the one from the other.
            Another thing (I feare) will be obiected againſt me, that I
haue not rightly pointed my diſtinctions. Whereunto I anſwer,
that if you looke into the Author, you ſhall find his meaning, and
my distinctions to agree. For albeit he hath ſet a periodes (.) in
the end of many ſentences, yet doth not the full ſence end there, but
ſtill hang, and continue, as Lipſius him ſelfe confeſſeth in theſe
words: Nec enim sinis ſemper ſententiae in fine clauſulae, ſed
pendet ea ſemper, & haeret. I haue followed theſe vſuall points:
(,) : (.)
            And whereas I was perſwaded by ſome, to leaue out the quotacion
of the ſeuerall Authors, and the notes of the margent; I agreed
not to their perſwaſion for two reſpects. The one, that therby
it might be thought, I had bene a corrupt, and faithleſſe tranſlator,
and that I durſt not ſet my worke to the touch. The other,
that the ſaid marginall notes, do giue great light to the worke, &
ſerue to explaine many matters therein: beſides they haue this
ſingularitie in them (which I haue not ſeene in any other) that
they do entertaine one another, as if they were a continued ſpeech:
which if you reade them by them ſelues, you ſhall ſoone finde out.
Moreouer, if any be pleaſed to confer, ſome one ſentence of mine,

or more, with the originall, by the quotacion of the Authors, the
ſame may be more eaſily found, and he the better ſatisfied, of my
paines, and diligence in this labour, or what fault I haue committed
therein.
            Laſtly, whereas I haue ſometimes changed the tenſe, otherwhiles
the perſon: I ſay, the diſcourſe could not elſe be well
knit together: and herein I haue eſpecially in the whole worke auoyded
the pluralitie of Gods (which all Chriſtians deteſt) and
the Author could not but mention, his ſentences being taken altogether
from prophane writers. And as concerning ſome thing left
out in the third Chapter of the ſecond Booke, it was a thing done
of ſet purpoſe; for ſome important cauſe, which I meane not here
to vtter.
            Thus I haue (gentle Reader) giuen thee ſome taſte of this
notable diſcourſe; which I deſire may be well diſgeſted by thee,
the which I do leaue to thy fauourable peruſing: yet before thou
enter any further therein, I pray thee with thy pen to correct thoſe
faults, which haue paſſed the preſſe, which by reaſon of my dayly
attendance at my Lords are grown to a greater number, then
either my deſire or the Printers was they ſhould. And
ſo I wiſh thee many happie, and proſperous
yeares.
            At my houſe at Newington Buts, the firſt
of Ianuarie. 1594.
            
               Thy friend to vſe,
VVilliam Iones.
            
         
         
            
            The Author his Epistle.
            
               
                  
                     EMPEROVR.
                     KINGS.
                     PRINCES.
                  
               
            
            
               THe charge you ſuſtaine is great, and glorious. What is
more magnificent amongſt men, then for one, to haue
authoritie ouer manie: to giue lawes, and commandements:
to gouerne the ſea, the land, peace, and warre?
This dignitie ſeemeth a certaine kind of diuinitie, and
ſo it is indeed, if it be exerciſed, for the profite, & good
of the Common wealth. But how hard a thing it is, both reaſon, and examples,
do teach vs. If we looke into reaſon: of what difficultie is it, for
ſo many heads to be brideled by one head, and that vniuerſall multitude,
vnquiet, diſunited, ſeditious, to be moderately brought vnder a
certaine common yoke of obedience? If we regard examples, how few
haue bene found, from the beginning of the world, who haue exerciſed
and diſcharged themſelues of this charge, with commendation? Surely
it is a thing of more importance, then the ignorant ſort do deeme, to
hold a direct courſe in this troubleſome ſea, and in the height of Fortune,
not to be carried away with the winds of immoderat libertie. How
manie vertues, are there required, by the which (as it were with Ankers)
this ſhip is held? How manifold wiſedome, whereby (as with a
helme) it is gouerned? So that I may moſt truely ſay, it is a hard thing
for man, to rule ouer man: neither is it poſſible to be brought to paſſe,
by the wit of one alone. Wherfore thoſe wiſe men are worthely praiſed,
who in former age, and at this day, haue had this care, to haue guided
kings, by the light of their wholſome counſels. For wherein could
they poſſibly do better ſeruice to mankind? To ſet down ſome precepts
concerning maners, or ſciences, deſerueth praiſe, and there is good vſe
thereof: and is it not a matter of more worth to do the like in a kingdom,
& Ciuill gouernement? when as by that, ſome one citizen only, is made
better, and more learned: by this, in one, all others. Surely it is euen ſo.
We that are commanded, are linked together as it were with a ſtraight
chaine, with him that commandeth. And as the mind in mans bodie,
cannot either be whole, or diſeaſed, but the functions thereof in like
maner, are either vigorous, or do languiſh: euen ſo is the Prince, in this

ſocietie. Doth he leade vs the way to vertue? we followe. To vice? we
encline thither. Liueth he an honeſt, and bleſſed life? we flouriſh. Is he
vnfortunate? we decline, or runne to ruine with him. And as the light
or darkneſſe in this world below proceedeth frō the ſunne: ſo the greater
part of good or euill in the ſubiects, is deriued from the prince. Ceſar
ſaid no leſſe ſtoutly,Lu
                     •
                  an. 5. then truly, that all do follow the affections of great 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Mankind 
                     〈◊〉
                   in a few. Therefore this is a notable reaſon, that to
deserue well of the Common-wealth, we ough
                  •
                to deſerue well of our
Prince▪ that is, we ought to guide, and direct him, to this marke of the
common profit. For (be not ye (ô princes) led away with error) this is
your end. You haue preheminence ouer men, but it is for the benefite
of men: neither are you onely, Lords, and Iudges of matters, but patrones,
and ſtewards.
            They are euill, and wicked Princes, who in a kingdome, thinke vpon
nothing elſe, but the commandement they haue, being arrogant, and
idle, and who do imagine, they are not giuen to their ſubiects, but their
ſubiects to them. For like as the ſtarres receiue light, yet for the vſe of
mortal men: ſo do you your dignities, but yet tied to a charge & office.
The Common-wealth by God, and men, is deliuered into your boſome:
yea it is in deed laide in your boſome, but to th'end it may be cheriſhed.
O rightly is that Prince iuſt, & lawful, who in his greateſt felicitie,
had not rather heare men ſay, that he is mightie, then that he is good:
and who knoweth, how to conioyne two moſt diuerſe things, Modeſtie,
and Prudence together. Who when he walketh abroad, men do ſtriue to
behold, as it were ſome fauourable, and beneficiall godhead: and being
indifferent betweene loue, and aw, and changing oft their iudgements,
do doubt, whether they ſhould ſalute him as their Lord, or as their father.
Theſe are thoſe worthie things (ô Princes) which bring ſafetie, to
the which both thoſe of former age, & my ſelfe do call you. Giue vs the
hearing. Neither do you for this reaſon deſpiſe our counſels, becauſe
you are aboue our commandements. For as it is a moſt happie thing in
a prince, not to be compelled. So is it a miſerable thing in him, not to
be perſwaded. I confeſſe, ye haue thoſe about you, that do dayly yeeld
you, plentie of their counſell: but would to God they gaue alwayes
faithfull and good counſell. Alphonſus that worthie amongſt kings, being
asked, who were the beſt Counſellers? anſwered the dead; vnderſtanding
thereby good authors, and ſuch other monuments, who neither
flattering at all, nor keeping any thing ſecret, do lay open the pure
and ſimple troth. The which that it may ſticke faſt in your memories: &
that you may either knowe by my meanes, or acknowledge with me,
thoſe things that are of beſt worth, I do from the bottome of my heart
pray vnto thee, who art the eternall veriue. Fare ye well.
            
               
                  
                     EMPEROVR.
                     KINGS.
                     PRINCES.
                  
                And God graunt you may raigne manie yeares, proſperouſly.
         
         
            
            AN ALPHABET OF THE
authors contained in this worke.
            
               GEntle Reader, if thou pleaſe, thou mayeſt with
one view, behold thoſe Authors, from whom
this diſcourſe is gathered. Amongſt the which
Cornelius Tacitus hath the preheminence, being
recited extraordinarily, becauſe he alone
affoordeth more matter, then all the reſt. The
reaſon hereof conſiſteth in the wiſedome of the man, both becauſe
he is very ſententious, as likewiſe becauſe Lipſius had bene very
conuerſant with him: by which meanes he offred him ſelfe without
call. Others are in two rankes. Thoſe whoſe words Lypſius
vſeth more often, are
            
               Amongeſt the Romanes. Amongst the Graecians.
               C. Saluſtius.
               T. Liuius.
               Annaeus Seneca.
               M. Cicero.
               Q. Curtius.
               C. Plinius Iunior.
               
                  Fl Vegetius. But in
matter of warre.
               Ariſtoteles.
               Thucydides.
               Plato.
               Xenophon.
            
            
               Thoſe whoſe authoritie he vſeth more
ſparingly: are
Amongst the Romans.
               Acta Apoſtolorū.
               Adagia.
               Aemilius Probus.
               Afranius.
               Agellius.
               Ambroſius.
               Ammianus Marcellinus.
               Apuleius.
               Attius.
               Auguſtinus.
               Auſonius.
               Bernardus.
               Boethius.
               Coecilius.
               Coelius ad Cicero:
               Caeſar.
               Capitolinus.
               Caſſiodorus.
               Cato Cenſorinus.
               Claudianus.
               Columella.
               Cornel. Nepos.
               Cyprianus.
               
                  
Eccleſiaſticus.
               Eccleſiaſt. hiſtoria.
               Egeſippus.
               Feſtus Pompeyus.
               Florus.
               Frontinus.
               D. Gregorius.
               Guil. Neubrigenſis.
               Horatius.
               Ieremias.
               Iſidorus.
               Iuſtinus.
               Iuuenalis.
               Lactantius.
               Lampridius.
               Lucanus.
               Lucretius.
               Manilius.
               Martialis.
               Origenes.
               Ouidius.
               Pacuuius.
               D. Paulus.
               Perſius.
               Petronius.
               Plautus.
               Plinius Senior.
               Porcius Latro.
               Propertius.
               Prouerb. Salomonis
               Publius Mimus.
               Quinctilianus.
               Seneca Tragicus.
               Silius Italicus.
               Statius.
               Suetonius.
               Terentius.
               Tibullus.
               Titinnius.
               Valerius Flaccus.
               Valerius Maximus
               Varro.
               Velleius.
               Virgilius.
               Vlpianus.
               Vopiſcus.
               Vulcatius.
            
            
               Amongst the Grecians.
               Adagia Graecorū.
               Aeſchylus.
               Appianus.
               Archilochus.
               Ariſtophanes.
               Baſilius.
               Callimachus.
               Democritus.
               Demoſthenes.
               Dio Caſſius.
               Diogenes Laertius.
               Diodorus Siculus.
               Diphilus.
               Epicharmus.
               Euripides.
               Euſtathius.
               Gregorius Nazianzenus.
               Herodotus.
               Heſiodus.
               Homerus.
               Iamblichus.
               Iſocrates.
               Lucianus.
               Menander.
               Mercurius Triſmegiſtus.
               Philo Iudaeus.
               Pindarus.
               Polybius.
               Serenus.
               Sophocles.
               Stobaeus.
               Syneſius.
               Theocritus.
               Theognis.
            
         
         
            
            Faults eſcaped in the printing.
            Fol. 10. line 16. for into, reade, vnto.
            Fol. 14 line 3. in the margent, for be, reade by.
            Fol. 19. line 7. in the margent, are is wanting.
            Fol. 29. line 11. in ſtead of for, reade of.
            Fol. 48. line 13. for Sepidus reade Lepidus.
            
            Fol. eod. line 27. and 32. for ſhadowes, reade ſhallowes.
            Fol. 65. line 14. for abroad, reade abroach.
            Fol. 68. line 4. put a coma after vſe.
            Fol. 75. line 34. for yet, reade yea.
            Fol. 80. line 7. for like, reade likewiſe.
            Fol. 83 line 3. for at, reade to.
            Fol. 100. line 6. for netles, reade nets.
            Fol. 101. line 10. for note, reade not.
            Fol. 102. line 3. for aſſuring, reade cenſuring.
            Fol. 140. line 20. for factes, reade faſts.
            Fol. 154 line 16. for experience, reade expence.
            Fol. 156. line 9. for it was ſpoken, reade it was not ſpoken.
            Fol. 165. line 4. for moode, reade moone.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF
POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE,
WRITTEN IN LATINE
BY IVSTVS LIPSIVS.
            
               CHAPTER I.
               
                  The ſcope of the author, with the argument of his diſcourſe.
The definition of ciuill life. The praiſe of vertue in general.
               
               
                  I Intend to inſtruct thee, how thou mayſt ſafely
ſet forward in the way of Ciuill life, and finiſh
thy iourney without wandering, & that,
not by my owne ſayings, but by the precepts
of ancient authors, deliuered alſo in their own
wordes.
               O great God be thou my guide, and ſo direct my hand, and
mind, that I may vnderſtand, diſcerne, and ſet forth to view,
that which ſhall be wholſome, and profitable.
               I define Ciuill life,
                  The definition of ciuill life. 
                  to be that which we leade in the ſocietie of
men, one with another, to mutuall commoditie and profit, and common
vſe of all.
                  Two things are neceſſarie thervnto, Prudence and Vertue, I aſſigne vnto it two guides, Prudence, and Vertue:
in the firſt I follow the iudgement of manie, in the other
particularly mine owne: becauſe I can not be induced to beleeue,
anie can poſſibly be a good Citizen, except likewiſe he
be an honeſt man. Without vertue, ſuch wiſedome ſhould rather
be ſubtill craft, and malice, and any other thing rather
then prudence. And albeit, that by the ſterne thereof properly,
ciuill life be gouerned, yet is it not without the vſe, and aide,
of the other loadſtone. I will therefore firſt intreate of vertue,
and that by right,Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  being the proper good appertaining to man.
                  Vertue is onely proper vnto mā
                   All

other humane things are not durable;Shee Sence p. 89. 
                  for the glorie of beautie,
                  Saluſt Ca
                        •
                     i.
                  and riches is fraile, and ſlightly 
                        •
                     adeth away, but vertue euer ſhineth,
and is eternall:*
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . 89 
                  which thing is onely immortallin a mortall
m
                        •
                     n.
               
               
                  Wherefore,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   all that men till the ground for,Saluſt Cati. all that they haz
                     •
                  rd
their liues for by sea, all that they build for, of right doth

                     〈…〉
                  :
                     
                        •
                     laut. Am. 
                  for ſhe in her ſelfe conta
                     •
                  neth all things,

                     〈…〉
                   that is 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,She 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   nothing.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  She is no ſtranger vnto
vs, but offreth her ſelfe of her owne accord, lightening the
vnderſtanding of all 
                     〈…〉
                   her ſelfe known
                     ••
                   to thoſe, who

                     〈◊〉
                   not after her.Idem C
                        •
                     nſ. ad Polyb. 
                  She is eaſie to be met with, ſhe is milde and
tractable, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   her ſelfe vnto all men, neuer bisdaining any

                     〈…〉
                   worthy of her. Let vs then runne
vnto her as to a ſanctuarie, ſith that ſhe onely is quiet, ſafe and
aſſured, and vnder her owne command,She fflicted a ſanctuarie to the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and all other things beſides,Corniſic. ad Her
                        ••
                     .
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto fortune, who beareth rule ouer them,*Sen. ep. 113. miſeries, calamities,
and reproaches, hauing no other power againſt vertue, then
a litle cloude againſt the ſunne.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Of Pietie, the firſt part of vertue. The definition of pietie,
and the deuiſion thereof, into beleefe, and worſhip. And
firſt of beleefe.
               
               
                  I 
                  Deuide vertue into two branches, Pietie, and
goodneſſe,The deuiſion of vertue. What pietie is. Two principall partes thereof, Beleefe and worſhip. Pietie is a right beleefe concerning God,
and the true worſhip of him: For of theſe two Pietie
conſiſteth, and without the either of them
ſhe is lame, and vnperfect. We ought then before
all things to labor (as much as in vs lyeth)
to attaine to the knowledge of this ſupreme godhead, & when
we vnderſtand what it is, to worſhip, & adore it religiouſly,
and purely. The true light of both is to be ſeene in holy Scriptures,
albeit certaine ſparkles, lye ſcattered here and there in
prophane authors, which I will gather together; concerning
beleefe theſe which follow;
                  Beleefe is the beginning of pietie. 
                  And this beleefe is moſt neceſſary,
                  Aug. lib. 1. de lib. arbi
                        •
                     .
                  for to deeme well of God is the beginning of Pietie. Let this then

be reſolued, and ſet downe as a principle, that there is one God,Tac. 5. Hist. Ibid.
who ruleth,That there is one God. That he is eternall. and gouerneth all things, (ſo I terme; that ſoueraigne,
and eternall, immutable & immortall eſſence, the which partly I
will deſcribe, (for who can define that which is infinite) to
be A certaine ſpirit,Cic. 1. T
                        •
                     ſc. or intelligence,The deſcription of God. which is free and in the greateſt
libertie, ſeparate from all mortall and elementarie frame, and
compoſition, giuing all things life and mouing, being not moued by
any, but of it ſelfe in continuall motion.It is a dāgerous thing ouer curiously to ſearch what God is. 
                  I will not adde any thing
hereto, for euen certaine things though true, are not vttered of
God without danger:*C
                        •
                     pri in Symb. Aug. lib. 1. de Ord. whom we ſeeme beſt to know, when we confeſſe
him to be incomprehenſible. Yet it ſhall be lawfull for me, to
preſent to your loue, and admiration, his Effects, and Affects,
(if I may be permitted to vſe thoſe termes.) He is moſt great,
his power is not to be meaſured,Ou
                        •
                      8. Met. neither hath it any end,The power of God. and whatſoeuer
his will leadeth him vnto, is a ſoone accōpliſhed & brought
to paſſe. He is moſt iuſt, he neither in any 
                     〈◊〉
                   nor place, doth any
wrong or iniurie,Plato in Theae
                        •
                     eto. Ouid 13. Met. but is euen as much as may be,His iuſtice. moſt righteous. He
beholdeth mortall things with an vpright and iuſt eye: He conſidereth,
and iudgeth of the workes, the counſels, and deſſeignments
of men: Nothing is hid from him,Sen. epi. 84. he is preſent in our
minds, and ſtill accompanieth vs in the midſt of our ſecret thoughts
and cogitations.*His iudgement and preſence euerie where. It is he ſurely who is an eare, and eye witneſſe, of
thoſe things we do,*Plaut. Cap. Boeth. de Conſ. who becauſe he alone ſeeth all things, we may
rightly call him the very Sunne or eye of the world. Neither is he
onely a beholder of that we do, but a rewarding, & reuenging
iudge likewiſe,
                  His ouerſight of our actions, and his diſtribution of reward and puniſhment. and this I hold for an vndoubted troth, that the
diuine godhead doth take a view of all our actions,Salust ad Caeſar. and doth not
ſlightly paſſe ouer our good or euill deedes, but agreeable to their
different nature and qualitie, recompenceth the good and puniſheth
the bad.Ho
                        •
                     . 3. Od. 
                  It is he which gouerneth all things, the maſſie, and immoueable
earth,The vniuerſalitie of his gouernement. which tempereth the windie and tempeſtuous ſea,
and his power deſcendeth euen vnto hell:*Ouid. 1. de. Arte. neither doth he like a
ſluggard ſleepe and take reſt,*Cic. in Somnio. but he is alwayes watchful, & with
a perfect ſenſe and memory, ruleth and gouerneth all things. It is
not onely requiſite for vs, to know theſe things, but moſt neceſſarie,
for indeed the firſt cauſe of the tranſgreſſions of miſerable
mortall men,Silius. 4. is the ignorance of the nature of God.That the ignorance of these things 
                        〈◊〉
                      the cauſe of wickedneſſe. 
                  Which neuertheleſſe

we muſt ſeeke after with modeſtie, this ſaying being
likewiſe true, that it is more holy and reuerent to beleeue the
wonderfull workes of God,Tac. in Ger. then curiouſly to enquire why he hath
done them.Yet many things are rather to be belecued 
                        〈◊〉
                      God, 
                        〈…〉
                      to be enquired after.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Of the worſhip and ſeruice of God, the ſecond member of Pietie.
The definition thereof. That this worſhip is two fold. Many inſtructions
concerning religion.
               
               
                  I Proceed to intreat of the ſeruice of God,What worſhip is. which
is no other thing then the worſhip of the knowne
godhead, conſiſting in the obſeruation of certaine
lawes and ceremonies. For God requireth to be
worſhipped of vs, and to that end man is borne.
This is done by double ſeruice,That it is twofold, internall, and externall. 
                  internall, and externall.
The firſt is that, which conceaueth in the hart, and vttereth
from the hart; praiers, praiſe, and thankſgiuing vnto
God: The latter is that, which expreſſeth the ſame things, but
by certaine rites and geſtures. Theſe two we do commonly
call religion, and that not vnfitly: concerning the which, receaue
ſome ſound and wholeſome leſſons, euen from thoſe,
who otherwiſe were ignorant themſelues of the true knowledge
of God.Religiō is a powerfull thing. It is deere and precious to all men. Religion hath great power ouer the mindes of
men, and our life is eſtabliſhed and aſſured thereby.*Plin lib. 14. Nat. hiſt. Cic. 5. in ver. 
                  We are all
forciblie affected to religion, and ſuch as we haue receiued it from
our fathers, we do beleeue, we ought to keepe and obſerue it inuiolablie.
                  It is not altered on the ſudden.
Wherefore, whatſoeuer religion we are brought vp in,
we are hardly induced to change it,Philo Iud. ad Caium. becauſe euery man his religion
ſeemeth beſt vnto himſelfe, iudging thereof not according to
reaſon, but by affection.
                  It is highly to be eſteemed, & In either ſtate of life, We ought then diligently to obſerue it,
as well publikely as priuatly,Liu lib. 5. for all things fall out for the beſt to
them which worſhip God aright, and croſſe and contrarie to them
which contemne his ſeruice. Wherefore we ought to haue great
care and regard thereof in either ſtate of life,It is highly to be eſteemed, & In either ſtate of life, and to take heed,
leaſt holy rites and ceremonies accuſtomed in aduerſitie,
                  Tacit. 11. Annal. 
                  be not left

off and neglected in proſperitie.
                  But without ſuperſtition. But we ought ſtill to vſe a mean,
leaſt the people fall to ſuperſtition, which is an vtter enemie to religion.
                  Idē. 5. Hiſt.
Wherevnto (being enclined by default of nature) we are
the rather drawne,Liu. lib. 4. by thoſe,To the which we are either either endined, or forolbly drawnd. Being an an instrununt to 
                        〈◊〉
                      with Though it torment them that 
                        〈…〉
                      being the 
                        〈…〉
                     . We ought to 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  to whom it bringeth profit and commoditie.
Neither doe great ones hinder this, becauſe they are
certainly perſuaded,Curt. lib. 4. 
                  nothing hath more force to range the multitude
in better order then ſuperſtition, which we ought to eſchew
and auoid,Cic. de 
                        •
                     in. 1. for after it hath once ceaſed 
                        •
                     n our harts, we are neuer
at reſt, this difference being betweene religion and ſuperſtition,Varro apud Aug. deci
                     
                        •••
                     . lib. 6. Apud Agel. lib. 4. cap. 9. Cic. de natu, d
                        •
                     or. 2.
that the religious perſon doth loue God, the ſuperſtitious dreadeth
him. This ſaying is well ſpoken, if it be well vnderſtood,
we ought to be zealouſlie, not ſuperſtitiouſly religious. Now in this
ſeruice of God it behooueth vs, to bend alwaies to that which
is internall, and to conſider that this ſeruice of him, ought to be
of the beſt ſort, moſt chaſt, moſt holy, to the end he may alwaies be
worſhipped with a pure, entire, and incorrupt hart and mouth.
                  Religion is inwardly to be diſgeſſed, & The mind to be adorned therewith. Notwithſtanding 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſort that ceremonies be not 
                        〈…〉
                      commaunded by lawes or 
                        〈◊〉
                      by 
                        〈◊〉
                      Religion 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Imprint
this golden ſentence in thy mind,Seneca. 
                  the beſt ſacrifice we can
offer to God is a pure hart. And yet we muſt not altogether
contemne externall things,Sen. apud Aug. li. 6. de ciuit. Ibid. although the moſt part of them (as
one will haue it) pertaine rather to custome, then to the ſubstance
of religion But a wiſe man will obſerue them as emoined and commaunded
by lawes (not as acceptable of themſelues to God) if they
be not manifeſtly wicked and impious: otherwiſe,Cic. de Di
                        •
                     . lib. 2. 
                  we ought to
yeeld to religion, and not ſtubbornly reiect the vſe and custome allowed
of in the common-wealth wherein we liue. Moreouer take
not too much delight in vaine words & friuolous queſtions,
but ſet forward in the way of well dooing, for the whole religion
of Christians, conſisteth in liuing without blame and reproch.
                  I. act. l. 5. c. 9.
Liſten vnto Moyſes the Aegyptian,Moysē apud Ruffin 
                        〈◊〉
                      Hiſt. l. 2. c. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                      de rep. in 
                        〈…〉
                     . who ſayth,But in liuing well. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  concerning a
man his faith, he giueth credit rather to his eyes then his cares. But
I will end this diſcourſe, for me thinks I heare Plato murmuring,
that theſe ſpeeches are of hard diſgestion and dangerous,
which is a moſt true ſaying in this our age.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Of Deſtinie, a dependent of Pietie. What it is, and whence it
proceedeth, what force and vſe it hath.
               
               
                  I 
                  Haue husbanded Pietie: now I purpoſe to ſet two
grafts which do ſpring vnder this tree, or rather
out of it,
                  Deſtinie taketh his beginning from beleefe. Deſtinie, and Conſcience. Of the which this
plainlie taketh his beginning from beleefe, that other
from Worſhip. For, if God gouerneth and guideth, hee
likewiſe foreſeeth, and decreeth of all things, and that as he is
eternall, from all eternitie eternallie, and this is Deſtinie,Liu. lib. 25. vnder
whoſe law the ſetled courſe of worldly affaires is ordered, which is
no other thing (as an auncient writer ſayth) then A ſentence
and decree.*What deſtiny is and as it were the voice of the diuine go ahead.*Aug. vide lib. 5. de 
                        〈◊〉
                      cap. 9. Stat. 1. The
                        •
                     . Ta
                        •
                     . 4. Annal. Theſe
holy words haue a mightie and immutable poiſe and waight, and
deſtinies do obey the heauenly voice.Who is the author thereof. 
                  And whereas, ſome doe affirme
that Deſtinie is in the things them clues, which neuertheleſſe
haue their influence from the Planets, and others do refer the
ſame vnto the beginning and linking together of naturall cauſes,
they do fouly erre, we deriue it from the principall cauſe, which
is God,
                  To wit, God him ſelfe. of whome all things do depend, and from whome are the
cauſes of cauſes.*Senec. 2. quaeſt. Nat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . lac. 1. A
                        •
                     gon. All things created march forward in their order,
and do hold a ſetled courſe proceeding from their firſt mouer.
This opinion liketh me (being conſtrued in this former godly
ſence) that all things are preordained by deſtinie, from the beginning:*The force therof in worldly matters.
                  And let them deccaue themſelues ſo long as they liſt,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. de Diuini. Curt. lib. 5.
who are perſuaded that worldly matters are turned about, & driuen
by chance, and vncertainly: as for me I beleeue that euerie
thing by an immutable law followes the order preſcribed, and eſtabliſhed
by an eternall appointment, conſtitution, and binding together
of hidden cauſes, long before preordained and decreed, to the
which all humane things are ſubiect.
                  Manil. 4. Deſtinies do gouerne the
world, and all things are tied to a certaine law: yea euen our actions,
and the circumſtances of them, that is, the time and the
means by which they are brought to paſſe.
                  Stat. 3. Theb. From the beginning
of the world, ſuch a day was ordained for ſuch a battell, and ſuch a

people borne to become ſoldiers, & to go to warre. Yea men themſelues
are liable herevnto, yet but in part (for the will of man
hath a preheminence) all mortall men are ſubiect vnto destiny,Mercur. Triſm. cap. 12. Paemad.
whether you regard their birth, or their continuall mutabilitie, ſo
that they cannot auoide or alter it by any aduiſe or helpe:
                  All pruden
                        •••
                      farre vnequa
                        ••
                      thereto. the
fatall diſpoſition of the diuine prouidence,Apul. Metam. 9. cannot by any prudent
counſell, or aduiſed remedie, be either ouerthrowne or reformed.
And is there any man that preſumeth ſo farre of himſelfe,Q
                        •
                     i. 9. Met. to
thinke he is able to bridle and ouer-rule the destinies? No,
                  Neither is 
                        〈…〉
                      any 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  not if
they were foretold him,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  for thoſe things which are preordained
by deſtinie, cannot be ſhunned, although a man be forewarned, according
to that Greeke ſaying;
                  Herodot. 9. A man cannot by any art,or driue
backe nor auoid that which is appointed to happen from aboue,
neither will he giue credit to him, that ſhould admoniſh him thereof
by likelihoods.Prodigious 
                        〈◊〉
                      auoyde
                        •
                     . 
                  No not if prodigious monſters ſhould forewarne
him.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 5. O how vaine are the aduiſes, and friuolous the woonders,
which ſeeke to ſtay the destinies! what are ye little gods, that
go about to warre againſt destinie?Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6. 
                  For, the inuiolable law of neceſſitie,
will neuer ſuffer nor permit the wiſest mind, to iudge aright
of theſe prodigious ſignes.The reaſon 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that God taketh a wa
                        •
                     , or 
                        〈◊〉
                      the vnderſtanding In 
                        〈◊〉
                      matter, that the cauſe therof ſeemeth to proceed frō our ſelues. He findeth deſtinie, and is found of it, who 
                        〈◊〉
                      from it. 
                  This ſouereigne and diuine eſſence
when it intendeth to change the fortune of men,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 2. 
                  doth then take away
their vnderſtanding, and corrupt their counſailes. We ſee it
chaunceth daylie, that who ſo the deſtinies do lay hold on,Animianus Mar. lib. 14 Vell. lib. 2. their
ſences doe become blockiſh and dull, which is the reaſon (a thing
greatly to be lamented) that what ſo commeth to paſſe, ſeemeth to be
allotted vnto vs deſeruedlie, and that the thing which happeneth
by chaunce, ſeemeth to proceed from our owne default. I adde further,
that of tentimes,
                     
                        •
                     iu. 8. thinking to ſlie from deſtinie, we meet with
it:*Sen. Trag. Oca
                        •
                     p. Lucan. 7. Many fearing deſtinie, do fall therein. The dread of future
danger, hath put many into mani
                     •
                  old perils.Neuertheleſſe we ought to row (as it were) in this barge, God himſelfe being the ſteers man. 
                  You will then ſay,
what courſe ſhall I take? Shall I do nothing but leaue all to
deſtinie? Poore foole, that is euen the readie path to lead thee
vnto it, and that likewiſe by deſtinie. Dooſt thou deſire to
lead a happie life and to attaine vnto felicitie? take pains and
labour,
                  Saluſt Cati. for the fauour and helpe of God is not purchaſed by womaniſh
vowes and ſupplications only,For the deſpiſeth the ſluggiſh but by watching and painful trauell,
all things ſucceed proſperouſly. Neither do thou hope or expect,

that fortune or victorie ſhall be throwne in thy lap from aboue,& Aydeth them that labour.
as thou ſittest idle.*Liu. 7. Graec. Ada
                        •
                     . Tac. 4. Hiſt. God ſelleth vs riches for the price of
labour. And in this ſence it is true, that God aideth the valiaunt
and couragious. The like reaſon holdeth in miſeries and calamities,
Thou ſayst God will remedie theſe things,Liu. 6. but he will not
diſcend from heauen for thee. It is to be required that he giue vnto
thee an vnderſtanding mind, that thou thy ſelfe mayſt take order
with them.VVhat profit 
                        〈…〉
                      knowledge of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . The cheefeſt is 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  I will ſpeake no more of this great deapth, which a

                        〈◊〉
                      ought to attempt and trie, but not wade too farre therein.
What profit reapeſt thou by this diſcourſe? Surely this,
that thereby thou maiſt become truly religious, and follow
deſtinie, that is to ſay God. For what is the part of an honeſt
man, but to obey deſtinie?*Sen. de ariſeth vnto vs bythe. li. 2. in ord. Peri. We muſt of neceſſitie ſuffer that which
God ſendeth, and couragiouſlie that which commeth from our enemies.*Sen. Ep. 108
The beſt is, pattently to endure, that we cannot better nor
amend, and to follow God without grudging, by whoſe appointment
all things do happen. He is no good ſoldier that marcheth vnwillingly
after his captaine.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of Conſcience, another ornament of Pietie. The definition and diuiſion
the reof. The trouble and torment of a wicked, and peace
and ioy of a good conſcience.
               
               
                  
                     NOw Conſcience (as I ſayd) is another ofſpring
of pietie,
                  Conſcience taketh her beginning from Pietie, & 
                  and it is euident that ſhe taketh her
beginning from the roote of the worſhip of
God. For where the ſeruice of God is of force
and flouriſheth, ſuch plight is ſhe in; where it
waxeth withered, and languiſheth, ſuch is her
eſtate likewiſe.
                  You ſhall hardly find a man of good cōſcience that hath no religion. The definition, & Diuiſion therof. 
                  And in whoſe ſoule ſoeuer there is no religion,
nor feare of God, there the ſeed of a good conſcience is verie
ſmall, and as it were choaked, and oppreſſed by bad ground.
Now Conſcience is a remaine, and ſparkle, of right and perfect reaſon
in man, iudging and manifeſting good or euill deeds. For which
cauſe it conſiſteth of two partes, of approuing, and reprouing,
the one of good workes, the other of bad. Howbeit the force

thereof is more common, and ordinarie in the later, (as vices
in cur life, are moſt rife) which is the reaſon that it doth
ſtill (as it were) retaine the generall name of Conſcience. For
we commonly ſay,
                  Another definition more word. Conſcience is a pricking and ſorowfull remembrance,
to haue violated the diuine god nead, & not to haue
worſhipped, and ſerued it as we ought.She is deepely rooted in vs. 
                  And this feeling (or
ſenſe) being rooted, and fixed in man, laſteth while he liueth,
and is not extinguiſhed neither by force, nor fraud, we haue
receiued this conſcience of God,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . pro Clu. which cannot be taken from vs.
And this profit we reape thereby at is a correctreſſe of our affections,Origenes.
and ſchoole miſtreſſe of our ſoule. A ſcourge after ſin,
                  Being auaileable to man againſt ſinne.
                  becauſe the enormitie thereof is manifeſt ſo ſoone as it is committed.
                  Taci. 4. An.
                  A bridle before ſinne,
                  Sen. Ep. 88. Cic. pro M
                        •
                     l. becauſe the deteſtation therof, which
nature hath condemned, is inherent in vs.She is ſharpe and forcible. 
                  And ſurely, the power
thereof is great in both kinds, to the end that they which
are not faulty, might be without feare, and they which haue offended,
might imagine their puniſhment to be alwayes in their
ſight.Bi
                        ••
                      apud Stob. Iſod. Solil
                        •
                     . lib 2. Sen. Ep. 43. Epicurus apud. Sen. epist. 88. I
                        •
                     uenalis. Saluſt. ad Caeſar. Sen. Ep. 43. 
                  So that a good conſcience neuer dreadeth,A good conſcience is a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & 
                        〈◊〉
                      conſcience, a perpetuall 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  nay rather it is
alwayes ioyfull: Doeſt thou deſire neuer to be ſad nor penſiue?
leade an honeſt life. But an euill conſcience is euer troubled, and
tormented, euen in ſolitarineſſe: for, it may ſo happen, that a wicked
liuer may hide him ſelfe, yet ſhal he ſtill doubt of him ſelfe.
But how can he be vnſeene? ſith he alwayes beareth his witneſſe
in his breaſt, which neither deceiueth, nor is deceiued:
Hold this for firme: Euery man his ſoule giueth him hope according
to his conſcience.*It is a true and vncorrupt witneſſe, & A dayly tormēt or which is neuer wearie of executing. O miſerable wretch that thou art, if
thou makest no account of this witneſſe, nay rather of this executioner
which burneth, which beateth, which tormenteth,
and that, with ſo much the more paine, that he yet ſuffereth
thee to liue. This Greeke ſaying is true, the conſcience is a
ſcourge to the ſoule, and that with a continuall and ſecret
ſtroke,
                  Saluſt. Cati. for a corrupt and impure ſoule, contemned of the world,
and hated of God, cannot be at reſt neither waking nor ſleeping,
in ſuch wiſe doth the conſcience eat & conſume an vnquiet mind.
Yet ſo we liue at this day,
                  Plin. l. 3. ep. Ci
                        •
                     . ad At. lib. 13. 
                  that verie many feare their credit
and good name,VVho many ſtād in dread of. But an honeſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      neuer feareth it. but very few their conſcience. But an honeſt
man his life is otherwiſe, carying this reſolution, not to decline

one iot from a good conſcience, euen vntill death: and ſuch
a courſe oughteſt thou to take, and to aſſure thy ſelfe of this
that nothing can be imagined more happie,Aug. 21. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and to be deſired, then
an vntroubled and quiet conſcience.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Of goodneſſe, another member of Pietie. What goodneſſe in this
place is. Certaine generall and breefe precepts to attaine
therevnto.
               
               
                  ANother branch of vertue remaineth, I mean
Goodneſſe, which neuertheleſſe I will lightly
plaine ouer, becauſe it properly hath no
place in this our ciuile building, but belongeth
to morall worke. Neither do I here vnderſtand
it to be any thing elſe, then an vpright
life,
                  What goodneſſe is. 
                  as well in the cariage of our ſelues, as in all our actions
ruled by honeſtie. Yet may I not ouerſlip it, to the end you
may know how neceſſarie it is,That it accompanieth Pietie. If it be true being faſtened into Pietie, or
rather ioined into it. Without good demeanour, Pietie is not
only vaine, whatſoeuer ſhew you make in countenaunce, in
word, in zeale, or deuotion, but as it were nothing at al, like
vnto the apples which grow in Iudaea, which are no ſooner
touched, but they conſume into vapour and ſmoke: euen
ſuch is lippe Pietie, without the vitall iuice of deeds. If thou
loue Pietie, thou oughteſt then by right to loue and deſire to
be of a good conuerſation, and that rather in effect then appearance,
in good earneſt then for a ſhew,Sal. in Cati. Vell
                        •
                     ius li. 2 Striue to be good indeed,Inward goodneſſe is only to be accounted of, & Falſe and fayned Pietie to be reiected.
                  and not to ſeeme ſo, and with that worthie Cato: Neuer
do well to the end thou maist be ſeene of others.*Cicero. Tac. 4. Hiſt. A good conſcience
is a ſufficient praiſe and reward of vertue. Make not thou
vp the number amongst ſinguler men, rather then amongst good
men:
                  Saluſt Cati not amongſt thoſe, whom ambition hath made diſſemblers,
who carrie faire countenances and falſe harts.
                  We ought not ouermuch to eſteeme riches, Why carkeſt
and careſt thou ſo much for riches?Apul. in Apolog. 1. Vſe fortune as a garment,
which thou rather deſireſt to be made fit then vnſeemely,
and ouerwide.Nor ouerche
                     
                        •
                     iſh our bodie. Why ſetteſt thou thy mind ſo much to trim

vp thy body?Sen. Epist. 
                  Who ſo pampereth his body with ouer much delicacie,
maketh ſmall account of honeſtie. Seeke thou thine owne
praiſe in thy ſelf by a true and inward vertue, not grounding
thy ſelfe vpon the ſhew of fraile and vaine things. Be thou moderate
in thy apparell and courteous in thy ſpeech.*Ta
                        •
                     . An. 15 In Agric. Sal in Frag. Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  Of an honest
countenaunce and modeſt ſpirit.*There ought to be 
                        〈…〉
                      kind of b
                        •
                     ſhfulneſſe, & Conſtancie. The mind eſpecially is to be ado
                        •
                     ned. Which 
                        〈◊〉
                      a cheefe Lord. Which is eternall. 
                  Contemning riches, firme and
conſtant in the truth, and reſolute againſt feare, eſpecially carefull
to adorne the mind,Sal. I
                        •
                     gurt. which is the guide, and Emperour of
the life of mortall men, the ruler of mākind, who bringeth to paſſe,
and poſſeſſeth all things, & is neuer in ſubiection: & conſider, that
the faireſt fauour,
                  Indidem. 
                  greateſt riches, ſtrongeſt body, and al ſuch like
things do ſuddenly periſh,
                  In lidem. 
                  but worthie deeds of the mind like vnto
the ſoule, are alwaies immortall.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Of Prudence, another guide of ciuile life: How neceſſarie it is.
The definition thereof, and the expoſition of the ſame. The
parts and profit thereof.
               
               
                  YOu haue alredie Vertue as one guide of your
life,Prudence guideth Vertue it ſelfe. wherevnto I will adde another which I
called Prudence. The which if you thorowly
conſider, you ſhall find it not onely ruleth
your ſelf, but vertue likewiſe, yea it directeth
it. For what vertue can be without Prudēce?
Plato ſayth trulie,In Men
                        •
                     ne. 
                  Prudence marcheth before and ſheweth the
way of well doing.
                  The which without it is maymed and lame. And another Philoſopher affirmeth, that it
is impoſſible truly to attaine to the estimation of an honeſt man,
                  Arist. 6. Ethic. cap. 5.
                  without Prudence. The reaſon hereof is, that al vertue conſiſteth
in Election, and meanes to bring things to paſſe, which
we cannot purchaſe without prudence: therfore without it
vertue is not obtained And like as the carpententers worke
cannot wel go forward without the plūmet & the ſquare, ſo
can we not in like maner enterpriſe any thing, without this
guiding rule,The definition thereof. The dex
                        •
                     eritie which I define to be an vnderſtanding & 
                        〈◊〉
                     
of thoſe things which we ought either to deſire or refuſe, in
publike, & in priuat. I termed it vnderſtanding, becauſe it ſeeth

al things,Diſcretion thereof. & therefore is ſitly called the eye of the ſoule.
                  Arist. & Iamb. I added
this word diſcretiō, becauſe with a ſound iudgemēt it maketh
choiſe and ſeuereth honeſt things, from vnworthie and diſhoneſt,
                  Tac. 4. An.
                  things profitable, frō thoſe that are hurtfull. I interlaced theſe
tearms in publike, and in priuate, in regard that there are as it
were two kinds or ſorts therof, Domeſticall, & Ciuile. Of the
which,It is two fold, for it handleth matter, at home & abroad the firſt is profitable for it ſelfe, the latter for others,
We repute them to be prudent, vvho are able to diſcerne what
is auaileable particularly for themſelues, and generallie for all.*Ariſt. 4. Ethic. cap. 5. Plato Alc. 2
                  We tearme him diſcreet, who is of abilitie and power by aduiſed
counſel to do good to himſelfe and the common wealth.
                  It is the directreſſe and rule of our life. For
which cauſe the vſe therof is imploied about many matters,
and he ſayd not amiſſe, who named Prudence, the art of liuing
wel,
                  Ci. 5. de Fin. Auctor libri de 4. virtutibus. 
                  as Phiſicke the art of healing.
                  Idem. For it is Prudence that
doth diſpoſe of things preſent,
                  Her offices. 
                  foreſee things to come, and call to
memorie things paſt, who doth not deceaue, nor can be deceaued,
vnto whom all things are ſubiectHer power. 
                  All things yeeld obedience
vnto Prudence, euen Fortune her ſelfe: neither is it ſaid without
cauſe,
                  Menander. 
                  A wiſe man frameth his owne fortune:
                  Plau Trin. Soph. Antig. Sal. ad Caeſ. rightlie did
the tragicall poet affirme that Prudence holdeth the ſupremacie
in felicitie. Contrarilie, miſerable and wretched follie, doth
often ouerthrow herſelfe and others.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  That vſe and memorie engender Prudence. Their definitions.
The force and certaintie of experience preferred. The rareneſſe
and difficultie to attaine therevnto ſhewed.
               
               
                  
                     PRudence hath two parents, Vſe, and Memory
of things.
                  Two things engender Prudence: Experience & Memorie. For I denie that, that which an
ancient poet hath writ (Vſe begot me,
                  Afraenius▪
                   
                  and
Memorie my mother brought me forth) ought
to be attributed to Wiſedome, being more
fitly applied vnto Prudence. By vſe I vnderſtand,
The knowledge of worldly matters which we haue either
ſeene or had the handlnig of. By memorie, the like knowledge
of thoſe things,
                  Experience is the moſt certaine inſtructor. 
                  we haue eyther heard or read. Vſe is more ſure

then the other, and therefore may rightly be in ſtead of a
father. For it inſtructeth vs, by our own not by other mens
harmes, by examples neere at hand not farre diſtant: it is
preſent, aſſiſteth, and beareth ſway, in the ſucceſſe of many
things;Plin. lib. 26. Idē lib. 17. wherefore it is truly written, Vſe is a perfect teacher
of all things:*It far excelleth all other maiſters. 
                  and we giue beſt credit to things tryed by experience.
Nay further,Cic. de Orat. 
                  vſe ſurpaſſeth the rules and precepts of all
teachers. And who ſo hath much experience may wel brag,It diſcerneth good & euill.
                  that he hath particular knowledge of good and euill.
                  Hom. Od. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Manilius. This is
profitable, (or rather neceſſarie) for euerie art, for by often,
                  It inuented all artes. 
                  &


much vſe, experience frameth arte, examples pointing out the
way: and principally it conduceth vnto Ciuill pollicie,And perfected polit
                        •
                     ck 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  and
who ſoeuer will be reputed skilfull in Ciuill gouernement,
                  Ariſto. Eth. 10. cap. vlt. 
                  he ſhal
find that he had need of experience. In which neuertheleſſe this
euil happeneth that it is not learned by precepts, but taught
by time.
                  Cic. 2. de Or. For as the Poet ſayth,This diſcōmodity is yet therin, that it is attained vnto verie late, & doth properly belōg vnto old men. 
                  Olde age bringeth experience.
Whereupon this prouerbe is ſprong,Oui. 6. Met. 
                  Wiſeaome belongeth to
old men.
                  Solon. And wiſe Solon ſaid, by learning dayly, he poſtea on to
old age.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The fruite that proceedeth of the memorie of things, or
of a hiſtorie. That this way is very eaſie, not onely to
attaine vnto prudence, but to goodneſſe likewiſe.
               
               
                  AS concerning Memorie,
                  The properties of memorie. another parent of
prudence, I do not onely equall it with vſe,
but preferre the ſame in certaine things before
it. She is more familiar and eaſie, extendeth
her bounds further, and bringeth
more things that are profitable both to prudence,
and beſides to more perſons,The readineſſe, and often vſe thereof. then vſe doth. Shee agreeth
with all men, and fitteth all times, and ſeaſons. And
whereas the iourney we make by our owne experience, is
long, and dangerous, this way is more ſafe, and aſſured, &
therefore more plaine and beaten:Tac. 4. Annal. and they are not fewe in
number, who are inſtructed by the euents and examples of others,

that is by hiſtorie,
                  Hiſtories doe giue her life, which is no other thing, then the ſoule
and life of memory. For all examples ſhould be obſcured with
darkeneſſe,
                  Cic. 2. de Or. Idem pro Ardna. Di
                        •
                     dor. Sic. 1. Pabl. or. Cic. 2. de Or. 
                  if the light of learned authors did not cauſe thē ſhine.
This is ſhee who is the keeper,
                  By her vertue, and vice haue their reward. She inſtructeth vs in print how to l
                        •
                     ue, 
                  and preſeruer of the vertue of
worthie perſonages, a witneſſe of the wretched actes of wicked
men, a benefactreſſe to all mankind. She is the light of truth, the
miſtreſſe of life, yea the true Ladie thereof. For in her, as in a
glaſſe,Plut in Timoleon. Liu. 1. thou mayeſt, adorne and frame thy life by the vertues of
other men: wherein this thing is of eſpeciall moment and profit,
that thou mayeſt therein euidently behold, all maner of inſtructions
and examples,
                  and 
                  to traine thee vp to benefit thy ſelfe, and the
eſtate thou liueſt in, and to teach thee, that thou oughteſt to auoyd,
that which is diſhoneſt either to be begunne or ended. In
which regard,Directeth thoſe that haue publike authoritie. it is moſt neceſſarie in this part of Ciuill life,
neither did Polybius without good cauſe affirme,Lib. 1. 
                  hiſtories to
be the trueſt doctrine, to practiſe vs in the managing of Ciuill
affaires. And moſt neceſſarie they are in matter of publicke
counſell,In conſultation ſhe holdeth the chiefeſt place. 
                  the memorie of things paſt being moſt profitable, in common
conſultations: which was the cauſe, why the Emperour
Alexander,
                  Ariſt. 1. the. cap. 5. 
                  did admit learned men, Lamprit. in Alex. to his counſels of peace
and warre, and eſpecially thoſe, who had knowledge and vnderſtanding
in hiſtories.
                  The beſt counſellers are the dead that is, approue 
                        •
                     authors, which are without diſſimulatiō
                   And another king ſaid, the beſt counſellers
were the dead,
                  Alphonſu
                        •
                      Siciliae. meaning thereby the bookes, and treaties
of hiſtories.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  A briefe addition concerning doctrine, how profitable it
is, both to vertue, and prudence. The right vſe thereof.
The end thereof, and meanes to attaine thereunto.
               
               
                  I 
                  Haue alreadie giuen you two guides, and
would leaue off theſe preambles, but that I
intend briefly to adde ſomwhat concerning
doctrine, as an aide and helpe to the guides
I gaue you.
                  Doctrine is a helpe to prudence. 
                  For it is manifeſt, doctrine is not
onely much auaileable vnto Prudence,Quinct. lib. 12. cap. 2. 
                  but to
vertue likewiſe: the which albeit it receiueth from nature her

ſelfe certaine motions,It graceth and perfecteth vertue. it is neuertheleſſe to be perfected by doctrine:*Sene. ep. 81.
Neither yet can it be attained vnto in any large, and
full meaſure, except it iumpe with a minde, well diſpoſed and trained
vp.Idem ep. 89 
                  Notwithſtanding I intend not hereby,
                  It properly purgeth and prepareth our minds to vertue. We muſt practiſe it to profit thereby. that learning
is able to giue vertue vnto vs, but prepareth our mindes to embrace
it. Doctrine then is diligently to be ſought for, but to
this end,
                  Ci. 1. de Fin. 
                  that we may put it in practiſe, for it is not ſufficient
for vs to obtaine wiſedome onely, but we muſt likewiſe vſe it, and
take profite thereby.Pacuuius. 
                  I hate with the Poet, thoſe men,For it conſiſteth not in bare wordes, but in laudable actiōs. who are
Philoſophers in words, and make no ſhew thereof in deeds: and
with Marius in Saluſt,In Iugurt. that learning pleaſeth me litle, that doth
not aduance the learner in vertue. Nay it doth rather hurt, becauſe
many vnder this vayle,
                  They which make not this vſe thereof, do abuſe it. 
                  do hide, and ſhadow their vices,
being traitors,Indidem. and deceiptfull, couering their couetouſneſſe &
luſt, diſſemblers,*Indidem. falſe in friendſhip vnder a colour of Art and
ſcience,Of which ſort they are, who haue lightly taſted, but not throughly diſgeſ
                        •
                     ed it. The true end, & Mefiocritie thereof. 
                  the moſt part of them, who make profeſſion of learning
with their lips, and neuer beautifie their minde with worthy ſciences,
are of this ſort. Contrarily, do not thou embrace learning
for a ſhew and oſtentation,
                  4. Hiſt. nor to couer thy vnfruitfull
idleneſſe with a glorious name, but to th' intent thou mayeſt be able
to ſerue the common wealth thou liueſt in, being firmely armed
againſt al accidents. Neuertheleſſe thou oughteſt to vſe a
diſcretiō herin,
                  Sene. ep. 89. Acſchylus. 
                  for to deſire to know more the reaſon requireth,
is a kind of intēperancie.*He is vnwiſe that is ouerwiſe Not he that knoweth many things, but
he that vnderſtandeth thoſe things which are neceſſarie and profitable,
is right wiſe. And therefore it is very truely ſpoken,
that many times the rude multitude are more wiſe then others,Lactant. lib. 2. Iuctit. Tac. in Agr.
becauſe they haue knowledge of ſo much as is requiſite and neceſſary
for them.The immoderat deſire of learning ought to be reſtained. 
                  Wherefore imitate Agricola, who kept backe and
reſtrained his mind ſet on fire with a deſire of learning, knowing
it to be a very hard thing to hold a meane in wiſedome. For the
moſt part of vs at this day,
                  Sen. ep. 107. are as intemperate in our ſtudie, as
in all other things,Which vice is frequent at this day, but eſpecially in old men. and we learne not how to liue, but how to diſpute,
with which true ſaying I will cloſe vp and ſeale this
booke.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE
OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL
DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtine
by Iuſtus Lipſius.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He intreateth generally of Gouernement. He ſheweth the
neceſſitie, and fruit thereof in the ſocietie of men.
               
               
                  I Haue pointed you out two guides to leade
you on this way, yet but in generall termes,
and onely in a bare ſhew: I beſeech you ſet
forward in your iourney, I will inſtruct you,
how you may follow them, and ouertake thē,
and that not onely mile by mile, but almoſt
paſe by paſe.
               Ciuill life conſiſteth in ſocietie, ſocietie in two things,
Traffique, and Gouernement. The firſt, is the argument of an
other diſcourſe: the latter, the matter, and ſubiect, I intreat
of:The definition of gouernment. The force, which I define to be, A certaine order as well in commanding:
as in obeying, the power (or rather the neceſſitie wherof)
is ſo great, that it is the onely ſtay of humane affaires: For
without gouernement,and 
                  no houſe, no citie, no nation,
                  Cic. 3. de leg. 
                  neither the
whole ſtate of mankind, nor the vniuerſall nature of things, no
nor the world it ſelfe can ſtand,
                  Profit thereof, 
                  and continue. Whereof it followeth,
that the profit thereof is great: for to beare rule,
                  Arist. 1. Polit. cap. 3 
                  and
to be ruled, is not onely in the number of thoſe things which are
neceſſarie, but amongest thoſe likewiſe that are profitable.
Surely,It is the band that tyeth all things together 
                  this is the chaine,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  by which the common wealth is linked
together, this is the vitall ſpirit, which ſo many millions of men do
breath, and were this ſoule of commanding taken away, the common

wealth of it ſelfe ſhould be nothing but a burthen, and open
proy.
                  And keepeth men in order. Finally, this is that rod of Circes, which tameth both
men,Liu. lib. 6. and beaſts, that are touched therewith, whereby each
one is brought in awe and due obedience, where before they were
all fierce and vnruly.
                  Contrarily diſobedience is the mother of confuſion. On the other ſide all things runne to
wracke, where this ſetled vnderprop is wanting, and doe
ſoone breake a ſunder, if they be not ioyned together with
this glewe: and that which was ſpoken by a Poet, is ouermuch
for a Poet.Sophoc. There is no greater miſchiefe in the world
then want of gouernement, it is the deſtruction of Cities, it ouerthroweth
houſes, and leaueth them wast, it cauſeth the ſouldier
to turne his backe in battell: but obedience preſerueth the ſubſtance
and life of ſuch as follow her.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The deuiſion of gouernement; that Principalitie is the
firſt, and beſt part thereof, which is proued by diuerſe
arguments.
               
               
                  NOw this Gouernement is three fold.There are thre
                        •
                      ſonnes of gouernement. It conſiſteth
of Principalitie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ac. lib. 3. 
                  Of the beſt and worthieſt
men, and the Popular eſtate: For either the
common people, or the chiefe men; or ſome excellent
perſon (as my author Tacitus ſaith) do
gouerne all Nations, and Cities. And ſeeke
while you liſt, and you ſhall not finde anie companie, or
ſocietie, without one of theſe formes of gouernement, neither
in that gouernement, anie other forme beſides theſe.
I confeſſe they are intermingled, and confounded amongſt
them ſelues, and that in a leſſe, or a greater meaſure, yet in
ſuch maner, that alwayes ſome one part ouerpoiſeth, & beareth
ſway, of which it rightly taketh his denomination.
               But which of theſe ſortes of gouernement is the beſt?It is a hard, and vncertain thing to iudge, which of the three is the beſt. It
hath bene long in queſtion, which Tacitus doth reſolue, and
yet leaueth in doubt;Ibid. 
                  The choiſe forme of a common wealth
(ſaith he) compoſed of theſe three, may more eaſily be commended,
then eſtabliſhed: or if it be eſtabliſhed, it cannot poſſibly be of long

continuance.
                  Yet principality ſeemeth the beſt. If I ſpeake not more agreeable to the troth, yet
do I declare the matter more plainly, and do expreſly prefer
principalitie: the reaſons that induce me hereunto are
theſe.In reſpect of antiquitie. Firſt; it is the moſt ancient kind of commanding: for
this is certaine,Cic. 3. de leg. Sal. Catil. 
                  all nations of former age, did firſt yeeld obedience
vnto kings: and this name of gouernement was firſt ſpred on
the earth: as another moſt truly ſaith in the entrie of his hiſtorie:
In the beginning of things,
                  Iuſtin. lib. 1. 
                  the dominion of countreys and
nations was in the hands of kings.
               
               Next,In regard of nature eſpecially. it is moſt agreeable to nature: the which euen other
liuing creatures doth teach vs, in whom we behold this
image of gouernement: men likewiſe for the moſt part cō
                  firme
the ſame: and wander ouer the whole world, & you
ſhall find that there are few, who craue their libertie,
                  Sal. Epist. Mithridatis 
                  and the
greater part, deſire to be vnder iuſt and lawfull Lords, and ſo
they are.
               Thirdly,Likewiſe by reaſon & vſe. and eſpecially it conſenteth with reaſon. For
we ſee one bodie is ruled by one mind, euen as one ſhip,Tac. 1. Ann. is gouerned
by one Pilote.
               
                  What ſay you now to the gouernement of many?
                  For the gouernment of manie, withdraweth our minds to folow many. And ingendreth diſcord. On the other ſide principality noriſheth peace 
                  I ſay
it breedeth confuſion: euen as if there were two Sunnes in the
firmament,Serinus. all things ſhould be in danger to be conſumed vvith
fire.Tac. 4. Ann. 1. Hiſt. 
                  For, it is a hard thing to find the power of many, and concord
to dwell alwayes together in one place. Wherefore, it concerneth
the common quiet of all, that all power and authoritie be
giuen to one. We haue read; nay further, we our ſelues haue
ſeene,
                  1. Annal. 
                  that oftentimes there hath bene no other remedie to appeaſe
ciuill diſcords, and diſſentions amongſt the people, then by
the ſubmitting of them ſelues to the gouernement of one.For the which likewiſe the authoritie of ancient writers doth make. 
                  Neither
do the ſages of the world diſſent from me, which he well
witneſſeth that ſayth,
                  Ploto in Polit. Callimach. Homer. Liu. lib. 26. A King is as it vvere, a god amongeſt
men: another affirmeth that kings, come from God: and the
third repeateth oft that kings are nouriſhed, and brought vp
with God: whereunto another addeth, that the gouernement
of a king is a moſt excellent thing, amongst the gods, and amongſt
men. So that I may rightly conclude, and wiſh with Homer,
Let there be one Lord, and let there be one Prince:Iliad. 2. 
                  For I am

not ignoraunt of many other reaſons, which I will not alleage,
in this narrow compaſſe of other mens words, within
the which I haue included my ſelfe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The definition of Principalitie: The declaration of it by
the ſeuerall partes thereof: And firſt vnto whether ſexe
it belongeth.
               
               
                  NEither yet do I confuſedly cōmend all Principality,
but onely that which is true, and
lawfull,What principalitie is. which I define to be, the gouernement
of one, impoſed according to cuſtome, and
lawes, vndertaken, & executed for the good
of the ſubiects.
               
               In which definition, if I be not deceiued, I haue not onely
included the whole nature of true principalitie, but the
way likewiſe to attaine thereunto, which I will diſtribute
into parts, and afterwards explaine.
               In the beginning of this definition, I haue placed the gouernement
of one: But whether is that vnderſtood of man or
woman? Surely of both, but eſpecially of the man,That it is beſt in men. becauſe
nature commaundeth it ſo,Ariſt. 1. Po. cap. 8. 
                  for euerie male, is by nature
made more apt, and fit to beare rule then the female:
                  Not ſo well in women. Becauſe they the weaker veſſels. the
reaſon hereof is manifeſt,Sen. Octus. becauſe God our Creator, hath
giuen vvitte vnto vvomen, but hath denied them ſtrength of
bodie.
               
               Yet for that weake ſexe, we haue prouided theſe forcible,Yet there are theſe reaſons making for thē, which are drawne from the commodity of vertue.
and ſtrong weapons; theſe reaſons making for them, that
vertue excludeth none, and receiueth all:*Sen. Epist. Idem. 
                  respecting neither
wealth, nor ſexe.
               
               And to ſay the troth, haue we not read, heard of, & ſeene,
many worthie Queenes, who being valiant, wiſe, and chaſt,From examples of former time.
                  haue with a manlike prouidence,
                  Tue. 6. An. 
                  caſt off all imperfections belonging
to women.
               
               The conſent of diuerſe nations maketh for them:For the cuſtom of nations. the ancient

                  Brittons, did not only make them their rulers in peace,
but their leaders in warre likewiſe.In Agr. For the Brittons were accuſtomed
to go to warre, vnder the conduct of women. The Germaines
preferred them before men them ſelues,De Morib. Ger. and were of
opinion, that ſome ſacred, and prouident thing remained in them:
For which cauſe,Ibid. 
                  they did neither reiect their counſels, nor ſet
light by their anſwers. Yea I muſt tell you that many of them
whether this pleaſe or offend you,
                  4. Hiſt. 
                  were reputed amongſt them for
Propheteſſes, and as their ſuperſtition increaſed, they held them
as goddeſſe. Wherefore as theſe men, and my ſelfe do deeme,
they are capable of a ſcepter, except the Lawe, or the Cuſtome
of the countrey, do otherwiſe prohibite the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  How we ought to take the charge of Principalitie vpon vs.
That there are two lawful meanes to attaine thereunto,
Election, and Succeſſion, both which are here handled.
               
               
                  THeſe things I eſpecially note, and obſerue, and
therefore I adde; Impoſed according to cuſtomes,
and lawes;
                  Many do affect the place of a Prince. not without good conſideration
fortifying the entire and paſſage, and as it
were the head, of this royall high way, which
many will ſeeke to trace awry.Sal. Iug. As one ſayth, the nature of
mortall men coueteth to beare rule:
                  An 
                        •
                     th
                        •
                     t by the corruption of nature. and as another affirmeth,
the deſire of authoritie is auncient,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 15. Anual. 
                  and of long time ingrafted in
them, which is more feruent then any other affection. Wherefore,
manie deſire to gouerne not to any good end, they being
not good them ſelues, whom neuertheleſſe the cuſtome,Yet they are reſtrained by a double bridle, Succeſſion, and Election.
or law of nations, hath reſtrained with a double barre of Election,
and Succeſſion.
               
               
                  The later I call that, when this honor commeth of blood, and
one Prince is borne of another: the other, when as birthright being
ſet a ſide,Succeſſion ſeemeth to be the better. they are choſen by conſent of voyces. Election is more
ancient, but Succeſſion more vſuall, and in apparence the

better,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  becauſe this is true, that there is leſſe danger in the acceptation,
then in the election of a Prince.
               
                  Beſide, this is a let to commotions, when otherwiſe the
chaunge of things giueth oportunitie,The more quiet & Safe for the ſubiects. to great and ſtrange attempts:1. Hist. 3. Annal.
                  For it is euident, the diſhoneſt hopes of ambitious diſturbers,
are cleane cut off, when it is certainly knowne who ſhall
ſucceed.
               
                  Likewiſe the prince himſelfe by this means is more aſſured,
                  And more be hooffull for the Prince himſelf.
                  and as it were placed in the middeſt of many ſtrong ramparts.1. Annal.
                  For it is certaine,
                  4. Hist. that neither armies by ſea, nor whole legions,
and bands of men by land, do more ſtrengthen and fortifie
an Empire, then the number of children.
               
                  Howbeit the other way of Election,Election hath likewiſe theſe reaſons to maintaine it. 
                  is better pleaſing to
others,
                  Plin. Pan. 
                  who affirm, that it is meet and conuenient that he which
commaundeth ouer all, ſhould be choſen by the conſent of all, were
it but for this cauſe,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. Ibidem. 
                  that oftentimes it falleth out, that election
meeteth with the most worthie.*Becauſe it meeteth with the worthieſt. For to be borne and ingendred
of Princes is caſuall, and carrieth no other credit with
it, whereas an entire and ſound iudgement, belongeth to election,
and where choiſe is made, there conſent is ſhewed.
               And further,Ibidem. this forme of choiſe is not ſo ſeruile,Becauſe of it ſelfe it is more worthie. 
                  Election
carrying with it a ſhew of libertie.
               
               But whether ſoeuer of theſe two are the better,Beſides theſe two direct paths, all others are by waies, and not proſperous. all other
means to attaine to a kingdome are vniuſt, neither lightly
hath any man executed that well,
                  Eodem libro. 
                  which he hath gotten ill: nay
nor kept the ſame long,Curt. lib. 4. becauſe no authoritie can be durable,
which is purchaſed by villanie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  The beginning of kingdomes for the moſt part deſerue praiſe: but
that is not ſufficient, we ought to perſeuer and continue.
               
               
                  I Added further vndertaken, and executed, which
words I did not couple together without conſideration:
for there are many who vndertake, and
begin well, but do not execute and end the ſame
accordingly. I place the bell and prize, in the end of the race,

not in the beginning.
               And whether it happen by malice, or be ordained by deſtinie
to mortall men,The beginning of Princes raigns are commōly good, but not their end. I know not,Tac. 15. A
                        •
                     . that the beginnings of gouernments
and principallities, are commonly the beſt, but towards
the end they decline and wax worſe. This the Poet was not ignorant
of, who ſayd, The estate and condition of kingdomes,
                  Lucan. li. 8. 
                  is
most mild and pleaſing vnder a new king.
               
               The common people know this well,Therefore new kings are pleaſing. who with ioy receaue
a new king,
                  Tac. 21. An. 
                  as they commonly ſtand affected, to new gouernments.
But how often is their hope deceaued?But it continueth not long. For moſt Princes,
                  12. Annal.
                  whether it be by their own means, or the induſtrie of their miniſters,
when they firſt come to rule, are liked and beloued, and are
afterwards more hated and maligned after they haue gotten the
gouernment.
                  Becauſe that either their diſſembling is layd open. Or that they change their diſpoſition. This commeth to paſſe, becauſe their vertues
were but in a fained ſhew, when as all men do vnderſtand,
how the report of clemencie is profitable to thoſe that begin to
gouerne:
                  4. Hist. or elſe, that they had not taken any deepe roote in
them, and that therefore they ſoone learned and tooke boldnes,
                  2. Hist.
by little and little to do euil, thorow the flatterie and fauor of
their fortune, and inſtruction of bad teachers. Or whether it be
likewiſe that the nature of bearing rule doth permit it,12. Hiſt. 
                  that
by continuance they change their clemencie into pride.
               
               
                  But this is a bad courſe,
                  Which for the moſt part falleth out for their owne harme, fortune changing with them. 
                  for a kingdome is beſt kept and conſerued
by the ſame skill & means it was firſt gotten: & therfore
if they do not continue conſtant,
                  Ibidem. 
                  let them take heed least in
changing their conditions, they do not likewiſe change their fortune.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  To what end a Prince ought to direct all his actions. That it
ought to be for the good of his ſubiects, for which he ought to
ſed aſide his owne priuat benefit.
               
               
                  LAſt of all I added, for the good of the ſubiects, in
which words the end of true gouernment is comprehended,
and the faire marke, whereat our roiall
champion ought to aime, which is no other thing,
then the commoditie, ſafetie, and preſeruatiō of the ſubiects.

For a gouernour of a ſtate,
                  Cic. lib. 5. de rep. Ibidem. 
                  ought to propoſe,
                  The happie eſtate of the ſubiects ought to be the obiect of the Prince. 
                  and ſet before him,
the happie life of his citiſens: that the ſame may be ſtrengthened
in wealth, aboundaunt in riches, renowmed and magnificent
in glorie, honeſt and venerable thorow vertue.
               
               
                  Haſt thou a care only of thine owne affaires,
                  And therefore he is ſet in the throne. 
                  thou deceaueſt
thy ſelfe,
                  Xenoph. in Memorab. Socrat. li. 3. for a king is not choſen to the end he may pamper
vp himſelfe in delicacie, but that by his means, they which haue
honoured him with that dignitie, may liue happily.
               
                  In this one thing eſpecially, a king differeth from a tyrant,
                  But a tyrant propoſeth his own felicitie.
that a tyrant regardeth only,Ariſt. 8. Po. cap. 10. & ſeeketh after his own commoditie,
and a king the profit and good of his ſubiects, who is the
right paſtor of the people, as Homer tearmeth him.
                  A king ought to haue care of his ſubiects, as a ſhepheard of his ſheepe. Therefore ſuperioritie is not the end propoſed vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                     . He ſhould care for them and cheriſt them. And not neglect thē as one heedleſſe, and retchleſſe. 
                  Wherefore
whoſoeuer thou art that art graced with this high title, conſider,
                  Se. de Clem.
that the thraldome of thy ſubiects is not committed vnto
thee, but their libertie, defence and protection.Iudidem. * Neither is the
common wealth thine, but thou art the common-wealths.
               
                  Heare what a Poet ſayth,
                  Claud. ad Hon. Thou oughteſt to take vpon thee
the charge and office of a good citiſen; and father, to prouide for
all, not for thy ſelfe, and not to be moued ſo much for thine owne
priuat, as for the publike loſſe. He is an euill gouernour, who
of a large and ample fortune,Tac. 4. Hiſt. Ibidem. can not gather any other profit,
then the vſurpation of licentiouſneſſe: who taketh no care how
matters paſſe, but playeth the Prince in voluptuouſneſſe and luſt.
But a iuſt and good king,
                  For this is a burthen, and not only a dignitie. 
                  laboureth, watcheth, and knoweth
that the greateſt Empire is accompanied with greateſt cares.
His vigilancie preſerueth his ſubiects when they are aſleepe,Salust. his
labour giueth them their eaſe,Sen. Conſ. ad Polib. his induſtrie and trauell, maintaineth
their pleaſures, his care in his charge, their reſt and quiet.
Wherefore,
                  Ibidem. he may ſometimes pauſe and refreſh himſelfe, but
neuer be diſſolute and careleſſe.
               
                  This he ought to do for his owne good, and for the benefit
of his ſubiects for the greatneſſe of the Prince,Ibidem. is then well
grounded and eſtabliſhed,A carefull Prince ſitteth ſure. when all his ſubiects ſhall perceaue, he
is not only ouer them, but for them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Of the right way which a Prince ought to take, and firſt of
vertue. Which is ſhewed to be neceſſarie in regard of
himſelfe.
               
               
                  I Haue defined what a iuſt prince ought to
be, I wil now faſhion and frame him in ſuch
ſort, and guide him as it were by the hand,
that he may attaine to that happie hauen. I
confeſſe this way is incloſed within the
bounds and limits of the publike weale, but
yet very ſecretly (for no man can diſcharge himſelfe thereof
as he ought, except he be an honeſt man, which is not ſufficient
of it ſelfe, for he muſt likewiſe be indued with wiſedome)
I will bring foorth and lay open all this way of gouernment,
and will ſtrew the ſame (if I may ſo ſay) with a
ſlender grauell of wholeſome precepts.
               There are two things which make a Prince lawfull and
ſufficiently accompliſhed,Vertue & Prudence, are helpes to make a common-wealth happie. Vertue beſeemeth a Prince, in regard of decencie. 
                  Prudence and Vertue, that the one
may appeare in his actions, the other in his life.
               I will firſt ſpeake of vertue, which the Prince ought to labour
for, and aſſociat to himſelfe, that by him, they ouer
whome he commaundeth may likewiſe poſſeſſe it, it being
as ſeemely for a king to be endued with honeſtie, as with
dignitie. Willingly do I aſſent vnto Cyrus,
                  Xen. Paed. 8 who was of opinion,
that no man was fit for an Empire, except he did excell thoſe
ouer whom he did beare rule. Such is our common iudgement,
and where he is made by election, oftentimes it falleth out,
that he is choſen amongst the number of thoſe, who are moſt ſufficient
and capable for their preheminence in vertue, or for thoſe
actions which proceed of vertue.
                  Ariſt. 5. Poli, ca. 10. I agree with the Poet who
ſayth,Auſon. in Monoſ. 
                  He vvhich ſhall liue vprightly, not he which commaundeth,
ſhall indeed be a king.
               
               
                  His fame and renowne doth require this,
                  In reſpect of his good name▪
                   
                  which ſhall neuer
be pure and vnſpotted, if his life be not ſo, for report doth
register all the deeds and ſayings of the Prince.*Sen. 1. de Clem. Indidem. And he can no

more couer and hide himſelfe, then the ſunne.Indidem. 
                  Wherfore he hath
good cauſe to haue care of his reputation, which as he deſerueth,
ſo ſhall it be ſpred abroad.Tac. 1. Hiſt. And ſo much the rather, becauſe
if he once be hated, whether he do well or ill, they tax him.
               
               
                  Further,
                  Sen. Thyeſt. 
                  the eſtabliſhment of his eſtate doth require it,
for,
                  And in conſideration of his profit. where there is no ſhame, no care of right and equitie, no holineſſe
of life, no pietie, no faith, that kingdome cannot long continue.*
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      1. Hist.
Set before you Nero, and what other tyraunt you
pleaſe, who were ruined and depriued of their eſtate, by the reſiſtance
of the people, thorow their owne crueltie and riotous
life.
               Theſe ſpeeches tend to the ouerthrow of a Prince, that
holineſſe,
                  Sen. Thyeſt. 
                  pietie, fayth, belong to priuate perſons, but let kings liue
as they liſt. By experience you ſhall know whether it be ſo
or not.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  That the Prince ought to cloath himſelfe with vertue, for
his ſubiects ſake likewiſe, and communicate the ſame
vnto them, without the which, no ſocietie is either honeſt,
or permanent.
               
               
                  NOw the Prince ought to haue another care,
that he being good, his ſubiects may be ſo likewiſe.
For where vertue is wanting, what ſocietie
is there, I will not ſay, praiſe-worthie,
but firme and ſtable?Without vertue the ſtate of a common wealth is weak. That which a Poet
ſpake of a citie, may well be applied to a
whole ſtate: If the inhabitants be good men,
                  Plaut. Perſ. 
                  the ſame is well
and ſufficiently fortified, but if they be otherwiſe giuen, ſurely
a wall or bulwarke a hundred fold double,
                  Ibidem. 
                  is not auaileable for
their defence.
                  By vertue it is eſtabliſhed and happie. Giue eare to that which one foſtered by wiſedome,
hath left vnto vs,Polib. lib. 6. 
                  that eſtate of common wealth is to bee
wiſhed, and is of al other moſt ſetled and ſure, where priuatly men
liue holily and innocently, and publikelie, clemencie and iuſtice, do
flouriſh. Heare what another of the ſame ſchoole ſayth: If
thou intend to gouerne a common wealth rightly,
                  Pla. Alci. 1. 
                  and commen
                     
                        ••
                     
                  
                  
d
                     •
                  bli
                     •
                  , communicate thy vertue with thy citiſens.
               
                  Let vs rather credit theſe men,
                  The wicked opinion of ſome men. 
                  then thoſe bad polititians,
who imagine that Kings are ſo much the more jure and eſt abl
                     •
                  ſhed,Sai, ad Caſ.
by how much they are more wicked, and worſe then thoſe
ouer whome they do commaund:And the reaſon thereof. 
                  and decrne that they will with
most patience ſuffer bondage,Plin. Pane. who are fit for nothing elſe then to
be boudmen.The diſproofe of the 
                        •
                     ame. 
                  But ſure herein they do greatly erre, for the
worst ſort of men,Sal. ad C
                        •
                     ſ. do hardly and moſt vnwillingly endure a commaunder.
               On the other ſide, good men of a mild and harmleſſe diſpoſition,B
                        •
                      how much euery man is more vertuous then other by ſo much doth he with p
                        •
                     cience endure to be commanded
                  do rather ſtand in dread then imprint feare in others.
                  Id
                        •
                     m in 
                        •
                     ugurth. Plaut. Mil.
This is a moſt true ſaying, It is an eaſie matter to gouern good
men. Wherfore the prince ought with great diligēce & care,
labour to bring to paſſe,Sal. ad C
                        •
                     ſ. that as he himſelfe is good and vertuous,
thoſe ouer whome he commaundeth, may likewiſe excell in
goodneſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  That the ſubiects are eſpecially framed to goodneſſe by the
example of the Prince. Which is of wonderfull force in
both kinds.
               
               
                  THis goodneſſe is attained vnto by two means,
by lawes and example: of the firſt I wil ſpeake
hereafter, of the latter I intend preſently to
diſcourſe.
               Such as Princes are in a common wealth,The ſubiects frame their cō
                     ditions after the maner of the Prince. The reaſon thereof is, of
like condition of life the ſubiects are wont to be: and euery one
faſhioneth himſelfe after the example of the king.Ci
                        •
                     . in Epiſt. Claud. 5. Conſ. Hon
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     
                  
               
               The reaſon whereof is manifeſt, for that all men turne
their minds, and their eyes to behold thoſe that are placed in
ſuch dignitie,Plin. Pane. 
                  which is the cauſe that we haue leſſe need of gouernment
then of good example,
                  That by nature, we had rather follow then lead. which doth worke more effectually
then the lawes themſelues.Tac. 3. Ann. For, the deſire to follow and
imitate the Prince, is of greater force then the puniſhment of
lawes: And yet euen this emulation is a certaine hidden
law.The actions of the Prince are commaundements. For,Quinct, Declam. 4. 
                  this is the nature and condition of Princes, that al their
actions do ſeeme precepts and inſtructions.
               
               
                  
                  Doeſt thou long to haue thy citizens trained vp in goodneſſe?
                  Vellel. lib. 2.
                  be thou a patterne vnto them.
                  And he being good commonly the ſubiects are ſo. A prince, by doing that
which is lawfull and right, teacheth his ſubiects to do the like:
and if the king couet that which is honeſt,Sen. Thyeſt. all men vvill deſire
the ſame.
               
                  Haſt thou a mind to haue them liue diſſolutely,
                  If he be euill, they are euill. 
                  and diſhoneſtly?
giue thy ſelfe to looſeneſſe of life. For Princes do
not onely ingender vices,Cic. 3. deleg. but do likewiſe bring them forth, and
ſowe the ſame in the citie, and doe more harme by their example
then by the ili they commit. To which purpoſe my author
affirmeth, that by the enuie (or fault ſayd I) of on
                     •
                  ,Tac. 3. An. all do
amiſſe.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He entreateth more diſtinctly of the vertues of a Prince,
and firſt of lustice, how neceſſarie it is, especially for a
Prince.
               
               
                  VErtue then is decent and profitable for a
Prince. What euery vertue? Yes ſurely in
my opinion
                     •
                   yet in ſuch manner, that I confeſſe
ſome kind therof to be more neceſſarie
for him, then the other, which ought eſpecially
to ſhine, and properly to carrie a maieſtie
and rule in this roiall dignitie.
               The vertues proper for a Prince,The vertues fit for a Prince are of two ſorts. Greater vertues, & Leſſer vertues. ſeeme vnto me, to be of
two ſorts. For ſome, are as it were ſmall ſtarres; others, as
great reſplendent lights. Amongſt the great lights, I place
Iuſtice and Clemencie, whereof I account the firſt as the ſun,
the which except by the cleareneſſe thereof, it doth beautifie
and enlighten the whole bodie of kingdoms, they remaine
darkened and full of ſtorms and tempeſt.Iuſtice is accounted amongſt the greater vertues. 
                  For the power
and efficacie thereof is ſo great,
                  C
                        ••
                     . 2. Offic. 
                  that euen they which mayntaine
themſelues by vill
                        •
                     nie and miſcheefe, cannot liue without
ſome parcell of Iuſtice: which in this place I define to be, a
vertue obſeruing that which is iuſt and right,
                  The deſcription thereof. 
                  as well ech man
towards himſelfe, as towards others.
               
               
                  
                  I ſayd towards himſelfe,
                  The Prince ought to exe
                        •
                     
                     ciſe Iuſtice in himſelfe. 
                  becauſe I tie the prince hereto,
whom it ſhall not diſpleaſe to be vnder the cenſure of the
lawes,
                  Pl
                        •
                     n. Pane. 
                  albeit ſome are of opinion, that they are not written for
a Prince.And to bind himſelfe to the lawes. Not making euerie thing lawfull for himſelfe. 
                  But that Principallitie,Pla. in Pol. which is lawleſſe, is irkeſome,
and diſpleaſaunt, to the which no man will willingly ſubmit
himſelfe. This is a verie ill inſtruction,
                  Spart, in Antr. Cara. what ſo the Prince liketh
is lawfull for him to do, But this is a worthie ſentence,
When thou hast full libertie to do more then is lawfull,Sen. Troad. it then
best beſeemeth thee to bridle thy will. And let the Prince remember,
                  Cic. orat. 
                        •
                     ro Rabir.
not only how much is committed to him, but likewiſe
how much is permitted.This reſtraint doth not weaken his gouernment. 
                  That ſaying of the Poet, is falſe, diſhoneſt,
and bad,
                  Lucan. li
                        •
                     . 8. 
                  that all the power of a ſcepter is weakened if it
once begin to ballance iuſtice.
               And that which an Orator vttered is more true,Cic. Parad. 
                  that
right and equitie are the bonds of cities:
                  Nay it doth eſtabliſh it, as that ſpeech likewiſe
proceeding from the mouth of a godly perſon,Aug. 4. de Ciuit. 
                  If
iuſtice be taken away,
                  And doth indeed rightly eſtabliſh it 
                  what are kingdoms like to be, but great
thefts?
               
               This is a barbarous opinion,Wicked ſpeeches to oppugn the former reaſons. comming from a Barbarian:Tac. 15. An.
                  In an ample and large fortune, that is moſt iuſt, which is
moſt profitable.
               
               
                  In confutation whereof, this kingly ſentence was ſpoken
by a king:
                  The contrarie where of carrieth truth with it. Albe it we haue power to do all things,Theodahad apud Caſſio, V'ar. lib. 10. Eurip. let vs
beleeue thoſe things only are lawfull for vs, which are iust and
lawdable. It was wiſely ſayd by a Poet, It is not lawfull
for great perſonages to doe that which is vnlawfull. Finally
Eufemus ſaying is to be deteſted,
                  Malicious precepts. that nothing is to be
accounted:In Thu
                        •
                     id. lib. 6. vniuſt in a citie or Prince, that bringeth in commoditie.
               
                  Follow not thoſe teachers, but put in practiſe this precept,
purer then refined gold.
                  A ſentence more ſimple and pure. I eſteeme that no riches can
grace and adorne any man,Xen. de Cyri Exped. lib. 7 (but eſpeciallie a Prince) more then
vertue and Iuſtice.
               But what do they talke of profit?Glorie waiteth vpon Iuſtice. let them rather put the
Prince in mind that it bringeth glorie.Ci. 3. de off
                        •
                     
                   For Iustice is the
foundation of eternall ſame and renowne, without the which nothing
can deſerue to be praiſed and commended. The prince of

princes hath left vs a verie notable leſſon,Augu
                        •
                     . apud S
                        •
                     N. in Ludo that through piety
and iuſtice,
                  In a maner diuinitie. 
                  Princes become Gods.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  That Iuſtice ought to be adminiſtred to the ſubiectes equally,
& temp
                        •
                     ratly: and that without a heape, and
confuſion of lawes: And likewiſe that the ſtudie of
pleading ought to be taken away.
               
               
                  THe Prince then, ought not only to obſerue
Iuſtice to him ſelfe,To adminiſter iuſtice is the principall dutie of a Prince. but as I added, towards
others likewiſe: becauſe it is his dutie to embrace,
and maintaine this Goddeſſe, together
with the charge for his kingdome. If
you make ſearch of the originall, and firſt
beginning of authoritie,Cic. 2. de Of. you ſhall find, that wiſe and prudent
Princes, were firſt made, and ordained to adminiſter i
                        •
                     ſtice.
                  And therfore is he eſpecially created. And
what is the meaning here of thinke you? but that they were
choſen, and inueſted in their royall throne, to oppoſe them
ſelues againſt force and breach of peace, to th'end, that they
might with an equalitie, and indifferencie, maintaine, and vphold
both high, and low, vnder the ſame lawes.
                  Ibidem. Arist. 5. polit. cap. 10. Ariſtotle ſaid wiſely,That euery man may receiue right, and be preſerued.
that a good Prince ought to be a protector of his people, and
ſo he will, to the ende, no vniuſt thing be enterpriſed againſt the
mightie, and that the commonaltie receiue no wrong. Heſiodus
likewiſe rightly affirmeth,Heſiod. Theogn. that in times paſt, kings were created
onely to this ende, to declare vnto the people that which was
right, and to puniſh offences.
               
               Let then our king ſpeake that which is right,Let him heare mens cauſes according to right and adminiſter
iuſtice to euery one,Sen. de Clemen. 1. which he ought to apply, an
                        •
                      ſct
againſt all wrong, and iniurie.
               
               Let there be n
                     •
                   briberie in his Court,Without regard of reward, or fauour. nor gap ſet open,Tac. 13. An. and
way made to ambition.
               Let him giue eare to the complaints of his ſubiectes, and
heare the accuſer,1. Hiſt. and the accuſed, for they which are executed,
without examination and triall of their cauſe; do die as innocents.
               
               
                  
Let him not violate the lawes,According to the preſcriptiō of the lawes. 
                  for in them doth conſiſt the
ſa
                        •
                     egard of the citie:
                  Ariſt. Rhe
                        •
                     . 1. cap. 3. Colum. lib. 1 yet let him ſometimes temper them,
for it is not ſpoken in vaine, that auncient vvriters were of
opinion, that the extremitie of the lawe, was me
                        •
                     re iniuſtice.
               
               
                  Let him verie ſeldome eſtabliſh newe lawes, for it is certaine,
that,
                  T
                        ••
                     . 4. An. I
                        •
                     idem. that common wealth is moſt corrupt, that hath moſt
lawes.Newe lawes, as 
                        〈…〉
                      the multitude of lawes is to be auoyded. 
                  If you looke into this our age, you will confeſſe, that
as heretofore we were moleſted with miſeries, ſo we are nowe ouercharged
vvith new lawes.And theſe common pleading
                        •
                     . 
                  From whence the arte of pleading
hath proceeded. For as the vehemencie and multitude of
diſeaſes,Annal. 11. doth bring in the Phiſitions gaines, ſo the contagion of
pleading courtes, filleth the lawyers purſes. Whence it commeth
to paſſe, that there is no kind of marchandiſe ſo vendible,Ibidem.
as their craft,Which may be 
                        〈◊〉
                      amōgst the corrup
                        •••
                     ns of this our age. and deceipt. And why ſhould I not ſpeake the
troth?
                  Colum. lib 1 This brawling ſtudie infecteth all Europe, the which
a certaine perſon did rightly tearme, a lawfull robberie or
theft. My wiſh doth agree with the prayer of olde Cato, that
the courtes might be ſet vvith ginnes and caltraps,Plutar. to take them
vvithall.For which cauſe we had need of a new luſtinian. 
                  And our Prince ought to vſe the meanes, and prouide,
that a citie,Plin. Pane. and ſtate, eſtabliſhed by lawes, be not by lawes
ouerthrowne, and brought to ruine.Colum. lib. 1 * In former age common-wealthes,
haue bene happily gouerned without lawyers, and ſo
they may well be hereafter.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The definition of Clemencie. That it is praiſe worthie
in a Prince, and cauſeth him to be beloued, renowmed,
and aſſured.
               
               
                  I Preſent now vnto our Prince Clemencie, the
other light, which is as I may call it, the
Moone of Empires.The offices of Clemencie. This goddeſſe, is milde
and gracious, who doth mollifie, and temper
matters, taketh away the hurtfull, rayſeth
vp them that fall, and runneth to preſerue
thoſe, that throw themſelues headlong into daunger.

I know not how I ſhould deſcribe it in other wordes, then
to be a vertue of the mind, which with iudgement, enclineth from
puniſhment, or reuenge, to lenitie.
                  The deſcription thereof.
               
               
                  This, of all other vertues is moſt fit for man, becauſe it
agreeth beſt with his nature: but it carieth not that grace,That it is moſt fit for a I rince. and
comelineſſe in any other perſon,Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem. as it doth in a king or Prince, becauſe
they haue more occaſion to exerciſe,Becauſe it may freely be vſed. and vſe it, and it manifeſteth
it ſelfe moſt of all, where it hath moſt matter to vvorke
vpon, for it ioyneth to the ſcepter, all things that are worthy
the ſcepter.
               
               
                  Firſt of all, loue:
                  Sen. Trag. who ſo deſireth to be beloued,And ſo indeed it ought, in regard that it purchaſeth him loue. His ſafetie. let him puniſh
with a ſlow hand.
               
                  Next, ſecuritie, which ſpringeth from loue: for neither
ſentinels,Claud. ad Hon. nor armed men on euery ſide, are not ſo ſafe a defence, as
the heartie goodwill of the ſubiectes. Other things, are broken
or corrupted, either by force or fraude,
                  Plin. Pane. this tower is inacceſſible,and
this fortreſſe is vnpregnable, not to haue neede of a fortreſſe.
               
                  Thirdly Stabilitie: for that kingdome is beſt eſtabliſhed,Liu. lib. 8.
where the ſubiects do gladly obey.The eſtabliſhment of his kingdome.
               
               
                  On the contrarie ſide,
                  Seneca. neuer any Empire continued long,
where the Prince was hated. Waigh the euent of all ages, and
you ſhall ſee,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. all things haue happily ſucceeded to thoſe,Neither did cruel a
                        •
                     d
                        ••
                     humane Princes euer gouerne long. who
haue tempered their authoritie with gratiouſneſſe, and clemency,
yea euen their enemies, haue bene more reſpectiue vnto them then
the citizens, and ſubiects of others.
               
                  Laſtly, they purchaſe vnto them ſelues immortall glorie
by this meanes;
                  Cic. pro Lig. For there is nothing that cauſeth men to approch
ſo neare vnto God,It likewiſe getteth h
                        •
                     m honor: and as it were maketh him diuine. as to giue life, and ſafetie to men. This
ſaying of the Poet deſerueth to be written in letters of gold.
                  Let the Prince then 
                        〈◊〉
                      after it, and 
                        •
                     ay it vp as a treaſure.
It is a vvorthie thing,Sen. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . to excell amongeſt vvorthie men, to employ
the time for the good of his countrey, to pardon the aſſucted,
to abſtaine from crueltie, to temperate vvrath, to be a
mediatour for peace and quiet, in the age vvherein vve liue,
this is the higheſt pitch of Vertue, and the readie way to heauen.
               
                  Let then ſuch a Prince as I would haue, practiſe to gaine

the loue of his ſubiects, and to put feare into his enemies:
                     
                        •
                     nd he to his people a king & a tither, not a tyrant. * Neither
let him thinke vpon Lordſhip,Tac. 11. An. 12. Annal. and bondmen, but vpon king,
and ſubiectes, ouer whom he ought to execute clemencie, and adminiſter
iuſtice: So this ſaying of Homer ſhal agree with him,
that he ſhall be accepted of as a louing father:That they may 
                        〈◊〉
                      for him, & not him ſelfe. 
                  and that his ſubiects
as Bias ſaith,
                  Odyſſ. 2 & alib
                        •
                     . will not feare him, but for him.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  A larger praiſe of vertue, but with moderation. That it
paceth ſoftly from iustice. And yet it leaueth not the
force of gouernement, but bindeth it together vvith a
plyant, and eaſie knot.
               
               
                  BVt he ought (as I ſayd) practiſe this vertue
not inconſiderately, but with iudgement:
for without diſcretiō it ſhould be too much
effeminateneſſe, and lenitie, and vice, rather
then vertue. I cōfeſſe that this moone, goeth
ſomtime a litle aſide, frō this ſharpe & piercing
ſunne of iuſtice:Clem
                        ••
                     cy doth decline from iuſtice. ſhe goeth a ſide indeed, but goeth not
away, & that by a by-path, not by a contrary way. Neither
ought Iuſtice to take offence, if our Prince do not alwayes
(as we ſay) follow it at the heeles,But for our good. which cannot be without
the ruine,By reaſon of our dayly and innumerable offences. and ouerthrow of mankind. For, trespaſſes, and offences,
are dayly committed without meaſure.
                  Tac. 3. An. Thucid. li. 3 * All men are borne
to erre and go aſtray, both in priuate, and in publike, neither can
any law be made of ſufficient force to reſtraine them, and cauſe
them to keepe a meane.
                  Which ſometimes a Prince muſt winke at, otherwiſe all men, and all things elſe goe to wr
                        •
                     cke. Wherefore it is conuenient, that the
Prince do ſometimes diſſemble,Tac. in. Agr. and make a ſhew, that he had
rather men ſhould beleeue, that his ſubiects were trained vp in
goodneſſe to his hands, then that he had framed them to be ſuch.
               
               
                  But ſhall he ſtill puniſh with rigor? not if he regard the
common profit: for, ſeueritie by the often vſe thereof,Puniſhmentes often inflicted become contē
                     ptible: na
                        •
                      they giue vs occaſiō to offend. And ſtirre vp rebellions. weakeneth
authoritie:Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem. 
                  and I know not by what contrarie reſiſting
vice, we ſee thoſe faults moſt vſually committed, which are moſt
often puniſhed.
               
                  Nor if he reſpect his owne priuate commoditie: for, like

as trees that are lopped,Ibidem. do ſend forth new branches: So the rigor
of a king, augmenteth the number of his enemies by executing
them.Ibidem. * It is a temperate feare, vvhich reſtraineth, and bridleth:
but a ſharpe, and continuall puniſhment, ſtirreth vp reuenge. I
ſhould haue ſpoken more truly if I had ſayd, that crueltie,Sal. I ugurt. Tac. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
bringeth more feare, then authoritie, to him that vſeth it.Neither doth feare withhold them. * Feare,
and terror, are ſlender bondes to bind loue, the which when they
are looſed, they that haue laid ſeare aſide, do forthwith begin to
hate.6. Annal. * And when the authors are found out then they take courage
to them.
               
                  Learne thou by this: for what glorie dooth redound to
thee hereof?
                  Beſides this manner of puniſhment is diſhonourable for a king. And ruſhee is ſtill to be tempered. Often puniſhments, and executions, are no leſſe diſhonorable
to the king,Sen. 1. de Clem. Caſſio
                        •
                     . 11. Var. then the number of burials to the Phiſition.
The other way of Clemencie is farre better: and it is profitable
for a good, and gracious Prince, ſometimes to paſſe the limites
of equitie, to ſhew his clemencie, vvere it but in regard of
mercie, & pitie, to which all other vertues do in honor giue place.
               
                  Let him obſerue this example rather of mild iuſtice: It is
fit for a Prince to know all,Ta
                        •
                     . Agric. but not to proſecute all,Againſt ſuch as offend lightly, or repent earneſtly. that he forgiue
and remit ſmall faultes, and with ſeueritie puniſh capitall
crimes: let him not alwayes puniſh, but often pardon the penitent.Claud.
* It is a vvorthy deed to ſet free the afflicted, and a kinde of puniſhment
to ſee the offendor humble, and ſubmit him ſelfe.
               
                  But what doth Cleon whiſper,
                  Benignity doth not weaken commanndement. 
                  that there are three things,
that are moſt hurtfull in euery gouernement?Thuc. lib. 3. Commiſeration,
gracious ſpeech, and lenitie.
               
                  But he erreth foully.
                  Nay it doth with more efficacie, commaund and execute certain things. 
                  For Clemency hath likewiſe her force;
A calme,Claud. Pan. Mallij. and mild authoritie, bringeth that to paſſe, vvhich a
violent power is not able to do: and a gentle intreatie is of more
force,Plin. lib. 8. Epist. then an imperious commaundement. Surely reucrence is
hardly purchaſed by terror, and loue is of more force to obtaine
vvhat thou deſireſt, then feare.
               
                  I ſeale vp this diſcourſe with the ſignet of Saluſt.The diuine ſaying of Saluſt. I am of
this opinion (quoth he) that all Empires that are gouerned with
crueltie,Sal. ad Caſ. are more trouble ſome, then of long continuance, neither
do I thinke that any one perſon, can be a terror to many,Which a prince ought to diſgeſt. but that
he muſt dread many: and liue a miſerable life, and wage a continuall,

and doubtfull warre, for on vvhat ſide ſo euer he turne
him ſelfe, he ſhall neuer be aſſured, but alwayes in doubt, or
daunger.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  An addition concerning faith, vvhich taketh her beginning
from iuſtice, or iuſtice from it. The commendation
thereof as the ſtay of mankind. How glorious, and profitable
it is for a Prince. The opinion of certaine newe
Doctors reiected.
               
               
                  YOu haue alreadie two lights, from whoſe
brightneſſe, and reuerberation as it were,
two other are enflamed, Faith and Modeſtie.
Of the which faith, is ſo neare a neighbour
vnto Iuſtice, that you may truly affirme, the
one taketh her beginning from the other.
Neither doth it greatly import, from which each other proceedeth.
For,Cic. 1. Offic. 
                  faith is the ground-worke and foundation of Iuſtice:
which ſetleth not in the heart of anie, that doth not
honor, and loue the other. Thus I may briefly deſcribe it:
An effect vvhich is in vs,
                  The deſcriptiō of faith. of that we haue either spoken, or promiſed.
               
                  A vertue ſurely which the Prince ought to cheriſh, and
embrace, if either his owne eſtate, or the publike weale, be
deare vnto him,
                  The praiſe thereof. 
                  being the moſt diuine,Sen. Epi. 89. Silius ad ſidem. and perfect good thing,
that can happen vnto man.The praiſe thereof. * Begotten before Iupiter; the ornament
of the gods and of men: vvithout the which neither the land,
nor ſea, can enioy peace: the conſort of iuſtice, and a ſecret diuine
power,The honour attributed to it at Rome. incloſed in the heart of man: which the auncient Romanes
did not without cauſe,
                  Cato Cenſor. place in the Capitoll, neare to
great, and mightie Iupiter. For as Iupiter is the protector of
mankinde, ſo is Faith.Cic. 3. Offic. Neither doth any thing more ſtrongly
vphold the ſtate of a Common wealth,That it ought firmely to be kept in euerie cōmon wealth. Honor requireth this & then faith. Wherefore,
we ought to beleeue, we are boūd to obſerue & keep it inuiolably.Auct. ad Her. lib. 3. Euripid.
               
               
                  Honour doth perſwade this, becauſe nothing can be more
glorious, then a tongue that harboureth faith.
               
                  
                  The fruite that commeth thereof doth moue vs thereto:
                  Profit.
Let it be permitted to violate,Arist. rhet. ad Theod. 1. cap. 15. Cic. pro Q. Roſc. Com. Ariſtop. Acharn. and infringe the law of contracts,
and you may take away the vſe of trafficke from amongeſt men. It
is then a moſt wicked and treacherous part, to breake faith, ſith
that it preſerueth our life.
               
                  Where are now theſe new teachers?
                  Neither are thoſe ſubtil wits to be hard, who do vndermine Princes. In whō there is neither
religion, nor faith, nor any truſt in their vvordes, and treaties:
who poyſon the eares of Princes, and exhort them to ſet aſide,Cic. 3. Offic.
all iuſt and honeſt things, if by that meanes they may get the
vpper hand. Who reuiue this ſaying, which was buried long
ſince,
                  Ex Euripide 
                  that for a kingdome, it is lawfull to violate right, and equitie,
but in other things pietie is to be obſerued.
               
                  O vaine and falſe perſuaders,
                  Sen. Ep. 89. faith is not compelled by anie
neceſſitie to become diſloyal,Faith is not to be infringed, by any force neither is it corrupted by any reward.
*Silius lib. 13 It is to be preferred, before the purple and glorious ſhewe of
mightie kingdomes.
               
                  Herewithall they mingle deceipts, and cauils;
                  Fraude. 
                  I know it
well: and they vvhich are faithleſſe will neuer want matter, to
breake off their promiſe:*Liu. lib. 9. Ibidem. Alwayes couering their fraud, vvith
the cloake of equitie. But let them giue care to that which
worthie Braſidas ſaith;
                  Thuc. lib. 4. It is more diſhonourable for thoſe which
are in authoritie, to entrap or hurt, by deceipt diſguiſed like honeſtie,
then by open force.
               
                  And whereas ſome do alleage,
                  Cic. 3. Offic. that faith ought not to be
kept vvith infidels,Yea it is to be kept with infidels. 
                  they deceiue them ſelues, and do ſeeke lurking
holes to hide their periurie:Ibidem. Ambr. 2. de offic. Silius lib. 14. 
                  For we ought to keepe promiſe
euē with thoſe that are faithleſſe. Yea in the field,
                  And euen with our enemy. He is a right
ſouldier, that ſetteth downe this for his firſt, and laſt reſolution,
to be true of faith in battell.
               
                  Wherefore, ô ye Princes, driue thoſe kind of men from
you,
                  Idem lib. 2. and hold inuiolably the treaties of peace you make, and let
faith be more precious vnto you then your Empires.Both God and men deteſt periurie. 
                  And call to
minde,
                  Arist. rhet. ad Alex ca. 18. Tibul. that they vvhich feare either vengeance from aboue, or
infamie amongeſt men, do neuer falſifie their faith. For this is
moſt certaine, that albeit periuries are hidden at the firſt, they
neuer remaine vnpuniſhed though it be late.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  Preceptes concerning Modestie, which doth accompanie
Clemencie. That it ought to be infuſed into the vnderſtanding,
and actions of a Prince.
               
               
                  FAith is as it were another ſunne like vnto iuſtice,
but the brightneſſe of Modeſtie, proceedeth
from the light of Clemencie, being of
like colour, gracious, and mild, and alwayes a
companion of the mind:What modeſtie is. I define it to be, An
vnderſtanding tempered with reaſon, not vaunting it ſelfe for any
action of our own, or of thoſe which belong vnto vs. Which vertue
ought likewiſe to be ingrauen with the reſt: (for what
are we men? or how long ſhall we continue?) but eſpecially
in the Prince,In courtes, and with great perſo
                        •
                     ages it is ve
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     are. who being eminent by dignitie of his place,
                  Bernard▪ in Epiſt. 
                  it is impoſſible
but that he ſhould be caried away with the hope of great
matters.
               
               
                  For,
                  Sen. 2. de ira all that is vaine, & light in the mind, is lifted vp with the
leaſt fauourable wind that bloweth. Whence it proceedeth for
the moſt part▪
                  
                  Sal. Iug. 
                  that great perſonages do cary a diſdainful mind:
and that pride is the ordinary imperf;ection of Noble men.
               
                  But our Prince ought to be temperate,
                  Yet they ought to embrace it. 
                  and to vnderſtand
that to carry the reputation,Tac. 15. A
                        •
                     . and credit of modeſt, is acceptable amongeſt
the chiefeſt men,Por he is aboue & not without the condition of men. and pleaſing to God. And what cauſe
hath he to be inſolent,
                  Plin. Pane. let him remember, that he is but a man,
though he rule ouer men. Do ſcepters and riches, lift vp mens
mind? Miſerable,
                  Tac. 1. An. 
                  and vaine are they that deeme ſo. All mortall
things are vncertaine,Both a kingdom and all that is therein is vaine and Vncertaine. and do ſuddenly periſh, and when thy
wealth and fortune is higheſt, then thinke thy fall and ruine is
nighest.*Valer. lib. 6. cap. vlt. Curt. lib. 7. That which we terme ſtrength, and worldly riches, are
fraile, & trāſitory things, not vnlike to the puppets or trifles that
childrē play withal.*And ſubiect to ſudden ru
                        ••
                     e. Do you not know that the talleſt trees, which
are many yeares a growing, are cut downe in an houre?*Sen. Hercul. Fur. I haue
ſeene cruel & bloody Dukes, laid in baſe priſons: & tyrants murthered
by the hāds of the multitude.*Curt. lib. 7. Neither is there any thing
ſo firme, but may receiue dōmage by that which is feeble.*Ibidem. Sometimes
the mightie Lyon, is made the nouriſhment of litle birds, and
the ruſt conſumeth iron.
               
                  
                  Our Prince then ought to temper and moderat his vnderſtanding,
                  Modeſtie like wiſe is to be embraced in externall ma
                        •
                     
                     ters.
                  yea and his actions likewiſe For the perſon of the
Prince,Cic. Phil
                        •
                      8. ought not only to content the minds, but alſo pleaſe the
eyes of his ſubiects.
               
                  Let his talke be graue: for,
                  Sen. Epiſt. As a modeſt paſe becommeth a
wiſeman, ſo ought his ſpeech be compendious,In talke. not raſh. Let him
vſe few words: away with theſe bablers,
                  For theſe common tatlers are vnprofitable. 
                  of whom it may be
ſayd, That they haue many words and little wit.*Sal. Catil. Idē ad Caeſ. All their
ſtrength and vertue lying in their tongue.*Curt. lib. 7. 
                  That old ſaying, neuer
yet deceiued me. A barking dog will neuer prooue good biter:
and the deepeſt riuers run with leaſt noiſe.
               
                  Let him vſe no exceſſe in his apparell,*In apparell. 
                  but obſerue that
which a worthie perſonage writ to a mightie king:
                  Ariſt. praef. ad Alex. that it
is more honourable and princelike, to decke and adorne the mind,
then to ſet forth the bodie with gorgious raiment. It was well
ſpoken by a Romane Emperour,
                  Marius apud Saluſt. 
                  that this ouer-neatneſſe in
attire, belonged to women, but labour to men. And wherto ſerueth
this fineneſſe in apparell?
                  Xenoph. in Hier. It ſeemeth vnto me, that Venus,
or one of the graces is ſent from God, or diſcended from aboue,
to follow the Prince.And in all other outward ſhow. 
                  I haue no other opinion of any other
outward ſhew, and concerning modeſtie, I do ſhut vp my
diſcourſe with this precept of a Scythian, which ſeemeth
not ſpoken like a Scithian; Oye princes, hold faſt your fortune
with cloſed hands,C
                        •
                     rt. lib. 8. for ſhe is ſlipperie, and will not be ſtayd,
where ſhe hath no liking to abide. And if you bridle your felicitie,
you ſhall gouerne it the better.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  By occaſion offered, he diſcourſeth of Maieſtie, as an annexed
ornament. He ſheweth what maieſtie is, and how
we ought to vſe it.
               
               
                  YEt do I not in ſuch ſort commend modeſtie,The deſcription of Maieſ
                        •
                     ie.
that I would haue our Prince deſpiſe Maieſtie:
which is a certaine reuerent highneſſe,
due to deſerued vertue, or to thoſe things which
approch neare vnto it. The Greekes name it

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , we tearme it in a priuate man

                  Authoritie, in a Prince Maieſtie.
               
               
                  It is a weapon that in gouernment is of great force,
                  Which is profitable to thoſe that gouerne. 
                  for
in peace authoritie is to be deſired to purchaſe credit:*Ci
                        •
                     . Top. Idem 
                        •
                     ro leg. Man. 
                  and
is more auaileable in the ordering of battailes, and warlike commaundements.*It properly ſpringeth from vertue, 
                        •
                     et from externall cauſes.
                  For my ſelfe. I can no more ſeparat it from the
Prince, then vertue it ſelfe, which for the moſt part dooth
engender it,
                  Idem Topi. 
                  though likewiſe the concurrence of external matters,
doth helpe much.
               
                  As firſt a kind of grauitie in behauiour,
                  From grauitie. 
                  if it be ſo tempered,
that it leane neither to melancholineſſe nor arrogancie,
*Tac. Agric. Neyther that this come to paſſe which hapneth verie ſeldome,Ibidem.
that mildneſſe do not diminiſh thy authoritie, nor ſeueritie take
away the loue of thy ſubiects. For the which cauſe Germanicus
was ſo much commended, who
                  2. Annal. with equall reuerence
was esteemed, whether he did ſhew himſelfe to the people, or
ſpeake vnto them, and in the highest pitch of Fortune, carrying a
Maieſtie and ſtately port, was neuer noted of diſdaine and arrogancie.
               Likewiſe certaine things proceeding from nature,From the comlineſſe of body, or from his ſpeech. do
much auaile herein, as if a man be of a comely ſtature,
                  15. Annal. 
                  and hath
a good grace in his ſpeech.
               
               Alſo it may be much ayded by art, as if he ſometimes abſent
himſelfe and go aſide,From a temperate paſe. for, for the moſt part they
which are too much in compaine are accounted common.
And the ſaying of Liuie is true,Liu. lib. 35. that the ordinarie and vſuall
beholding of great perſonages, breedeth ſat
                        •
                     etie, and cauſeth leſſe
reſpect vnto them.*Tac. 1. Ann. In Agric. 
                  And we beare moſt reuerence to Maieſtie
a farre off: And men alwaies hold that to be more ſtately, which
is vnknowne vnto them.
               
               But in all theſe things we ought to vſe a meane, which is
the ſalt and ſoule of euerie vertue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  He reciteth other leſſe vertues, which doe adorne the
prince, the which he doth lightly and breefely paſſe
ouer.
               
               
                  I Come now to thoſe which I tearmed leſſer
lights, theſe are vertues, not in equall meaſure
ſo excellent and neceſſarie to the prince, as
the former I recited, yet are they very profitable:
which as ſtarres I will plant, and faſten,
in the heauen of this ſupreme head (if it be
lawfull for me to ſpeake ſo.) Hearken then O Prince.
               
                  Be thou bountifull,
                  Cic. 1. Offic. 
                  for there is nothing that fitteth better
with the nature of man,Liberalitie is a worthy thing in a Prince. then liberalitie: and it beſt beſeemeth
a prince,
                  Sal. Iugur. 
                  being leſſe diſhonourable for him, to be vanquiſhed
by force, then by liberalitie. Yet this vertue is to be vſed
with diſcretion,
                  Plin. li. 7. ep. 
                  for repentance followeth haſtie liberalitie.
There ought likewiſe moderation to be had herein:
                  Yet is it to be vſed with diſcretion and moderation. 
                  For if
the ambition of the Prince do emptie the treaſurie,Tac. 2. An. it is to be
doubted leaſt he be driuen to ſupplie his wants by bad meanes.
You may ſo long draw water at this well, that in the end it
will become drie. It was well ſpoken of a graue and holy
perſon,
                  Hieron. 
                  that liberallitie is the ruine, of him that is liberall: and
they are deceaued who do imagine,Tac. 1. Hist. that prodigalitie doth graft
in them a kind of liberalitie: many know how to ſpend, but not
how to giue.
               
                  Loue chaſtitie:
                  He ought derely to loue his wife, But not to be ſubiect to her. 
                  For there can no honeſt thing remayne in a
mind corrupt with luſt.11. Annal. 
                  Giue eare ſometimes to thy wiſe,
yet not as ſenceleſſe Claudius did,
                  12. Annal. who was ruled and commaunded
by his wife, that is a hurtfull thing, both to thy
ſelfe and the common-wealth:
                  Arist. 2. For what difference is there,
whether a woman do beare rule,Polit. cap. 7. or he that gouerneth be ruled
by a woman.
               
                  Refraine from anger: either be thou not angrie at all,
                  He ought eyther to refraine from anger, or not to hide it. 
                  or
do not hide it:
                  Tac. Agric. 
                  for it is more honourable for a Prince to

offend, then to hate.*Ibidem. They which do cloake their anger are of
an euill diſpoſition, and not to be brought from it. They which
keepe ſecret their hate (which is an euident ſigne of a cruellIbidem.
thought) when they are ſeperat from companie they glut themſelues
with malice.
               
                  Make thou ſmall account of ſlaunderous ſpeeches:
                  Let him not enquire what ſl
                        •
                     unders go of him. A
worthie mind aſpireth to a great fortune, and deſpiſeth ſuch
things:*Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem. Whoſe propertie is to be pleaſaunt and peaceable, to
diſdaine, and make no reckoning of ſmall offences, & diſpleaſures.
And this is generallie true: If we are angrie with reproches,Tac. 4. An. it
ſeemeth thereby that we conſent that they are true: whereas if
we ſet light by them, they paſſe away as forgotten.
               
                  Yet haue care of thy good name & remēber that the counſelsIbidem.
of all men tend to conſider,Let him be carefull of his honour, and reputation. what is profitable for their owne
particular: But the ſtate of Princes is farre different, whoſe
cheefeſt care in all their actions, ought to be, to haue a good report.
               
                  Haue alwaies before thine eies the honour of thy poſteritie,
and imagine this with thy ſelfe, that all other things
will follow thee immediatly,Ibidem. if thou principally labour to leaue a
good memorie after thee. By the contempt of renowme vertue is
contemned.
               
                  To attaine herevnto, aduaunce learning, which languiſheth,
for if the reward and price of paines and ſtudie, be taken
away learning must needs decay.*Let him be a fauourer of learning. And effect this that vnder
thee it may receue ſpirit, and life.*11. Annal. Plin. Pane. 1. Annal. So ſhalt thou neuer want
worthie wits, to record the Historie of thy time.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE
OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL
DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtine
by luſtus Lipſius.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  That Prudence is moſt neceſſarie for a Prince: without
the vvhich, power and riches are vnprofitable. That
they ought to be intermingled together: that the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
in gouernment is of more force then the other.
               
               
                  I Haue wouen out this roial garment of vertues:
Now I purpoſe to take in hand the
webbe of Prudence. Which that I may get
thorow with, and beat with a luckie ſlaie, I
call vpon thee for ayd, ô thou true Minerua,
the eternall of-ſpring of the eternall Father.
               The vſe of Prudence is neceſſarie in all worldly affaires,The vſe of prudence in gouernment.
but eſpecially in gouernment. For without Prudence, it is
not onely weake and feeble, but I may well ſay none at all.
Who will vndertake to rule and direct a ſhip in his courſe,
without a needle that hath touched the Load-ſtone? No
more can any man enterpriſe to gouerne a common wealth,
without an vnderſtanding inſpired by this goddeſſe.
               
               Doeſt thou imagine to rule onely by force? thou art
deceaued.Without it, power is blind and headie. Such as the Cyclop (the Poets make mention
of) was, hauing loſt his eye: in like eſtate is a Prince,
that wanteth this light in his fore-front.Horat. 3. 
                        •
                     d. 
                  Force that is
not aſſisted vvith aduiſe, of it owne ſelfe deſtroyeth it ſelfe.
                  
*Cur
                        •
                     . lib. 8. 
                  Neither is that poſſeſſion permanent, which is purchaſed with
the ſword.
               
               
                  Contrarily,
                  Both of them being mixed together are of moſt force. God alwaies encreaſeth moderat power.Hora
                        •
                     . 3. 
                        •
                     d. 
                  I tearme
it moderat, by reaſon of the mixture of prudence. For as the
eloquent Orator ſayth: Power co
                     •
                  ioined with Prudence is profitable,Iſocrat. ad Demonit.
but force without it turneth rather to detriment. The
Poet applieth fitly to this purpoſe this ſentence,
                  Val
                        •
                     r. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 4. Argon. 
                  that we
must not only pur truſt in our ſtrength, for Prudence oftentimes
is of more might then much force.
               And ſurely,Otherwiſe it were a hard matter to rule men. in gouernment it is manifeſtly the ſtronger,
becauſe ſhe alone without other helpe, doth with a gentle
bridle, bring voluntaries within the compaſſe of obedience.
               
                  It is a ſtrange thing thou canſt not tame, and bring
wild beaſts into ſubiection, without certaine handling
and art, and doeſt thou imagine to get the vpper hand of
man?
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  then the which there is no liuing creature more ſtubborne,
nor that requireth to be handled with greater skill? We
are by nature fierce,
                  Who are vntoward by nature. 
                  wild, impatient in reaſonable matters,
and moſt of all of bondage.
                  Xen. 1. Paed. And we do oppoſe our ſelues against
none ſo much as againſt thoſe whome we vnderſtand, do
go about to beare rule ouer vs. This he did well perceaue,
who writ, that it is more eaſie to gouerne all other liuing creatures,
then man.Therefore Prudence is needfull. 
                  Wee ought therefore to vſe Prudence, and
to beleeue that it is the onely proper vertue belonging to a Gouernour.Ibidem.
                  Truly the euent of all ages hath,
                  Ariſt. 3. Po. 
                  and will euer inſtruct
vs,
                  Whoſe force is aboue force. 
                  that in the managing of waightie affaires,Tac 13. An more
things are brought to paſſe by good aduiſe and counſell, then by
force of armes. It is a true oracle which was ſpoken by a
Poet: The wiſedome of one prudent perſon,E
                        •
                     rip. doth ouerthrow
the force of many. Wherevnto I adde, that manie things which
of their owne nature are difficult, by counſell are made eaſie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Prudence is two fold, from our ſelues, and from others.
The firſt may be wiſhed for, but the other often falleth
out. For it is 
                        •
                     ildome, or neuer ſeene, that a Prince is of
himſelfe endued with competent wiſedome.
               
               
                  IT is not then without cauſe,Wiſedome i
                        •
                      double, that I wiſh the
Prince to be indued with this vertue, and
much more I deſire that he ſhould vſe and
practiſe it.
               
                  For there are two ſorts of wiſe men,
                  Proper, & Bo
                        ••
                     owed. 
                  as an
ancient poet very fitly ſayth.
                  Heſid. ope. 1. He is moſt of all
to be cōmended, who can foreſee all things to come: But he in like
manner doth deſerue great praiſe, that can follow the wiſe aduiſe
of others.Cic. Pro Clu. 
                  And our cunning perſuader 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   him to
be moſt wiſe who is able to diſcerne what is needfui
                     •
                   and requiſite:
and he cometh next vnto him, who can obey and execute
that which another ſhall haue wiſely inuented. And the worthieſt
Hiſtoriographer that euer writ, agreeing with theſe,
or borrowing from them,
                  Liu. 22. 
                  ſayth, I haue often heard him to be
reputed, for the cheefest wiſe man, who as occaſion ſalleth out,
can giue good inſtructions what is fitteſt to be done: next vnto
him, he which can follow the good aduiſe of others, but he which
can neither giue good counſell, nor obey the ſage inſtructions of
others, I account him in the higheſt degree of indiſcretion. And
albeit I wiſh our Prince to march in the firſt ranke, notwithſtanding
I will rather put him in the ſecond.
               
               Firſt,Proper prudence is rarely ſeene in a king. becauſe I know not how it commeth to paſſe, (or
whether I ſhould attribute it to their age, or to their education,
or to their nature, this is true, but I ſpeake it with modeſtie)
that fortune hath denied Courtiers that firſt condition of
wit and vnderſtanding.
                  Indide
                        •
                     . Next,Therefore the other is to be embraced. though they ſhould attaine to
that perfection,Cic. 1. offic. yet ſeeing euery condition and ſtate of life, may
craue the aid of man, thē may the eſtate of gouernors moſt of
all ſtand in need therof.Tac. 3. An. For it is certaine,For the charge of a kingdome is great. that a Prince can
not poſſibly by his owne wiſedome 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the knowledge of all

things:*1. Annal. Neither can the vnderſtanding of one man weild ſo great
a charge.
               
               
                  Let the Prince be wiſe by the frequentation of wiſe men:Eurip. opin. Tac. 1. Ann. 
                  and
ioyne others vnto him to beare part of ſo great a burthen. For it
is true, that many waightie affaires doe need the helpe of many.Vel. lib. 11. Tac. 12. An.
*Neither are great matters 
                        •
                     uſtained without great means. And theſe moſt burthenſome labours of a Prince,As examples teach vs. whoſoeuer
doth vndertake, ſhall need aſſiſtants.
               
                  Let him looke ouer all ages, and he ſhall neuer find, but
that great ſtates did vſe many helpers to gouerne their fortune.
*Vell. 2. Xen. 8. Paed. One man may heare and ſee ſome few things:Ibidem. But a Prince
ought to haue many eyes and many eares.*Liu. 44. 
                  If Thales himſelfe
were king, yet notwithſtanding, if he would vndertake to manage
all matters of his owne head, I would rather deeme him to
be preſumptuous then wiſe.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  That the Prince had need to ioine aſſistants vnto him,
and that with diſcretion. That they are of two ſorts,
Counſellers, and Miniſters. What they ought to be, and
what proſit commeth by them.
               
               
                  SVrely he had need of Aſſistants, and I
deeme it the cheefeſt part of princely wiſedome,
to ioine vnto him wiſe men. An Orator
of Athens perſuadeth in this fort.Princes had need of friend
                        •
                     , Which is th
                        ••
                      true treaſurie. 
                  The
principall labour of a prince ought to be,
                  Plin. Pane. 
                  to
procure to himſelfe true friends.
                  Ibidem. For a kingdome
can haue no better defence, then ſure friends.
               
               
                  Beleeue that which proceedeth from the experience of
two wiſe kings: and firſt from Micipſa of Afrique.
                  Micipſae apud Sal. Iu. It is not
force of armies,And the ſtay of their ſcepter. nor treaſure, but friends, that are the ſafegard
of a Kingdom.*Cyro apud Xeno. lib. 8. 
                  Next Cyrus of Medea ſayd: It is not this
golden Scepter that preſerueth the ſtate, but the ſtore of true
friends is the truſt and ſafest ſcepter, that kings can poſſeſſe.
               But what means wilt thou vſe to procure thee truſtie
friends?They are to be choſen with iudgement. This belongeth vnto iudgement. Moſt happie is
that Prince, and borne for the good of the common wealth,

that hath attained to that diſcretion either by nature, or experience:
yet I will in ſome ſort ſuccour him.
               There are two ſortes of Aſſiſtantes: Counſellers,
                  They are of two ſortes. and Miniſters.
               
               The firſt doe eſpeciallie aſſiſt, with their opinion and
ſpeach: The ſecond, with action, and handy worke (as it
were.)
               The former ſort are moſt venerable;Counſellers are the moſt worthy. of whom a worthy
Philoſopher writ this.Ariſt. Rhet. ad Alex. 
                  The moſt diuine thing amongeſt men is
to geue good counſell. So that it is vſed as a Prouerbe, Conſultation
ſurely,
                  Apud Plat. 
                  is a certaine ſacred thing.
               
               
                  Counſellers then are moſt neceſſary. Are not kingdomes,
Citties,
                  Sall: ad Caeſar. 
                  and priuate families,
                  A true ſaying. 
                  preſerued by counſell? I haue
euer obſerued and found this true, that all kingdomes, Citties,
and natiōs, haue with happineſſe enioyed their authoritie, whileſt
they were vpheld with ſound and wholeſome counſell: but when
fauour, feare, pleaſure, began to corrupt counſell, their wealth
immediatly dimmiſhed, afterwardes their ſtate became a proye to
the ennemy, and laſtly they were compelled to endure the yoke of
bondage. I will therefore firſt as reaſon leadeth me intreat
of Counſellers.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  A more diſtinct definition of Counſellers: and their chiefe
partes expreſſed to be goodneſſe and experience of matters.
That choice ought to be made of them, by their
fame.
               
               
                  
                     I Call thoſe Counſellers, who being faithfull,Counſellers
and hauing experience, in the affaires of the
world, and in men, do geue good aduiſe, either in
peace, or warre. I termed them faithfull, that
is to ſay good men.
                  Plin. Pane. Arist. 6. Eth. Nicom. Cap. 7. Tac. Agric. 
                  For I hold the beſt men,Ought to be faithfull, or of an honeſt life. Generally prudent.
to be faithfulleſt.And particularly in matters of their owne countrie. 
                  I added experienced, in the
affaires of the world, and of men: that is to ſay, wiſe men. For
this is the proper dutie of a wiſe man, to geue good counſell. Such
I eſteeme them to be, who are not ignorant in the manners, and

mindes, of the Prouince.
               
                  Admit not raſhlie ſtrangers to thy Counſell, for I hold it
moſt aſſured, that they are able to g
                     •
                  ue beſt counſeil in a commō
wealth,Ci
                        •
                     . 2. de Orat. Sal. Catil. who are beſt acquainted with the ſtate thereof.
               
                  But receaue old men willing lie: for where the body is weakeſt,Old men.
there vnderſtanding and wiſedome is ſtrongest.
               
                  Young men for the moſt part are improuident,
                  Ibidem. effeminate,
and tender, wauering, and inconſtant by reaſon of their age,
and are eaſely entrapped by deceipt. This old ſaying did neuer
yet deceaue me, counſell of old, and execution of young men.Plutar.
               
               Thirdly,Hauing tried both fortunes. thoſe thou chuſeſt ought to haue made triall of
both fortunes, for it is a true precept, that loſſes, are leſſons to
vs: The ſaying of Mithridates, may hereunto to be fitlie applied,
fortune by taking many things from me,
                  Sal. in Fre. 
                  hath taught me
by experience to geue good counſell.
               
               Fourthly,Of an indifferēt capacitie. as I would not haue Counſellers be ouerdull of
conceipt: So would I haue thee not to chuſe theſe ouerſharpe
wittes. I laie open to thee, this ſecret, for a precept:
Thoſe that haue ſomewhat a blunt wit,
                  This. lib. 3 
                  for the moſt part are
more capable to rule a common wealth, then they which are quicker
ſpirited. The reaſon hereof is, that theſe ſubtill, and firie
wittes, are in a continuall motion,Curt. 4. 
                  and more ſit to ſet new
matters a broach, then to gouerne.
               
               But where may a Prince finde out ſuch perſons?They are to be choſen without briberie. By the report of many. 
                  He muſt
not herein be carried away,
                  Tac. Agric. 
                  thorow his owne priuate affection,
nor by the prayers, and prayſe, of a fewe. But if it may ſo be it
were neceſſarie that our Prince, had a perfect knowledge
of them, or at the leaſt that he made triall of them, at the
touch ſtone of common report.Plin. Pane. For any priuate perſon may
deceaue, and be deceaued, but one man cannot abuſe all, nor be
be
                        •
                     uiled by all men. This was long ſince verie aptlie ſpoken
to a Prince:Idem. Ibidem. 
                  Beleeue, that what reputation ſoeùer we carry abroad
in the world, ſuch men we are, and no better.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  A declaration of the third dutie. To giue good counſell.
Which is as it were, compriſed in fiue precepts.
               
               
                  I Did with reaſon adde, that it is required in
them, to giue good counſell. Is not this the
marke they ſhould aime at, and as it were
the hauen, that faithfull and good Counſellers
ſhould ſaile vnto? Whereat no doubt
they ſhall arriue, if they direct their courſe
by thoſe lines I will preſcribe them.
               
                  Firſt, I preſent vnto them Piette,Cypr. in. Ep. Plin. Pane. 
                  as a diuine law to gouerne
their counſels by:
                     
                        •
                     et them be godly. 
                  For, this is a generall & true rule, that men
cannot deliberate any thing prouidently and vprightly, without
the ayd and aſſiſtance of God, whoſe honour and glorie they are
firſt to propoſe and ſet before them.
               
                  Next vnto that I ioyne libert
                     •
                  e of ſpeech,Free of ſpeech. 
                  that they may with
a ſtout courage, & without feare, vtter their opinion: & not
frame their ſpeech,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. Plin▪ lib. 3. Ep. 9. 
                  rather with the fortune of the Prince, then
with the Prince him ſelfe. For libertie in words euen as faith,
do at the firſt bluſh offend th
                     •
                  ſe, who they oppoſe themſelues againſt,
but afterwards being well diſgeſted, they are well accepted
of and commended.Tac. 11. An. 
                  Wretched are they, who giue not leaue to the
troth, and are ſtill in ſuſpence, and do anſwer enclining that way
they ſee the Prince led: being doubtfull,
                  3. Hiſt. 
                  and ſo faſhioned that
they commend or diſallow things, to be good, or bad, by the euent
or ſucceſſe of them.
               
                  Thirdly Conſtancie. For they are highly to be blamed, who
being irreſolute and vncertaine,Sal. ad Caeſ. are carried hither and thither,Conſtant and firme.
as the affection of others doth leade them, being ſometimes of one
opinion, ſometimes of another, ballancing the euill, or good of the
common wealth, as the arrogancie, and diſsimulation of thoſe
vvhich do gouerne, doth leade them.
               
                  Yet I would not haue them opinatiue: Neither do I deeme
that he ought to be accuſed of inconſtancie,Cic pro Balbo. who like vnto a ſhipman,But with moderation.
doth moderate his opinion, in the rough tempeſt of a Common
wealth.Seneca. 
                  For he is truly prouident and wiſe, that keepeth

not alwayes the ſame paſe, but the ſame way.*Idem. And he is not
therefore to be eſteemed variable, but rather applyable, and fitting
things to the purpoſe. And that I may cōclude in a word,
who holdeth not one, and the ſame courſe, though he tend,
to one and the ſame hauen.
               
               
                  Fourthly,
                  Let thē be modeſt & pleaſing Modeſtie. And they are alwayes to be commended,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt.
who do gouerne after a pleaſing maner: and vndertake
the managing of all things, with mild induſtrie. For oftentimes,
we muſt vſe a certaine arte, and pliantneſſe, and take a contraie
courſe when we may not ſafely paſſe, by the common
high way. Such a one was Cornelianus Piſo, vvho by his will
was neuer author,6. Annal. of any ſeruile ſentence, tempering all things
vviſely, as be was forced by neceſſitie. Such a one was Sedipus,
vvho amended many things,4. Annal. that were ill handled in counſell, by
the obſtinate flatterie of others: and wanted not the commendation
of moderation, his authoritie, and good grace, being alwayes
of like estimation with his Prince.
               
                  Fiftly,
                  To conclude, ſecret. Secrecie. Silence ſurely is the beſt and moſt aſſured
bond, in the adminiſtration of vvaightie affaires.*Val
                        •
                     r. 2. c. 2 Curt. 4. Neither can
he enterpriſe great matters, who knoweth not how to be ſecret.
Counſellers then ought to be ſecret, but (as I aduiſe them)
nor ouer-curious to learne ſecrets. For, It is not lawfull,Tac. 3. Ann. but
moſt dangerous, to ſearch into the inward thoughts of a Prince;
and if he be diſpoſed to keepe any thing ſecret, you ought not go about
to boult it out, nor diſcouer it.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  What things are to be auoyded of a counſeller: and firſt
what lets, and ſhadowes (as it vvere) there are, that
do hinder them in their courſe, vvhich are noted to be
fower.
               
               
                  I Haue ſhewed you the plaine, and eaſie wayes,
wherein our Counſellers may ſafely ſet ſailes; but
there are likewiſe ſhadowes, and rockes, which I
will giue them notice of: the which if they doe
not with care ſeeke to auoyde, they may eaſily become a

ſport, and paſtime to the winde.
               
                  Amongſt the ſhallowes, ſtubburne ſelfe will is one,
                  Stubburneſſe is a hinderance of counſell. 
                  againſt
the which this ſhip of perſwaſion, hath oftentimes touched.
For ſome men are ſo contentious by nature,
                  Tac. Hiſt. 
                  that they can do
no other thing then thwart other mens opinions,*Indidem. vvho oppugne
the counſels vvhich they themſelues do not aduiſe, though they
be neuer ſo good, and profitable:*Indidem. and do ſtubburnly vvithſt and
thoſe, who are moſt wiſe, and expertenced: Shewing them ſelues
moſt indiſcreet in two ſorts: whether it be that they would
haue all the reſt only,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ucret. to be made wiſe (as it were) by their ſpeech:
or otherwiſe,
                  Tac. 14. An. that if they haue any credit, or authoritie, in them
ſelues, they ouerthrow the ſame by their dayly variance.
               
                  Likewiſe Diſcord amongſt Counſellers them ſelues,
                  1. Hiſt. 
                  is an
other of theſe ſhallowes.As likewiſe diſſention. 
                  For oftentimes, the grudge of a priuate
quarrell, doth incenſe and prouoke enimitie, to the preiudice
of a common vvealth.
               
                  Thirdly Paſſion:Sal. Catil. Ibidem. 
                  from the which ſurely it is requiſite,Alſo partialitie to either partie. that
al they, that do conſult of doubtfull matters ought to be free. For
where they trouble the mind, it is a hard matter to diſcerne the
troth.Cic. 1. Offic. 
                  And eſpecially, where anger beareth ſway, there can
be nothing rightly, and conſideratly aduiſed:*Stat. 
                  and violence can
neuer gouerne any thing well.
               Fourthly Couetouſneſſe,
                  Finally deſire of gaine. or a greedie deſire of ones priuate
gaine. This true ſaying I gathered out of Lauie his ſecretes,
that priuate matters, haue ſtill hurt publike conſultations,
                  Li
                        •
                     . lib. 22. Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  and
vvill do euer. And ſurely is it anie wonder? Euery man his
particular profit, is a moſt peſtiferous poyſon, againſt true zeale,
                  Which corrupteth & Breaketh all things.
and iudgement: and Couetouſneſſe teacheth vs to ſell all things
for money:*Sal. Catil. Ibidem. 
                  It ſubuerteth faith, and honeſtie, two principall
inſtruments of good counſell. Yet we ſee all ſortes of men
are commonly led away therwith, & eſpecially marchants:
neither ought we to make ſlight accompt of the law which
was eſtabliſhed amongſt the Thebanes,
                  It is eſpecially ingrafted in marchants. forbidding, that no
man ſhould be admitted to the adminiſtration,
                  Ariſt. 3. pol. 
                  and gouernement
of a common vvealth, except he had firſt left off traffick and the
trade of marchandiſe, the space of ten yeares.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  What impediments, and (as it were) reckes, do hinder, and
ſtay a good mind? He ſheweth that they are three in
number.
               
               
                  
                     AMongſt the Rockes,Confidence is hurtfull. 
                  againſt the which this
ſhip may be driuen, and daſht a ſunder, the
firſt that appeareth is
                  Cic. Pro leg. Man. Confidence, vvhen the
ſame is not conioyned with vviſedome. It is a
moſt true ſaying,
                  He! that hath vnderſtanding, let him learne this. 
                  that theſe raſh counſels,Liu. lib. 35. at
the firſt ſhew are pleaſing, in executing hard, &
difficult, and in the end, wofull. Be not thou deceaued, for the
firie,
                  Thuc, lib. 1. 
                  and haſtie men, do boldly bolt foorth their opinion, but
vvhen they come to matter of execution, they tremble, and faint.
I rather aſſent to warie Mimus,Let them be warie in counſell and hardie in execution. 
                  who was of this mind, that
he vvhich hath diſcretion to feare,Publius. knoweth beſt how to vndertake
an enterpriſe. And I agree with the Greeke writer, that
he is moſt aduiſed, who in deliberating is poſed and ſtayed,Herod. lib. 7 and
doth caſt before vvhat doth happen after, and in performing is
reſolute.
               Greedie deſire is another rocke.
                  Couetouſneſſe is to be reſrayned. For fewe things are vvell
brought to paſſe with ouer-coueting,Thuc, 6. but many things are happily
atchieued by heedie conſideration.
               
                  Vnto this,
                  Haſtineſſe is to be eſchued. Haſtineſſe, is annexed, verie daungerous for
ſhipwracke in this ſea. For he that is caried away with a longing,
and greedie deſire, runneth on headlong: and who ſoeuer
maketh ouer much haſt,
                  Liu. lib. 22. 
                  marreth all. All things ſort a
good effect, to him that is prouident, but haſtineſſe is blinde, and
cannot foreſee.The very plague of prudence. 
                  And it is truly ſaid,
                  Idē lib. 31. there is nothing more daungerous,
and hurtfull in matter of counſell then celeritie. Wherefore
there are two things that are moſt oppugnant,Thuc. lib. 3. and contrary
to a ſound iudgement,To the which ſlowneſſe is a freind. And haſtie perſons are ſeldom happie. haſtineſſe, and anger. I loue thoſe that
are ſomewhat ſlow, vvho vtter not any rawe speech,Plaut. Mil. but that
vvhich is well diſgeſted, as the Comical poet ſaith. For wheras
ſome are raſ
                     •
                   in their conſultations,V
                        •
                     l. lib. 2. and play the men in executing:*Tac. 4. Hiſt.
                  & ſome of ſudden determinations, but of a happie ſucceſſe;
why ſhould I be moued herewith? I knowe that this

happeneth by chance, whereto I intend not to truſt, but will
rather be ruled by reaſon, and by this precept, that ſudden repentance
followeth theſe haſtie braines,
                  Lin. lib. 31. vvhich commonly commeth
too late, and therefore is vnprofitable to them. We haue
ſeene,
                  Except it be in miſchie
                        •
                     e. 
                  we do daily behold, and ſhall alwayes be eye witneſſes,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt.
                  that this is euer true, that wicked deuiſes proue beſt on the
ſudden dispatch, and good counſels vvith deliberation: which are
as proper in conſultation,Yet it is ſit for execution. 
                  as celeritie in matter of action: For
we ought to conſult ſlowly,Dimoſt, Exord. 22. Ariſt. 6. Ethic. cap. 9. and to execute ſpeedily. I ende with
this waightie ſaying of a wiſe man, that we ought with expedition
to execute a thing once concluded on, but to conclude vvith
deliberation.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  How a Prince ought to behaue him ſelfe in hearing counſel.
Certaine precepts concerning this matter.
               
               
                  I Haue faſhioned Counſellers,Let the Prince frame him ſelfe to conſultation the matter it ſelfe
leadeth me, that I ſhould now frame him that is
to receiue counſell. For it were to ſmall purpoſe,
that they were prepared to giue counſel, if he him
ſelfe were not capable to receiue the ſame and all the licour
of wholſome counſell ſhould be ſpilled, if it ſhould want a
meete veſſell into the which it ought to diſtill. Let the
Prince then obſerue theſe rules in taking counſell.
               
                  Firſt let him deliberate in time.
                  Caeſ. lib. 3. Com. He which is conſtrained to
enter into conſultation,Let him take counſel in time. at the inſtant when the matter ſhould be
put in execution, is ſtill in feare, and it ſeemeth vnto him, all is in
dannger to miſcarrie.*Sen. Ep. Theſe ſuddaine counſels do properly
belong to fencers,
                  Cic. Phil. 
                  not to Princes. The inſtances of times do
much preuaile, in a common wealth: and it importeth much, whether
one, and the ſame thing, be determined, vnder taken and performed,
either before, or after.
               
                  In a popular eſtate, this errour often falleth out,
                  Which hapneth rarely in a popular eſtare. 
                  where
thorow liberty this ill hapneth, that they being not cōmaunded, do
ſeldom meete altogether in their aſſemblies:*Tac. in Ger. Ibid. So that many times,
two,Let him not be too long in conſulting. or three dayes do paſſe in ſtaying for thē who ſhould cōſult &
gene their aduiſe. The Prince likewiſe ought to take great

heed hereof, leaſt that by fruictleſſe delayes,3. Hiſt. the time fit for
execution, be waſted in deliberation:*Illic. Nor the day ſpent in
wordes, when the enterpriſe ſhould be put in practiſe.
               
                  Let him heare with iudgement,
                  Let him diſcerne & iud
                        •
                     e. 
                  and not like vnto ſenceleſſe
Claudius, who neither did loue, nor hate but as he Was prouoked,12. An.
& induced thereunto by others.*Horat. He is a moueable blocke,
who is ſtirred by his ſeruants, as if he had no ſinewes of his own.
               
                  Yet let him auoide Obſtinacie:Let him not be contentitious. 
                  For this is a diuine ſaying
of the Prince Marcus. It is more decent and conueni
                     •
                  nt that I
ſhould follow the aduiſe,Capitol. in M. Anto. Philoſ. of ſo many, and ſuch worthy friends, then
that they ſhould onely be ruled by my will.
               
                  Let him keep ſecret his determinatiō,
                  Let him notopen his determination. 
                  following this rule:
Deliberate with many what is beſt to be done,Veget. lib. 3 but what you intend
to do with very fewe, or rather with thy ſelfe. Surelie ſecrecie
is the ſoule of Conſultations:Ibidem. & no counſels proue better
then thoſe, vvhich are hidden from the enemy before they come to
action.
               
                  Let him freelie permit his Counſellers, to ſpeake their
minde boldlie,
                  Let him loue thoſe that are free of ſpeach, and Hate flatterers which are hurtfull. 
                  not louing this court holy vvater,*Plut. Apo. Curt. lib. 8. Flattery
doth more often ſubuert & ouerthrow the wealth of a kingdome,
then an open enemie.3. Hiſt. 
                  His eſtate is deſperate, vvhoſe eares are
ſo framed, that he cānot heare any thing but that vvhich is pleaſing,
and turneth to his hurt, and doth reiect that vvhich is profitable,
if it ſeeme any thing ſharpe.*Capitol. in Gord. Iun. That Emperour is miſerable
from vvhom the troth is hidden.
               
                  Let him heare with indifferencie: and keepe this precept
ſecret,
                  Let him neither reward, 
                  that he geue no rewardes in regarde of anie good aduiſe,
                  nor
                  leaſt ſome vnder hope of gaine do decline from the
troth,
                  Puniſh in regarde of counſell geuing. and to currie fauour, ſpeake againſt their conſcience.Thuc. lib. 3 
                  But
let him likewiſe take heede, that he do not on the other ſide
puniſh thoſe, which haue not hapned to geue good counſell.
For no man vvould vtter his opinion,Curt, lib. 3. if it ſhould turne to a matter
of danger, if the ſame chaūced to be diſliked. Neither ought
he to thinke them the trustier,Ibidem. that do geue beſt counſell (that
is) vvhoſe aduiſe proſpereth beſt.For the euent commeth from fortune or rather from 
                        •
                     od. 
                  For it is certaine,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  that many
times, bad counſels haue better ſucceſſe then good, becauſe Fortune
gouerneth diuers things, as it pleaſeth her. And that this

is true,
                  Plau. Pſeu. we ſee that this goddeſſe alone doth ouerthwart and ſubuert
the counſels of a hundred wiſe men together, with whome
(for a concluſion) I admoniſh our Prince,
                  And certaine things are about our rea
                        •
                     h 
                  he do not ſtriue,
but leaue to deſtime thoſe hard and intricate counſels,Tac. 6. An. which
cannot be brought to a concluſion.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  That ſecret meetings and conſultations of Courtiers, ought
to be reiected.
               
               
                  I Adde herevnto this ſmal note of a moſt important
matter: that is,Court counſellors are bad. that he ſhould vtterly
reiect a kind of domeſticall counſell,
which ſome do vnaduiſedly imbrace; which
is commonly framed by ſome followers of
the court,Tac. 3. An. 
                  who do vſe to commend whatſoeuer
the Prince doth,
                  Cic. ad Q. Fra. ep. 1. l. 1 
                  whether it be good or bad:*Who ſpeake pleaſing things. Do ſecke their owne gaine. 
                  and for their owne
priuat lucre, with counterfeiting and diſsimulation, do ſtill whiſper
ſomewhat in his eares.
               
               But do thou take heed and beware of them: for who ſoeuer
is ſo officious vnto thee in priuat▪ 
                  careth little for that
which belongeth to the good of thy eſtate,
                  Ibidem. 
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the leaſt part therof.
And though he ſeeme neuer ſo ſufficient,Ibidem. yet this ſort of followers
or ſeruaunts,
                  Diſhonor the Prince. 
                  that do ſo fawne, and ſeeke to pleaſe, can carrie
no credit with them, and much leſſe profit the Prince. And
troth it ſelfe admoniſheth and ſayth,Vopiſcusin Aureliano. that theſe chamber
counſellors,Yea and ſell him. 
                  do ſell the beſt, the warieſt, and wiſeſt Emperor.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Precepts concerning Miniſters. And three obſeruations,
to the which they ought to be tied.
               
               
                  ANd now that I haue throughly finiſhed my diſcourſe
cōcerning Counſellers, I do paſſe vnto the
other ſort of Aſsiſtants,
                  What Miniſters of a Prince are. In publike. which are Miniſters. I call
thoſe Miniſters, who in publike or priuate, do vndertake
any function, for the ſeruice of the Prince. In publike, as

Gouernors, Preſidents, officers of the Exchequer, Iudges,
and to be ſhort, they which in part do manage the affaires of
a kingdome or common wealth.
               In priuat,In priuate. as they are for the moſt part who do follow the
Court to adorne and ſet forth the ſame: which in one word
we do tearm Courtiers. Of the which leſſe care may be had.
But they which are to bee imploied in publike affaires,
ought in my opinion to be choſen with great care: and eſpecially
that theſe three things do concur in them.
               Firſt,They are to be choſen in regard of their ſtocke. Baſe perſons are to be reiected. that they be of an honeſt ſtocke or parentage. For
as a piller of Philoſophie ſayd:Ari. 5. Pol. 
                  It is most likely that they will
prooue beſt who do come of moſt honourable parents. And ſurely
that Prince hath little worth in him, who placeth neere
his perſon men of ſmall value or account.Plin, Pane. 
                  And it is an infallible
token, that the Prince hath no great honour in him, when
his principall officers are men of a baſe ſtocke.
                  Except they be indued with ſome ſinguler vertue. I do except thoſe
in whom any excellent vertue doth appeare: for then do I
freely confeſſe,Vell. 2. 
                  that who ſo is most vertuous, he is accounted
to be most noble. And in whoſe mind ſoeuer vertue is ingrafted,
                  Ibidem,
                  we ought to attribute much honour vnto him.
               
               
                  The ſecond obſeruation I giue,
                  Honeſt men are to be choſen. 
                  is their manner of life,
which eſpecially I regard. For I haue read,
                  Apud. Ca
                        •
                     . in Alex. 
                  that, that common
wealth is better and more aſſured, where the Prince is ill conditioned,
rather then that, where the Miniſters are of a bad diſpoſition.
It is then moſt requiſit, that they be of a good behauiour,
and that this precept be of force with them,
                  Claud. Cic. ad Q. Irat. Ep. 1. 
                  that authoritie
is onely purchaſed by vertue.*Nor ſuch as haue an euill name. Neither ought the Prince
giue any credit to thoſe, who are ill reported of, nor commit any
part of his estate into their charge:Nor ſuch as are ſuſpected. 
                  no, not to them whoſe
good life he ſhall ſtand in doubt of. Is it not farre better to
appoint thoſe to beare office, and to aſſiſt in gouernment,Tac. in Agr. who are
without fault, then others whome you muſt needs blame, after
they haue offended?Their fault is the Princes. 
                  Surely I deeme it ſo.
                  Sen. Med. 
                  For the euill deeds of
euery man are layd to the Prince his charge: and it ſeemeth, that
he which doth not withſtand offences when he may, doth in ſome
ſort giue commaundement to do them. It is his dutie,
                  Cic. ad Q. Frat. in this
charge of gouernment, to haue care, that not only he himſelfe

do benefit the common-wealth, but that his officers do the
ſame likewiſe.
               The third note I giue,They are to be choſen by their diſpoſitiō. is their Naturall inclination, the
which in as much as it is different, and vnlike in euery one,
Some one being by nature inclined to handle matters of ſtate:
                  Plutar. Pol. precept.
                  ſome other diſpoſed to follow the warre:
                  Euery man is to be vſed according to his naturall inclination. the firſt thing that a
Prince ought to do,Ibidem. 
                  is to call euery one (as neare as may be) to
that function he is most apt vnto. Mecenas atchieued many
things very fitly, which Agrippa could not bring to paſſe:
and the poet ſayd well,Propert. li. 3 that all things are not alike agreeable
to all men.
               
               
                  Next,
                  They ought not to be of too high a reach. 
                  he ought to haue an inſight into this their naturall
inclination: that is, he ought to make choiſe of thoſe that
are well diſpoſed, not of ſuch who are preſumptuous and
high minded,
                  Tac. 6. An. 
                  that they may be fit for thoſe matters they do vndertake,
and not thinke themſelues too good for the charge they
execute. This caution of Tiberius is not ſlightly to be ouerpaſſed:
who did not affect thoſe that excelled in vertue,1. Ann. and deteſted
them that were vicious. Fearing leaſt thoſe that did ſo
ſurpaſſe, might be a ſtumbling blocke in his owne way: and thoſe
of the worſer ſort a ſhame and diſhonour to the common wealth.
               Thoſe then of the middle ſort are the beſt, to whoſe fidelitie,Thoſe of the middle ſort are fit.
both in times paſt, & at this day, Princes may with moſt
ſafetie commit their ſecret affaires.
                  3. Ann.
               
               
                  Where may one find a man of an vncorrupt and free ſpeech?
*Eod. lib. Eod. Sith flatterie being couered with plainneſſe, is beſt pleaſing to
Princes?
               May I thinke I haue with reaſon exhorted you,Yet herein a right choiſe ſildome hapneth. or rather
that I haue thorowly perſuaded, and ſetled you in this opinion?
I ſtand in feare I ſhall hardly do it. For I know not
how,4. Ann. this vice of affection doth follow the Court. And the
Prince as well as others, by a certaine deſtinie in his natiuitie, is
inclined to theſe flatterers, and they that vtter their mind plainly,
are hatefull to him.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Certaine precepts ſet downe for Miniſters themſelues,
as their ſafegard. Firſt concerning inferior officers:
next touching thoſe who are in higher calling. That
all authoritie in court is vnſtable.
               
               
                  I Will not diſcourſe further concerning Ministers,
but I will inſtruct thē in ſome points.
You good men which frequent the Court,
your life, and the way wherein you walke, is
verie ſlipperie: and as a holy perſon affirmed,
thorow many dangers you come vnto a further
perill.
                  The Court is fall of danger. Wherefore you ought to be very circumſpect,Aug. 8. conf. cap. 6. and to
ſtay your ſelues well, leaſt you fall. I will ſupport you with
theſe precepts.
               You which are of a low degree,Officiouſneſſe becommeth ſeruaunts. ſhew your ſelues officious:
For the more dutifull and readie a man is in the ſeruice of
his Prince,Tac. 1. An. 
                  the ſooner he commeth to honour and preferment.
               
               Be you likewiſe profitable,Let them be profitable. leaſt that agreeable to the old
prouerbe, you be not as the moaths and mice of the court.
                  Conſtant.
               
               Be not ouer-ſhamefaste.
                  Boldneſſe. For it is certaine,Imp. dictū. Sen. Trag. Hip. 
                  that baſhfulneſſe
is but an euill officer to ſerue a Prince.
               
               
                  But you which carrie credit,
                  Modeſtie. 
                  and hold the cheefeſt places
in court, it becommeth you not to be of that cariage and behauiour,
you ought to meaſure your ſelues,Plin. Pane. not by the Princes
fortune,A quiet diſpatch of ou
                        •
                      buſineſſe. but by your owne. Thoſe things you take in hand, do
them without oſtentation. They are alwaies pleaſing, who
do ſo behaue themſelues, that in managing waightie affaires,Vell. 2.
they ſeeme as if in a manner they did nothing. Such a one was
Piſo: for no man euer with more feruencie deſired his eaſe,Eod. lib. nor
with more facilitie, finiſhed that he went about, nor with better
grace enterpriſed that which was neceſſarie to be done, without
any manner bragge or ſhow that he was much buſied.A diſſembling of vertues. 
                  This is the
verie means to auoid enuie, which whilſt ſome men haue
fought to qualifie, they haue fallen euen to the imitating of vices.Tac. 16. An
                  Which was well conſidered by thoſe ancient Mecenates,

who being enuironed with ſo many delights,Claud. de were able to keepe
and preſerue their mind free from all manner vice. And Criſpus
his diſcreet nephue,
                  Tac. 3. An. who differing from others,O worthie perſon ſit to be 
                        〈◊〉
                      a Court. ſeeming to be
more prone to daintineſſe and pleaſure, did not withſtanding, with
a forcible and ſtout courage, applie himſelfe to the handling of
important matters, which he performed with most diligence vnder
a ſhew of idleneſſe.
               
                  He that is wiſe,
                  Let them refer al they receaue to the Prince. 
                  let him obſerue this, to aſcribe nothing to
himſelfe,
                  Tac. 
                        〈…〉
                     . nor to delight himſelfe in the praiſe of thoſe things he
hath brought to paſſe, but as a miniſter, refer his fortune to the
author and perſon that ſet him on worke.
               
                  Let him be as the Moone, and attribute all the brightneſſe
of his glorie to that Sunne.Aemd. Pro. in Dat. This is the condition of Kings, that
they lay the burthen of thoſe things that fal not out proſperouſlie,
on their ſeruaunts necks, and applie their happie ſucceſſe to
themſelues. Agrippa did wiſely admoniſh him,Let them take the labour to themſelues, and attribute the glorie to the Prince. that intended to
conſerue his credit in Court,Dio. l. 11. c. 9 to obſerue two things: the one, that
with his labours he ſhould molli
                     •
                  ie the hardneſſe of matters: the
other, that hee ſhould leaue the glorie of atchieuing them, to
others.
               
                  In generall doeſt thou determine to liue euer in Court?
then acquaint thy ſelfe with theſe two,
                  Let them be patient, & Warie in the higheſt degree. 1. Patience, (by the
ancient example of him,
                  Sen. 2. de ira. 
                  who being demaunded, how he had
attained to that great age in Court? (a thing which chaunceth
verie ſildome) anſwered, By ſuffering wrong and giuing thanks)
2. And Warie circumspection,Let them be patient, & Warie in the higheſt degree. 
                  becauſe many will ſeeke to entrap
thee,
                  Sen. Hip. and deceipt beareth great ſway in Princes courts.
There is the place,
                  For the court is the place of deceipt. where the mind of euerie one burneth with
a deſire to reprehend and controll the deeds and words of other
men:Sal. ad. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . to which end it ſeemeth, that neither their mouth is wide
enough, nor their tongue readie enough. There are ſecret ſpies
and enemies,
                  Tac. 1. hist. 
                  who do priuily defame the poore ſoule, that knoweth
nothing thereof, and to the end he may with more ſubtiltie be
intrapped, they commend him openly. Why ſhould I abuſe thee?
Albeit thou art able to gard thy ſelfe from all others,Sen. Praes. l. 4. Q. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . thou ſhalt
not withſtanding be endangered by thine owne fauorits.The authoritie in court is ſlipperie. 
                  And
though no man ſeeke thine ouerthrow, thou wilt fal of thine

owne accord. For there is nothing in the world, leſſe firme,Tac. 13. An and
more vnſtable, then a power that is not able to ſupport it ſelfe.
Conſider thoſe well deſeruing Penſioners in Court,
                  3. Ann. they retain
rather a ſhow of the Princes friēdſhip, then any effect therof:
whether this proceed rather of ſome imperfection in kings,
                  Kings are vnconſtant.
(whoſe willes as they are vehement, ſo they are variable.)Sal. Iug. * Or,
that great ſtates are by deſtinie ordained,Deſtinie vncertaine, & not to be of any long
continuance,Tac. 3. An. and either they wax wearie, when they haue giuen
all, or theſe others whē they ſee nothing left that they may craue.
But all goeth well,
                  Hapneth vnexpected. 
                  if ſome other Arateas voice bee not
heard exclaiming. O Cephalus theſe are the rewards and recompences
of Princes fauours.Plut. in Ar. 
                  Theſe things fall out daylie,
but they ſhall neuer happen to me.
               
               
                  And let who ſo liſt ſtand aloft on the ſlipperie height of the
Court,Sen. Thyeſt. as for me,The Author deſireth to be farre from Iupiter, for feare of lightening. I will fill my ſelfe with pleaſant eaſe, and in an
obſcure place will take the benefit of quiet leaſure.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE
OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL
DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtine
by Iuſtus Lipſius.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Proper Prudence, to wit, that which is requiſite to be in a
Prince, can hardly be tied to precepts. That it extendeth
very farre, that it is vncertaine and couered. Which
is the cauſe why there can no certaine rules be giuen
therof.
               
               
                  I Haue troden out the path of forraine Prulence,
now I enter into the field of that which

                     •
                  oth peculiarly belong to a Prince, which is
indeed a ſpacious field, for who can find out
any certaine way or limits thereof? It is a
verie diffuſed thing, confuſed, & obſcure.
                  Generally all humane affairs are the matter Prudence worketh on. And euerie particular thing. Firſt
it is diffuſed, for what is there that ſtretcheth further then the
affaires of this world? vnto which generally Prudence belongeth,
yea to euery particular action. Heare the Philoſopher;
Prudence concerneth particular matters,
                  Ariſt. 6. Eth. cap. 8. 
                  the knowledge
whereof, a man attaineth vnto by experience, but particulars are
infinite, which is the cauſe why we cannot cōprehend them
within the compaſſe of Art, nor containe them within the
account of number. For Precepts ought to be limitted and cortaine.
                  Sen. Ep. 85. Ibidem.
                  * And if rules cannot be determined by art, they are without
the reach of wiſdome.
               
               Next it is a confuſed thing,It is imploied about things vncertaine. becauſe all that we call Prudence,
is indeed, vnſtable and wauering. For what other thing
is Prudence, then the election of thoſe things, which neuer
remaine after one and the ſame manner?
               
                  
Now, if the things themſelues are vncertaine,Prudence is variable. 
                  Prudence it
ſelfe likewiſe muſt of neceſſitie be ſo, and ſo much the rather,
becauſe it is not onely tied to the things themſelues,
but to their dependents, hauing regard vnto the times, the
places, and to men and for their leaſt change, ſhe changeth
her ſelfe, which is the reaſon why ſhe is not in all places alike,
no nor the ſame in one and the ſelfe ſame thing. But
the nature of Art is farre different,Ari. 6. Eth. cap. 3. 
                  We giue beſt credit to that
which we know of his owne nature is not ſubiect to change. And
ſurely it is impoſſible for any m
                     •
                  n to reduce that which is
vncertaine, to certaine and ſtrict limits of precepts.
               Laſtly,It is darke, by reaſon that 
                        〈◊〉
                      cauſes of things are vnknown vnto vs. it is obſcure, becauſe the affaires and ſucceſſe of
worldly matters are couered with a thicke miſt.Plin. Pane. For God
doth hide their beginnings from vs, and for the moſt part the
cauſes of good and euill are kept ſecret from vs, vnder diuers
forms And who is there that euen in ordinarie matters doth
not rather doubt of their cauſes, then retain a perfect knowledge
of them? Now without the vnderſtanding of cauſes,
there can be no Art, no nor any grounded doctrine.Or that man ought not to enter into the knowledge of them. I adde
moreouer▪ that in this publike and ciuile gouernment albeit
it be reckoned amongſt thoſe thinges which are of this
world, the greater part of the cauſes notwithſtanding come
front aboue, and are not to be found out on earth. And as
Lucretius ſayth;Lucret. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 5. 
                  A certaine hidden force doth continually
trample vnder foot the affaires of this world, and ſpurneth at the
glorious Scepters, and princely ornaments, and ſeemeth to make
a ſcorne of them.
               
               Wherfore let vs confeſſe the troth that both I and others
are blind in this matter. Neither is there any that hath as yet
I will not ſay fullie ſet downe the precepts belonging to
Prudence, but not ſo much as made trial therof. What then?
Shall I ſit ſtill and be ſilent? The matter I haue in hand, and
the order therof do forbid it. And I wil rather like the ſhipman
(who hapning in ſome ſhould▪ being not able to hold any
ſetled and direct courſe) trace out ſome way confuſedly
by the ſtarres. O thou who ouer-ruleſt the ſtars, be thou
my guide.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II
               
                  The deuiſion of that Prudence vvhich properly belongeth
to a Prince, into Ciuill, and Militarie. Ciuill prudence
againe is deuided into humane and diuine. That the
Prince ought to haue care of the later, and to obſerue
and defend one religion.
               
               
                  
                     AL Prudence which I wiſh to be in a Prince
is two fold, Ciuill and Militarie.Ciuil prudence. 
                  Ciuil prudence
I vnderſtand that which is conuerſant
in the dayly managing of matters in time of
peace.Militarie pru
                     
                        •
                     ence. 
                  Militarie prudence, that which is vſed
in warre, and when things are diſordered and
full of trouble. Againe the ſubiect of Ciuill prudence is double,
for it concerneth 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   things, & humane:Prudence concerning things diuine. 
                  and that prudence
(I ſay) is vſed in matters diuine, vvhich toucheth, ordereth,
and directeth holy things, and religion, onely ſo farre
forth as a Prince ought to haue care of them. I do iuſtly and
and with reaſon tye this prudence hereunto, becauſe the
Prince, hath not free power in holy matters; God forbid
he ſhould; but a certaine inſight, and that rather for their
defence, then to attribute to himſelfe, as iudge to determine
of them.
                  Ariſt. 7. pol. cap. 8. D
                        ••
                     g. Stoic. apud St
                        •
                     b. 
                  Surelie in euerie common wealth,
                  Religion is the principall matter in a commō wealth. the ouerſight of
heauenly things, ought to march formoſt: And to whom doth
the ſame belong rather then to the Prince? It is a moſt
ſeemely thing that that which holdeth the preheminence in goodneſſe,
ſhould be had in reuerence by the worthieſt perſon, and that,The Prince ought to haue care thereof. In reſpect it is an ornament vnto him.
to the which all other things are ſubiect, by him who commaundeth
ouer others. This is not onely conuenient, but expedient.
               
               
                  Firſt for the conſeruation of the Prince, for Cyrus did
trulie reaſon in this ſort,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Ped. lib. 8. If all his familiar freinds (and his ſubiects
in like manner) did feare God,Becauſe his cō
                     ſeruation 
                        〈◊〉
                      therein. they would with leſſe boldneſſe
enterpriſe any vnhoneſt and vnlawfull matter either amongſt
them ſelues, or againſt him.For th'enlargement of his 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Next: for the augmentation, of his kingdome, for know

this, that God is moſt fauorable to thoſe, who with greateſt affection
do worſhip him:Ariſt. Rhet. ad Alex. 
                  And Cicero is thus bolde to bragge,
that the Romaines did not ſurmount all other people and Nations
by pollicie or by maine force, but thorowe pietie, and religion.Orat. de Aruſp. reſpon.
               
               
                  It is likewiſe auayleable for the whole eſtate; for how
can we be ſafe, except religion be preſerued without harme.
                  And in regard of the good of all his ſubiects.
Religion and the feare of God are the onely things which do
conſerue ſociety amongſt men:Lact. de ira Cap. 12. Eod. lib. Cap. 8. 
                  Take away this bond, and the
life of man ſhall be ouercharged with fol
                     •
                  y, miſchiefe, and cruelty.
               The like will fall out, if there be confuſion of religion:
Neyther ought wee in any ſort to geue eare to thoſe Kings
of Egypt,
                  This religion ought not to be confuſed. who the better to establiſh their eſtate (as they
thought) did bring in a diuerſe and confuſed religion,
                  Diodor. Sic
                        •
                     l. lib. 2. 
                  to the end
that the Egyptians them ſelues might not conspire amongſt them
ſelues. O fooliſh men. One religion is the author of vnitie;
and from a confuſed religion there alwayes groweth diſſention.
               
                  How much better did a father of learning inſtruct vs by
this aduiſe vnto Auguſtus,But the beſt is, to obſerue one pure religion. 
                  which is yet extant:
                  Macen. apud Dionem Caſſium lib. 52. Ibidem. Do thou reuerence
that diuine Godhead by all the meanes thou mayeſt, and
at all times, obſeruing the lawes of thy countrey, and endeuour
that others may do the like: and addeth further, truly thou
oughteſt to ſhewe thy ſelfe highly offended,Whoſo do ſeeke to chāge the ſame ought to be puniſhed. and to puniſh thoſe,
who do innouate any thing in matter of religion, not onely in regard
that it is Gods cauſe (whome, who ſo contemneth, he will
without all doubt make little accompt of any other thing) but
were it euen for this reſpect, that theſe fellowes that finde out new
religions, do ſtirre vp many to deſire an alteration of things,
whence proceedeth conſpiracies, ſeditions, conuenticles, which
doubtleſſe are moſt dangerous in any ſtate.
               
                  O graue words too full of pietie, being written from a
heathen, vnto a heathen: This is true prudence,
                  Lact. 1. Inſti. Cap. 20. 
                  and No
other religion, nor worſhip, beſides the adoration of one God,The ancient and approued cuſtome is to be obſerued. is
to be obſerued by a diſcreete Prince: and that according to
the ancient cuſtome, for It is the part of a wiſe man,Cic. 2. de deuinat. to maintaine
the lawes of his Aunceſtors, by obſeruing their holy ceremonies:Ariſt. Rhet. ad Alex.
* And to ſwarue from, or violate the cuſtome receaued

in a Countrey, is amongſt all Nations accoumpted a capitall
crime. Wherefore they that goe about to trouble the ſame,
ought to be puniſhed.
                  Iuſtinus lib. 8. He is by right beſt beloued of God,The diſturbers thereof are to be puniſhed. by
whome the maieſty of God is maintayned. Imprint this deepe in
thy heart,
                  And the ſame to be preſerued by al our might. There is nothing geuen vnto man of more excellency
then religion,Lactant. lib. 5. Inſtit. Cap. 20. which we ought to preſerue with all our power
and might.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  A more ample diſcourſe concerning one religion. VVhether contrarietie
in the ſame may be ſuffered? which ſeemeth may
after a ſort be permitted for a time: and how long it may be
ſuffered.
               
               
                  WHerefore wee firmely holde this opinion,
that one religion ought to be obſerued in
one kingdome. Howbeit, two things may
be enquired of, whether puniſhment is alwayes
to be inflicted vpon ſuch as diſſent
from the ſame, and generally vpon all of
them? Of which matter, curioſitie doth not force me to
reaſon, but the common profit, and the preſent eſtate of
Europe, which I confeſſe I cannot conſider without teares.
Good Lord,The miſery of 
                        •
                     urope by reaſon of the contrariety in religion. what firebrands of ſedition hath religion kindled
in this fayreſt part of the world? The chiefe heads of
our chriſtian common wealths are at ſtrife amongſt them
ſelues, and many millions of men haue bin brought to ruine
and do dayly periſh, vnder a pretext of piety. Who can be
ſilent in this matter? Surely not I: albeit with Plato I am
not ignorant,In Eutyphr. that theſe things are ſubiect to the reproches of
the common ſort:
                  If any man ſeek to remedy this euill, he is ſet vpon with reproches. And that nothing can be ſo well and prouidently
ſpoken herein,Sen. Epiſt. 
                  that malice can not find matter to repine
at. Notwithſtanding I wil take this charge vpō me, and
endeuour what I may to quench this holy fire:Yet the author attempteth it. Howbeit, they which offend are left to the iudgement of the wiſe. being in this
reſpect the more to be excuſed, that I ſet down Counſels not
decrees, nor do I reſolue of any thing, but propound it only.
Thou which hapneſt to reade it, vnderſtand this, that theſe

things proceede from a deuout, and pure minde: and if it
ſeeme otherwiſe to thee, I ſubmit thē to the cenſure of thoſe,
to whom the deciſion of the cauſe doth properly belong.
               To geue thee vnderſtanding of my meaning▪ I make two
degrees of thoſe, who offend in matter of Religion:Ther are ij. ſorts of men which offend in matter of Religion, open diſturbers 
                        〈…〉
                      in priuate. For either
they do it publickly or priuatly. Thoſe (I ſay) make publicke
faultes, who do both themſelues deeme amiſſe of God, and
of holy rites and ceremonies, and alſo by commotions do enforce others
to do the like They offend priuately, who are likewiſe in
a 
                        〈◊〉
                     , but they keepe the ſame to them ſelues.
               
               
                  Concerning thoſe of the firſt ſort,
                  The opē diſturbe 
                        •
                     are always to be puniſhed. 
                  firſt a queſtion ariſeth
whether they ought to eſcape vnpuniſhed? which I do denye.
Let them be puniſhed by thee, leaſt thou ſuffer affliction for
them: eſpecially if they moue ſedition: For it is farre better
that one do periſh, then a whole multitude:Cyp
                        •
                     ianus de 
                        〈◊〉
                      paenitent. Auguſt. Sen. de Ben. 3. Cap. 7. Cic. Philip. 9. * They which violate
religion are chastiſed in one place after this manner, and in
another countrey after another ſort, but they remaine no where
vnpuniſhed. Here is no place for clemencie, burne, ſawe aſunder,
for it is better that one member be caſt away, then that the
whole body runne to ruyne.Except the puniſhing of them be like to breed commotion. 
                  For what outrage ſoeuer is done to
holy religion, all in generall are wronged thereby.54. Cod. Iuſtin. de Haeret. 
                  This courſe
thou oughteſt to take, ſo long as the diſturbers may be
quieted without any further trouble. But thou wilt ſay,
what if it fall out otherwiſe? and what if the times be ſo
diſpoſed,
                  Tac. 3. Annal. that a ſuddaine conſtraint will bring more domage
then profit to the common wealth? For ſuch things do fall out,
as if you do but looke into this our age, in the which this
fatall itching diſeaſe of ouerweening beareth ſuch rule,
you ſhall ſee, that all men deſire rather to dispute, then to liue.Sen. Epist.
                  Sophiſters and curious ſearchers are now euery where,
                  The miſerable curioſitie of this our age. 
                  who
are buſied in enquiring,
                  Plato in Apol. both what is vnder the earth, and
what is aboue the heauens. And what a multitude is there of
them? Whome if wee will condemne,Tac. 3. Annal. wee muſt ouercome
them in ſet battaile.Somtimes they are to be ſuffred to the end they may the better to be rooted out. 
                  Wherefore heerein I do with reaſon
doubt, whether it be not fit that the Prince do ſomewhat
conſider the times (which all Politicians are of opinion he ought
to yeeld vnto) or that it be better to differ the ſuppreſſing ofCic. ad A
                        •
                     t. 12. Epist. 1.
                  
ouergrowne vices, then to make it openly knowne, that our force
is too weake to checke and controll them.Thoſe that are ouerhaſty in theſe matters do much hurt. 
                  I ſay to let the matter
ſlip for a time, For euen in corporall diſeaſes, nothing is more
dangerous then vnſeaſonable Phiſicke:Sen. Conſ. ad Helu. Liu. 22. 
                  And I know by experience,
that Phiſitians oftentimes do more good with their patients
when they take their eaſe, then when they ſtirre abroade
and moue their body. Truly,
                  Time healeth many things. time and quietnes doth for the moſt
part cure theſe melancholy perſons. Others cry out, weapons and
warre: But do not we ſee again, that weapons and warre haue
bred reſiſtance by force of armes?Plin. Paneg. Sen. 1. de Clem. * The minde of man is rebellious
by nature, enclining to that which is forbidden, and of hard
attempt.And diet is the beſt cure. 
                  Well, is behoueth thee more then once to conſider, if it
be not better to temporiſe, then by vntimely remedies to ſet miſchiefes
abroade.Tac. 12. Ann.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Whether euery particular perſon, & thoſe that liue quietly to thē
ſelues, are to be puniſhed? Likewiſe whether ſearch & inquiſition
is to be made after them? Experiēce teacheth that neither
of both ought to be done (if the matter be conſideratly handled)
and that they had more neede of a teacher then a tormenter.
               
               
                  THe ſecond queſtion ariſeth, concerning thoſe
who do offend priuately in matter of religion.
As for example, ſuch a one his mind is corrupt
with errors, but he infecteth no man therewith,
he is quiet, and ſilent at home. Whether is
he to be puniſhed,S
                        ••
                     . Oed. or no? It ſeemeth he ought not.They that 
                        〈◊〉
                      in priuate ſeeme not to deſerue puniſhment at all. Nor they which are doubted are with ouermuch ado to be ſought after. This way doth not better them. 
                  It is the
leaſt freedome that can be demaunded of a Prince, to haue licence
to hold ones peace. Peraduenture likewiſe it ſhall not be fit to
make ouermuch ſearch for ſuch a one. For what good can
ariſe thereby?Curt. 8. 
                  No Prince can rule the mindes in like ſort as he
may the tongs of men:
                  Auguſt. in loan. * God is the king of mens minds. Wherefore
the greateſt thing thou art able to bring to paſſe by this
terror is, that he who doth moſt of all ſeeme to be obedient, doth in
outward ſhew conſent, but neuer in his hart: For who can compell
me,
                  Lactan. 5. Cap. 14. 
                  either to beleeue that I liſt not, or not to beleeue that I
will?
                  Ibid. * There is nothing more free then religion, which the minde
no ſooner withſtandeth, but forthwith it vaniſheth, and is no more

religion.
                  Ex Thenusty dicto apud Socrat. Conſtraint bringeth in diſſimulation, and thereby
thou mayſt procure,
                  Maketh them diſſemblers. 
                  that ſome few may do worſhip to thy throne,
but not to God. King Theoderic did in former age ſay very
well, that he could not command religion, becauſe no man could
be enforced to beleeue againſt his will.
                  Eccleſ. Hiſt. 3. Cap. 21. Caſſiod. Var. 2. Epiſt. 27. O how much more temperate
and ſafe is the other way, of teaching, and inſtructing?
faith is to be perſuaded, not to be wrought by compulſion.
                  They ought rather to be inſtructed. 
                  Our
minds like vnto noble and generous horſes, are beſt ruled with an
eaſie bit.
                  Bernard in Cant. Sen. 1. de Clem. Sallust. ad Caeſ. Ouerrun all Europe in thy imagination, and thou
ſhalt ſee,Rigor hath alwayes hurt, and will do euer. by theſe ſeuere proceedings, Cities are rather ouerthrown,
then made better. Surely ſo it is, and thoſe things that
do reſt in opiniō, are altered rather by teaching then commanding,
                  Auguſt. Epiſt. 6. 5.
                  by inſtructing, then by threating. If there be any diſcord
in inſtruments, you do not in a rage breake the ſtrings, but
reduce them to concord by patience and leaſure: why may
not the like be done in matter of faith?Rather ſeeke to amend them then to cut them off. 
                  And why doſt thou not
in like manner correct vices,
                  Idem ad African, Piocos. Lactant, in hac tali re: lib. 5. Cap. 13. In Act. Apost. Cap. 4. 
                  that there may be ſome who repent
them of their faults?
                  The repentant are doubly good. and theſe are commonly the beſt ſort of
men. That faith is moſt ſetled, which repentance doth redreſſe.
The which ô moſt gracious and mercifull God graunt vs,The Authors vnſayned prayer.
and bring to paſſe, that the multitude of them that beleeue, may
be of one hart and one ſoule, and ſo with prayers and ſighings
I ſhut vp this diſcourſe.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  He entereth into the diſcourſe of humane prudence, which doth
proceede of theſe two ſprings, the humor of the people, and the
diſpoſition of the eſtate. Firſt, he handleth the inclination of
the people, which he ſheweth (as it were) in a table.
               
               
                  PRudence in worldly matters doth now call me to
intreate thereof, of the which I will ſpeake more
freely,The head of gouerning prudence is two fold. and more willingly. I vnderſtand the ſame
to be a skill to gouerne externall matters quietly and
ſafely.
                  The nature of the people & Of the Eſtate. This ſpringeth frō two fountaines, the nature of the
people, and the diſpoſition of the eſtate. Surely when you
haue well conſidered all, you ſhall finde, that no precepts
haue bin giuen to gouerne aright, either in times paſt, or in
this age, that do not iſſue from theſe ſprings. Wherfore firſt
I will ſhew you the way vnto them, and will afterwards (as

it were) cut forth of them certaine chanels of wholeſome
counſailes. Whoſoeuer then thou art, that deſireſt to attaine
to wiſedome and dexterity in matter of gouernment, thou
oughteſt to knowe the nature of the common people,
                  Firſt, the nature of the people. Which is of three ſorts. Thine owne ſubiects. 
                  and by
what meanes the ſame may be diſcreetly gouerned.
                  Tac. 3. Annal. In my opinion,
there are three ſorts of people, thine owne ſubiects, thy
neighbors, and all men in generall. Thou oughteſt firſt to
enter into conſideration of thine owne ſubiects, for what is
more neceſſary, then that thou ſhouldeſt be acquainted with
the nature of thoſe ouer whome thou doeſt commaund? It
is an eſpeciall vertue in a Prince,
                  Martial. 
                  to know the diſpoſition of thoſe
that belong vnto him. Next,Thy neighborn by reaſon thou oughteſt to haue
regard to thoſe that are neereſt bordering vnto thee, becauſe
it falleth out that thou haſt often to treat, & cōtract friendſhip
with them. For the humors of men are different, and as
well Cities as particular men haue ſeuerall inclinatiōs:
                  Liu. 45. 
                  and ſome
Nations are geuen to anger, others are valiant, others cowards,
ſome are geue to wyne, others to luſt. And laſtly,All in generall. thou oughteſt
to knowe how all eſtates generally are gouerned, becauſe
there are certain motions & affections, which thou ſhalt generally
find in all ſorts of people, the which except thou art
acquainted with, how canſt thou frame thyſelf to agree with
them?Ariſt. 3. pol. It is written long ago, he cannot well tell how to command,
who hath not bin commaunded: or rather as our Philoſopher
doth turne it, No man can well beare rule, except he
firſt hath yelded obedience to authority. Moſt true it is, not becauſe
all Kings ſhould be choſen out of the common ſort,
(no, I meane nothing leſſe: many are borne to beare rule, and
for the moſt part kingdomes do come by ſucceſſion) but it
is to ſhewe, that the humor and inclination of the ſubiects
ought to be as well knowne to the Prince, who commandeth
ouer them, as if he were one amōgſt them. Heare what
an ancient Prince ſayth,Galbam apud Tac. 1. Hist. 
                  the moſt profitable and ſhorteſt way to
attain to the diſcerning of good & euil,
                  The righteſt way to gouerne well, is to know how the people are affected. 
                  is to conſider, what is to be
liked, or eſchued vnder the gouernment of another Prince. The
counſellor of a great king geueth this aduiſe:Macen. apud Dio
                     
                        •
                     em. lib. 3. 
                  If thou thy
ſelf diddeſt of thine owne accord that thing which thou wouldeſt
another that had authority ouer thee ſhould do vnto thee, thou

ſhouldeſt not erre in any thing, but diſpoſe thy buſines orderly,
and therewithall leade a life moſt pleaſant, and without danger.
               
               Thou oughteſt therefore to learne theſe things. But of
whom?But how may the ſame be learned? A briefe table thereof. By inquiry, by vſe of good authors: and ſomewhat
thou ſhalt be inſtructed by me, who will point forth vnto
thee the chiefeſt paſſions of the people as it were in a table.
               
                  The common people are vnſtable,Cic. pro Murena. Idem pro dome. and nothing is more vnconſtant
then the rude multitude.They are inconſtant. * They are geuen to change,
and do ſuddainely alter their determinations like vnto tempeſts.
               They do caſt off all paſſions,Tac. 1. Hiſt. or elſe are out of meaſure affected,
being ordinarily moued at ſuddain matters,Subiect to paſſions. & now as prone to
pitty, as they were of late wholy bent to cruelty:Quinct. 2. declam. * Neyther is any
thing more eaſy then to carry the multitude which way a mā liſt.
               They are voyd of reaſon:Voyde of reaſon. they haue no conſideration, neither is
there any troth in them.Tac. 1. Hiſt. Cic. pro Planc. * They are not led to iudge of any thing
by diſcretion, or wiſedome, but rather by a certaine vehemēt rage
and raſhnes.Ibidem. * They haue neyther councell nor reaſon, nor diſcretion,
nor aduiſednes.Idem 8. * They iudge of many things by opinion, and
of very few according to troth.Roſcio. They are void of care, & brought
vp inflattery, which they are accuſtomed vnto,Tac. 2. Hiſt. not making any
difference betweene that which is true and falſe.
               They encline alwayes to the greater part:Enclining to the greater part. The multitude rather
by cuſtome,Salluſt ad Caeſ. then by ſound iudgement, ſometimes runne after
this man, ſometimes after another by an opinion they haue that he
is the wiſeſt:Sen. de beat. * as one heard followeth another.
               They are by nature enuious.Enuious. They behold another mās felicity
with griefe:*Tac. 2. Hiſt. Liu. 42. and being ill affected as may appeare in matters of
ſport & paſtime, they do fauor the worſt ſort of mē, & the weakeſt
               They are full of ſuſpicions:Suſpicious. The vnskilfull multitude are inclined
to doubt of euery thing:Tac. 2. Hiſt. 1. Annal. * and it is their faſhion to accuſe
one falſely with vntrothes.
               They are light of beliefe:Light to credit. and do eaſily credit and receaue all
newe matters:1. Hiſt. lbid. * especially bad reports:3. Annal. * and in what ſort ſoeuer
they heare a thing, they beleeue it to be ſo.
               Yea they encreaſe the rumor.They encreaſe reports. And as it is the cuſtome of report,
they make matters greater then they are,Eod. lib. Lucan. 1. * and ſo euery
one thor owe feare doth geue force vnto fame: dreading the miſchiefe

they themſelves haue forged and imagined, no man being
author thereof.Siluis 4. * Neyther do they enquire who was the rayſer
thereof, they are ſo poſſeſſed with feare.Ibidem. * And this plyant
timorouſneſſe of theirs doth geue force to the report of many
vaine matters, ſtill adding ſomewhat to that they haue
heard:Tac. 1. Hiſt. * Which at the firſt runneth abroade as doubfull,
afterwards it is beleeued as a troth, by thoſe that are either
glad or careleſſe therof, eſpecially if they affirme to haue bene preſent,
or to haue ſeene it, as theſe great lyars commonly do.
               They cannot moderate and refraine their ſpeech,They vtter that which they are forbidden. and by how
much the more ſtrictly they are forbidden to ſpeake of any thing,
ſo much the ſooner they blab the ſame abroad: and in ſtead of
publiſhing the troth, which they may lawfully doe, they ſet lies abroad
which they are forbidden.3. Hist. * It is to no purpoſe to place men
of warre in all parts of the citti
                     •
                   to prohibit them so ſpeake, that
is the cheefeſt way to nouriſh report.2. Hist. * their longing after newes
cannot keepe any important matter ſecret, and miſchieuouſly they
augment the rumor, which they are commaunded to ſuppreſſe.
               They are ſtill ſhuffling the cards,They deſire ſtir and trouble. and deſirous of new commotions:*Eod. lib. Sal. Iugur. Cic. pro Clu.
light headed, ſeditious, and quarrelſome, coueting new
matters, enemies to peace and quiet. Eſpecially if they haue a
leader.Eſpecially if they haue a leader. And like as the ſea, which of his own nature is calm without
ſurges, is mooued by the force of the winds, ſo the people, who
of their owne diſpoſition are quiet, are by the perſuaſions of ſeditious
perſons ſtirred vp, like violent tempeſts.Tac. 4. Hiſt. * For without a
leader, they are headre, timerous, and without courage.1. Aun. * And it
is truly ſayd, the common people dare do nothing, their cheefe
commaunders being taken away.
               They fauour theſe hot and fierie fellowes,Thu
                        •
                     . 3. 
                  and in their iudgement,
                  They fauour raſh and haſtie perſons.
whatſoouer is moderat, that hath a kind of ſlouthful cowardiſe:
and what ſoeuer is circumſpectly and prouidently handled,
that ſure they ſay is ſlow negligence: but what ſoeuer is raſh and
headie, that is deemed by them to be couragiouſly and valiauntly
enterpriſed.Liu. 7. * Wherefore they which haue more fooliſh boldneſſe
then aduiſed counſell in them, do eaſily draw them on their ſide.Tac. 4. Hiſt.
* As likewiſe, the flattering tongues of ſome impudent fellowes
without hart or courage.
               
                  
They neglect the publike profit,They neglect the publike profit and truſting to their multitude,1. Hist.
ſet light by the affaires which concerne the commonaltie.They are diligent in their own buſineſſe.
* Euery man being pricked forward with a particular gaine,Ibidem.
they make no account of the common benefit.Saluſt orat. Phil. Ibidem. * They wiſh for the
miſchiefs, which they ſee prepared, that they may fal like thūder,
and yet euery one in particular would be exempt from them.
               They are fierce in words,Stout in words. and malapert by nature,Tac. 2. hist. 3. Hiſt. Sal. orat. Marcij. but dare go
no further.But in words only. * For as they are quicke of ſpeech, ſo they are ſlow of
ſpirit.
               They are either caſt downe with ouermuch feare, or raiſed
vp with ouermuch hope.They neuer keepe a mean. This is the nature of the multitude,Liu. 23.
that either they obey ſeruilely, or command arrogantly. Neither
know they to retaine and vſe libertie, which is a mean betweene
both.Tac. 1. An. * They are immoderat in all things, and whilſt they dread
nothing, they ſet a good face on the matter to put others in feare:
do but once affright them, you may without danger inſult againſt
them.6. Ann. * They are bold to commence commotions, except they ſtand
in feare of authoritie. There are many other things, which
thou of thine owne diſcretion maiſt ad herevnto.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  The other ſpring, the nature of the king, and kingdome laid
open. Two things are to be conſidered herein, what may
generally and particularly agree with either of them.
               
               
                  I Do now haſten to the nature of a ſtate or
kingdome:The nature of the kingdome, another part of Prudence. out of the which I will ſlightly
explaine theſe things vnto thee. Thou oughteſt
to know the diſpoſition therof generally,
and particularly.
               
                  In this generall knowledge theſe things are
incident.
                  It is vnſtable. 
                  Euerie ſtate is wauering and vnſtable.
                  Tac. 1. An. 
                  For the gouernment
of all is a heauie burthen, and ſubiect to fortune.Sen. Oedip.
* And like as the tops of high moūtains are alwaies beaten with
the winds, ſo the mightieſt empires, are the obiect of fortune,And often ouerthrowne on the ſuddaine.
* Who dareth enterpriſe any thing,Sen. Ep. 82. hauing like power ouer Empires,
as ouer Emperors themſelues, which is the cauſe why
kingdoms do often come to ruine, by ſecret means, and thoſe

empires that haue borne the brunt of ciuill wars,Ibidem. and withſtood
forrain force,And the whole as ſoone as part. do fall of themſelues. And for the moſt part the
whole decaieth when it once beginneth to fal, as Liuie truly
writ,
                  Liu. li. 37. 
                  that the maieſtie of king is with more difficultie brought
frō the higheſt pitch to a mean, then from a mean thrown down
to the loweſt fortune.Sen. de Ben. 6. cap. 33. * For we do not diſcend from dignity,It is either in the height of fortune, or in low eſtate. by the
ſame ſteps we mount vp vnto it: & oftentimes there is no diſtinctiō,
between the higheſt ſtep, & the loweſt ſtair of fortune. They
which deſire to poſſeſſe a kingdome (or which do alreadie enioy it)
find no meane,Tac. 2. Hiſt. between a downfall, and the top of glory.
               
                  Neither is it only the obiect of fortune,
                  It is for the moſt part ſubiect to hatred. And that by reaſon of the manners of the Princes, geuen to licentiouſneſſe. 
                  but ſubiect to Hatred.
God the creator & maker of the world, coupled hatred and
a kingdome together.Sen. Theb. 
                  Oftentimes the cauſe is in the inſufficiencie
of Princes,
                  Idē Agam. 
                  For they imagine that to be the greateſt teſtimonie
of their authoritie, that it is only lawfull for them to do
that, which is vnlawfull for any other.Idem Hip. * He that hath too large
power, deſireth to do that which is vnpoſſible.
               
                  And many times their obſtinat Pride is cauſe therof.
                  Being ſtubborn and proud. This
indurat princely pride,Ibidem. reſiſting againſt the troth, will not be mollified
nor bent to that which is right.Sen. de Ben. 6. cap. 30. * Deeming it as foule a
diſgrace to yeeld, as to be ouercome.
               
                  But another principall cauſe is in the nature of the ſubiects,
                  Another cauſe is that all men are hard to be gouerned.
                  becauſe no man doth willingly ſubmit himſelfe to be ruled
by another:Sal. ad Caeſ. and albeit he be of a good diſpoſition who hath moſt
authoritie, yet he is feared, becauſe he may be ill.It is ſubiect to conſpiracies. 
                  Which is the
reaſon that euerie ſtate is ſubiect to conspiracies.Attius. Many are
falſe and diſloyall to the ſtate, and very few are honeſt. Neyther
are Princes without cauſe,
                  Sal. Iugurt. 
                  euer in Feare,Therfore Prince
                        •
                      are timerous. 
                  and by nature prone
to feare: and yet many times more then needeth, dreading
things doubtfull,Sen. O
                        •
                     dip. as though they were certaine.
               
                  Princes likewiſe are iealous,Suſpicious and iealous. 
                  and of their natural inclination
careful to preſerue their power.Tac. 4. An. Sen. Agam. Tac. 2. An. * Neither can the ſcepter, more
then the nuptiall bed,Euen of their own children. indure a competitor. So that euen the ciuill
diſpoſition of their children,1. Hiſt. is diſpleaſing to thē 
                  And whoſoeuer is
neereſt in appearāce to raign, is alwaies ſuſpected & hated of thē.
Thou oughtſt to know theſe & the like matters in general,
                  The ſtrength of a kingdome is to be knowne.
                  now particularly it is neceſſary for thee to learne how farre

thy kingdome extendeth, and of what nature it is, yea aboue
all things, thine owne power and ſtrength ought to bee
knowne vnto thee. It behooueth thee to meaſure thy kingdome,
and to acknowledge thine owne force.Lucan. 
                        •
                     . Sen. de Ben. 6. cap. 30. * Whilſt many haue perſuaded
themſelues to be of as great power as they were made beleeue,
they haue drawne vpon them ſuperfluous warres, to the
danger of their eſtate.
               Likewiſe the qualitie of the kingdome is to be conſidered,And the diſpoſition or forme thereof.
as whether it be of ancient continuance, or newly eſtabliſhed,
whether it come by ſucceſſion or election, whether
thou art come vnto it lawfully or by the ſword, and ſuch other
matters, for the which the kingdome ought to be moderated
after a diuerſe and ſundrie manner, and the rains of
gouernment eyther to bee let looſe, or reſtrained accordingly.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Certaine precepts drawne out of theſe fountaines. And
firſt generall inſtructions ſet downe, which do either eſtabliſh
or ouerthrow an eſtate. Then he diſcourſeth
particularly of force. That it is neceſſarie for a prince
to haue his gards, men of warre, fortreſſes, or rather
colomes.
               
               
                  THus farre forth it goeth not amiſſe, I haue
pointed out as it were the two Northerne
ſtarres, to the which I muſt often bend mine
eyes. Now I doe boldly ſet ſailes, and do enter
into this profound ſea of precepts. The
which I will diſpoſe in this order, that thoſe
which are profitable for the prince, and do eſtabliſh his
kingdome, ſhall haue the firſt place, next vnto the which
I will ioine thoſe that do offend and ouerthrow the ſame.
There are then two things which do giue peace,Two things eſtabliſh a kingdome, & Two things ouerthrow the ſame. or ſettle the
kingdome, Force and Vertue. Two things likewiſe which do
diſquiet or bring the ſame to ruine, Force and Vice. Let vs
then looke into theſe things exactly and diſtinctly, ſo farre

forth as my capacitie will reach.
               
                  Firſt, I place Force as a maintainer of the eſtate, in which
ſence I vnderſtand it to be a defence which the Prince to good
purpoſe ioineth vnto him,The definition of Force. either for his owne ſafetie, or for the
aſſurance of his kingdome.
               It is for the moſt part two fold,The diuiſion thereof. conſiſting of men of war,
and places of aſſurance. Men of warre likewiſe are of two
ſorts; the gard, & the ordinarie bands of men.The kings gard The gards are
properly for the defēce of the kings perſon, that is, they who
are a ſafegard vnto him in the night watches when he ſleepeth,
and march by his ſide for his defence in the day,
                  Sen. 1. de Clemen. Tac. 1. An. 
                  and oppoſe themſelues
to al dangers. And as Tacitus writeth of his prince, who
accompanie him to the court, and to the citie. For it is a laudable
& ancient cuſtome, & albeit the Prince ſtād in no feare,
yet are the a grace vnto him,Sen. 1. de Clem. and he ought to vſe them, were
it but in reſpect of Mai
                        •
                     ſtie.
               
               
                  Likewiſe I would haue him entertaine ordinarie bands of
ſoldiors, to wit,
                  The ordinarie and ſet bands of men. 
                  a greater force (according to the abilitie and
ſtate of the kingdome) to withſtand common accidents and
encounter
                        •
                      of war,
                  Tac. 4. An. Ibidem. 
                  and who, if occaſion ſo fall out, may quickly
be aſſembled together. For we are not ignoraunt, that the voluntarie
ſoldior is often miſſing, and if there were a competent
number alwaies, they are not of that courage and gouernment
that others vnder pay are: for we ſee (as the cuſtome is euen
now a daies, that they that are needie, and haue no certain place
of abode, do of their owne accord follow the war. This precept
is of great moment,
                  Dio. li. 11. 2 
                  and C. Caeſar was wont to ſay, that there
are two things which do purchaſe, maintaine, and enlarge an empire;
Men of warre, and Monie. And another of the ſame opinion
(though ſomewhat more digreſſing from honeſtie)
gaue this counſell to his children,
                  Seuerus Impert, apud Dionem in vita eius. Agree amongſt your ſelues,
enrich your men of warre, and make no reckoning of others.
               Thou maiſt vſe two ſorts of places of aſſurance,How far foorth fortreſſes are to be vſed. Fortreſſes,
or Colonies: the common people, and common practiſe
of theſe daies will inſtruct thee how to vſe the former: and
my ſelfe and ancient cuſtome, how thou ſhouldeſt diſpoſe
of the latter. Truly Fortreſſes are not ſuch ſure holds as men

hold opinion: they are vaileable to withſtand a ſmal affault,
but ouer feeble as we haue had experiēce to reſiſt a generall
& great aſſault. Yet in the borders of a countrie, & againſt a
cōmon enemy, I do not greatly miſlike thē, but in the midſt
of a kingdom, & againſt the ſubiects of the ſame natiō, I vtterly
reiect thē. Doeſt thou diſtruſt any people, & art thou
deſirous to keepe thē vnder? In ſtead of Fortreſſes, I would
vſe Colonies,
                  Colomes preferred before them. which are the very manſion places of bondage.
                  Tac. in. Agr.
               
               They are a moſt ſure and ſafe defence, for in them not
onely the place it ſelfe is of ſtrength, but which is more,
the men likewiſe. For all Colonies for the moſt part do conſiſt
of ſtrangers, (with whom it is not eaſie to complot a
conſpiracie, with the naturall people of the countrie) yet Colonies
ought not without great aduiſe to be put in practiſe,
except it be againſt ſtrangers.But eſpecially againſt ſtrangers. Or ſuch as thou haſt newly conquered. For thoſe ſtubborne and ſtiffe
necked people,
                  Flor. 4. cap. vlt. 
                  not accuſtomed to the yoke of bondage, are eaſily
brought to rebell and ſet themſelues at libertie. Or elſe againſt
the obſtinat, whom thou haſt newly brought in ſubiection,
for whatſoeuer they ſay,Curt. 7. 
                  truſt not that thoſe that thou haſt
conquered will be ſure friends vnto thee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Of a double vertue, the conſeruer of kingdoms. The loue of
the people greatly commended, and the way to attaine
therevnto, ſhewed to be three-fold.
               
               
                  WHerfore Force ought to be vſed euen of the
beſt prince, in due time, according to the old
ſaying,Tac. 1. An. 
                  there are certaine things to be handled
by force, to the end the reſidue may remain in
quiet. But Vertue ought much more to be
practiſed, wherein ſurely, as it ſeemeth vnto
me, the chiefeſt ſtrength & charge of principalitie cōſiſteth.
I do in this place vnderſtand it far after another maner then
the cōmon ſort do,What vertue in this place is. for I tearme it, alaudable affection of the
king, or towards the king, profitable to the whole eſtate. I do with
aduiſe diſtinguiſh it in this manner. For where as this vertue
                  
containeth two mēbers, Loue and Authoritie: trulie both of
thē ought to ſpring frō and by the king, yet in ſuch maner,
that they haue their ſeate, and place of abode in the harts of
the people. Loue, is an affectiō towards the king, Authoritie,
an opinion they conceiue of him. By their ſeuerall definitiōs,
you may with more eaſe vnderſtand the matter, and my
meaning therein.
               
                  For Loue which in this place I here deſire, and do perſwade,
                  The difinition of good will.
Is a ready inclination, and liking of the ſubiectes, towards
the king and his eſtate.The profit thereof. 
                  Which conduceth greatly, or is rather
neceſſarie, in the managing of matters of ſtate. For as Plato
ſaith trulie,
                  Epiſt. 4. ad Dion. the efficacie of the actions proceedeth of this, that
thou thy ſelfe art pleaſing to the people.How the ſame is to be gotten. 
                  Wherefore thou
oughteſt to endeuour to adorne they ſelfe therewith: and that
by theſe three wayes, Lenitie, Bountifulneſſe, and Indulgence.
               
                  Thou oughteſt firſt to ſhew Lenitie in thy ſelfe,By lenitie in ſpeach, and behauiour. 
                  being
of a milde ſpeach and behauiour,
                  Tac. 5. Hiſt. prouoking men to be officious
vnto thee, by thy gentleneſſe,Plin. Pane. and affabilitie. And why oughteſt
not thou to liue is ſuch manner with thy ſubiects, as a father with
his childrē?Tac. 5. Hiſt 
                  yet with this prouiſo, that thy honour be not hurt
hereby. Wherein there ought to be great moderatiō: in ſuch
ſort,
                  Plin. Pane. 
                  that neither thou purchaſe thee reuerence with terrour, nor
loue with ſeruile humility. This hapneth very ſeldom, as it deſerueth
great cōmendation,
                  Cic. Oratore ad Brut. 
                  when diuers vertues of a different
qualitie, are thorow prudence ioyned together.
               
                  But thou oughteſt rather to manifeſt this lenity in thy gouernemēt:
                  By lenitie in thy whole gouernement.
                  that the ſame may be peaceable,
                  Sen. 1. de ira. 
                  calme, & the face
thereof no otherwiſe, then as the cleare and bright skie. This agreeth
with the nature of mē, who cā neither wholy endure bō
                  dage
nor liberty:Tac. 1. Hiſt. Idem. Agr. * being brought in ſubiectiō to obey, not to ſerue.
               
                  And likewiſe it fitteth the common vſe of gouernement
                  Whence commeth quietnes.
                  it ſelfe,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  for indeede we do vſuallie with more willingneſſe obey,
where we are commaunded with moſt lenitie: yet we obey
with more loyaltie,
                  Lib. 22. 
                  as Liuie ſaith,
                  Faith 
                  that no terrour did remoue
the people from their loyaltie, when all things were enflamed
and ſet on fire with warre, ſurely becauſe they were gouerned
by a wiſe, & temperate commandement. Theſe are the words of
                  
Caeſar,Aſſuranc
                        •
                     
                   that a power vſed vvith moderation,Apud Dion. lib. 43. doth conſ
                     •
                  rue all
vvhatſoeuer hath bene purchaſed and gotten. On the other
ſide, vvhoſoeuer vvithout diſcretion doth abuſe his authoritie
towards all men vvithout regard or reſpect,Ibidem. he ſhall neither find
true loue, nor aſſured ſafetie.
               
                  Thou oughteſt likewiſe to ioine bountifulneſſe herevnto,
                  Likewiſe let the Prince be liberall.
                  for they vvhich exerciſe liberalitie,Cic. 2. de 
                        •
                     in. do purchaſe vnto themſelues
loue and goodwill, which is of eſpecial moment, either to liue quietly,
or gouerne peaceably.Which is alwaies profitable. 
                  Shall I tell thee how great the force
thereof is; A kingdome is better preſerued by liberalitie,Sen▪ de breu, vitae. then by
an armie. Surely according to a common ancient prouerbe,
The most acceptable thing of all other is to receaue.Ide deben. 
                  Be bountifull
then, following the example of Augustus,Tac. 1. An. vvho did
win the ſoldior vnto him with rewards, the common ſort vvith
plentie of victuals, and all generallie vvith the pleaſure of eaſe.
But giue more freely when thou doeſt take the gouernment
of a new Empire vpon thee,
                  Eſpecially in a new gouernment. 
                  ſo ſhalt thou eſtabliſh thy ſelfe,
and the ſubstance of thy ſubiects encreaſing by the change of
matters,Ibidem. will rather deſire thoſe things vvhich are preſent and
aſſured, then the auncient things which were doubtfull. Yet
oughteſt thou to be liberall with diſcretion,
                  Yet ought the Prince take heed on whom he doth beſtow his rewards. 
                  neither do thoſe
kings like me,
                  Sen. 4. de Ben. cap. 37. Plin. Pane. 
                  who do distribute their rewards like vnto blind
men, they know not to vvhom. Beſtow thou thy gifts vpon
thy companions in vvarre, and to them that are partakers of thy
perils:Ibidem. 
                  and likewiſe to thoſe vvho haue deſerued vvell and
commendably of thee in time of peace: or, to conclude, to them
who are likely to proue men of worth,
                  Ibidem. alluring theſe by rewards,
the other by example. Neuertheleſſe thou oughteſt to
vſe a meane in thy liberalitie.
               
               
                  For this frankneſſe and bountifulneſſe will turne to thy ruine
and ouerthrow,And how much he giueth. except thou vſe a meane therein.Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  If thou giue to
al in generall, if thou giue to euerie particular perſon, what
wil be the end therof?
                  Otherwiſe he ſhall ouerthrow himſelfe and the common wealth. The commō wealth muſt needs decay,2. Ann. for
thy ſubſtance cannot ſatisfie euery one particularly. And it is euen
the next way,
                  Cic. 2. de off. that thou ſhalt be conſtrained to extort from
other men. Which is a moſt hatefull thing, neither ſhalt thou
euer be followed with the like loue of thoſe to whome thou haſtIbidem.
                  
bene liberall, as thou ſhalt be proſecuted with hate by thoſe others
whoſe ſubstance thou haſt taken away. Wherefore thou
oughteſt to haue great regard hereof,
                  Plin. Paneg. 
                  and let the Prince rather
geue nothing, then to take from others.
               
                  Indulgence, was the third thing I counſailed our Prince,Let him vſe Indulgence in the cheapnes of victuals.
yet meant I only the ſame ſhould be permitted ſo far forth
as it might be without corruption in their behauior & life.
Thou oughteſt to ſuffer them to liue plentifully, and pleaſantly.
Plentifully, that they be not ſcanted in their foode
and ſuſtenance, nor wearied with dearth of victuals. For the
common people hath no other care of the ſtate, but that they may
haue plenty of corne, and other prouiſion: *Tat. 4. Ann. 4. Hiſt. Iuuenal. Sat. 10. Cic. 2. de offic. 
                  and their thought is
onely but of two things, of their meat, and of ſports and paſtimes.
Wherefore they which take the charge of a common wealth,
ought to take order, that there be ſtore of thoſe things which
are neceſſary.
               
               
                  Likewiſe he ought to let them liue pleaſantly,
                  In ſports and paſtime. 
                  as to ſee
playes, and ſuch other vſuall pleaſures. For the common
people,
                  Senec. Epiſt. 116. Tac. 14. 
                  like children, do greatly loue their recreation, and deſire
pleaſure, and are glad if the Prince encline that way. And you
ſee,
                  Which are approued by antiquity. that thoſe of former age did not ſet ſmall accoumpt of ſuch
ſhewes,Ann. Ibidem. and paſtimes: For there is ſome vſe in the practiſe of
them, when thoſe that are amongſt the people who are moſt
vnciuill,
                  Idem in Agric. Ibidem. prone to moue warre aud diſſention, are by theſe recreations
accuſtomed to loue peace and eaſe. Which with the vnskilfull
is called humanity,They make men tame and gentle. when in deede it is a part of bondage:
and it is moſt certaine,
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  that the Romaines preuailed more againſt
their ſubiects by ſports and recreations, then by force of
armes: which thing a certaine player was not ignorant of,
                  They withdraw men from worthy attempts.
                  who when Auguſtus reproched him that thorowe his occaſion
there was a tumult amongſt the people, aunſwered,
It is behooffull for thee ô Caeſar,Pylades apud Dion. lib. 54. Tac. Agric. that the people ſometimes be
withheld by vs from their other buſineſſe. A wittie anſwere,
for ſurely, the vertue and fierce courage of the ſubiects is diſpleaſing
to them that commaund.
               Yet euen in theſe recreations a meane is to be vſed,Yet laſciuiouſnes and riot is to be auoided. and
the Prince ought to haue care,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 14. 
                  that theſe pleaſures rather

tend to mirth, then to laſciuiouſneſſe: for this diſſoluteneſſe wil
eaſily breake foorth, and then neyther ſhame nor modeſty, nor
manners can take place, which is the ready way to bring thy
ſelfe and thine to ruine: for what hope of goodneſſe can
there be, if men once growe to impudencie?
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Authority greatly commended. Three manner of wayes ſhewed
which leade thereunto, of the which becauſe the principall
force and ſtrength of the ſtate doth conſiſt in them, he diſcourſeth
curiouſly and exactly.
               
               
                  AMongſt thoſe vertues which help to conſerue a
kingdome, Authoritie beareth a place, which I
touched before,*Lib. 2. Cap. 16. but ſlightly: now I am to ſpeak
thereof more largely, & fully. I do againe define
it to be a reuerent opinion of the King and his eſtate,
                  The definition of authoritie. 
                  imprinted
as well in his owne ſubiects, as in ſtrangers. It conſiſteth of admiration
and feare,Whence it ſpringeth. the temperature or mixture of both the
which do make this vertue, which I confeſſe to be more
readily obtayned of ſome people,Curt. 3. for in ſome Nations a reuerence
towards their kings is ingendred by nature, others are
more hardly bent, but all are drawne thereunto by this
threefold way or meanes,How the ſame is to be gotten. which I will ſhewe. By the forme
of gouernment, the power of the ſtate, and the manners of the
king. By euery one of the which I will leade thee ſeuerally,
and wil ſet my foote not only in good order, but leaſurably,
that the print thereof may be ſeene. Who is he that findeth
fault therewith? I knowe that this is the vnderprop of
kingdomes,It is the ſafegard of kingdomes. 
                  that the maieſty of the Empire,
                  Idem lib. 8. 
                  is the rampart of
our ſafetie. This is as it were a ſtrong and loftie tower, in the
which the Prince is ſafe from rebellion, and diſdaine. Do
thou ſcale the ſame, and poſſeſſe it, God fauouring thee,
my ſelfe guiding thee.
               The firſt way that leadeth thee thereunto is The forme of
gouernment,
                  The which ſeueare gouernment doth engender. wherein three things are neceſſary to eſtabliſh
authoritie; that it be ſeueare, conſtant, and reſtrained.
               
               
                  
                  Firſt it ought to be ſeueare, becauſe this ordinarie, and
daylie lenitie induceth contempt, which is the very plague
and ouerthrow of gouernment.
                  Which is framed from the cuſtome of the king himſelfe, and of his ſubiects. 
                  In this corruption of manners
and of men if wee haue not ſeueritie in vs to force feare,Sall. Orat. lepid. Cic. pro Mil. Sen. 1. de Clemen.
wee muſt ſeeke to purchaſe and vſe it; the rather becauſe the
hope to eſcape vnpuniſhed, doth bring with it an vnbridled
liberty to do euill. And who will ſtand in awe of him, whoſe
ſword is alwayes in his ſcabberd ſo faſt tyed that it can hardly
be drawne out? Who rather by negligence then clemencie,
doth ſuffer the edge of his authoritie to waxe dull?Cic. 1. in Ca
                        •
                     il. 
                  Do
not thou gouerne after this manner, and learne the nature
of the common people, for they are not ſuch by nature, as to
yeeld obedience to ſhame,The common people are to be b
                        ••
                     dled with feare. but to feare:Ariſt. 10. Ethi. Cap. vlt. nor to abſtaine from vnhoneſt
attempts, for the loathſomneſſe of them, but in regard of
the paine and puniſhment inflicted. Thou oughteſt then to
vſe Seueritie, but in due time: for wholeſome Seueritie is
to be preferred before a vaine ſhowe of Clemencie.Cic. ad Brut. Epiſt. 2. Cotys the
King of Thracia, did aunſwere one very well who reproched
his ſeueritie, ſaying that it was rather rage then ruling:Stob. de Regno. Cic. 2. de offic.
But (quoth he) this rage of mine doth make my ſubiects
well tempered. Euen ſo, Seueritie is to be vſed in reſpect
of the common wealth, without the which 
                     〈◊〉
                   can be well
gouerned. *Varr. in Fragm. Wee knowe that it is better to cut off the finger,And they which offend to be cut off. But not altogether.
then to let the Gangrena gaine the arme. Yet ought the ſame
be vſed in ſeaſon,
                  Sen. 1 de Clem. 
                  and by pauſes. For the ſeldome puniſhing
offences doth beſt correct the corruptions of a Citty: It is a
thing deſeruing great prayſe, as often as thou mayeſt thereby
bring to paſſe, that puniſhment may teach ſome fewe,
and feare may light vppon all:Cic. pro Cluent. Id
                        •
                     min Ver. and by the correction of one
wicked man, the miſchiefe of many may be bridled. But yet
if offences do become ouer vſuall, or growe headſtrong,
                  Except they growe too ſtubborne. Then execution i
                        •
                      to be done.
                  then ſurely let this take place, that an intemperate patient
maketh a cruell Phiſition. *Publius. Tac. 3. Annal. You can not remedy the olde and
inueterate diſeaſes of the body, but by violent and ſharpe medicines.
Much leſſe can a minde which is corrupt, and infecteth
others, diſeaſed, and burning in luſt, be cured with gentle
Phiſicke.
               
                  
                  The ſecond thing I deſire,
                  Conſtancy is a helpe to Authority. & The obſeruation of lawes and cuſtomes. 
                  is that the forme of gouernment
may be conſtant, which I interpret to be, when it runneth
after one and the ſame ancient tenour. What do you
talke of change? heare the true opinion of Alcybiades:
Thoſe men liue ſafeſt, who do gouerne their common wealth,
without altering awhit their preſent cuſtomes and lawes,Apud Thuc. lib. 6. albeit
they be not altogether ſo good.Conſtancy is a helpe to Authority. & The obſeruation of lawes and cuſtomes. 
                  Heere like Auguſtus who did
thus admoniſh the Senate: Obſerue constantly thoſe lawes
which are once eſtabliſhed; neyther do thou alter any of th
                     ••
                  .Apud Dion 52.
For thoſe things which remaine whole in their eſtate, and the
ſame, although they be worſer, yet are they more profitable to
the common wealth, then thoſe which are brought in by innouation,
albeit they ſeeme better. And there are two reaſons of
this paradoxe. Firſt that the lawes them ſelues haue not
ſufficient ſtrength and life, when they are to be ſo ſoone altered,
                  The often change of laws breedeth contempt, as well to them ſelues, as to the author of them.
                  or abrogated. For a plant, which is often transplanted,Sen. Epiſt.
cannot prooue well: Next, that the Prince is little ſet by, who
wauereth in ſuch ſort, and thorowe diſhonorable inconſtancie
forbiddeth that which he commaunded,Tac. 3. Hiſt. and commaundeth
that which he did forbid.Authors of innouations are hurtfull in a common wealth. 
                  Wherefore remoue theſe authors
of innouations which are about thee,
                  Quinct. lib. 3. Inſtit. 
                  who do change
thoſe things that are iuſt and right, that they may ſeeme to
bring ſomewhat of their owne inuention: and be perſuaded of
this,
                  The old and ancient cuſtomes are the beſt. that in time paſt there was better prouiſion for all things,Tac. 15. Annal.
and thoſe things which are altered, are made worſe: wherefore
in the leaſt things,
                  Vale. Max. lib. 2. 
                  euen all the leaſt circumſtances of ancient
cuſtomes are to be obſerued.
               
                  But thou wilt ſay vnto me,
                  Yet ſometimes they are to be changed. 
                  ſhall I neuer change them?
Surely neuer: but when eyther great proffit, or vrgent neceſſitie
forceth thee thereunto. For, I confeſſe,
                  Tac. 7. Hiſt. that the auncient
rigour, and ouermuch ſeuerity, which we come nothing
neere, is ſometimes hurtfull: But in this caſe we muſt proceede
gently, and in ſuch ſort,
                  Not forcibly. that this globe in the common
wealth may be turned with the leaſt noiſe that may be:Cic. ad Att. lib. 2. Ep. 9. 
                  and
ſlowly, and as it were by degrees, and not at one puſh: by
the example of Auguſtus,But by little and little. 
                  who in the beginning of his
Empire did not execute all things immediatly, as was decreed:Dio. 52. fearing
                  
fearing that all things would not ſucceed well, if he ſhould tranſpoſe
and change all men from their places at one time; but certaine
things he diſpoſed at the preſent time, and referred others
to fitter oportunitie. And this is it, that Tacitus ſpeaketh of
him:
                  Tac. 1. An. that he did riſe by little and little, and drawe vuto him the
charge of the lawes, and offices. He ſayth by little, and little,
the like whereof thou art to obſerue in the like matter.
               
               Thirdly, I eſtabliſhed a reſtrained kinde of gouernment,Reſtraint of gouernment helpeth authority.
that is, that not onely the chiefe ſtrength and honor be deriued
from thee, but remayne with thee likewiſe. Surely it
is deriued from thee, when thou thy ſelfe doeſt manage the
affaires of greateſt importance,The King ſhould hold all things in his hand. or at the leaſt ratifie & confirme
them,1. Ann. 
                  leaſt thou do diſſolue the force of Principalitie in
referring all things to the Senate. Not that I do deſpiſe conſultations
(I already did perſuade the neceſſitie of them, and
ſo I do ſtill) but that I would haue it knowne to all mē, that
thou art he vpon whome all others do depend.All men haue an eye to him: and looke for preferment by him. Be thou the
onely iudge of matters,
                  2. Ann. 
                  by the prerogatiue and royall name of a
King. *Liu. 9. 
                  Kings are lords of times and ſeaſons, and of the things
that are handled in them, and they are leaders and not followers
of counſell. Doeſt thou yeeld any thing herein?Tac. 1. Ann. then thou
looſeſt all. For the conditiō of bearing rule as a king is ſuch, that
it cannot otherwiſe ſtād, but whē all authority is cōmitted to one.
               
               
                  The chiefeſt and greateſt honor muſt likewiſe remaine
with thy ſelf.
                  Aduance none to ouerhigh dignitie. 
                  The chiefe amōg the learned ſaid, the ordinary
ſafegard of principalitie, is to make no one man great. *Ariſt. 5. Polit. Cap. 11. Tac. Agric. It hath
ben alwaies dangerous not only to aduance the name of a priuate
perſon aboue the Prince, but euen to equall it with him. But what
if it ſhould happen? thou oughteſt to amend this fault, yet
in ſuch ſort, that thou do not depriue him by violence, but
leade him on by degrees,
                  Ariſt. 5 Polut. Cap. 11 
                  and as Ariſt. ſaith,
                  Abate thoſe by degrees who are already ſo aduanced. we muſt bring it
to paſſe by certain by waies, and circumſtances, not taking all his
authority from him at one time. Neyther do I only forbid to
beſtowe very great honor vpon any, but likewiſe I would
not haue the ſame of long continuance,
                  Latro apud Senec. 7. Contro
                        •
                     . vlt. 
                  eſpecially in matter
of warre, and offices of Lieutenancie. It is an olde precept,
                  Geue no great-dignitie to continue long.
there is nothing ſo profitable, as to ſhorten the authority which

is great. *Liu. 4. It is a ſure guard of thy liberty (or principalitie) if
thou doeſt not ſuffer great commandements to endure long:For men waxe proude. 
                  the
reaſon hereof is,
                  Dio. 52. 
                  becauſe Gouernments that are of long continuance,
make men prowde, and driue them to attempt innouations.
               Thou ſeeſt the firſt way, I will likewiſe ſet foote into the
ſecond in thy behalfe,Power is the ſureſt way to authoriue. which is Power. This is the readie and
princelie path, to leade thee to perfect Authoritie. If thou
be furniſhed with all other things, and this wanting, what
will they auayle thee? And aſſure thy ſelfe,Liu. 2. that Maiestie
without force is vnaſſured.
                  The definition thereof. I vnderſtand power in this place
to be an abilitie of things competent and neceſſary,
                  Cic. 2. de Iuuent. 
                  to conſerue a
mans owne, and to get more: which theſe fiue inſtruments
will purchaſe thee,How it may be gotten. 
                  Wealth, Weapons, Counſell, Alliances, and
Fortune: ſo that thou vſe them to the purpoſe, and after
that manner that I will inſtruct thee. But ſtay:1. By money. In the fore-front
I place Wealth, and who doubteth of the force and
vſe therof? Riches muſt needes be had, without the which,
                  Demoſt. Olinth. 1.
                  nothing can be done at all as it ought to be. Long ſince an experienced
and wiſe man,It is the ſinews, the head, the feete. did pronounce that Money was the
very ſinewes of a ſtate.
                  The maſter of mens mindes. The ruler of ſtrong holds. For, deſireſt thou to haue confederats,
or men of warre?Mucian apud Dio. in Veſpaſ. Ariſt. Rhet. 2. this will help thee to them: All things are
ſould for money. Wouldeſt thou deſtroy thine enemies, or
ouerthrowe Cities? this will bring it to paſſe,Cic. 2. in Verr. 
                  There is nothing
ſo defenced, that money cannot ſubdue. This engine will
batter downe all Caſtels,Cic. 1. ad Att. Ep. 12. Hora. 2. ſermon. 
                  if an Aſſe onely laden with golde, is
able to enter. To be ſhort, both diuine and humane things,
do obey theſe goodly riches.
                  A ſword of ſiluer pierceth thorowe all things. Doeſt thou not beleeue it?Philippo Macedoni id datum. at
the leaſt credit this oracle, Fight with ſiluer ſpeares, and thou
ſhalt conquere all.
               
               
                  The ſecond inſtrument is VVeapons.2. By weapons. 
                  For it is certaine,
that mightie Empires are not kept by ſloth, but warre is to be
made with men and with weapons.Tac. 15. Ann. 
                  It ſeemeth it was wickedly,
though according to the time it may be profitably ſpoken,
that the praiſe of a priuate perſon is to maintaine his owne,Ibidem. but
of a Prince,Kings make inuaſion. to ſight for other mens poſſeſſions. I confeſſe it were
rather to be wiſhed,
                  De morib. German. that he would defend his owne greatneſſe

with induſtrie: but we may only wiſh it: For how may he
euer do ſo?
                  Ibidem. It is impoſſible to remaine at reſt amongst great
and mighty ones: and where they come at handy ſtrokes,And ſo they ought often. Except they looke to be inuaded. By ſtrangers. the titles
of modeſty and honeſty are attributed to the Conqueror. And
there will alwaies be VVolues rauiſhing other mens liberty,
                     
                        ••
                     vell. l. b. 2. vntill
this foreſt of mankinde be cut downe. I adde further, that
though this were not,
                  Liu. 30. 
                  notwithſtanding, no great citty could
long remaine at quiet, for if they want enemies abroade,By their owne ſubiects. they ſhall
finde them at home. Expell, and force away this inward euill,
                  Wherfore they ought to repreſſe warre with warre.
                  and trouble others,
                  Idem. 
                        •
                     2. 
                  rather then vndoe thy ſelfe: the eſtate of
the Romaines tooke encreaſe, by daring and doing, not by theſe
faint counſels, which fearefull perſons do tearme wary.
               
                  Howbeit, I do alſo mingle Counſell,3. By counſell. 
                  neyther can any power
be eſtabliſhed without it. Tacitus ſayth,
                  1. Annal. VVeapons are to
be tempered with counſell, which I do place in the firſt ranke.
Doeſt thou deſire to make warre?
                  Warre is not raſhly to be moued. 
                  Firſt ſee that it be prouidently
vndertaken.
                  Publius. The minde that hath diſcretion to feare,
knoweth ſafely how to attempt. I hate theſe haſty perſons, who
whilſt they ſeeke to endanger others,Sen. 1. de Ira. do not looke vnto thēſelues.
And I knowe,
                  Tac. 11. An. that Power is more ſure by prouident counſels,
then by raſh aduiſes.Nor exceſſiuely 
                  But take heede that thou vſe a meane
herein,
                  Curt. 7. leaſt while thou ſtriueſt to attaine to the height, thou be
throwne downe by the ſelfeſame branches thou diddeſt take hold
on. *Val. 4. Cap. 1. Plut. in Pyrrho. Curt. 4. To be ſhort, that power is moſt ſafe that vſeth a meane in
her owne proper forces. Art thou a ſecond Pirrhus?The mind is to be ſatisfied. who alwaies
with a new thirſt, doſt aduance thy ſelfe ſomewhiles to this
thing, otherwhiles to that? Do not ſo: It is eaſier to make a
conqueſt of ſome things, then to preſerue thē when they are gottē,
And thou ſhalt rather finde Fortune,Publius. Florus lib. 4. Cap. vlt. then hold her faſt. Do thou
eſtabliſh things gottē before.
                  We ought to content our ſelues with that which we haue gotten, or was left vs. It is a harder matter to conſerue
Prouinces, then to make them thine; they are gotten by force, and
kept by iuſtice.Sen. Conſol. ad Marc. 
                  Why doeſt thou ſet forward ſo haſtely? Felicitie
cānot hold out, nor cōtinue to the end, except it pace on ſlowly.
This I do perſuade mighty kings;
                  But eſpecially meane Princes who do always with perill moue trouble to others. 
                  but to thoſe princes whoſe
power is ſmall, this is my counſell, quietnes is ſafeſt for you,
neither ought ye to labor how to get, but to ſaue. Conſider
that the Torteſſe being retired into her ſhel,Li
                        •
                     . 34. is ſafe frō blows, but

if ſhe putteth forth any part, whatſoeuer is vncouered, is ſubiect
to miſchances. So is it with you, when yee are drawne within
your owne ſtrength, yee are ſafe,
                  Ibidem. but if with a greedy deſire of
getting more, you paſſe your bounds, whatſoeuer is without is naked,And deſire that they cannot compaſſe.
and in danger of euery ſtroake.Curt. 7. 
                  They are fooles who couet
that they are not able to compaſſe.Tac. 2. An. 
                  It were better for you by
counſell and pollicie to attempt forrain matters, and not to meddle
with weapons.4. By alliances. 
                  Likewiſe another of theſe waies do concerne
Alliances, which (as I ſaid) are of much force to eſtabliſh power,
I hold it the beſt to chuſe ſuch confederates,
                  Ariſt. Rhet. ad Alex. Cap. vit. who are of
no ſmall abilitie, and do dwell next vnto thee: that is, who may
be auayleable to thee, both with their force, and with the
cōueniencie of place. For what good is to be gotten to ioyne
thy ſelf to thoſe who are weake and miſerable?
                  It is to be made with our neighbors that are mightie. they ſeeke but
ſome companions of their ruyne.Lucan. 8. 
                  If thou be wiſe,
                  Ibidem. ſticke to God,
and deſtinie,Seldome with them who are 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Leaſt thy ſelfe be afflicted with them. and honor them that are fortunate: *Ex Hadriani licterio. and do not
leane to a ruinous wall. *Curt. 4. When any man conſulteth of anothers
fortune, he ought to bring his owne to counſell. Neuertheleſſe, if
any mans eſtate be ſuch,
                  Except by anothers affliction thou be in pe
                        •
                     il likewiſe. Then in pollicy thou art to help him. whoſe ruyne draweth thy ouerthrowe
withit likewiſe, then ſurely eyther ioyne thy ſelfe to him,
                  Ex Tac. de Morib. Ger. 
                  or
do thy beſt to help him: what if it be ſecretly? It is an olde
pollicie, openly to ioyne friendſhip with one,12. Annal. and vnder hand but
with more truſt to encline to another. It is great danger when
two neigbor Princes that are mightie,
                  It is a dangerous thing whē two mightie one are at variace: which thou ſhouldeſt ioyne thy ſelfe vnto, and yet a thing neceſſary. Herein is no indifferency. 
                  are at warres together,
who can neyther conquere nor be ouercome,Sall. Ep. Mithrid. but with thy
loſſe. What courſe wilt thou take in this caſe? for thou canſt
not auoide, but thou muſt make one of them,
                  Liu. 32. eyther thy
friend, or thy foe.
               
                  And where ſome hold it to be the beſt counſell as the middeſt
and ſafeſt way,Ibidem. to be at quiet, and not take armes: ſurely
that is not the middle way, but none at all:Ibidem. For what ſhall elſe
become of thee, then to be a pray vnto the conqueror, when as
thou being aſſured on no part, doeſt depend vpon euents, to the end
that thou mighteſt apply thy counſels to fortune? We haue
ſeene, and ſhall ſee (ſuch is the eſtate of Europe at this day)
that they, eyther whoſe ſloth, or bad circumspection,Sall. Ep. Mithrid. haue not
moued war, that they might be ſafe thorow other mens labours,

haue in the end bene ſhrewdly chaſtiſed.Ioyne thy ſelfe therefore to God. 
                  Wherfore in this caſe
we ought with Caeſar, to caſt the dice,Sueton. 
                  and to ioyne our ſelues
to one of them. But to which of them I pray you? If they be
equall of power, to the better; if vnequall, to the ſtronger:
except ſome other conueniencie or profit do draw thee. For
ſurely herein I haue regard thereunto. Why doſt thou think
vpon theſe high & haughtie things? rather looke vnto thy
ſafetie,
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  and with the frenchmen, allow the courage of Valentinus,
and follow the counſell of the wiſe.5. By fortune. And ſurely it is aboue other things. 
                  I made Fortune the
laſt inſtrument to eſtabliſh power: but why had I not made
it the firſt? Surely I ſhould, if I had had reſpect to the force
thereof.
                  Curt. 8. 
                  For who can denie that the greateſt glorie and power,
are more often the fauours of Fortune, then of Vertue.Who doth wō
                     derfully fauour ſome. 
                  For ſome
are borne vnder that planet,
                  Cic. pro lege Man. 
                  that it ſeemeth Fortune is from
aboue ioyned vnto them for honour and glorie, and to exployt
great and waightie matters: who according to the ſaying of
Pompey,Sal. ad Caeſ. Terent. Ad. 
                  are men, of greater hap, then wiſedome: whom while
they ſleep god proſpereth in al things: *Inter Adagia & Plu Liu. 7. Theog. Curt. 3. who take cities in their nets:It ſupplieth all wants without labour.
                  & victorie flieth into their lap frō heauen: whom the Poet likewiſe
hath ſet out in their colours: Many haue a left mind,The fortunate cannot do ill if they would. but
God is right for thē: who turneth to the beſt whatſoeuer they begin
but badly. As contrariwiſe Fortune who is mightier then all
reaſon, daſheth and diſſolueth in others, whatſoeuer they haue
prouidently enterpriſed. Wherefore they may well reioyce that
poſ eſſe her:
                  Plaut. Pſeud. 
                  for ſhe onely giueth authoritie.
                  The common ſort eſteeme ſuch man great As euery one
is fauoured by Fortune, ſo he is honoured and accompted off, and
according to his wealth, all men iudge of his vviſedome. Yet let
them reioyce with moderation,
                  I know not if their continuance be certain For Fortune changeth her ſelfe. 
                  becauſe meere and naked felicitie
is fraile:
                  Curt. 4. 
                  neither can anie thing be durable, that reaſon
doth not vnderprop. *Ibidem. Vell. 2. Albeit that Fortune ſeemeth to breath on
theſe her fauorites, yet in the ende ſhe ſhall not be able to ſatisfie
their vnaduiſedneſſe. And whom ſhe hath long followed, ſhee
ſuddenly leaueth them, as though ſhe were wearie. Do I ſay ſhe
leaueth them?
                  C
                        •
                     ſ. 3. Ciuil. 
                  yea ſhe caſteth them off: and ſhe is wont, to
reſerue them for a harder chaunce,And hurteth them ſhe played withal. whom ſhe exalted to greateſt
dignitie.Auſon. 
                  Be thou admoniſhed hereby, and by the precept of
the Poet, vſe Fortune reuerently.
               
                  
Now the third way which is,Behauiour is the laſt way to get authoritie 
                  of behauiour, offereth it ſelfe,
which I do in this place conſider in him which beareth
rule, to be two fold, internall, and externall. Internall, that
which conſiſteth in the mind, as vertues; externall, that
which is in the bodie, as a certaine carriage or geſture. As
concerning vertues,Worthie Pietie doth much aduaunce it. they ought all to be ioyned to Authoritie,
yea and euen the ſhow of that which is like Vertue:
                  Tac. 15. An but
eſpeciallie theſe two, Pietie and Prouidence, beare the cheefeſt
place, for Pietie ſurely is reuerenced of all men, and it
maketh Princes as it vvere gods:
                  Tac. 2. Ann. and ſetleth an opinion in
men,Curt. 3. that they ſeeme to enterpriſe nothing without ſome heauenly
aſſiſtance.
               
               
                  Wherefore Aristotle did admoniſh,
                  It purchaſeth obedience. that a Prince ought
earneſtly and aboue all things to haue care of things diuine.Ariſt. 5. pol. cap. 11. 
                  He
addeth the reaſon hereof, For the ſubiects do hope that they
ſhall ſuffer leſſe iniustice from that Prince, whom they deeme religious
and who feareth God:It ouerthroweth Cōſpiracie. and leſſe conſpiracies are complotted
againſt him, as hauing euen God for his helpe and ſuccour.
               Now prouidence likewiſe will enter the hearts of men,
                  Prouidēce likewiſe helpeth. 
                  vnder
the colour of admiration:
                  Valer. 2. cap. 10. if thou doeſt vndertake, or do
nothing but aduiſedly and circumſpectly; that is, happilie.
For,Which ſildome is deceaued. for the moſt part, euen fortune doth accōpanie thoſe things
which are handled with great reaſon:
                  Liu. 5. and therfore the ſame is
to be ſaid of authoritie, for contempt followeth them that
faile in their proceedings:And therefore it is eſteemed. and things that fall out croſſe and
contrarie do diminiſh the authoritie of Emperours.
                  Caſ. 7. Moreouer,
ſuch a diſpoſition is ſufficient of it ſelf, to purchaſe honour,
if thou be aduiſed in thy enterpriſes, and by nature wary,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  and
one whom prouidēt counſails that carrie reaſon with thē, do rather
pleaſe, thē proſperous deliberatiōs which happen by chance.
                  Tac. 2. An.
               
               Amongſt the externall things in Behauiour, I put geſture,
that thou maiſt be of a comly grace & countenance,
                  Outward things do not a little profit. graue, and
leaning to ſeueritie, yet not to threatning.Ariſt. 5. pol. cap. 
                  Be not bitter in
ſhew, but maieſtical, that thoſe which meet thee, may not tremble
with dread of thee, but feare thee with reuerence. Likewiſe the
court of the prince hath, and bringeth much dignitie if it be
feated in a goodly and faire ſoile. By my aduiſe he ſhould

chuſe ſome principall citie,Tac. 3. An. 
                  where he might order all his buſineſſe.
                  And euen the prince his pallace.
This he ſhould keepe his court in. The ſunne although
it alwaies maketh his courſe thorow the middeſt of the skie,
                  Claud. 
                  yet
doth it with his beames giue light to all things. Yet it were not
amiſſe ſometimes to withdraw himſelfe to ſome other place,
that by the auoiding of trouble and weariſomneſſe to remaine ſtill
in one place,
                  Suet on. Tib. cap. 10. 
                  thou maiſt by thy abſence maintaine thy authoritie.
Thou maiſt ſee other things which make to this purpoſe
aboue in their proper chapter, which I will not repeat.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  He commeth to treat of thoſe things, which are the means to ouerthrow
kingdoms, amongſt the which the firſt is Force. The
ſame is ſhewed to be two-fold: Conſpiracies, and treaſon. Both
which he ſheweth how they may either be auoided or puniſhed.
               
               
                  I Haue related thoſe things which do either maintaine,
or eſtabliſh a kingdome: now I am to come
to thoſe matters which are noiſome & hurtfull to
the ſame. Amongſt the which Force doth firſt offer
it ſelfe vnto me,The definition of force as it is meant in this place. being taken in this ſence, that it is a ſecret
attempt of one or more, either againſt the king or the eſtate. I
tearmed it ſecret, becauſe I intend not here to ſpeake of
force in general (for there is a certaine open force, as Faction,
Sedition, Warre; which I do in reaſon defer,Which he intreateth of in the fift Book. and refer them
to militarie prudence) but only of that hidden force, which
properly oppoſeth it ſelfe to the force which helpeth to eſtabliſh
a kingdome.The diuiſion thereof. There are two ſorts hereof, Conspiracies
& Treaſon. Of theſe two, Conſpiracies are oppoſed to the
gard, treaſons, to the places of defence. For I do diſtinguiſh
them in this manner meaning that conſpiracies are properly againſt
the kings perſon: treaſons, againſt his ſtrong holds, his
men of war, his fortreſſes.The danger thereof. Either of theſe are peſtilent euils,
and to be dreaded, but rather to be feared, thē with eaſe auoided.
For how is it poſſible thou ſhouldſt? they lurk & neuer
appeare,Tac. 2. Hiſt. vntil they bring deſtructiō.It is hardly withſtood. Surely thou maiſt openly
withſt and open war: guile and deceit are ſecret, and therefore

ineuitable. Salust ſayth,Sal. ad Caſ. 
                  It is no matter of difficultie for a man
of courage to ſubdue his knowne enemie, but good men cannot
readily withſt and nor auoid priuie perils.
               
               
                  But that I may firſt ſpeake of Con piracies.The prince may be dangered by oue. 
                  We know
that the king heth open to the trecherie euen of one perſon:Curt. 4. that
couetouſneſſe maketh no conſcience of wickedneſſe.
               
                  We know, that the faith of ſolders is vnconſtant,Tac. 2. Hiſt. and that
there may be danger in euerie one of them.Ibidem. * What wil thy bands
of men and thy gards auaile thee, if either one or other of them
do demaund the readie hire promiſed by diuerſe for the executiō
of a ſuddaine miſchiefe?Curt. 9. 
                  Surely if we will but recount the end
of kings, we ſhall find that more haue bene ſlaine by their owne
ſubiects, then by forraine enemies. And why ſhould we wonder
thereat?
                  The deſperat perſon, is the 
                        •
                     nterpriſer thereof. Who ſoeuer maketh no reckoning of his owne life,Sen. Epiſt. 4.
is lord of thine.Sen. Trag. Here. Oct. * And he ſetteth all men at no value, who firſt
maketh light account of death. Wherefore it is hard to giue
either aid or counſell herein: yet ſome may bee had, and
that of theſe foure,
                  There are four remedies thereof. Enquirie, Puniſhment, Innocencie, Deſtinie.
               Firſt of Enquirie, becauſe it is moſt neceſſarie that thou
ſhouldſt haue certaine ſpies, or Listeners,
                  Arist. 5. Polit. 
                        •
                     a. 11 and that thou do
thy beſt that nothing whatſoeuer thy ſubiects do or ſay,
                  Inquirie is to be made of mens ſpeech. 
                  be hid
from thee. I ſay whatſoeuer thy cheefeſt and principall ſubiects
do. For what eye can haue an inſight into them all?
This, as it is profitable to other matters, ſo is it eſpecially auaileable
againſt conſpiracies, becauſe very ſildome it falleth
out that men do ill,The toung betraies the hart. except firſt they ſpeake ill:Curt. 6. and the
vnaduiſedneſſe of the toung hath come to ſtrokes. Marke it wel,
and thou ſhalt find, moſt of thoſe traitors haue either in
ſome place themſelues ſpoken ill of the king,Idem. 8. or haue giuen
good eare to thoſe who haue diffamed & ſlaundered him. Wherfore
by this wiſe way, thou ſhalt not a little arme thy ſelfe against
thy domeſticall enemies.
                  Idem. 6. For the matter is ended if it be
once diſcouered,Rewards to the diſcouerer, and that by a publike law or docres. which to the intent it may the ſooner be
brought to paſſe,Sal. Cat. why docſt thou not openly promiſe recompence
of monie, and free libertie to the diſcourers thereof? and
that by publike law, oftentimes renewed? I am of opinion
it concerneth the prince greatly, and do know,Tac. 15. An 
                  that al things

may come to light,
                  Tac. 15. An. Ibidem. 
                  either by torture or reward.
                  Their hope reuealeth all. * For when the
mind of any doth thinke on the rewards, and therewithall large
ſummes of money, and power are ſet before his thoughts, the right
and ſafetie of others doth giue place. And beleeue me, they do
betray their deareſt friends. But in theſe priuie accuſations,Yet we muſt giue credit to them with diſcretion.
conſider that thou do giue eare to all, but not credit all. For
many, either thorow hope or hate, will vtter lies wherefore
by the precept of Maecenas, thou oughteſt not to beleeue all
things which ſuch perſons giue thee information of,
                  Dio. 52. 
                  but trie and
examine them thorowly.
                  Leaſt innocent perſons be intrapped. Good Lord,Ann. Marc. 18. 
                  who ſhould be guilileſſe, if
it were ſufficient only to accuſe men? And for as much as the
matter concerneth thy eſtate, thy ſelfe, and thy life, thou
oughteſt take great care leaſt thou ſeeme to do any thing ouerhaſtilie
herein, or in thine owne cauſe, in reſpect of thy
ſelfe.Tac. 15. An. Otherwiſe thou ſhalt be defamed many times by the report
of the common people,
                  Leaſt way be made to ſlaunder and hate. 
                  as though thou haddeſt put innocent men
to death, either thorow enuie or feare.
               
               
                  For the vulgar ſort cannot be eaſilie perſuaded,Dio. 52. that a man
naked hath conſpired againſt one armed, being in the middeſt of
his gard: and will not almoſt beleeue it, except the miſchiefe
come to action.Liu. 11. 
                  So that one exclaimed not without reaſon,
that the condition and eſtate of Princes was most miſerable,Suet. Domit. cap. 21. for
albeit that the attempt and conſpiracie againſt their perſon be
ſufficiently manifeſt yet is it not beleeued, before the conſpirators
be executed. Therefore thou oughteſt to proceed warily
and ſlowly herein.
               
               
                  What if the matter be prooued? puniſh them,
                  Puniſh thoſe that are conuicted. 
                  and that
ſeuerely (It is the ſecond helpe I gaue) For vvhat vnlawfull
death may be executed vpon a traitor and a theeſe?Cic. pro. Mi. 
                  It is he by
whom the libertie and life of all is hazarded: It is he, who in
the perſon of one doth oftentimes deſtroy al, and bringeth to
ruine the fortune of a mightie people.Sal. Catil. Sen. 1. de Cl
                        •
                     m. Sal. Catil. Cic. pro Marcil. Sal. Catil. * In this caſe, who is hee
that maketh mention of clemen
                     •
                  le and mercie? Thy ſafegard (ô
king) is our ſafegad. Neither is this reuenge properly thine,
but the common wealths. Be not lauiſh of our blood, and in 
                     ••
                  
                  uing
a few wicked wretches, take heed thou, 
                     〈◊〉
                   work
                     •
                   the
deſtruction of all goodmen. But yet let it be done in ſuch fort,
                  Yet not raſhly.
                  
that ſometimes delay do ſteppe betweene reuenge. For
what if conſpiracies do come to light in an vnſeaſonable
time? Knowing it, thou ſhalt diſſemble it:Tac. 14. An. 
                  oftentimes the
onely remedies against conſpiracies, is to faine that we are ignorant
of them. But what if they be enterpriſed by great perſonages,
whom thou canſt not preſently puniſh with ſafetie?
Keepe the matter ſecret: and looke firſt vnto thine own ſecuritie,
before thou take reuenge.
                  11. Ann. Sal. Cat. * For, the matter requireth, rather
to beware of them, then to conſult what ſhall be done with them.
And albe
                     •
                  t I ſtir thee to reuenge,Nor alwaies. yet do I not alwaies exclude
pardon.
               Suppoſe that ſome worthie perſon were taken in this
wicked complot, to whom thou and thy countrie haddeſt
bene formerly bound, what wouldſt thou do in this caſe?
Truly puniſh him, if thou maiſt do it without perill,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  if not, qualifie
it. Heare from a woman, no womans counſell. Liuia ſpeaking
to her Auguſtus. He is taken, now he cannot hurt thee,
                  Ibidem.
                  vvell may hee aduaunce thy renowne.
                  Ibidem. 
                  There is nothing more
glorious, then when a Prince is harmed, without inflicting puniſhment.
               
               But doth it onely aduance thy renowne? ſurely it maketh
much likewiſe for thy ſafetie.In this caſe clemencie oftentimes is proſitable. It is an incredible thing
how this noted kind of clemencie, doth driue others either
with ſorrow or ſhame from the like attempt.
               
                  Hold this for firme,
                  Ibidem. Clemencie doth not only make men more
honeſt, but more aſſured: and it is the ornament of Empires,
and likewiſe their ſtrongeſt ſafegard.This is principally of force, in the ſtocke of Noble men. 
                  For ſurely, the parents and
children of thoſe who are put to death,Ibidem. their kinsfolks and friends,
do ſucceed in ech of their places. By which means there is made
a certaine knot and chaine of conſparators How wilt thou vntie
and breake it? By this clemencie I haue ſpoken of, and
principally by our third aid Innocencie, which is, that by ouer
oftē diſpleaſing others, thou doeſt not giue cauſe to hurt
thy ſelfe,
                  Plin. li. 
                        •
                     . Ep. 
                        •
                     lt. Idem Pane. Power doth make a bad trial what force it hath by the
contempt & harme of others.It is a cauſe to take away conſpiracies. Other things 
                  And by proofe we ſee, that the moſt
truſtie gard a Prince can haue, is his own innocencie.
               Now do I preſent vnto thee Deſtinis, the fourth ſhield.

Poore wretch,are to be left to deſtinie. why doeſt thou ſo torment thy ſelfe? If deſtinie
ſo pleaſe,I
                        ••
                     e. Sat. 4. Ad dictum vetus Alluſum. Actor. c. 17. Prouerb. Salo. c. 3. Theoer. 
                  thou muſt yeeld thy faire white necke to the ſword:
and when thou haſt done all thou maiſt, thou canſt neither
rid thy ſelfe of thy murtherer nor ſucceſſor. If it pleaſe not deſtinie,
thou art ſafe, God, euen God in whom we liue, and moue,
                  We are in the hands of God.
                  and are, he will be by thy ſide, and will keepe thy feet that thou be
not taken.
                  Who is the cheefe gard of kings. His praier for princes. * It is he who hath care of a good prince. Put thy truſt
in him, I wil vndertake theſe vowes for thee, but vpon this
condition, I do deale with him to keepe thee ſafe and ſound, if ſo
thou preſerue others:
                  Plin. Pane. Ibidem. * If thou gouerne the common wealth aright,
and to the common profit of all.*Ibidem. 
                  If otherwiſe thou do, then
that he may turne his eyes from the custodie of thy body, & forſake
thee in thy praiers thou poureſt out openly.
               
               
                  I haue finiſhed to entreat of Conſpiracies:The offence o
                        •
                      treaſon. Now Treaſon a
ſecret and dangerous miſchiefe is to be drawne out of her denne:Val. 9. ca. 6.
*Ibidem. Bringing no leſſe diſcommoditie to mankind, then faith doth profit
and ſafetie. And it alwaies threatneth our ouerthrow,
                  Who are moſt bent thereto? Couerous men. 
                  for
ſo much as commonly our enemies are within the walles,Sal. Catil. and
in the middeſt of the citie. To the which eſpecially couetous
men are enclined,
                  Idem. Iugurth. Tac. 16. An. 
                  who do prefer their gaine before their good
name, before faith, finally before all other things.Men vnconſtāt 
                  Openly they
are honeſt, ſecretly and in their hart, they are faithleſſe and deceitfull,
couering their couetouſneſſe and luſt. Likewiſe theſe
temporiſing wits,Curt. 4. Ibidem. Liu. 24. 
                  that is to ſay, being light and wauering, depending
vpon the doubtfull change of times: As though that
faith ought to ſtand as it were vpon fickle fortune.Secret diſſemblers. 
                  And laſt of
all thoſe that are ſecret and diſſemblers, who according to
that ſaying of Homer,Odyſſ. 
                        •
                     . Do vtter in words very goodly things,
inuenting miſchiefe in their heart. So that thou ſhalt not diſcerne
a traitor before thou be betraied.Latre apud Sen. cont. 7. 
                  Yea to the end they may the
more eaſily beguile, they extoll faith aboue all things. Obſerue
this, Deceipt procureth credit before hand in ſmall trifles,Liu. 28.
to the end that when occaſion is offred, it may with the more aduauntage
beguile vs. By the which note thou maiſt beſt diſcouer
them.
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  For it is naturally ingrafted in men,
                  Diſſembling doth often diſcouer them. by how much
more that the things they do are full of guile, ſo much the more
often they commit them.
               
                  
Thou ſeeſt the miſchiefe it ſelfe, and the doers therof, but
how wilt thou auoyd them? By this double means of Enquirie
and Puniſhment,
                  They are with ſpeed to be puniſhed. which I haue foretold thee. In the firſt
I alter nothing, in the latter ſomewhat, becauſe I am of opinion
it ought neuer be differred,Val. 9. ca. 
                        •
                     . 
                  and wicked treaſon, ought to
be reuenged with ſpeedie puniſhment. What doeſt thou dread
in this caſe? Things are manifeſt,Dio. 52. 
                  ye
                        •
                      it behooueth not to
bring ſuch perſons to iudgement, but it as lawful to execute them
ſuddenly as open enemies, and to puniſh them alwaies.And neuer to be pardoned. In my
iudgment here is no place for pardon, if thou do pardon
them,Salu. Catil. take heed least this pittie and mercie cauſe not thine own
miſeric. They that are traitors to their countrie, to whom,
and when will they euer be honeſt?Becauſe they are paſt amēdment. neuer hope for it: they
are to be cut off, and that not ſo much in regard of reuenge,
                  Cic. ad Bru. 
                  as
that thou maist for the preſent withdraw wicked ſubiects by
feare from enterpriſing ought againſt their countrie,
                  They are to be puniſhed for examples ſake. 
                  and ſet
downe an example for thoſe that come after, that none go about
to 
                        〈…〉
                      ſuch madneſſe. Likewiſe a cruell puniſhment is to
be inflicted on them,And with cruelti
                        •
                     . euen ſuch, if thou giue care to Plato as
was appointed for ſacrilegious perſons:Li. 9. de leg. 
                  O ye iudges (quoth
he) let like execution be done vpon theſe, as vpon church robbers.
They deſerue no leſſe,Becauſe it is a deteſtable wickedneſſe. doth not our countrie hold the ſecond
place next vnto God?Sal. Catil. but the ſame thorow their wicked
complot and counſell commeth into very great danger: therefore
there can no ſufficient cruelt
                        •
                     e be ſhewed in puniſhing ſo outragious
and deteſtable a wickedneſſe.
                  Cic. 4. in Ca. A wickedneſſe which
the verie enemies abhorre, neither is it good to them,They are ſcarſe acceptable to thoſe they gra
                        •
                      tiſie. that
receiue good thereby.Tac. 1. An. 
                  Traitors are hated, euen of thoſe for
whom they employ themſelues. I confeſſe ſometimes they receaue
recompence; but ſurely it is not that they are deemed
worthie that honour, but thereby to draw on others.
                  Surely traitors are not. They loue
the fact, but not the executor thereof, and Augustus ſpoke
very fitly, I like of the treaſon, but do not approue nor allow traitors.
                  Plut. Apop. Stob. ſerm. 2.
And likewiſe before him, Philip ſayd that he loued thoſe
that were to be hetraied, but not the traitor.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Of a double vice, the ouerthrowe of kingdomes, and firſt of hate,
the euill whereof is ſet before our eyes. Thoſe things are to be
auoyded which induce thereunto: yea the very ſnowe and ſhadowe
of them: ſuch as are in Chaſtiſements, Tributes, Cenſuring
of manners. A precept how the Prince ſhould behaue
himſelfe in euery one of theſe.
               
               
                  THou ſeeſt that miſchiefe is preſent, and an
ordinarie follower of force: which as our
poet ſayth, doth weaken and ouerthrowe the
wealthieſt. But be thou ſure, that it is more
frequent with Vice, though it be longer a
comming,Cic. pro Rabir. poſt. which I define to be An euill diſpoſition
of the King,
                  The definition of Vice. 
                  or againſt him, hurtfull to the ſtate. This
Vice is twofolde, Hate, and Contempt, which oppoſe themſelues
to as many vertues that eſtabliſh a Kingdome: the
one is a bad affection towards the King, the other an euill
opinion of him.The definition of Hate. For Hate, is an obſtinate and harmeful malice
and offence in the ſubiects, againſt the King and his eſtate. For I
do not in this place vnderſtand that common and ciuill
hate,
                  Idem pro Milo. 
                  wherewith we do maligne all thoſe that are wicked:
                  Whence it ſpringeth. but a
ſharper paſſion, ſpringing of feare, with a deſire of reuenge.
For the people do dread the mightie men, in regard of the
iniuries or harmes they may do them, vnder couler of chaſtiſement:
and they are grieued, and do deſire to be reuenged,
for the iniuries they haue already receaued. So of a very
euill mixture, Hate, as bad a broode is ſprong: which if it
be once ingrafted and imprinted in the hearts of men,
                  Idem de Aruſp. reſp. Idem 2. de offic. it is incredible,How great miſchiefe commeth thereof.
                  what power, it hath to do euil. For how can any thing
be firme that proceedeth from feare? It is but a bad maſter
of diuturnitie.
                  Id. Phil. 2. Id. 2. de 
                        〈◊〉
                      Ibid. * There is no force of any Empire ſo great, which
being oppreſſed with feare, can be of any long continuance. The
cauſe hereof, an ancient poet declareth, Whome they feare,
they hate; and who ſo they hate, his deſtruction they deſire.
Surely by certaine degrees they deteſt thee,
                  Sen. 1. de Clemen. 
                  they attempt againſt
                  By degrees it deſtroyeth thee.
                  
                  thee, they 
                        •
                     ppreſſe thee. What ſhall let them to do it?
they haue many hands,
                  And for the moſt part without recouery. 
                  and thou but one necke.
                  Ex dicto Caligula. Cic. de Aruſp. reſp. Id. ad Lent. lib. 1. Ep. 9. Sen. 1. de Clem. * Occaſion will be
taken, and they which are not able to exploit ſo much with their
riches, I know not yet what fortune and fit time they expect. To
be ſhort, all this ſecret hidden hate, doth ſuddainely burſt out.
Alas thou knoweſt not how great a rabble will riſe, where
hate is increaſed aboue meaſure. Gather thy ſtrength to thee,
defend thy ſelfe, keepe thy guard about thee, thou ſhalt well
feele,Hate is open to dayly danger. 
                  that it is not the ſubſtance of any one that is able to reſiſt
the hate of many. For thou art expoſed to ſo many perils, as thy
ſelfe art danger to many:
                  Cic. 2. de off. Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibid. * Neyther canſt thou with aſſurance
behold thoſe wicked hands, to whoſe ſafegard thou haſt committed
thy ſelfe.
                  And therefore to be auoyded. Fly then from hate, or thy kingdome will flye
from thee, nay euen thy life. But how wilt thou ſhunne it?
Surely if thou doeſt auoid thoſe things, by which it is gottē.
               Firſt vices, then the very opinion of them.It ſpringeth from Vice. Vices are of
three ſorts, repugnant to thoſe former inſtruments, which
purchaſe loue, Cruelty, Couetouſnes, rigor. For who is he ſo
vnwiſe that knoweth not, or ſo impudent that denieth, that
theſe are noy ſome, and hurtfull to the ſtate? Wherfore I do
not only inſtruct thee, but warne thee to eſchue them, inſiſting
ſo much the longer herein, by how much thou mayeſt
receaue greater domage hereby.Or the opinion of vices. For we know that men are no
leſſe led with an opinion and report,
                  Cic. pro leg
                        •
                      M
                        •
                     uil. 
                  then with ſome certaine reaſon,
either to feare or hate. For the opinion of Vices proceedeth
from thoſe things which haue ſome affinitie, & neighberhood
to thoſe I ſpoke of before, of which ſort, Chaſtiſements,
Tributes, Cenſuring of manners are. Which of themſelues
are laudable, yea very neceſſary in euery kingdome,
yet they looke with an vnlawfull ſhow & countenance, except
they be handled with skill and pollicy. Do but looke
how litle Chaſtiſements do ſwarue from cruelty;Whoſe ſeare is in chaſtiſements. for there is
no ſparing of bloud. Tributs, from couetouſnes; for money
is greedely gathered together. Cenſuring, from rigor; for a
bridle & meane is laid vpō them by conſtraint. And ſurely
ſuch they ſhould be, if the end, which openly tendeth to the
ſafety of the ſubiects, did not make a diſtinction betweene
thē. Wherefore to the end thou mayeſt proceed warily and

prouidently herein, thou oughteſt to be very circumſpect.
Firſt in Chaſtiſements, and take heed that thou do not vnſheath
the ſword of iuſtice careleſly,Chaſtiſements are to be freed from hate. but in ſuch ſort,Sen. 1. de Clemen. 
                  that
ſpare be made euen of the moſt baſe bloud.
               
               1. I ſay thou oughteſt ſlowly to be drawne thereunto.By ſlowneſſe. For
it is likely,
                  Ibid. 
                  that who ſo condemneth ſuddainely, doeth it willingly.
Let this ſentence not be forgotten of thee: It is better to
heale the vnſound parts, then to cut them off.
                  Cic. 2. ad Ait. Ep. 1.
               
               2. Nay be thou neuer brought to it,
                  By a couler of the common profit. 
                  but whē the cōmon profit
ſhall perſuade thee thereto.Sen. 1. de Clem. Cic. 2. de off. 
                  Doeſt thou regard thy priuate affaires?
thou doeſt erre. For all the care of him that puniſheth
any man, ought to be referred not to himſelfe, but to the benefit of
the common wealth. But if ſometimes (as it cannot but happen
in principalitie) that thine own eſtate is in danger, diſſemble
it, & ſhow a countenance as though thou wert forced to puniſh
againſt thy wil, & with great ſorrow.Sen. 1. de Clem. Sen. 1. de Ira. * Nor ſo much to make away
thoſe who haue offended, as to feare others leaſt they periſh.
               
                  3. All things are to be intended for example,
                  By repreſſing anger. 
                  not for reuenge:
wherfore anger especially is to be reſtrained in puniſhing.Cic. 2. de off. Sen. 1. de Ira. Cic. 2. de off.
                  For doth any man hate his owne members whē he is forced to cut
thē off? I adde further, who ſo commeth to puniſh in choller, ſhall
neuer hold that meane which is betweene ouermuch & ouer litle.
               
                  4. Likewiſe we ought moſt of all to abſtaine from taking
pleaſure therein, or from the leaſt ſuſpicion thereof:
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. It is a
rage proper to brute beaſts, to reioyce in ſhedding bloud,Reioycing. & in tormenting.Claud. Conſul. Mallij. Tac. 15. Annal.
                  And the Poet ſpake wiſely, that he is cruell, who delighteth
in puniſhmēt, and ſeemeth to attribute to himſelf the reuēge
of the laws. This thou ſhalt get thereby, that albeit thou
vſeſt mercy towards thoſe that are guilty, and haue deſerued to
be executed, yet will they not beleeue it is done for the profit of
the common wealth, but to ſatisfie the cruelty of ſome one.
               5. Thou oughteſt to take heed that puniſhmēt be inflicted
according to the vſuall cuſtoms,By the obſeruation of cuſtomes. for it ought to be vſed according
to the cuſtom of the countrey.
                  Ariſt. Pol. Cap. 11. Whatſoeuer is newly inuented,
or ouermuch herein, is hurtful, & they are rightly called
cruell,Sen. 2. de Clemen. 
                  who haue cauſe to puniſh, but vſe no meane in puniſhing.
               
               
                  6. Care ought to be had that there be equalitie herein:
                  By the equalitie of puniſhment. and
that for one and the ſelfe ſame cauſe, ſome be chaſtiſed,Cic. 2. de off. and others

not ſo much as called in queſtion: or that ſome be more hardly
handled, others more gently:
                  By the equalitie of puniſhment. 
                  which is a hatefull thing, except
it be towards Noble men.
                  Plin. lib. 8. Cap. vlt. 
                  For I ſee that all Phiſicions,
although bondmen in matter of ſicknes, do nothing differ from
thoſe that are free, yet are the free men, vſed more mildly and
gently.
               
                  7. Laſt of all,
                  By abſenting himſelfe. 
                  beware that thou do not call vpon executions,
                  Tac. Agric.
                  neyther be thou a beholder of them, for euen Nero
withdrew his eyes and commaunded miſchiefe to be done, but was
no looker on. The decree of a worthy perſonage pleaſeth me
well:
                  Xenophon in Hieron. It behooueth a Prince, when any puniſhment or execution
is to be made, to commit the matter to others: when recompences
and rewards are to be geuen to vndertake that himſelfe.
               Thou haſt thoſe inſtructions, which do ſufficiently mitigate
vulgar and vſuall puniſhments:A difficulty in puniſhing a multitude. But what is to be
done in ſtrange and new puniſhments? As poſe the caſe,
that a great many, and they being mightie men haue offended,
of whome thou wilt hardly rid thy hands without
great hatred. Here firſt I would perſuade not to make them
a way by peecemeale, or by pauſes, but altogether as it were
with one ſtroake.
                  They are to be executed all together. In ſhowe this ſeemeth more ſharpe,Tac. Agric. but in
effect there is more mildnes therein:Sen. 1. de Clemen. 
                  For that re
                        •
                     terated, and
often reuenge, doth ſuppreſſe the hate of a fewe, and ſtirre vp the
malice of all. Make inciſion at once of that which is to be cut
away, and then lay vnto the ſore theſe two mollifying plaiſters.
Firſt,Hate is to be mollified by benefits, & By the execution of the Executioner. in doing good to others,Tac. 14. Annal. 13. Annal. 
                  as a witneſſe, that they being
taken away, thy lenitie is encreaſed: Next, turning as it
were another way, in puniſhing the miniſters of thoſe miſchiefes.
Some will thinke this a wicked deede: but what of that?
this hath ben vſed in times paſt of ſeueare Dukes,
                  1. Hiſt. who haue
taken away the hatred of ſhedding of bloud, by ſhedding of
bloud, and haue offered vp certaine vile and abiect perſons
as a ſacrifice to ſatisfie the publicke hate.
                  Plin. Paneg. Curt. 10. The common ſort are
by that meanes appeaſed: yea they reioyce, that the wrath of
the Prince hath fallen on the miniſters of wrath: neyther can any
power gotten by miſchiefe be of long continuance.
               
               
                  I do now come to lenifie the matter of Tribute:Tribute procureth bitterneſſe and hate. 
                  vnder

which name I comprehend all kind of exaction. The word
hath a harſh ſound in the eares of the common people, and
the effect pincheth them at the hart, neyther is there a more
vſuall harueſt of hate then this.
                  Cic. 2. de off. 
                  For no vice is more inormous
then couetouſnes, especially in Princes and gouernors of a common
wealth.I liad. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  How diſhonorable is it, for that Prince in Homer
to be called the deuourer of the people?For the common people will hardly part with money. 
                  Surely by the iudgement
of the people it is ſo, who had as leife thou ſhouldeſt
take away their life from them, as their money. A certaine
Poet ſayth truly,
                  Cornicus Verus. 
                  that money is the ſoule, and the bloud of mortall
men: And we ſee, and heare dayly, how many Princes by
getting money ouercouetouſly,Tac. 3. Hiſt. haue purchaſed to themſelues more
hatred then ſtrength. Wherefore with diligence and care,
                  Fiue ſalues do cure this. 
                  attaine
likewiſe to this point, and cleanſe, or mollifie, as much
as in thee lieth the hatred that is ſetled thereto, which I promiſe
thou mayſt happily atchieue, in vſing theſe 5. playſters.
Firſt apply Neceſſity forthwith to this ſore of the mind,
                  Firſt neceſſity. 
                  and
endeuour to make it knowne to all,Cic. 2. de off. that if they loue their ſafety,
they muſt obey neceſſity.There is no eſtate without Tribute. 
                  What common wealth, or kingdome
is there without Tribute?Tac. 4. Hiſt. Neyther the peace of the people can
be purchaſed without weapons and men of warre, nor ſouldiers
without pay,Cic. proleg. Man. Tac. 13. Ann. nor pay can be had without Tribute: this is the ornamēt
of peace, and the ſtrength of warre: wherefore ſhow them
that it importeth the ouerthrowe and ruyne of the Empire,Which ought to be obſerued. if the
profit by the which the commonwealth is ſuſtained ſhould be diminiſhed:
nay if ſometime it be not increaſed.
                  Or rather increaſed. 
                  For alwayes
heed muſt be taken,
                  Ibidem. 
                  that the accoumpt of the gettings, and neceſſity
of expence, do agree together. I know the cōmon people
doth not conſider this,
                  Dio. 52. diligently looking vnto the reuenues and
profits of the Prince, winking at his coſts and charges. But do
thou acquaint them therewith,
                  But the people is to be taught. & Inſtructed. 
                  and ſometimes for thy profit
make them an accoumpt of thy expences.Plin. Paneg. Plaut. Bac. Tac. 12. An. 
                  What doeſt thou
doubt of this? always ſome Nightingale will help with her ſong.
And always the Prince, who is couetous to heape vp money, ſhall
neuer be without a pretence, as though the kingdome could not be
defended without Subſedies. If thou makeſt any difficultie
hereof, marke yet, thou ſhalt finde thoſe that excell herein,

and will helpe thee againſt them ſelues. I do wonder, and
yet I ſmile thereat,
                  Plin. Pa
                        •
                     e. 
                  that Princes of them ſelues being couetous
and greedy, who need no teachers, yet haue they ſtill learned many
things of the ſubiects againſt them ſelues.Ibidem. * And they haue neuer
wanted thoſe, who with a graue and ſad countenance, haue
proudly ſtood for the profit of the kings coffers.
               Yet if the people ſhould refuſe it,But the people is to be taught. & Inſtructed. then I ſend thee to
Them: ſtocles, to ſee what he hath done. He going in Ambaſſage
to thoſe of the Iſle of Andros for money, told them,
he came accompanied with two goddeſſes, Perſuaſion, and Force.
                  Plutar. Them.
Conſider this,Seldome to be compelled. yea and do thou imitate it, and alwaies vſe this
firſt goddeſſe: Is it not better to intreat, then to command?
and the other when neede requireth. And what though neceſſitie
vrge thee thereto?Tac. 14. An. 
                  the perſuaſion of him, who hath power
to commaund, ſheweth ſufficiently the force of neceſſitie.
               
               
                  But take good heed that Moderation (this ſecond ſalue)
be vſed, that the Tributes be not ouergreat, but reaſonable,Tributs ought to be leuied with moderation.
as the aboundance,
                  4. Annal. Plant. Bace. Plin. Pane. 
                  or the ſmall ſubſtance of euery one will permit:
and abandon thoſe, who drayne mens ſubſtance to the
leaſt dramme:Leaſt they be too great. 
                  whoſe treaſurie is the receptacle of the ſpoyle,
and bloudie proy of the Citizens. Do thou with Tiberius rather
ſheare thy ſheepe,That the ſubſtance of thy ſubiects may onely as it were be touched. then pull off their wooll to the skinne.Suet. Tib. Alexander
in former time ſayde right well,
                  Plut. that he hated the
gardener, who did cut the hearbs euen to the roote: and ſo
do I the Prince,
                  Ex. Cic. 4. Ad Ai
                        •
                     . Epiſt. 2. who doth cut the wings ſo neere, that the feathers
can not ſhoote out againe.
               Take thou but a ſmall thing from them, yea take by little
and little from them: If otherwiſe thou do, they will rightly
riſe vp againſt thee, and ſay,Plut. Them. 
                  that two goddeſſes are on their
ſide, Pouerty and Weakeneſſe. And to conclude, peraduenture,
they will betake them ſelues to warre,
                  Tac. 4. An. 
                  being rather driuen thereunto,
thorowe thine owne auarice, then their impatience to obey
thee. Surely,Pro. Sal. Cap. 30. Amm. 22. Ariſt. 2. Rhet. E Suet. Veſp. 
                  He that wipeth his noſe too much, maketh it bleed.
Foreſee likewiſe that theſe exactions be not baſe.Let not theſe taxes be diſhonorable. It is a diſhonorable
thing for a King, to drawe profit vpon all occaſions:
and as the old prouerb ſayth, euen to draine it from a dead
man. Renounce Flauius, who ſet an impoſition vpon Vrines.
               
               
                  
I do farre more miſlike theſe ſecret informations,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  when euery
rich man ſhall be made a proy.
                  Nor gotten by complayning falſely of men. Neyther do I greatly approue
of theſe lawes for treaſon, if they be too ſeuerely practiſed,
being oftentimes made as the onely and ſingular offence of
thoſe, who are without fault.
                  Plin. Pane.
               
               It belongeth likewiſe to Moderation,
                  Not ouer frequent. that the exactions be
not ouer often,Tac 4. An. and the Prouinces be not ouercharged with new
burthens.
               
               Thou ſhalt not euery day inuent new wayes,
                  Nor new ſtill inuented. 
                  nor frame diuers
new words to enrich thee,
                  4. Hiſt. 
                  viz. the hundreth part; the fortith
part; the fiftith part; tribute for pillars; tribute for doores:
which the Romaines called Centeſimae; quadrageſimae; quinquageſimae;
columnaria; Hoſtiaria:
                  13. Ann. Caeſ. 3. Bel. Ci
                        •
                     il. * And ſuch other names of
vnlawfull exactions which theſe Grypes haue inuented.
               
               Obſerue thou the ancient names,The Officers that gather money are to be kept ſhort. and take heed likewiſe
that thy leuies may be made without couetouſnes and cruel
                        •
                     y of
the Officers,4. Ann. which I tearmed Conſtraint, the third ſalue.
Driue both theſe from the, Couetouſnes which worketh by
deceipt, and cruelty by force. But by the firſt (I meane deceipt)
the danger to thee is great, and almoſt ineuitable.
               
                  Feſtu
                        •
                     . 
                  Theſe kinde of Officers are all of them ſuch Catchpoles
(which I ſpeake without preiudice to honeſt men) more
rauenous then Cats.Lucian. 
                  Whoſe ſtudie is how they may fleece men:Who for the moſt part are wicked, and rauenous Harpeys.
* and lay the gaine in their owne lappe:Arch. loch. Lampr. Conm. Caeſar. 3 de belle Ciui. Plan. Aul. 
                  making a little benefit
to them ſelues out of the Princes profit, and beſides the ordinarie
leuying; ſcruing their owne priuate commoditie. To be
ſhort, they are men of the race of Gerion, hauing ſixe hands,
whome if Argus with ſo many eyes were ſet to keepe, they would
beguile him.
               And yet they are to be reſtrayned and bridled, or elſe
they will bring thee to deſtruction. I ſay, theſe dogs will eate
and deuoure their owne Act
                        •
                     on.
                  Varro in Fragm. Tac. 4. An. But how wilt thou be able to
controll them? with a double caution. Firſt,A double meanes to beware of them. Choiſe of new, & Remouing the olde. 
                  that thou commit
thy affaires to men of greateſt truſt. Next, if they deceaue
thee, rid them frō thee, and likewiſe puniſh them: but after
what ſort?Plin. Pane. by the law of like: they robbed others of their money,
let thē looſe what they haue. They are to be vſed like ſponges,

                  and when they haue drunke their fill, they are to be preſſed. If any
thing may amend them,Yet neyther of theſe wayes is of ſufficient assurance. ſurely this will, though I feare it.
Why ſhould I deceaue thee, Mucianus and Marcellus may
ſucceede, and rather other men, then other manners. Repreſſe deceipt
by lawes, and it will by wonderfull ſlight and cunning riſe
vp againe:
                  E Suetonij Veſpa. cap. 16. Tac
                        •
                     t. 2. Hiſt. 6 Annal. Plin. Pane. * Compaſſe it about with Netles and toyles of a
thouſand penalties,
                  Var: 
                        •
                      Frag. and it will eſcape them: this ſhining golde
doth ſo daſell mens eyes: and taketh ſo deepe impreſſion in all
men,S
                        •
                     phoc. 
                  that it is not accoumpted euill that bringeth in gaine.
               
               
                  Now likewiſe thou muſt beware of crueltie and force,
                  Violence is to be auoyded in leuying tributs.
leaſt that which hath by ſo many yeares ben ſuffred without
murmuring, be not by new rigor conuerted into enuy.Tac. 13. An. 
                  Geue commandement
that exactions be taken with moderation, and
as this word*Nam Tribuo diuido. Tribute doth import, by equal diuiſion. This
helpeth much (eſpecially the poorer ſort) when they may
by little and little and by portions,Dio. 52. contribute whatſoeuer is preſcribed
vnto them.Euery ſmall thing is not to be taken. 
                  Auoide as much as may be theſe extremities,
when firſt their oxen,Tac. 4. An. then their lands, and laſt their bodies,
are deliuered and forced to ſeruice, or labor: and eſpecially
that paying one certaine Tribute they may not afterward
be charged, but remaine free and out of danger,Cic. 2. deoff. to poſſeſſe their
owne in quiet: and not be troubled with pillage, and the ſouldier:
For if force and violence be not vſed,Tac. Agric. they will willingly ſupport
all the charges of the ſtate, although they be heauy to
be
                        ••
                     e
                  Let them liue without diſturbance, hauing payed their tribute. Eſpecially from the ſouldier. * but they do hardly brooke them:Ibidem. 4. Ann. * Herehence proceedeth
anger and complaint, and when they can haue no other help,
they ſeeke remedy (as ſometimes it hapneth) by warre.
               
                  The fourth ſalue,
                  Spare, and as need compelleth thee ſo ſpend thy tribute money. As if thou haddest the keeping of another man his purſe. 
                  is Expence, which I perſwade not to be
lauiſh but profitable, and ſuch as is vſed in the familie of a
good husband. Who will be offended to be at a ſmall charge
for the common wealth, if they ſee thee liue ſoberly,Dio. 52. and moderately,
not wasting any thing vainely? Let them vnderſtand
that money is in deede leuied for the common profit, and
that thou art only a keeper and diſtributer thereof,Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 11. Tac. 2. Hiſt. as the
goodes belonging to the common wealth, not as thine owne.
So thou oughteſt to do. And not to lauiſh out and beſtowe
in priuate, to the end thou mayeſt more greedely take from the

common wealth:1. Hiſt. 2. Hiſt. 
                  and in an ample and large fortune ſatisfie the
vnſatiable deſires of thy fauorits.Spend it not where thou 
                        〈◊〉
                      but Where thou oughteſt. 
                  Neither do thou ſport with thy
monie,Sal. Cat
                        •
                     l. 
                  by vaine delights, and ſuperfluous coſts, foulie abuſing
that, thou oughteſt honeſtly to keepe and vſe. Let that be farre
from thee.
                  Lamp. Ale. 
                  Set before thee Alexander the Romane, who verie
ſildome gaue gold or ſiluer to any man, but to ſoldiers: affirming
it to be vnlawfull for him that was ſteward of the commonwealth,
to conuert that which the Prouinces had contributed, to
the priuat ſports and paſtimes of himſelfe and his fauorits. O
vertuous man,
                  Prodigall 
                        〈◊〉
                      are ill
                        •
                      accounted of, & Soone drawne drie. ô worthy prince imitate him: and note thoſe
tyrants,Sueto. Ner. cap. 30. Stob. ſer. 15. who are of opinion that wealth and riches yeeldeth no other
fruit then prodigall and riotous waſting: Whom Crates
long ſince, did liken to thoſe figgetrees which do grow on the
toppes of ſteepe and high mountains, of the which, men cannot gather
the fruit,Ibidem. but onely Crowes and Kites, that is, ſtrumpets,
and flatterers.Plin. Pane. 
                  Theſe men, although they catch and draw all
things vnto them, and hold that they haue caught,Prodigall 
                        〈◊〉
                      are ill
                        •
                      accounted of, & Soone drawne drie. yet want they
all things, euen as though they had caught nothing, nor held
nothing.
               
                  But our Prince,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  who is warie in the expence of his owne monie,
and ſparing the ſubſtance of the common wealth,Sparing princes are to be commended, & Haue alwaies their coffers full. 
                  which doth
not conſume his wealth vpon ieſters, counterfeits, not to
ſuch kind of abiect and vile perſons,Tac. 2. Hiſt. Plin. Pane. 
                  hath euer plentie; and
frugalitie alone hath that power, that it only ſufficeth in ſteed of
many liberall gifts and contributions.Sparing princes are to be commended, & Haue alwaies their coffers full. 
                  A great friend of Auguſtus
ſayd once vnto him,
                  Maecen. apud Dio. 52. that great ſubſtance was gotten, not
ſo much by receiuing many thinges, as not by looſing manie
things.
               The fift and laſt ſalue is Equalitie,
                  Charges are equally to be laid vpon men without regard of hate o
                        •
                      ſauor that is, that the contribution
may be iuſt and proportionable, in ſuch ſort, that no
man either thorow malice, or fauour, be either oppreſſed, or
eaſed.Pli
                        •
                     . P
                        •
                     ne. Cic. 2. de off. 
                  As the ſunne and the day do ſpring in common to all: So
the Prince ought not in any wiſe to purchaſe the commoditie of
ſome, or the diſcommoditie of others, but maintaine all men
vnder one equitie. Thou wilt ſcarcelie beleeue,The hoiſting vp of ſome and exempting of others, breedeth hatre
                        •
                     
                   how much
men are perplexed where there is inequalitie, a certaine kind
of enuie being rooted in the hearts of all men,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  whereby they do

meaſure alike the profit of others with their owne loſſe.
               
               Now there is one only means to maintaine this equalitie,The valuing of euery man 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  the aſſuring of euery man his ſubſtaunce,
                  Liu. 1. 
                  a moſt profitable
thing to aduance a kingdome to greatneſſe. Wherefore haue
I not cauſe to woonder, to ſee the ſame at this day, eyther
vnknowne or neglected? Surely yes, ſeeing it is
a matter of ſo readie and familiar example (for what
Common-wealth hath euer bene without it, that hath
but had a ſhew of goodneſſe?) and therewithall the vſe
thereof ſo manifeſt.Lib. 12. de Leg. 
                  Plato ſayth truly, that it is auaileable
to many matters, that euerie man do make a valuation what
wealth he is of.
               
               Surely it is profitable to many things,It conducteth to the full knowledge of the commonwealth. To know the number of men of warre. To impoſe the 
                        〈…〉
                     . for hereby onely
it commeth to paſſe,Flor. 1. ca. 6. that vvhat difference ſoeuer there is
of poſſeſſions, of dignities, of ages, of ſeuerall ſciences and
offices is ſeene (as it were) in a Table. By that meanes,
it is knowne by record, what men and money,
                  Liu. 1. euerie towne
and people, may beare the charge of and ſet foorth. To
conclude, it is neceſſarie in ciuill pollicie, to the end
they may rightly euery yeare diſpoſe of the tributes,
                  Cic. 2. in Verr. equallie,
according to the valuation of euery man. Therefore
if thou art wiſe, reuoke it againe for thine owne benefit,
and the profit of the common wealth: and the Cenſors
being choſen, let them value the ages, races, families,
                  3. de Leg.
                  and reuenues of thy people:
                  2. in Verr. to whome do thou giue abſolute
power, to ſet downe the vttermoſt estimation of their
ſubſtance.
               
               But by whom ſhall they be choſen? If thou wilt giue
credit vnto me,The Ce
                        •
                     ſors are to be choſen by the people. 
                  the people themſelues,
                  Ibidem. ſhall make choiſe of
them, to take away all hatred and ſuſpition in executing
their charge, which of it ſelfe is very troubleſome, that they
may with greateſt care elect thoſe to whom they do referre the
greateſt truſt of their ſubſtance.
               
               
                  But how many ought to be choſen?
                  Two in euerie Citie. Let there be two or
three in euery citie.Ibidem.
               
               How often ſhall the eſtimat of their ſubſtance be made?The 
                        〈◊〉
                      of their ſu
                        •
                     ſtance i
                        •
                      to be renewed.
Herein there is a difference of opinion:Ari. 5. P
                        ••
                     . cap. 8. 
                  and in ſome cities it

was done yearely, and in other greater cities from three to three
yeares, and from fiue to fiue yeares. For my ſelfe,Yearely, by the authors opinion. I beleeue it
were more certaine and better, that it were euerie yeare, by
reaſon of the departure of ſome citizens, and repaire of others,
the alteration by death, the encreaſe or deminiſhing
of their reuenues.
               
                  Well,
                  Of cenſuring of manners. 
                  from this Cenſuring, not turning much out of the
way, I paſſe to the office of a Cenſor, which is the third matter
that breedeth hatred. Of the imitating whereof, I ſhould
to ſmall purpoſe diſcourſe, if I did not firſt ſpeake of the way
how to practiſe it.
                  Which at this day is either vnknowne, or deſpiſed. 
                  For being moſt profitable in the vſe of
our life and manners (the miſerableneſſe of our age is ſuch)
that we ſee it ſo defaced thorow forgetfulneſſe,Cic. 5. de Repub. that it doth not
onely remayne destitute of honour, but is likewiſe altogether
vnknowne. Wherefore firſt wee muſt make it manifeſt,
by the definition thereof:
                  What it is. 
                  and I tearme this office of
a Cenſor to be A puniſhment concerning manners, or thoſe exceſſes
which are not forbidden by lawes.Without it the common-wealth, aboundeth in miſchiefe, or Periſheth. 
                  For the proper dutie
thereof,
                  Dio. 52. 
                  is to correct thoſe things which deſerue not to be puniniſhed,
yet being neglected or continued, they miniſter occaſion of
many great miſchiefs.Tac. 3. An. Val. 2. ca. 9. 
                  Yea being tollerated, they do, by little
and little, wholy ſubuert an estate. For vvhat auayleth it to
play the men abroad, if we liue like beaſts at home? Truly
if both dutie and ſhame,Ibidem. did not restraine euery particular perſon,
we ſhould be nothing more aſſured, to haue heaped vp riches
euen to the skies.Cic. in Piſ. 
                  This then is to be appointed as the Miſtreſſe
of ſhame and modeſtie,It is to be eſtabliſhed by this bond. 
                  and choice is to be made of ſome
one or other, as the corrector of manners, and maſter of the ancient
diſcipline, that they may ſtand in feare of ſomwhat
elſe, beſides the lawes,
                  Tac. 2. Ann. 
                  and that all men may know, that if
there be any default in their manners, they ſhall not want an officer
to correct them. For I do diſtinctly ſubiect theſe two,
                  Manners is the matter it wor
                     
                        •
                     eth on. manners,
and exceſſe, vnder this office of a Cenſor.
               By maners I vnderſtand, wantonneſſe, luſt, drunkenneſſe,
quarrels, periuries, and all ſuch other things,VVhat things are to be corrected in young men. which Honeſtie
& Modeſtie do condemne. Wherfore our Cenſor ſhal chaſtiſe
euery age and ſex,Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  he ſhall cut off from youth ill practiſes, and

vnlawfull deſires:
                  Old men. In The common people. From old men,Ibidem. 
                  thoſe pleaſures which their
age cannot entertaine without diſcredit. From the people in
generall, Idleneſſe,Ibidem. 
                  that they may applie themſelues about their
buſineſſe, and by that means be withheld from hurting the common
wealth.
                  Ibidem. To conclude, he ſhall do his beſt, that all may endeuour
goodneſſe and paines taking, not ſumptuouſneſſe, nor riches.
                  Exceſſe likewiſe min
                        •
                     ſtieth matter for it to worke vpon.
For in like maner theſe things are to be reſtrained: that
is, Exceſſe,
                  Tac. 3. An. the which otherwiſe would grow infinit in euerie
thing, where monie might be prodigallie conſumed.
               
               
                  I limit Exceſſe in theſe foure things, Monie, Buildings,
Banquets, and Apparell: but eſpeciallie in monie, which is
the nourice, or rather the mother of Exceſſe, and of many other
miſchiefs.
                  Which ſpringeth of abundance. Effeminat riches haue poiſoned al ages with diſhoneſt
ſuperfluitie.Iuue. Sat. 6. 
                  Wherefore our Cenſor aboue all things
ſhall take away the vſe and eſtimation of riches,Sal. ad Caeſ. a moſt dangerous
plague. O Prince, wherefore doeſt thou linger herein?
It concerneth thee greatly,
                  It concerneth the Prince to diminiſh their ſubſtance, & The ſtate. that there be not any who doth ouermuch
exceed, either in wealth or friends.
                  Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 8. Tac. 11. An The force of gold
and riches are hurtfull to the Prince, yea to the ſtate it ſelfe.
Heare the voice of the Oracle,
                  Val. 4. cap. 3 That familie, that citie, that
ſtate, may eaſily conſerue it ſelfe, where couetouſneſſe & luſt haue
leaſt force and credit.By too much wealth, they come to ruine. * I haue often heard,Sal. ad Caeſ. that many kings and
citties haue loſt their authoritie thorow their abundance, who
being poore, had their beginnings from vertue.
               
                  But it much more regardeth the good of the ſubiects,
                  Ibidem. for
where couetouſneſſe is become miſtreſſe,It likewiſe is profitable for the ſubiects. neither diſcipline, nor
good arts haue their full force:Ibidem. faith, honeſtie, ſhame, chaſtitie,
and all other good things are little ſet by.For where 
                        •
                     iches are, there are vices. 
                  Likewiſe, he that ſo
much imbraceth riches, cannot be cheriſhed of vertue, nor
beloued of God.
                  Ibidem. * Neither is there any mortall man, who can
lift vp his mind, or enter into conſideration of heauenly things, if
he ceaſeth not to flatter his body, and to take too great delight in
his wealth,Ibidem. 
                  Wherefore our Cenſor ſhall do very well to take away
this ineuitable deſire, to gather riches together, or at the
leaſt he ſhall diminiſh it as much as poſſibly he may:Ibidem. 
                  and tie vp
Couetouſnes,Couetouſneſſe is to be reſtrained, & Vſurie. this fierce, cruel, & inſupportable beaſt, this inueterat
euill in cities,
                  Tac. 6. An. this diſeaſe of vſurie, leaſt it be mooued as it

pleaſeth the welthier ſort,Ibidem. Cic. 2. de off. 
                  to the end that houſhold matters may
be prouided for by thoſe means,An vnhoneſt kind of gains. which are far from diſhoneſtie.
Finally,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  he ſhall forbid waſtfulneſſe, and he ſhall limit expences.
Concerning houſes,
                  Sumptuouſnes about building. 
                  he ſhall take order that they be not
ouerproudly built, nor ouer-curiouſlie decked, and beautified
with pictures,Ibidem. tapiſtrie, and other exquiſit works. Poore
fooles,
                  Ibidem. 
                  who deſire rather to ſet forth any thing to ſight then thē
                  ſelues:
and therein he ſhall procure that there be a moderation
in ſiluer veſſell,Tac. 2. Ann. in moueables, and in all matters of houſhold.
               Touching banquets,Concerning banquets. he ſhall condemne theſe ouer-daintie
appetites,
                  Plin. Pane. and reform theſe gluttons, who do make ſearch, both
by ſea and land, only to pleaſe their taſt. And to knit all in one
word,Tac. 3. An. he ſhall prouide, that the expence of the table be not exceſſiue.
               
               In matter of apparell,Ibidem. that men and women,
                  Touching apparell. the nobilitie
and the commonaltie, be not apparelled alike, and that they
who excell,
                  2. Ann. 
                  by reaſon of their degree and dignitie, may vſe a certaine
kind of attire by themſelues.
               
                  Doeſt thou make ſmall account hereof?
                  Theſe things are of great importance. And frō hence for the moſt part ſpring innouations. 
                  Thou deceaueſt
thy ſelfe,
                  Sen. ep. 115. Superfluitie in banquets and apparell, are tokens of a
diſeaſed citie, or which is rather in danger of death. For theſe
things do ſtirre vp youth,Sal. ad Caeſ. after they haue ſpent their owne ſubſtance,
to do wicked acts. Their goods are waſted their fayth
periſhed,
                  Cic. 2. in Cat. yet notwithſtanding, the ſame deſires remaine with
them, as when they had abundance. What other thing are they
like to do,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  then to diſorder thoſe things that are in order, and by
vice to ſeeke to purchaſe new means? Know this for ſure, that
in a common wealth it will breed a ſeminarie of the race of Catiline.Cic. 2. in Cat.
                  The eye of wiſedome knew this well,
                  Ari. 5. Pol. 
                  who ſayd,
                  Or alteration. alteration
is made in an eſtate, when men conſume all in liuing prodigallie,
for theſe fellowes bend their ſtudies to innouat matters,
and either they themſelues are very neere tyrannie, or elſe they
call others thereto.
               Theſe are the things which we would haue brought to
paſſe of our Cenſor,The Cenſor his weapons. but with what weapon? with a two
edged ſword,Reproch. & Puniſhment to thoſe who perſeuer therein. of reproch and puniſhment. The firſt properly
belongeth therevnto, and in times paſt it was only vſed.

The iudgement of the Cenſor (ſayth Cicero) dooth
for the moſt part bring no other euill vvith it,Ci. 4. de rep. to the partie
condemned, but ſhame.Idem pro Cluent. * For his power was eſtabliſhed, to giue
cauſe of feare, not loſſe of life.Reproch. & Puniſhment to thoſe who perſeuer therein. 
                  But as now adayes the manners
of men are, ſo would I ſeuerely adde the ſecond remedie.
But what if ſome did become ſo impudent, as to learne
to forget ſhame?Sen. ad Ser. * Not onely taking delight in the inticements
of pleaſure,
                  Val. l. 6. c. 9. but euen in the infamie thereof? Surely I would
chaſtiſe them,
                  Plin. Pane. and trace them out certaine markes vpon their
braſen forehead, where no blood were left. The firſt remedie is
but too common, and is but as it were a ſound in words,Sen. Natur. Quaeſt. without
any effect at all.
               Thus you ſee, what may generallie bee ſayd concerning
the office of a Cenſor.An exhortation to eſtabliſh cē
                     ſuring of manners againe. O Prince borne for the good of mankind,
eſtabliſh, or rather re-eſtabliſh it.Ci. pro Mar. 
                  Thou ſeeſt that all
things are throwne downe, and by the force of war beaten downe,
and troden vnder foot.
               
               
                  In the name of God raiſe them vp againe,
                  Which is profitable at this day, if euer it were. Cauſe Faith
to returne backe,Ibidem. correct voluptuouſneſſe, and bind together,
by ſeuere lawes, thoſe things vvhich being decaied, are ſcattered
here and there.It is followed with enuie. 
                  I denie not, but that this enterpriſe at the
beginning vvill be verie vneaſie,Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  becauſe it is a new thing,
becauſe it is contrarie to the opinion of the common people.
For the multitude loue their pleaſures,Ari. Eth. 1. cap. 5. and conſequently
liue diſſolutely.Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  Neuertheleſſe take in hand the good
of the eſtate,But herein enuie is not to be accounted of, and paſſe thorow all dangers. What doeſt thou
ſtand in feare of?
                  or Thou oughtest rather to labour for the
ſafetie of all men,Ibidem. then for their pleaſure.The opinion of cruell. 
                  With wiſe men,
                  Ibidem. it
will be accounted Clemencie to vvithdraw them from their
follie, and falſe pleaſure.Ibidem. * Not if thou doest vvinke at that
which is euill, diſſemble their faults, and with their preſent pleaſure,
giue conſent to their future miſchiefe.How it may be mitigated. 
                  And notwithſtanding
thou maiſt eaſily mitigat whatſoeuer ſeemeth ſharpe,
by this triple obſeruation.
               
               
                  Firſt,
                  Firſt by the life of the Prince. 
                  if thou ſubmit thy ſelfe to bee cenſured, that is, if
thou frame thy life by the ſame rule, thou wouldſt faſhion
other men by. O how gentle and effectuall, ſhould this

cenſuring be.
                  Plin. Pane. We are directed hereby, we are conuerted hereby.
And thou thy ſelfe,Tac. 3. An. by thy behauiour and life conformed to thoſe
of former time, ſhalt be the cheefe author of a reſtrained kind of
manner of liuing.Plin. Pane. 
                  For ſurely, the life of the Prince is a correctreſſe
of the behauiour of men, yea a perpetuall correctreſſe.
               
                  Secondly, if thou do not reforme all things at once,
                  Next by the modeſt correcting of faults. 
                  but
by little and little, reduce them to the ancient order.*Tac. 3. An. Ci. pro Sulla. For there
is none amongst vs all, that can be ſo ſoone reformed, nor change
ſo ſuddenly his diſpoſition, or alter his nature. There requireth
time herein, and there are certaine vices which the Prince may
beſt aboliſh by a little ſufferance.Sen. 1. de Clem. E Tacit. 3. Ann. Val. 6. ca. 9. * Shame will worke the beſt alteration
in ſome, in others neceſſitie, and euen a loathing of it in others.
For the mind of many men, wandereth thorow miſchiefe,
but doth make no abode there.
               Thirdly and laſt of all,Laſtly by diſtribution of rewards. if thou doeſt diſtribute rewards to
the good, who will beleeue that thou art rigorous, but in regard
of the loue thou beareſt to vertue, when they ſhall ſee
thee ſo louing to thoſe that poſſeſſe it? Solon ſaid long ſince,
that a cōmon wealth was maintained by reward & puniſhment.
                  Cic. ad Brut. Ep. 16.
               
               
                  True it is, for the reward of good men,Plin. Pane. and puniſhment of
the wicked, maketh men either good,Which are forcible ſpurs to vertue. or bad. Thou ſhalt alwaies
ſee, that where honour and profit is hoped for, men take pains, and
put themſelues in danger.Liu. 4. Iambl. * What ſo is in honour is augmented
and increaſeth, & that which is in contempt, declineth, and dimiſheth:
and this is a moſt manifeſt ſigne of a kingdome well eſtabliſhed.
Vſe it then and take heed that thou being a Prince,
                  And are continually vſed in a good gouernment.
it may not be ſayd of thee, that they vvhich haue done well,Plin. Pane. haue
had no other recompence, then the contentment of their own conſcience.
               
                  I haue ended my diſcourſe concerning hatred,
                  The concluſiā, and an admonition that all hate cannot be auoided. 
                  wherevnto
I ad this, that this plague is ſo farre growne in kingdomes,
that I know not, if any art, or policie, may thorowly root it
out.
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  For libertie is deſired, as vvell of good men, and badde,
as of valiant men, and cowards. Wherefore wee hate them
by nature, that ſeeke to take it from vs.
                  Some ſmall thing will alwaies remain. 
                  Now euery
Prince dooth abridge vs thereof,
                  Sen. de Pro. 
                  therefore albeit that
thou doe that thing that no man may in reaſon hate thee,

yet there will alwaies be ſome that will maligne thee, but make
thou no account thereof.
                  Such is the nature of the cō
                     mon people. Which is ſlightly to be accounted of. He that feareth hate ouermuch,Sen. Oedip.
knoweth not how to beare rule, I meane this light and popular
hate, for there is, I know not what kind of malice,Plut. Polit. and repining
in all people, againſt thoſe that gouerne. And it was moſt
truly ſpokē by a great king,
                  Idē Apop. that it was a thing accuſtomed to
Princes, to beare hard ſpeeches vvhen they do good. Thou ſhalt
therefore comfort thy ſelfe with this ſpeech of Auguſtus,Su
                        •
                     to. Aug. cap. 52. 
                  
                     •
                  t
is ſufficient,Whilſt good men make account of thee. if we be aſſured that none can do vs hurt: and likewiſe
with the opinion of the beſt and ſoundeſt iudgements,
becauſe that the graue verſes,Plin. Pane. and perpetuall honour of Chronicles
vvill one day make thee famous, and not theſe breefe
and popular praiſes.Tac. 4. An. * Posteritie will giue to euery one his due
honour.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The definition of contempt, the blame thereof, what things
ingender it. That a wiſe Prince ought to auoid it.
               
               
                  THere followeth contempt, which wee did
make the ſecond vice to ouerthrow a kingdome,
which as it ſerueth for our purpoſe,The definition of contempt.
                  Is a vile and abiect opinion of the king and his
eſtate, imprinted as well in the ſubiects, as in
ſtrangers.
                  The hurt that proceedeth thereof. Authoritie is the ſoule of a ſtate. A moſt hurtfull thing in kingdomes,
whoſe ſoule and life, is the authoritie and good eſtimation
which is had of him who gouerneth. For what
other force is there that effecteth this then that the ſoule of
one alone, yea and ſometimes of an old and impotent man,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. doth
commaund ſo many millions of men?
               All that we ſee is gouerned and ruled by that alone,Cic. pro Cl
                        •
                     . 
                  as it
were by a certaine godhead.
                  Sen. 1. de Clemen. * And like as the feet, the hands, the
eyes, do ſeruice to the ſoule, & by the cōmandement hereof, either
we are in reſt,
                  Without it, one cannot rule ſo many. 
                  or we labour:
                  Ibidem. So this infinit multitude is gouerned
as it were, by the ſoule of authoritie. But who can gouerne
without it?Liu. 3. 
                  The force of commaunding is in the conſent
of them that obey. That conſent ſpringeth of eſtimation,

by the which youth,
                  Lucan. 5. 
                  which is to enterpriſe great matters, doth
feare one particular perſon.
                  A kingdome without it commeth to ruyne. Take eſtimation away and take
away the eſtate: and all this webb of commaundement, will
runne but into many thrids, and ſmall peeces:
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. Lu
                        •
                     r. 5. * this ancient
maieſtie of the royall throne and their ſcepters without, it, will be
ſoone ouerthrowne.
                  But contempt is an aduerſary to authority. But what doth more apparantly take away
this eſtimation then contempt?Ariſt. Rhet. 2. Cap. 2. which is the action of
the opinion concerning that, which we beleeue, is of ſmall value,
or no worth at all. Contempt then is the death and deſtruction
of kingdomes: yea in ſome reſpect more then hate.
The Philoſopher hath taught it vs.Idem. 5. Pol. Ca. 10. 
                  Whereas there are two
cauſes for the which wee lift vp our ſelues againſt Tyrants,
                  Therefore it is the plague of kingdomes.
                  Hate, and Contempt, one of them which is hatred, muſt needs
bend it ſelfe alwayes againſt Tyrants: But many cauſes of their
ouerthrowe are ingendred of contempt. O true Phebus caſting
alwayes the beames of thy light a farre off. Surely it is ſo.In ſome reſpects more then hate.
The firſt cauſe and motion of the deſtruction of kingdoms
moſt commonly proceedeth from hatred; but the laſt, and
that which hath moſt force, is contempt. For the firſt is
ſlowe, or to ſpeake as the Poet doth, is nothing hardy, if it
be not armed by the latter, being oftentimes let by feare,
which Tyrants haue for their ſanctuary: and therefore not
without cauſe this hatefull verſe which hath bene the ouerthrowe
of many,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. hath pleaſed them: So they feare me, let
them hate me.
                  For contempt ſtraightwaies geueth the onſet. For ſo long as men are withhelde by this
bridle, they rather deſire, then dare enterpriſe any thing:
But contempt doth let looſe the bridle of feare, and breedeth
this,Yet is it not ouer frequent againſt Kings. that not thou onely deſireſt, but dareſt and
giueſt the onſet, and therefore the miſchiefe thereof is moſt
certaine.
               
                  But will it often come to paſſe? I am not of that opinion;
                  Plin. Pan.
becauſe the fortune of the Prince, is not ſo farre from any
other danger, as it is from a baſe kinde of humilitie.Idem. 8. Ep. vlt. * Is he likely
to be contemned who commaundeth and beareth the ſword to
puniſh? Not except he be lowly, and abiect, and ſuch a one, who
firſt despiſeth himſelfe.
               I affirme it cannot often happen by contempt only (forEſpecially lawfull Kings.
                  
I haue already ſayde that it is intermingled with hatred)
eſpecially if the Prince be lawfull, and ligitimate: Notwithſtanding,
becauſe it is a thing which may fall out, I
will inſtruct thee how thou mayſt auoide it, yet but in fewe
words. Why ſhould I ſpend much ſpeech heerein? Haue
I not ſufficiently fortifyed this way in ſquaring out authoritie?
Surely yes,Ariſt. 1. Top. Cap. 8. if this ſaying be true, that the precepts
of things contrary are alike.
               
               Now contempt againſt the Prince proceedeth principally
from theſe three. 1.The beginning thereof. The forme of gouernment, 2. the
fortune of the Prince, 3. and his behauiour.
               Concerning the forme of gouernment,From ouermild gouernment. if it be more milde
and looſe then it ought, which fault they commonly make
who do vſe ouermuch lenitie,
                  Cic. ad Att. 5. Ep. 14. Tac. 2. Hiſt. abandoning themſelues immoderately
to the popular fauour, and affecting the praiſe of
men, euen of the baſeſt ſort.
                  Which thorow libertie is hurtfull to the common wealth. Theſe are doublie hurtfull to
them ſelues, and the common wealth, who do driue all reuerence
from the common people, and geue them leaue to
offend.Ariſt. 6. Pol. Ca. 4. 
                  The libertie which is geuen to euery one to do what pleaſeth
them, cannot repreſſe the naturall corruption, which is ingrafted
in euery man. It was long ſince wittily ſpoken by a
bolde fellow to Nerua being now olde and growen weake,
It is an euill thing to be gouerned by a Prince vnder whome no libertie
is graunted:
                  Dio. in Nerua. 
                  But ſurely it is a farre worſe to be ruled by
him, vnder whome all things are permitted, to all ſorts of men.
               
               And not only this milde manner of gouerning breedeth
contempt,It likewiſe ſpringeth from an vnconſtant gouernment. but likewiſe an vnconſtant kinde of gouerning,
which varieth from the decrees and lawes, whereof this may
be ſayde,Or 
                  It is a field for all windes.
                  Adag. Eſpecially if the Prince
himſelfe be noted,From a wauering Prince. to be of a changeable dispoſition:
                  Tacit. 2. Hiſt. whome
men do deſeruedly contemne and feare as an inconſtant perſon,
either for ſuddaine offences, or inconſiderate fauours.
               
               Likewiſe if the forme of gouernment be careleſſe,Likewiſe from a careleſſe gouernment. as whē
the Prince neglecteth all things,Ibid. and ouerpaſſeth matters
though they be of great importance, hauing ſcarce giuen them the
hearing.
                  Ibid. * Thinking he hath enough, if he haue to ſerue his
turne for the preſent time, taking no further care. Or elſe,

when he beſtoweth his offices which are great, and perpetuall
without conſideration. What ſhould let them to deſpiſe
ſuch a one and followe others,4. Ann. when he caſteth off his
owne defence, and as it were of his owne accord ſeemeth to
exclude himſelfe out of his kingdome?
                  3. Hiſt.
               
               
                  Secondly, contempt proceedeth from fortune: as when
ſhe ſheweth herſelfe to be a ſtepmother, and not a mother:
                  Alſo when fortune is ſtill contrary.
                  and that ſhe ſetteth her foote of malice,Ex Ouid. de Triſ
                        •
                     . Tac. 2. Hiſt. againſt thy deſires.
Knowe this to be true, in thy prosperitie men will ſtriue to doe
thee ſeruice: if fortune croſſe thee, all men will in like manner
withdrawe them ſelues from thee: yea, they will riſe againſt
thee.
                  Schol. Theo. Tac. 1. An. When an Oke falleth, all men runne to gather wood thereof.
               Moreouer, if fortune either doth not geue thee ſupporters,
                  For want of children.
or if ſhe take them from thee whome thou doeſt leane vnto,
I meane certaine ſucceſſors or children. Thou ſhalt bee
greatly deſpiſed for this cauſe, and they will followe the
hope of a new ſunne riſing. Alexander the great knew this
well,Curt. 6. and complayned thereof, ſaying, my lacke of iſſue, in
that I am without Children, is deſpiſed.
                  When thou haſt a certaine ſucceſſor of thine owne it doth eſtabliſh it, For indeede as the
Tragicall Poet ſayth,Euripid. Tac. 5. Hiſt. 
                  The fortreſſe of the Court, are the
Kings children: and neither bands of men by land, nor nauies
by ſea, are ſo ſure a defence of a kingdome, as the number of
Children.
               
               Thirdly and laſt of all, contempt proceedeth from the
manners of the Prince, and eſpecially from theſe: If he be
geuen to luſt,15. Ann. and doe defile himſelfe as well in that which is
lawfull, as in that which is vnlawfull: For theſe womaniſh
vices, doe diminiſh greatly the reputation, not onely of a
Prince,Sen. de Bre. Cap. 6. but euen of a man. Others as one ſayth doe faile in a
more manly ſort.
               
               It is a foule blot to abandon himſelfe to venery and luſt:Ibid. Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  and
ſo is it in thoſe which are bound, and ſold to riot,It ſpringeth from riot and drunkenneſſe. and ouer pampering
themſelues:Ibid. * who are druncken before noone: who as
young Vitellij, or rather as young Calues, or like vnto dull
beaſts, to whome,
                  Ibid. ſo ſoone as you geue meate, they lye downe and
ſtretch forth them ſelues, taking as ſmall care for thoſe things
that are paſt, as for things preſent, and thoſe which are to come.
               
                  
                  Our guide of wiſedome ſayth well,
                  Ariſt. 5. Pol. Ca. 10. they which liue diſſolutely,
become contemptible: and giue many occaſions of attempt
againſt them:Id. 5. Pol. Cap. 11. * for it is not an eaſie matter to ſet light by, or
aſſaile him that is ſober, but one that is druncke; nor one that is
wakefull, and alwayes in action, but a drowſie perſon. Likewiſe
they that haue a dull ſpirit,Cic. in Piſo. they that are heauy and of a faint
ſpeech.
               Or other things of leſſe moment:From externall cauſes. as to haue an vnpleaſing
countenance: to be ouerburdened with age: to be
giuen to diſeaſes: which do often breede laughter and contempt:
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 4. Ann.
* As it is the cuſtome of the common ſort who accoumpt
caſuall or externall accidents as a fault:
                  1. Hiſt. * And do deſire that
their Prince might be of a comely ſtature and repreſentation.
               
               Thou mayſt drawe many ſuch like things from the
fountaines which we haue layde open in the diſcourſe of
authority.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  Whether mixed prudence, to wit, where there is deceipt, ought
to take place with a Prince? that ſome precept and inſtruction
may be giuen thereof.
               
               
                  IT ſeemeth vnto me, that I haue freely enough,
and as they ſay with a full hand, offered
thee of the beſt and pureſt wine, which
I could drawe out of the double ſpring of
prudēce. May it be lawfull for me to mingle
lightly,Deceipt may be in a kingdome. and ioyne with it ſome dregs of deceipt?
I iudge it may: Howſoeuer theſe Zenoes doe not
thinke it good who doe onely approue the path which by vertue
leadeth vnto honor:
                  Albeit ſome ſteame fellows deny it. who do not beleeue that it is lawfull
that the reaſon which we haue receaued of God,
                  Cic. pro M. C
                        •
                     l. 
                  to giue vs good
counſell,
                  3. de Nat. deor. 
                  ought to be imployed, to deceiue, and do a miſchiefe,
whome truly in other matters I will moſt willingly belieue:
but herein how can I?But the conditions of men, and men themſelues are againſt it. They ſeeme not to knowe this age,
and the men that liue therein, and do giue their opinion,
                  Ad Attic. 2. Ep. 1. 
                  as if
they liued in the common wealth of Plato, and not in the dregs of
the ſtate of Romulus. For amongſt whome do we conuerſe?

To wit,Pro Roſ. Com. with craftie and malicious perſons, who ſeeme to be
made of fraude, deceipt, and lying. Theſe Princes, with whome
we are to treate, are for the moſt part of this number: and
although they ſhewe themſelues to be like Lyons,Perſ. Sat. 5. 
                  yet are
they in their corrupt hearts, diſſembling Foxes.
               
               
                  Let ſome man now come and tell me,
                  Cic. 3. de off. that we muſt doe
nothing treacherouſlie, that we muſt not vſe diſſimulation, nor
doe any thing deceiptfullie. O pure men, nay rather poore
children. The Philoſopher doth note,
                  Ariſt. 5. Pol. that kingdomes are
ſubuerted by ſubtiltie, and guile. Doeſt thou ſay it is not lawfull
to conſerue them by the ſame meanes? and that the
Prince may not ſometimes hauing to deale with a foxe,A
                        •
                     ag. play
the foxe,We muſt frame our ſelues according to their diſpoſition we are to deale withall. And that, if we reſpect the Princes, and the common wealths good. 
                  eſpecially if the good and publike profit, which
are alwayes conioyned to the benefit,Cic. 3. deoff. and profit of the Prince
doe require it? Surely thou art deceiued: the for ſaking of the
common profit is not onely againſt reaſon, but likewiſe againſt
nature.Pro Plane. * We ought all to ſtand as it were in ſome ſphere
of the common wealth, which when it is turned about, we ought
to chooſe that part vnto the which the profit and ſafetie thereof
doth driue vs.Some ſuch things are held to be good being to a good end. 
                  Doeſt thou beleeue that any vnlawfull
thing is mixed herewith?
                  Cic. 3. deoff. 
                  There can not be any. For that
which is commonly reputed diſhoneſt, for this cauſe will not
be ſo.Ibid. * He which regardeth the ſocietie and benefit of men, doth
alwayes that which he ought.A Prince that will not bend to this, is not in the right. 
                  And therefore I beſeech you
be not ſo much aſtonied, nor offended, if by our iudgement,
this right and perfect reaſon hath not alwayes the vpper
hand:Pro M. Cael. 
                  and that we deſire, that the Prince be of a notable
and excellent wit,
                  He ought to encline to that which is proſitable. 
                  and yet that he be able to intermingle that
which is profitable,Tac. Agric. with that which is honeſt. I ſay intermingle
it,
                  Not to that 
                        〈◊〉
                      which is wicked. 
                  for that he ſhould wholie decline from that which is
honeſt, there is no force, that can force me to perſuade it.
I blame indeede, and deteſt theſe wordes,
                  S
                        •
                     l. Orat. Lepid
                        •
                     . There is nothing
honorable but that which is ſafe, and all things are honeſt that
do conſerue authoritie. And likewiſe theſe ſpeaches, Wee
beare rule,Sen. Thyeſt. as if wee borowed it, where nothing is permitted
to him which commandeth, but that onely which is honeſt.

                  Let theſe opinions packe to hell from whence they came;
as for me,
                  Auct. Theb. 
                  I confeſſe I am hee which doth forbid to commit
miſchiefe; I am maſter of equitie, and of all good cuſtomes.
My meaning is onely that it be ſometimes lawfull,
                  To fetch a compaſſe in his iourney: not to wander. 
                  and
reaſonable to trace out indirect courſes,Virgil. Cic. ad Lent. Ep. 9. 
                  in this tempeſtuous
ſea of the affayres of the world: and if wee can not arriue at
the hauen by the right Courſe, that wee turne ſayle, and alter
our Nauigation to attaine thereunto. Who will blame
mee ſo farre heerein, or demaund the cauſe why I forſake
vertue?
                  Others like
                     
                        ••
                     ſe do ſo. 
                  Wine, although it be ſomewhat tempered with
water, continueth to be wine: ſo doth prudence not change
her name, albeit a fewe drops of deceipt bee mingled
therewith: For I alwayes meane but a ſmall deale, and to
a good end; Mothers, and Phiſitions, doe they not often
deceiue little children, to the end they might beguile their
improuident age by a deceiptfull taſte:Lucret. 1. Ibid. * and the deceipt may
not be perceaued? And why ſhould not a Prince do the like
towards the ſimple people, or towards ſome other Prince
his neighbour?
                  When we are not ſtrong enough, there needeth pollicie. 
                  Surely when one is not ſtrong enough to debate
the matter, it is not amiſſe ſecretly to intrappe.Pacuu. 
                  And as
the King of Sparta teacheth vs,
                  Plut. Lyſand. & Apop. Iſth. Od. 4. Where we cannot preuaile
by the Lions skinne, we muſt put on the Foxes. I will alwayes
with Pindarus prayſe him,
                  A Prince ought to hold partly of the Lion, and partly of the Foxe. Young men vnderſtand this but little. 
                  who in matters of variance doth
make ſhowe to haue the courage of a Lion, but in Conſultation
it is as craf
                     •
                  ie as a Foxe. Be thou the like in time, and
place, and careleſſe of that theſe young men do ſay at ſchoole,
or within doores: whome I knowe,
                  Ariſt. 1. Eth. Cap. 3. not to be capable hearers
of ciuill doctrine, and much leſſe iudges: and ſurely this tribunall
ſeate requireth a man,
                  Old men, or they which haue experiē
                     
                        •
                     e know it well. Some kinde of perſons rage too much againſt Machiauell. who is not ignorant of thoſe
things which happen in this life.Ibid. 
                  Of ſuch a perſon we ſhall
eaſily obtaine this, neither will he ſo ſtrictly condemne the
Italian faulte-writer, (who poore ſoule is layde at of all
hands) and as a holy perſon ſayth,
                  Baſil. in Pro. 
                  that there is a certaine
honeſt and laudable deceipt.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  After what manner, and how farre forth deceipts are to be admitted.
That there are three ſorts of deceipt. That ſome
kinde thereof ought diſtinctlie to be receaued in a kingdome,
and others reiected.
               
               
                  NEither do I hold theſe things ſo ſtrongly,
that I will altogether let looſe the raines to
fraude and malice: let that be farre from
me. I will enlighten thee by ſome diſtinction,
and will hedge this field of deceipt
within his bounds and limits, that thou
mayeſt not wander at randon.The generall definition of deceipts. Deceipt in generall as it
ſerueth for my purpoſe, is a ſubtile counſell, which ſwarueth
from vertue or the lawes for the good of the Prince and the
eſtate.
               
               There are three ſorts thereof,Their deuiſion. 1. light deceipt, 2. middle
deceipt, 3.Into Light▪
                   and great deceipt. 1. Light deceipt is that, which
paceth not farre from vertue, being ſlightly watered with the
dewe of euill. Of this kinde I holde diſtruſt and diſſimulation.
               2. Middle deceipt,Middle, 
                  which withdraweth it ſelfe from vertue,
and approcheth neere to the confines of vice: in the which I put
purchaſing of fauor, and deceipt. 3. The third is that, which
not only ſeparateth it ſelfe from vertue, but likewiſe from the
lawes, by a forcible and perfect malice,
                  & Great deceipt. of which kinde trechery,
and iniuſtice are. The firſt ſort of deceipt I perſuade,
the ſecond I tollerate, and the third I condemne. Conſider
all theſe three ſorts by order.
               In light deceipt I haue firſt put diſtruſt, which I will altogether
inſinuate into the Princes fauour:Diſtruſt recommended to him that gouerneth. For euen as it
behoueth him in all his actions to be lingering and ſlowe,
ſo ought he to be in geuing his conſent, and in geuing credit,
that in all things he may proceede circumſpectly,Sen. 2. de Ira. & as it
were being doubtfull, I had almoſt ſaid that he ſhould not geue
                  
credit to any thing, but to that hee were an eye witneſſe of.
And although that credulitie be rather an error, then a fault,Cic. Epiſt. l
                        •
                     b. 10. Ep. 23.
and that it eaſily ſlideth into euery mans minde, how honeſt ſo euer
he bee:Credulitie is a ſoule fault in him. 
                  Notwithſtanding the ſame is to be remoued farre
from the Prince, in whome it is an occaſion,Sen. 2. de Ira. of ouer many miſchiefes.
Doth not hee watch for vs all?
                  Cic. Phil. 
                  It is then diſhonorable
and hurtfull for all to ſee him faile,And an error committed thereby. erre, and be
deceaued.
               
                  Not theſe Princes that are ſo ſimple and vncircumſpect,
how are they open to iniury? They be vndefended on all ſides,
                  Sal. Iug.
                  and in all places,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. men enterpriſe againſt them with leſſe feare,
and greater gaine.And oftētimes it is hurtfull. 
                  Yea men enterpriſe againſt them, credulitie
opening the way to the Traitor to hurt.Sen. O
                        •
                     d. 
                  Let the Prince
then ſtand vpon his guard and defend himſelfe with this
Shield,
                  For all things are full of treacherie, & Diſſembling euery where. in belieuing nothing, and in being wary in all things.Cic. Orat. poſt red. in Senat.
                  Doeſt thou thinke they are faithfull to thee and thy
friends?
                  Sen. Hipp. Cic. ad Q. frat. Ep. 1. 
                  Take heede to thy ſelfe, O deceiptfull life, thou doeſt
holde all thy ſenſes hidden: Yea too much the nature of euery
one, is as it were enfolded in many faynings, and couered
I knowe not with what vailes of diſſimulation; the forehead,
the eyes, the whole countenance, are for the moſt part liars, and
the ſpeach moſt of all. And as one ſayde long agoe,
                  Ariſt. apud Laert. O my
friendes, there is no friend: thou mayſt with reaſon ſay the
like:
                  Eſpecially in the Court. 
                  For ſurely in Princes pallaces this word friendſhip is but
vaine,Plin. Pane. and a thing of nothing; the effect whereof is baniſhed:
and albeit that thy Court be very great,Sen. Her. Oet. and that thou
art followed with an infinite number of people, and that thou
goeſt abroade accompanied with a great traine, neuertheleſſe
thou ſhalt hardly finde faith amongst them all.Wherefore we ought to be wary, and miſtr
                        •••
                     full. 
                  And therefore
not without cauſe men experienced in pollicie,Cic. ad Att. lib. 2. Epiſt. 20. in all their precepts
of hiſtories, and in the verſes of Poets, commaund and
forbid to truſt, and ſlightly to beleeue. The Sicilian Philoſopher
doth murmure thus, Bee thou watchfull,Epichar. and
bee thou mindfull of this, not to beleeue any thing, theſe are
the ſinewes of prudence. Another admoniſheth vs from
Greece, There is nothing more profitable to mortall men,Euripid.
then distruſt. What then? Thou wilt ſay vnto me, ought

I to truſt no man? I giue no ſuch councell,
                  Yet we ought to truſt ſome. (for both
theſe are held for vice,Sen. Ep. 3. to truſt all, and not to put confidence
in any) but to truſt a few, and but thoſe likewiſe, whoſe fidelitie
by long vſe is knowne vnto thee.
                  Though but few. 
                  To ſuch men what is
there In my opinion,Cic. ad Q. Frat. ep. 1. lib. 1. that may not only be committed to them, but
that they may likewiſe be credited with. I ſay in effect that thou
oughteſt to credit a few, but in ſhew all men, that is to ſay, by
thy face and countenaunce,Ad Lent. ep. 9. with the which it is moſt eaſie to diſſemble.
For herein thou oughteſt to haue regard to nothing
more then that thou ſeemeſt to diſtruſt.
                  We ought to keepe ſecret our diſtruſting. Many haue inſtructed
others to deceiue,Sen. ep. 3. whilſt they themſelues feare to be beguiled.*Liu. 22.
Euery man will be beleeued, and truſt repoſed in one doth
commonly bind to keepe ones faith.
               
                  And therefore Diſſimulation is neceſſarie,
                  Diſsimulation is to be admitted. which I haue ſet
downe and taught in the ſecond place: the which may rightly
beſayd to be the daughter of diſtruſt. But ſome one will ſay
vnto me, What needeth this diſſembling, if there be a mutuall
faith betweene vs? Diſſimulation is that which diſcouereth
the countenance,The vſe wherof ſtretcheth far. and couereth the mind.Cic. pro. C
                        •
                     . Plancio. Fridericus ſi
                        •
                     e Sigiſmundus. Nā
                     variant. 
                  It is ſo neceſſarie
for a Prince, that the old Emperour ſayd, that he knew not
wel how to beare rule, that knew not how to diſſemble. And Tiberius
being of the ſame mind, ſayd, that as he thought, hee
loued no other vertue ſo much as diſsimulation. This will peraduenture
diſpleaſe ſome liberall and free heart,
                  Tac. 4. Ann. 
                  who will
ſay,
                  Cic. 2. de off. that we muſt baniſh from all conditions and ſorts of life, diſguiſing
and diſſembling.And it is altogether neceſſary for a Prince. 
                  I aduouch, it ought not to bee amongſt
priuat perſons, but in a ſtate I vtterly denie it. They
ſhall neuer gouerne well, who know not how to couer well,
and thoſe to whome the charge of a common wealth is committed,Pro Milone Lib. 10. ep. 9
muſt needs be tied to this. And to come to the effect of their
determinations, they are conſtrained againſt their wils to faine,
and diſſemble many things with greefe. And that not onely towards
ſtrangers, or their enemies,Againſt the enemie. (for therein this precept is
allowed, that we keepe ſecret the miſchiefe vnder our tongue,Gregor. 15. Moral. Sen. Med.
and not blabbe it out, becauſe that hatred being diſcouered, cauſeth
them them to looſe the oportunitie of reuenge) but likewiſe
towards their owne ſubiects.
                  Againſt his own ſubiect▪
                   
                  They which are ſo open, ſo

ſimple without any counterfeiting,Cic. 1. ad Att. ep. 1. Ennius. without fraua, who carrie
their heart, as they ſay, on their forehead, ſhall neuer be fit to
play their part vpon this ſtage:
                  Yet but mode
                     
                        •••••
                     . 
                  where in my iudgement the
diſſembler of Afranius holdeth the cheefe place.
                  Cic. pro Sex. 
                  And yet
in ſuch ſort, that thou play thy part comely, and with a
good grace,
                  Ari. E
                        •
                     h. 3. cap. 7. for they which vſe to diſſemble but a little, and
in thoſe things which are not ſeene and diſcouered, do appeare
gratious Contrarily, they which vſe it immoderatly and to
ſmall purpoſe, are by right reputed vnwiſe. For to what end
ſerueth this couer, when thou art ſeene thorow it? Learne
this once in all kind of diſſimulation, Deceipt is no dec
                     •
                  ipt,Pla
                        •
                     t. if
it be not cunningly handled.
               Thou haſt my opinion concerning light deceipt. I now
come to thoſe of the middle ſort, in the which purchaſing of
ſauour, or to ſpeake more freely, corruption marcheth in the
firſt ranke.
                  What purchaſing of fauor is. This is, whē thou draweſt & allureſt vnto thy ſelf
the hearts and indeuours of thoſe which by right appertain
to another man.It is not onely much vſed, but It is an art at this day ouermuch practiſed of
Princes, the which alone in court for the moſt part (as Saluſt
ſaith of Fortune) doth moue most matters as pleaſeth her.
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. Cic. 2. de off. 
                  Cicero
prayſeth it maruellouſlie,It is likewiſe profitable. and made this the propertie of
Prudence, to gaine the affections of men, and to appropriat them
to our owne vſe. Which is done by two meanes, Perſuaſions,
and Preſents; by perſuaſions more ſildome, but by preſents
verie often:Moſt commonly it i
                        •
                      done by preſents. as at this day,Wherewith it is eaſie to corrupt ſome in euery place. 
                  all good customes are corrupted
and depraued,
                  Ibidem. 
                  by making too great account of riches. But
of whom are they not preferred,Sal. I
                        •
                     gur. 
                  before that which is good
and honeſt? And therefore if thou canſt vſe this engine
wiſely and couertly, thou ſhalt find euery where, thoſe who
are poſſeſſed vvith a pernicious deſire to gratifie and augment
forraine libertie and power.*They diſcloſe ſecrets. 
                  Who do both ſell the Prince and
all that belongeth to him.Ibidem. And therefore (keepe this ſecret)
euen in warre,
                  Ibidem. 
                  and amongst thy enemies thou ſhalt find aid.
                  In war
                        •
                     e they betray.
What?Tac. in Agr. This kind of fraud, hath it not pierced euen to the
ſacred, and indeuided bed of marriage? A most diſhonest
thing.
                  Yea euen women haue bene woon hereby. Yea women are likewiſe induced hereunto, or rather
bought,Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 11. 
                  to diſcloſe and diſcouer that, which maketh euen

againſt their husbāds.
                  Tac. 4. An. I haue read in Tacitus, that ſecrets were
diſcloſed by the corruption of a woman Now the deceipt herein
is,What deceit is. when for thy profit thou intiſeſt another by an error or
falſe tale, which many good authors do allow and maintaine
to be lawfull in a Prince.It is allowed of by the opinion of ancient w
                        ••
                     ters. Worthie Plato was of this opinion,
that for the commoditie of their ſubiects,
                  5. de Rep. Lib. 8. epiſt. 
                  it was lawfull for
Princes to vſe lying and deceipt. And our Pli
                        •
                     e ſayth, that to
deceiue in time and place▪ is wiſedome. And likewiſe a certaine
Poet affirmeth,Diphil. 
                  I esteeme that a falſe tale, if it be done for the
common ſafetie is not to be diſallowed.
                  It is vſuall with Princes. And Princes do likely
take pleaſure in them, who I know not after what ſort, do
ſeeke honour rather by a hidden by-path, then by a beaten way.
                  Val. 7. cap. 3
*Tac. 12. An. 
                  And they themſelues do oftentimes flie from force, eſteeming
deceipt to be ſtronger.
                  Val. 7. ca. 3. And oftentimes by pollicie of counſell
they atchieue that, which the neceſſitie of affairs, and want of
time doth denie them. They deceaue by ſpeech, by letters, by
Ambaſſadors,Sen. Thyeſt. and euen the Ambaſſadors themſelues, and do
abuſe them by whom they imagine to deceaue others.
                  Who do meaſure all things for their profit. Why
ſhould I diſcourſe any longer hereof, there are many that
do beleeue with Liſander,
                  Plut. Apop. 
                  that ſurely the tr
                        •
                     th is better then
falſhood, but by vſe, the excellencie and dignitie of the one and
the other, is diſcerned.
                  Humane reaſon doth tollerate it. Thou muſt needs allow theſe things, if
thou enter into conſideration of humane prudence. And
why not? They are referred to the profit of the common
wealth, which eaſilie draweth and draineth to it ſelfe, all the
venime of vice that is therein. And as in the application of
medicines, they do with approbation, mingle venimous
drugs for the good of the patient,Plat. 5. de Rep. ſo theſe things do ſeeme
profitable as it were a medicine.
               
               Add hereunto the common cuſtoms, & that theſe things
thorow vſe, are eſteemed as ſmall matters.
                  Sal. Iug. Nay likewiſe ioine
neceſſitie herewith. And that otherwiſe it were verie hard
for a good Prince to defend himſelfe and his, from ſo many
ambuſhes. For which cauſes alſo, I ſaid before that I was of
opinion, that theſe middle deceipts, ought to be tollerated,
and not wholy taken away.
               But what if I conſider that vpright and diuine law?But ſc
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     e Gods law. I do

ſucke very faſt and ſweat. It ſeemeth to forbid vs theſe
things: theſe ſpeeches proceeding from God, who is moſt
pure and moſt ſimple, That euery deceiuer is an abhomination
vnto the Lord.*Pr
                        •
                     u. 3. Eccl. 7. And againe, Vſe not to lie in any wiſe, for
the vſe therof profiteth nothing. And that I may take away all
place of refuge, behold how princes are publikely admoniſhed:
Excellent talke becommeth not a foole,
                  Prou. 17. 
                  nor lying lippes a
Prince. Thou which art a Politician, what replieſt thou
therevnto? The good of a common wealth? But a holy
perſon withſtandeth thee and ſayth,Aug. Ep. 8. 
                  It is not lawfull to lie, no
not to ſet forth Gods glorie, and wilt thou do it for a little
worldly honour, or a thing of nothing?Demad. 
                  Take heed, beware
leaſt this old ſaying be not prooued true in thee, that while thou
fighteſt for the earth, thou looſest heauen.
                  Neither can we ſo bring it to paſſe, or auoid it, but that ſome ſmall ſinne will remaine therin. A caue at concerning this matter. Truly it is hard, eyther
for you or me to find out any ſtarting hole here, were
it not that the ſayd holy father ſayth:A
                        •
                     gu. in Pſa. 5. 
                  that there are certaine
kind of lies, in which there is no great offence, yet are they not
without fault. And in this ranke we deeme that light corruption
and deceipt are only then, when a good and lawfull
king vſeth them againſt the wicked, for the good of the
common wealth. Otherwiſe, it is not onely an offence, but a
great ſinne,Prou. 10. howſoeuer theſe old courtiers laugh thereat. He
that walketh ſimplie, walketh ſurely.
               
               Now I come to ſpeake of great deceit,Great deceit. which I haue ranged
vnder theſe two heads, Trecherie and Iniuſtice. I find very
few, that openly and in their diſcourſes, do make reckoning
of them, but in action ouer many. For concerning trecherie
how often haue we ſeene agreements and couenaunts
broken, by cauils and quirks, becauſe they beleeue in their
heart that we may mocke little children with toies,
                  Plu. Apoph. 
                  and men with
oaths?
                  By 
                        •
                     launders they make a ſport of treaties. Wherefore it is ynough for them to find the leaſt
gappe in the world, for a colour of their diſſembling: and
they thinke by and by to be freed by an oath, we know al, how
they are woont alwaies to be perplexed:*Cic. 3. de off. Plaut. Aul. 
                  And what ſo is agreed
vpon, is no agreement, and what ſo is not concluded vpon, is a bargaine,
euen as it pleaſeth them.
                  Cic. 3. de off. O vaine men, for ſurely fraud
doth ſomewhat eaſe it indeed, but doth not altogether diſſolue an
                  
And what do theſe men looke for,Liu. 9. but to feele the wrath of
God,
                  But they do not d
                        •
                     ceaue God. 
                  whoſe Maieſtie they make a ſcoffe at? For I beleeue certainlie,I
                        •
                     od. lib. 2. de ſum▪ bono
                  that who ſo ſweareth, what art or diſguiſing ſoeuer there
is in his oath, God who is witneſſe of the conſcience, taketh he
oath as it is meant by him to whom it is made and giuen.
               
               
                  Now iniuſtice is another deceit,
                  The actions of iniuſtice. 
                  when againſt right and
law, one increaſeth that which he hath rather by miſchiefe
then craft.
                  Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 10. 
                  From this fountaine do iſſue the little riuers of
attempts,
                  It taketh away thoſe that are a let. that is, openly or in ſecret, to ſubuert mightie and
worthie men, in baniſhing them, as enuious perſons, which are
hurtfull to the eſtate.*Tac. 2. An. And to forge occaſions to this purpoſe,
                  For ſome cauſ
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
or to take hold of them which are offered. For they thinke it
were ouer-great curteſie to rid themſelues of them,1. Hiſt. vnder colour
of ambaſſage, or honour. They do rather make them away,
becauſe it is an old prouerbe in Court,
                  Plut. in Pomp. Dio. 43. That the dead
bite not. Likewiſe Caeſar himſelfe,
                  Or otherwhiles for none at all. 
                  who is ſo much commended,
when he could not condemne one for any ſufficient and probable
crime, he made him away by ſome ſecret means:The cruell deceipt of Iulius Caeſar. 
                  yea ſome
were diſpatched in his armies by trecherie,Ibidem. and attempts wrought
againſt them by thoſe of their own ſide.
               From the ſame head proceedeth this,Iniuſtice likewiſe inuadeth. In the change of Princes. Or in ciuill diſſentions. to couet other mens
goods, and to watch the time, as in the death of a Prince, for
the change of matters, is fit to effect great enterpriſes.
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. Or in the
troubles or diſſentions of thoſe that are nere vnto thee. For
as Ariſtopanes ſaith,Pluſ
                        •
                     uli verſus in Equit. 
                  it is good catching of Eeles, when the water
is ſtirred.
                  Tac. 6. An. Plut. Pomp. And theſe great ones called to the ſuccour of either
partie,
                  It hath equitie when it is armed. 
                  do preuaile againſt all. Let ſome one alleage the
lawes, anſwer will be made, Will ye neuer ceaſe to tell vs of the
lawes, who haue our ſwords girt by our ſide? Another wil ſay,
He that preuaileth with the ſword,
                  Id. Apoph. 
                  knoweth beſt how to diſpute
of bounds. Thoſe words & theſe precepts are in their mind,It meaſureth al things by profit
                  Whatſoeuer bringeth much profit,
                  Cic. 3. de off. 
                  is honeſt, although it ſeemeth
not ſo at the beginning. Likewiſe the glorie of a priuat familie
                     •
                  
is to conſerue his own,Tac. 15. An. Ci. 3. de rep. 
                  but to fight for that which belongeth
to other men, is the honour of a king. If Princes ſhould follow
iustice, and yeeld to euery one that which is his, and that which
they haue poſſeſſed by force of armes, they ſhould be turned to

dwell in cottages, in great pouertie.
                  A kingdome is a ſchoole of deceip
                        •
                     . Theſe men haue on their
ſide the ſchoole, but as for me, if euery thing were well
weighed, I ſhould hardly find any thing that ſhould perſuade
it me. What need I? It is truly written,Sen. Thyeſt. 
                  albeit no man
teach the way of deceit and miſchiefe, a kingdome will. I would
rather conſider this, if ſuch things ought to be tollerated or
reiected. Neither do they who approue theſe things, allow of
any notable and open iniuſtice.Many do allow ſome kind of iniuſtice. They only conſent concerning
ſome ſmall iniuſtice, and that when it is kept ſecret,
and do affirm,Iaſo. Theſſalo tribuit Plu. in Pol. 
                  that it is neceſſarie to be a little withdrawn from
iuſtice, in matters of ſmall importance, to the end they may
keepe it in waightie matters.A
                        •
                     , 
                        •
                     o make one away without law. For what ſay they? If one or other
trouble my eſtate, and I cannot be reuenged of them by
the lawes, without a greater trouble, ſhall it not be lawfull
for me to make them away ſecretly? It ſeemeth ſo, and this
is to be reckoned amongſt thoſe not able examples which doe
draw a little towards that iniuſtice,
                  Tac. An. 14 
                  which toucheth but certaine
particular perſons. for the commoditie of the common wealth.
And what likewiſe?Either to bend or breake priuiledges. if my ſubiects haue certaine lawes and
priuiledges which are to my preiudice, may not I violate
them?Plut. in 
                        •
                     la. yes that I may, not only according to the lawes, but alſo
according to the ordinary vſe of commaunding, to ouer-rule the
lawes.
               
               Thirdly to conclude,To poſſeſſe that which belongeth to another. if a cittie or a prouince be commodious,
and neceſſarie for my eſtate, of the which if I do not
ceaze, another will take it to my great detriment and continuall
feare, ought not I to preuent him? They to whome
ſuch things are profitable and allowable, will alwaies do ſo,
if they ſucceed proſperouſly. The euent maketh many wicked
things honeſt.*Sen. Hip. Dio. 48. 
                  In ſuch caſes, the vanquiſhed is alwaies diſhonored
and oppreſſed,
                  Sen. Here. Fur. 
                  and the conqueror praiſed and honoured.*And that onely in reſpect of profit. 
                  A
happie and prosperous miſchiefe is called vertue. Theſe things
and others of the ſame ſort, are ſuch that they are alwaies of
force, to draw a good nature from the right way, to run to
that ſide where profit diſplaieth his banner.Ariſtotle his Prince is ſcarſe good. So Ariſtotle
leaneth ſomewhat that way, and beleeueth that the Prince
ought to be framed in ſuch ſort,
                  Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 11. 
                  that he be either altogether

good, or halfe good, and not altogether wicked, but halfe wicked.
                  Democritus Prince dealeth wrongfully.
Another renowned & ancient philoſopher ſaid,Democritu
                        •
                     . 
                  that it is impoſſible
that the beſt Princes, as the eſtate of matters doth ſtand
at this day, do not commit ſome vnlawfull matter. Shall we be
mooued herewith,The Authors prince muſt not be vniuſt, but a little, and that vpon extreame neceſſitie. not much ſurely. And as for me, I ſhould
be of this opinion, that the Prince in deſperat matters,
ſhould alwaies follow that which were moſt neceſſarie to be effected,
                  Curt. 3.
                  not that which is honeſt in ſpeech. Then I ſay, let him decline
gently from the lawes, yet not except it be for his own
conſeruation, but neuer to inlarge his eſtate.That excuſeth ſome things. For neceſſitie
which is the true defender of the weakeneſſe of man,
                  Sen. Decl. l. 9. 
                  doth breake
all lawes.
                  Sen. Her
                        •
                     . O
                        •
                     t. And as the Poet ſayth, He doth not hurt, who hurteth
againſt his will. We muſt enterpriſe theſe matters with feare:With men, rather then with God.
God, euen God, doth not he oppoſe himſelfe openly? Who
with his flaming ſpirit, doth blow theſe guiles of men before
him,Plaut. Mil. 
                  as the wind doth the leaues and the ſtubble?
                  Who being pure, deſireth all things to be pure. He hath
giuen vs this inſtruction,Deut. ca. 25. 
                  The Lord is an enemie to all iniuſtice.
He threatneth,Eccl. cap. 10. 
                  that one kingdome is tranſported to another people,
for iniuſtice, wrongs, and reporches, and diuers deceipts.
                  The cauſe of the troubles at this day (if we
                        •
                      may ſay ſo to man) proceedeth from vniuſt gouernmēt. And
ſurely I do freely confeſſe that whereas Europe is troubled
with ſo many commotions, that kings and kingdomes do
burne with the flame of ſedition and warre, peraduenture
the true and iuſt cauſe is, that the gouernment of the moſt
part of them is not iuſt & right,Hom. Ili. 11. 
                  They corrupt publike lawes,
they driue iuſtice from them, not fearing the word of God, therefore
doth he rightly forſake them that leaue him, and for
theſe cauſes doth he dayly ſend them wo,
                  I
                        ••
                     ad. 
                        •
                     . 
                  and will not ceaſe to afflict them.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH BOOKE
OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL
DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtine
by Iuſtus Lipſius.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  He entereth to ſpeake of Militarie Prudence, with ſom
                        •
                     
excuſe, that he diſcourſeth thereof, being not a ſoldior.
               
               
                  BVt now thou eternal wiſdome,Plaut. Tr
                        ••
                     . 
                  with a cherefull
countenaunce, and from my heart I giue
thee praiſe, and will euer be thankefull vnto
thee, that thou being my guide, I haue eſcaped
theſe dangerous waies, and now am
come, where I may with more eaſe follow
on my iourney.
               This peaceable prudence, wrapped with her long gown,The ſecond part of military prudence.
hath long detained me: yet I haue vnfolded my ſelfe out of
it, and made knowne my meaning, and now I am come to
this militarie prudence, which is ſtearne to looke vpon, but
not ſo hard to diſcourſe of, ſhee preſenteth me her cote armour,
I accept thereof, and with my garment changing my
ſpeech, I now begin to ſet downe precepts of warre in generall.Virgil.
                  Arme your ſelues bring forth your weapons.
               
               But ſome will ſay vnto me,He maketh a queſtion whether he be fit to diſcourſe of military prudēce. dareſt thou enterpriſe theſe
things,Cic. 2. de ora. who art but a ſcholeman? who in earneſt, diddeſt neuer
ſee the enemie in the face, no not ſo much as their tents, and
to bee ſhort, diddeſt neuer execute the leaſt part of any warlike
office?
                  Which hee anſwereth hee may, though not of himſelfe. Yea ſurely, euen I dare vndertake it, yet not in
the truſt I repoſe in mine owne capacitie or ſtrength,
but in their wiſdome, from whome all this while I haue

borrowed, and taken. For what is there heere of mine?Ancient authors leade him the way. It
may be a certaine order, and compoſition of the diſcourſe:
but they do furniſh me with words, and with ſence, whome
(I dare confidently ſay) Haniball, or Ceſar himſelfe, would
not refuſe to heare in the ſame matter. For what is it that
theſe wiſe, and worthy men, were ignorant of? And why is
not their iudgement heerein good and ſound?Who were taught by experience: & Greatmen of iudgement. who partly
were preſent, and did commaund in warre? partly were
conuerſant with the Senate, and with the people, where the
like matters were ordinarily handled and diſcourſed of?
They haue then ſeene and heard: and that which is principall,Who were taught by experience: & Greatmen of iudgement.
they haue with iudgement obſerued the cauſes, and
grounds of theſe matters, which were done there: and not
onely the apparences of the ſucceſſe of affayres, but euen
the cauſes of them. That Alexander, who was rightly tearmed
great in martiall affaires, was not aſhamed to auouch
Homer to be his Maiſter, and to acknowledge him for ſuch
in matters of warre: haue not I more reaſon to aſſume theſe
vnto me? For that Poet (a worthy perſon ſure,Hiſtoriographers are the maſters of militarie diſcipline. and a Poet
aboue the reach of man, & yet but a Poet) what other thing
hath he done, but chaunted one onely warre, and that ſtuffed
with fables? But theſe on our ſide (it is euident that I
vnderſtand Hiſtoriographers) haue faithfully written of
warres and battailes, almoſt from the beginning of the
world, with a continued order, and with an vnſtayned fidelitie.
And they haue not onely done this,They deliuer vnto v
                        •
                      inſtruotions thereof both in ſecret, and openly. but oftentimes
in the diſcourſe it ſelfe, and in their digreſſions in
their Orations, they haue (as it were) of ſet purpoſe, intermingled
wholeſome precepts, and counſels, neceſſary for
all accidents in martiall affaires. What part belongeth vnto
warre, or what art, that theſe men do not with examples
ſet before vs, and afterwards likewiſe explaine in words?
as concerning the army,
                  Cic. 2. de. Orat. 
                  the campe, the marching of the footemen,
of ioyning battaile, the beſe
                        •
                     ging of townes, the munition, and
victuals, the laying of ambuſhes, and the eſcaping of them, and
all other things properly belonging to warre.
                  The Author hath 
                        •
                     pent much time in them. Now, ſeeing there
hath paſſed ſo many yeares that I conuerſe with them, and

do dayly wander, with the curious eye of my vnderſtanding,
by the ſpacious and pleaſant fields of hiſtories: why
ſhould it not be lawfull for me, to knowe and haue ſome
iudgement in them?Wherefore he may haue ſome inſight in them. But ſome will ſay; Thou haſt not
ſeene this thou writeſt of. True it is. And therefore I
challenge not to my ſelfe the vſe and handling of weapons,
but onely aduiſe, and iudgement, and that likewiſe tyed to
the opinion of other men.The very common sort of men geue their iudgement of warre. 
                  In all meetings,
                  Liu. 44. 
                  and likewiſe at
feaſtes, (a Gods name) ſhalt not thou meete with them who
teach how to conduct Armies, who knowe where the Campe
ſhould be placed, in what ground garriſons are to be ſet, when
we muſt come to handy ſtroakes with the enemy, and when we
muſt forbeare them? And no man findeth fault with them.
I am accoumpted a bolde,Why ſhould not the Author do the like. and impudent fellowe, if I
ſpeake of theſe matters according to the opinion of auncient
Authors. Iphicrates in former time beeing asked,
Who art thou, that takeſt ſo great hart to thy ſelfe? a horſeman,
or an Archer, or a Shot, or of any band of footemen?
Quoth he, I am none of all theſe, but one who doth knowe how
to commaund them all.
               
               I will partly imitate him,Who, though with his hand he be no Souldier, yet he is with his pen. and say, I am no Captayne, nor
Souldier, but one who many times may perſwade and
counſell them in ſomething. Therefore I will boldly march
forward with a ſetled pace, and will as it were out of the
gardens of auncient Authors, gather the flowers of ſentences,
and will weaue and plat them in the garlands of theſe
Chapters; which if it be well done, and with iudgement,
no man will blame me: If otherwiſe it happen, then will
not I likewiſe deny, but that theſe things are As flying duſt,
                  C
                        •
                     cill.
                  and as the ſpoyle and pastime of the winde. But the matter
it ſelfe will ſhewe which of theſe two it deſerueth the
name of; the which now I enter into, and do put my ſelfe
in martiall order, and with Ariſtophanes,
                  Ex Ariſt. Nebul. 
                  do gene the onſet
with my aduiſe, with my pen, and with my diſcourſe.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  This part of Prudence is recommended to a Prince, being
neceſſary for the defence and ſafegard of his
kingdome.
               
               
                  I Holde then, that militarie prudence is neceſſary
to the Prince aboue al other things,
ſo that without it hee can ſcarcely bee a
Prince.The part of a Prince is to defend himſelfe. For how is it poſſible he ſhould otherwiſe
conſerue his owne perſon, his
goods, and his ſubiects? A meere naked
force, is not auayleable to bring this matter to paſſe, if it
be not tempered with certaine induſtrie, and counſell: that
is,P
                        •
                     lib. lib. 6. with militarie prudence.Which he can not without fortitude. 
                  For in aſmuch as there are two
things, by the which euery common wealth is maintayned: courage
againſt the enemyes, and concord at home: Surely ciuill
prudence,Neyther is fortitude of force, without military prudence. will amplie effect the latter, but the former is not
to be ſought, or commaunded any other way, then by
militarie prudence; at the leaſt with ſucceſſe. And therefore
it is diſcreetly written,Tac. Agric. 
                  that other vertues may be diſſembled
as we liſt, but this imperiall vertue belongeth to a good
Captayne.
                  The prayſe of an accompliſhed Prince. And Homere did adorne his lawfull and perfect
Prince with this prayſe, that he was both a good gouernor,
and worthy warrior.*Homer. 3. Ilyad. Cicer. pro Murae. 
                  And indeede I muſt ſay what I thinke:
Military vertue doth excell all others:
                  The quiet, and ſtabilitie of matters proceedeth from warre. For without it, what
is it that poſſeſſeth life, or the quiet vſe thereof? Our countrey,
the libertie thereof, the ſubiects, yea, Kings themſelues,Ibidem.
                  are couered and kept ſafe vnder the defence and rampart
of military vertue. Wherefore thou ſeeſt how this is
with all earneſtneſſe to be embraced: and thou haſt iuſt
cauſe to apply all thy ſences to attaine to this diſcipline,
which is ſuch as followeth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  The matter, and order of thoſe things he is to entreate of.
The definition of externall warre, and that in the enterpriſing
thereof iniuſtice ought to be auoyded.
               
               
                  ALl militarie prudence, is couerſant in matter
of warre. Warre is of two ſorts; forraine,Warre is two 
                        •
                     ol
                        ••
                     .
and ciuill. I define externall warre to

                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 
                  Force and armes prepared, againſt a forraine
Prince and people. Of the which I will
ſpeake firſt, and will reduce the vniuerſall
precepts, which do concerne it to theſe three heads. 1. Of
enterpriſing warre,
                  What things are to be regarded in forraine warre. 2. Of executing the ſame: 3. and of finiſhing
it. If thou contemneſt any of theſe three, or doeſt not manage
them, as they ought to be, it will hardly fall out that
any good euent do follow.
               In the enterpriſing of warre, I do admoniſh thee to haue
care of theſe two things, that all iniuſtice, and temeritie, be
eſchued, but eſpecially iniuſtice: neyther oughteſt thou
euer begin any warre, but ſuch as vſe and reaſon doth admit.
For there are lawes belonging vnto warre,
                  Liu. 5. 
                  as well as to
peace;
                  Martiall lawes are to be kept. 
                  and thou oughteſt to make warre with no leſſe iuſtice,
then fortitude. And therefore in euery Common wealth,
                  Cic. 1. offi.
                  the lawes concerning warre ought especially to be obſerued: For
to runne headlong to fight,
                  Ibidem. 
                  and raſhly to come to handy ſtrokes
with our enemy, carryeth with it a ſpice of cruelty, and reſembleth
the bruite beaſtes.
                  Otherwiſe warre will be confuſed and continuall. Which cuſtome if we admit,Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  what other
thing ſhall we beholde, then warre amongst all nations?
And after the manner of barbarous people,
                  Sal. ad. Caeſ. 
                  we ſhall recompence
death with death, and ſatisfie bloud with bloud. Let it be farre
from thee:Wicked precepts. and let theſe ſpeaches neuer make breach in thy
hart: that there is right in armes,
                  Liu. 5. Sen. Her. Fur. Lucan. 7. 
                  and all things do belong to the
ſtrongeſt: Moreouer, that the euent of warre, not the cauſe, is
to be conſidered:
                  Iuſtice is to be approued not by the euent, but by the cauſe of warre. And this moſt wicked ſaying, that the conflict
maketh the conquered culpable. No, no, my friend, thou
deceaueſt thy ſelfe; It is not the conflict which doth approue

a man his innocencie, but the cauſe, although oftentimes
I confeſſe the ſucceſſe of warre as an equall iudge,
                  Liu. 21. 
                  geueth
victorie to him,
                  Albeit the cauſe being good oftentimes the euent is ſo. 
                  on whoſe ſide right is. For the cauſe, as
the Cape Bonae ſpei (of good hope) (geue me leaue to allude
hereunto) will guide thee to the land of Tryumph. The
cauſe geueth vs hope,
                  Lucan. 7. 
                  that God will be fauorable to vs: and by
a certaine inward,Propert. lib. 4. Eleg. 6 and ſecret force, the cauſe eyther putteth
courage in the Souldier, or maketh him a coward: and if it be
not iuſt, ſhame forceth him to forſake his weapons. Yea, the
Greeke Poet durſt write thus,Eurip. Erecht. that hee that vndertaketh
an vnlawfull warre, ſeldome eſcapeth with ſafetie. Yet that
is but an ouer-hard cenſure:Vniuſt warre ſpringeth commonly of two cauſes. for wee knowe ſometimes it
falleth out otherwiſe, for ſome ſecret purpoſe vnknowne
vnto vs.
               Now all warres are vnlawfull, which are grounded vpon
no other cauſe then ambicion and couetouſneſſe. Ouer
many haue that for their foundation. For if we dare confeſſe
a troth,Saell. in Fragm. 
                  the onely and auncient cauſe which pricketh
forwarde many Kings, to wage warre, is the extreame deſire
to rule,
                  Idem Catil. 
                  and to become rich.*Ambition. & Couetouſneſſe. 
                  The coueting to commaund,
is the matter they ground vppon, to make warre: and they
deeme the greateſt glory, to conſiſt in the greatest Empire.
And this doth euen happen oftentimes in men of greateſt courage,
and beſt wits, who thinke it a worthy matter, to ſeeke
cauſe of triumph vppon euery occaſion:*Cic. 1. de off. Plin. Pan. Iuuen. Sat. 10. 
                  The ſpoyles of the
vanquiſhed, their armour, and other tropheys of their victories,
are reputed by them things of more value, then worldly wealth.
                  Sal. in Fra.
This is the reaſon that theſe kinde of men make warre againſt
all men,*Ambition. & Couetouſneſſe. 
                  but especially againſt thoſe from whome they
thinke to purchaſe the greateſt ſpoyle. Neyther was this ſaying
euer proued falſe,Tac. 4. Hiſt. that they who ſet before them golde and
riches, as the principall cauſe of their warre, haue paſſed many
perils.
                  Sen. Hippol. And the Poet ſayth verie well, that vnlawfull rage
and deſire of gayne, and vnconſiderate anger, do breake the
league of amitie. Fitly doth he ioyne anger therewith, which
is reckoned amongſt the vniuſt cauſes of warre. For they
that are ſtirred vp with anger, or with hate, doe often

moue warre,Whereunto anger may be added. which they ſhould not. That holy Prelate
doth condemne anger,Auguſt. cō
                     tra Fauſt. lib. 22. Cap. 74. and theſe other paſſions, the deſire
to hurt, the cruelty of reuenge, a minde that is obſtinate and can
not be appeaſed, a brutall affection of rebelling, and a coueting
and ambition to rule, and if any other be of this ſort, in matter
of warre they are iuſtly blamed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He ſetteth downe in order, and diſtinctly, thoſe things which are
required in the enterpriſing of lawfull warre: and eſpecially
for what cauſes the ſame ought to be vndertaken.
               
               
                  THerefore a Prince ought to auoide theſe
things, and neuer to intangle himſelfe, but
in a iuſt warre. But thou wilt demaund
what manner of warre is that? I ſayd diſtinctly,
that theſe three things maketh the
warre lawfull,The right of taking armes belongeth only to the King. 
                  the author thereof, the cauſe,
the ende. The lawfull author is the Prince himſelfe. Neyther
certainely is it lawfull for euery one, to open theſe gates
of warre. But the order of mortal mē,
                  Aug. contra Fauſt. 
                  which is naturally enclined
to peace,
                  Or 
                  doth require this, that the authority, and aduiſe of enterpriſing
a warre,
                  The ſoueraigne. Magiſtrate. 
                  doth remaine in the power of the Prince: Or
elſe with thoſe in euery common wealth, who ſupply the
place of the Prince. And therefore Plato eſtabliſhed it for a
lawe,Lib. 12. de leg. that if any in priuate, without the knowledge of publicke
authority, did make peace or warre, he ſhould be held as criminall
of a capital crime.
                  It is alwayes lawfull to defend. There are two iuſt cauſes of taking armes;
defence, and inuaſion. Of armes defenſiue, who doubteth?
It is not onely iuſt but alſo neceſſary, when iniurie offered, is onely
withſtood by force.*Cic. pro Mil. Ibid. 
                  Both reaſon to men of vnderſtanding, and
neceſſitie to barbarous people, and vſe and cuſtome to all nations,
and nature it ſelfe, hath taught and preſcribed this euen to wilde
beaſtes, to repell alwayes all manner of violence, by ſuch meanes
as they were able, from their body, from their head, frō their liues.
I ſay Defence is of two ſorts,Not onl
                        •
                      a 
                        ••
                     ns ſelfe. in regard of thy ſelfe, and in reſpect
of ſtrangers. In regard of thy ſelfe, when thou driueſt

force and violence from thy ſelfe, and thy ſubiects,
and doeſt with armes defend thy liberty,
                  Sal. Cat. 
                  thy countrey, thy
parents.
               
               Forraine defence is likewiſe two folde, when thou vndertakeſt
it in regard of thy confederates,But others: 
                        〈◊〉
                      confederat
                        ••
                     
                   or of thoſe that
are oppreſſed. Cicero vnderſtoode it of his confederates,
when he ſayde,Cic. de rep. 3▪
                   
                  No warre is enterpriſed of a well gouerned
ſtate, but in respect of faith, or of the common ſafetie. Surely
faith forceth, and compelleth thee to helpe thoſe, with
whome thou are entred into league of friendſhip, and aide.
Therefore the prince of Philoſophers decreed,Ariſt. Rhet. ad Alex. that wee
ought to take armes, to withſtand an iniury done to our ſelues,
likewiſe to ſuccour and helpe our kindred, and thoſe wee are
beholding vnto, as alſo our friends and allies, which haue ben
wronged.
               
               The reaſon is not much vnlike in thoſe that are oppreſſed,Or ſuch as are wrongfully oppreſſed.
who if they are vexed with any outrage, or extreame
tyrannie, the common bond of ſocietie ſeemeth to conſtraine
thee to helpe them.Cic. 1. Offic. For he that doth not reſiſt, nor oppoſe
himſelfe againſt an iniurie if he may, is in as great fault,
as if he did abandon his parents, his countrey, or his confed
                        •
                     rats.
Yea,Ambr. de Offic. a Chriſtian Doctor ſaith to this purpoſe: that fort
                        •
                     tude
which by force of armes doth defend a man his countrey from
barbarous people, or thoſe that are weake and oppreſſed, or ſuch
as are entred into league with vs, from the violence of th
                        •
                     eues
and robbers, is perfect iuſtice.
                  We muſt go 
                        〈◊〉
                      further vnder couler of defence. And this is right and lawfull
defence: herein onely do thou perſiſt, and neyther moue
hand nor foote vnder this couler and pretext, to ſeaze
vpon other mens goods; which the ſlowre of Romane eloquence
doth confeſſe the Romaines them ſelues haue
done,Cic. 3. de rep. when he ſayth, Our Nation in defending our confederates
are become Lords of the whole carth. I allow it not, neyther
do thou follow their example.
               Now Inuaſion likewiſe, is lawfull and iuſt, but not all
ſort of Inuaſion. This inuaſion is iuſt before all the world,
when thou doeſt reuenge iniuries done vnto thee, and
by the lawe of Nations recouer thine owne. For this is

the firſt propertie of iuſtice,
                  It is lawfull to inuade, for proffered wrongs. 
                  that no man do harme to another,
                  Idem. 1. Offic.
                  except he be prouoked thereto by open wrong.
               
               Thou ſeeſt the exception thereof, wherefore if any man
doth forciblie take from thee thy goods, or thy prerogatiue,
arme thy ſelfe, but yet vppon this condition,But fi
                        •
                     st let him t
                        ••
                     e by challenge of right. that according
to the auncient order, thou firſt make Proclamation,
that is to ſay,
                  Plin. 22. Nat. Hiſt. Cap. 2. 
                  that thou do openly red
                        •
                     maund thoſe things
that haue with ſtrong hand ben wreſted from thee. Neyther is
it lawfull,Which is of more force then weapons. when thou art wronged forthwith to raiſe warre:
but where as there are two wayes to debate ones right, the one,
                  Cic. 1. Off
                        •
                     .
                  by way of diſputation, the other by force, for ſo much as the firſt
is proper vnto man, the other vnto beaſts, we ought onely to
haue recourſe to the latter, when we haue no meanes to vſe the
former. Obſerue this rule. For as often as any man ſubmitteth
himſelfe to iudgement, there ought to be a ſurceaſe of
warre, and according to the opinion of the king of a worthie
nation,Archid. apud Thucid. 
                  It is not lawfull to moue warre againſt him, who
is ready to do right, and make ſatisfaction, as to one who is iniurious
to thee. But if he refuſe it, and withhold that which
belongeth to thee, what may preuaile againſt violence,
                  Cic. lib. 12. Epiſt. 10. Liu. 9. 
                  but
force and might? In this cauſe this ſaying is of force, that
that warre is iuſt to thoſe, who are compelled thereunto by neceſſitie,
and thoſe weapons are ſacred to thoſe, who haue no other
hope left, but in their weapons.
               
               Now there ſeemeth another inuaſion to be lawfull,It is likewiſe lawfull to in
                     
                        •
                     ade barbarous and wicked people. albeit
no wrong be done: as againſt the Barbarians, or thoſe who
do altogether abhorre our manner of life, and religion, eſpecially
if they be mightie, and eyther haue, or do inuade others:
The reaſon hereof is the puniſhment, and correction
of euill. Saint Auguſtine ſayd very elegantly,Epiſt. 5. 
                  From whome
the libertie of ſinne is taken away, he is ouercome for his owne
benefit. And againe, With thoſe that worſhip God aright,
                  Id. lib. de verb. dom.
                  euen thoſe warres are without offence, which are vndertaken
not thorowe couetouſnes or crueltie, but thorowe a deſire to
make peace, and to the end that wicked perſons may be kept vnder,
& good men may be relieued.
                  A good end is required. I vtterly renounce all other
cauſes, and do adde this, as touching the end, which euen in

a good cauſe, may fall out to be bad. What if thou ſet before
thee reuenge? What if thy intent be glorie, or a kingdome?
Thou doeſt erre: neither are armes to be directed to any other
end (if thou deſire that they be iuſt) but to peace and
defence.Which is peace▪
                   
                  Let vvarre be vndertaken, that nothing but quietneſſe
may be ſought thereby.*Cic. 1. offi. Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  Wiſe men make warre, that they may
haue peace, and endure labour vnder hope of reſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Temeritie ought to be excluded from the beginning of
warre: and ſummarilie, what things ought to be conſidered
in the enterpriſing thereof.
               
               
                  I Haue ſufficiently (according to my power)
debarred thee from iniuſtice, now I will likewiſe
driue thee from Temeritie. For I would
not haue thee raſhly, and vpon euerie iuſt occaſion,Thou mayſt eaſily wrap thy ſelfe in warre.
enter into this field of Mars. It is a
matter of great importance, that requireth
deliberation,Sal. Iug. and that with leaſure. For know this, that a
warre is eaſily begun, but verie hardly left off, and the enterpriſing,
and end thereof,
                  But not ſo eaſily come out of it. 
                  are ſildome in the power of one perſon. And
like as thou maiſt eaſilie caſt thy ſelfe into a well, but canſt
with great difficultie withdraw thy ſelfe from thence, euen
ſo it is in warre,Ibidem. which may be begun by any, though he be a coward,
but cannot be left off but at the pleaſure of the conqueror.
Wherefore if thou art wiſe,Thuc. 1. 
                  take aduiſe of euerie thing which
may happen in warre,
                  All euents are to be forethought on. 
                  contrarie to thy exſpectation, before thou
enter into it.*Liu. 30. 
                  Weigh with thy ſelfe both thine owne ſtrength,
and the force of fortune,
                  For warre is doubtfull. 
                  and that Mars is common in warre.
*Ibidem. 
                  That there will be on either ſide weapons and men: and that
the ſucceſſe of matters, do neuer anſwer our exſpectation, leſſe
then in vvarre.*Sen. Theb. 
                  Although thou carrie with thee all the
ſtrength of Greece,
                  And fortune ruleth in wa
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  although that thy armed ſoldier do ſpread
themſelues farre and ne are, yet the Fortune of vvarre is euer
doubtfull. She hath ſure great force in worldly matters,
                  Liu. 9. 
                  but eſpeciallie
her power is ſeene in martiall affairs. Wherefore albeit

thou truſt in thy riches, thou oughteſt not to change things certaine,
for matters vncertaine.*Sal. Iug. Sen. O
                        •
                     d. Suet. Aug. cap. 25. Liu. 30. 
                  Neither is it fit to trouble a happie
ſtate. What ſhall it auaile thee to fiſh with a golden hooke?
*The dice are caſt for the chee
                        •
                     e matters 
                  The fortune of one hower may ouerturne thoſe things thou alreadie
poſſeſſest, and the honour thou hopeſt for.
               
               
                  Herevnto ad the miſchiefs which do neceſſarily follow
war,
                  Publike ſlaughters are to be forethought on. Spoile. 
                  the comming whereof is not onely miſerable, but euen the
feare thereof doth bring calamitie.*Cic. pro leg. Man. The Plough is then in no
account,Vir. 1. Geor. and other neceſſarie tooles lie cankred & ruſty, the huſbandmen
being fled.*Sen. Hip. Then miſchiefe walketh thorow euery
houſe,Rap
                        •
                     . without limitation or end: Neither doth any wickedneſſe
want example. And that which is worſt of all, what ſhedding
of blood,
                  M
                        •
                     rther. 
                  and what murther is there? it ſtandeth in the temple,Luc.
and the ſ
                     ••
                  pperie vermilion ſtones, are moiſt with much ſlaughter:
There is no reſpect of age.*Sil. 1. And when the weapons are thorow
hot, what is free from their ſlaughter? what is it that ſeemeth
not lawfull to rage? and when the hand is armed and li
                     •
                  ted vp,
what dare it not vndertake?
               
                  Theſe are publike euils,
                  Priuat miſchiefs are to be forethought on. The Prince in war committeth himſelfe to hatred. He is ſayd to be the cauſe of all 
                        •
                     uill. 
                  but what if thy priuat miſhap be
ioined to them? is not thy treaſurie drawne drie?
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. and all thy
monie conuerted to the vſe of ſoldiers? Thou offereſt thy ſelfe
to perils,
                  Quin. Decl. 
                  yea and to reproches For nothing is capable of ſlaunder
and of hard words, ſo much as war. Wherevpon one writ,
When war is once begun,Thuc. 5. it is neceſſarie for Princes to heare euill
ſpeeches paſſe on them, and to be blamed for the loſſe that is done.
And trulie,
                  Tac. in Ag. this is no indifferent condition of war, that all men
challenge to themſelues thoſe things that fall out proſperouſlie:
and what ſo happeneth croſſe and contrarily, they imp
                     •
                  te it to one
alone. Which things if thou thorowly cōſider, wilt thou not
confeſſe,
                  In reſpect of theſe matters, all warre is to be auoided. 
                  that vvar although it be iust,Aug. 19 de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . is to be deteſted? eſpecially
of a godly and chriſtian Prince, who according to the
law of God,
                  S
                        •
                     n. ep. 89. ought to ſpare other mens blood as his owne, and
knoweth that man ought not to vſe man prodigally.Whervnto many ſtir thee vp. 
                  Therefore
hate and contemne thoſe Courtiers,
                  Liu. 21. 
                  who are the furics and
firebrands of war.Tac. 11. Au 
                  In which number ſometimes the Nobilitie,
who thinke to be in ouermuch ſeruitude in time of peace,As Noble men. may be
put.Turbulent perſons. 
                  But very often theſe fierce & turbulent fellowes, whom

thou maiſt ſay,
                  Thuc. 1. are borne to this end, neither to be at quiet themſelues,
nor to ſuffer others to take their reſt. Many times likewiſe
ſtrangers and exiles are of this number,
                  Baniſhed men. 
                  who thorow
hope,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                        •
                     uc. 1. 
                  or feare do ſet forward and entice them to take arms, who
are ſlow and ſlacke therin.Vnder a publike prete
                        •
                     t, but for their priuat cauſe. 
                  For as the poet ſayth, Their priuat
cauſe doth forcemen to enter into wicked war. I ſay their owne
priuat cauſe, not thine, nor the cauſe of thy eſtate, bee not
thou deceiued herein. But why doeſt thou credit them? Be
ſure of this, that in ſuch a caſe, euery one will giue his aduiſe,
but few will put themſelues in danger.Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  With one contrary ſucceſſe,
all their affections will wax faint,1. Hiſt. who at the firſt in a iol
                     •
                  
                  tie
did boaſt of their faith and courage.The name of warre, is furie. The thing it ſelfe moſt foule 
                  Wherfore do not thou
beleeue them but vpon good ground, and with the ſhield of
this ſentence defend thy ſelfe againſt all ſuch falſe perſuaders.
Warre is ſweet to them that haue not had experience therof,
but he that hath taſted it,Pind. apud Stob. his heart doth tremble greatly, as
often as he ſeeth it comming.We ought very ſildome to vndertake war, but vpon neceſſitie. 
                  Alwaies conſider and ſet before
thee, worthy and fortunat Auguſtus (and marke it well) that
he neuer made war vpon any nation,Suet. Aug. cap. 20. but being moued by iuſt and
neceſſarie occaſions. And would to God I might imprint this
affection in thee, to remaine peaceable and quiet without ambition,
and yet not without power ſufficient to defend thee.*Tac. de Morib. Germ. Plin. Pan. Tac. de Mo. Germ. 1. Hiſt. Not
prouoking warre, nor fearing it.*No
                        •
                      to enter into trouble, Or cauſe ſlaughter. That is a more happie thing,
then either thorow hope or feare, to endanger thine own eſtate and
other mens fortunes: and to paſſe ſo far, that either thou must
be forced to periſh, or to become a murtherer, which with good
men is held to be equally as miſerable.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Three things are neceſſarie to make warre. Firſt a triple prouiſion
of 1 monie, of 2 victuals, of 3 armour.
               
               
                  I Haue ſet downe my precepts for the vndertaking
of warre, now I come to the execution
thereof: in which I conſider,What the preparation of waris, and of how many ſorts. or rather want
three things: Prouiſion, Men, and Aduiſe. I call
Prouiſion, Neceſſarie things for vvarre, to whatſoeuer vſe you
will imploy them, as theſe three are, Money, Victuals,

Armour.
                  It is to be made 
                        〈◊〉
                      we vndertake war. For except thou haſt theſe things prepared before
hand, it is but a vaine thing to thinke of warre:Quinct. l. 10 Inſt. 
                  We ought
firſt to make preparation for warre, before we put it in practiſe.
Yea thou oughtest long before to haue all things in a readineſſe,
                  Publius.
                  that thou maist get the victorie in a ſhorter ſpace.
                  Thorow warre, 
                        ••
                     actions are either hatefull or dangerous. For if thou
ſtay thy preparation till the warre begin, either it commeth
out of time, or elſe is vnprofitable, for as a moſt wiſe captain
of Athens did admoniſh,Peric. apud Thuc. lib. 1. 
                  VVarre may better be maintained
where prouiſion is alreadie made for an armie, then where men
are leuied on the ſuddaine. Therefore a prouident prince,Virg. l. 3. c. 3 
                  before
he begin warre, ought carefullie to conſult of the whole armie
and the expence thereof, eſpecially about monie, which is
ſo neceſſarie,Money is the vitall ſpirit of warre. that as the phiſitions do denie that men cannot
walke without ſinewes,
                  Petron. Sat. ſo warre cannot ſet forward without
coine. Money is that which giueth it motion and life, and it
is a true ſaying,Thuc. 1. 
                  The greater part of the affaires done in warre
are brought to paſſe by pollicie, and power of money. For ſurely if
thou looke vnto it,Neither are weapons auaileable without it. 
                  warre conſiſteth not especially in force of
armes,
                  Idem. 1. 
                  but in expence and charge, by the which weapons are made
forcible and profitable. I haue*Lib. 4. ca. 9 before diſcourſed more at
large concerning the force of monie.
               Neither is the neceſſitie of victuals of leſſe vſe,The neceſſitie of victuals. without
the which I will not only ſay there is no means to conquer,
but likewiſe not to liue.Vir. l. 3. c. 26 For, He that maketh no preparation
of neceſſarie corne and victuals, is ouercome without ſtroke. As
for other matters, they may be in time prouided for,
                  Id. 3. cap. 3. 
                  but if order
be not taken before hand for horſemeat and mansmeat, there is
no remedie to be had in time of neceſſitie.
                  A double vſe thereof. Therefore prouiſion
of ſuch things ought to be made, for the double vſe of ſoldiers
and ſtrong holds. That the ſoldier want not while he
is in his march or campe,Tac. Agric. and that thy holds may be fortified
and aſſured with all neceſſarie prouiſion, to endure a long ſiege.
               
               We may lawfully woonder at the foreſight of the Romans
in this behalfe, who for both theſe vſes in moſt towns
had in ſtore for a whole yeare, vineger, wheat, lard, barly,
                  Cap. in Gor. 
                  and
ſtraw:
                  The ſoldier is vntractable. and rightly blame our careleſneſſe at this day, when
beggerie dooth well nigh driue the ſoldiers to all kind of deſperation.
                  Lam. Alex.
                  
                  *A hungrie armie,
                  Caſſiod. 4. Varr. ca. 13. Iamp. Ale. 
                  cannot obſerue militarie diſcipline. And
as that emperour ſayd,Neither will hearken to a commaunder, when he is in want. 
                  there is no obedience in the ſoldior, except
he be well apparelled, armed, ſhod, except he haue plentie of
victuals, and ſomewhat in his purſe.
               
               In the third place I ſpoke of armour, whereby I vnderſtand,The preparatiō of Armor.
that the Prince haue ſome Armorie, where he may
haue certaine number of weapons, both for horſemen and
footmen, as alſo artillerie, pouder, bullets, and ſuch other
kind of munition, which hath bene inuented either in our
age, or in times paſt, to ſtrengthen an armie with.
               Herevnto I ad ſhipping,Of ſhipping, & ſea-matters. Theſe things cauſe the Prince to be feared. And quiet. and all kind of inſtruments belonging
to the ſea, if it be a Maritime countrie, and hath
ports and hauens in it. For it is hard to make prouiſion for
theſe things on the ſuddaine, and they being once in a readineſſe,
they are not onely auaileable in warre, but though
there be no warre.Id. 3. 
                  No man dare prouoke or do iniurie to him,
his kingdome, or people, whom he knoweth prepared, and readie to
reuenge.
                  Id. 2. And let him that deſires to liue in peace, prouide things
neceſſarie for warre.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The ſoldiers which are fit to make warre by land, are of
two ſorts. Horſe-men and foot-men. He maketh a ſhort
queſtion which of them are moſt neceſſarie.
               
               
                  BY men in this place I vnderſtand,What men are, and their deuiſion. 
                  an armed
multitude fit to aſſaile or to reſiſt, which I
deuide into ſoldiers and captains.
               The ſoldiers again are of two ſorts, horſmen
and footmen. For ſurely there is neede
of them both: from whome proceedeth all
the ſtrength of warlike counſailes,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  and without whom, albeit
counſails ſeeme to be of great wiſdome, yet they are but weake.
               
               But whether horſemen or footmen be moſt neceſſarie,Horſemen are better then footmen.
thou mayſt well doubt. Polibius (ſurely a very expert writer,
both in matter of warre and peace) ſeemeth to extoll

horſemen, and to aſcribe the principall force of victorie vnto
them.Lib. 3. Sayth he, It is better for the vſe of warre, to haue the
one halfe of footmen, and to be ſtronger in the number of horſemen,
then to come to handie ſtrokes with the enemie, being of like
number. In ſome kind of skirmiſh I wil not ouermuch withſtād
it, but I deny it in a ſet battaile, wherin I prefer the footmen.But only when they come to fight. During all the warre, footmen are better.
For in the aſſault and beſieging of towns, what great
vſe is there of horſemen? Likewiſe in a hillie countrie, or
where there are hedges?Vig. l. 2. c. 2. 
                  VVhereby it is vnderſtood, that footmen
are more neceſſarie for a ſtate who march in euery place.
Tacit
                        ••
                     s knew this well, and did inſinuat ſo much to the diligent
reader, by a certain people in Germanie named Calti,
(quoth he) All their ſtrength conſiſteth in their footmen,
                  Tac. de Mo. Germ. Ibidem. and he
addeth, thou ſeeſt others go to skirmiſh, but the Catti to warre.
And why ſhould the force of footmen be leſſe euen in skirmiſhes?Yea euen in the fight, if they be good men.
It may be they are longer in getting the victorie,
but more aſſured thereof. For it is the propertie of the force of
horſemen,
                  Ibidem. 
                  either ſpeedily to vanquiſh,
                  To be equalled with horſemen, if they bee well diſciplined and marualled. 
                  or to yeeld. But if footmen
do obſerue a good order, and if they be experienced in war
and well armed, which is done by militarie diſcipline, they
do eaſily receaue the chocke of horſemen.
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. The cheefe iudge of
all theſe things, gaue this ſentence, that footmen,
                  Ari. P
                        •
                     l. 4. cap. 13. 
                  how well ſoeuer
they are armed, without order ſerue to ſmall purpoſe, but
the reaſon and skill of ſetting them in order was vnknowne to
thoſe of former age, therefore they did put all their ſtrength in
their horſemen.
                  Barbarous people delight in horſemen. Learne this, whereſoeuer a battaile is well ordered
and diſpoſed, the footmen do preuaile, but amongſt
rude & barbarous people, it is contrarie.Footmen are a leſſe charge. And it is not without
reaſon nor in vain that we make more account of footmen,
becauſe they are ſooner in a readineſſe, and moreouer, a
greater number of footmen are nouriſhed at leſſe coſt & charge.
                  Vig. 2. ca. 1.
From theſe grounds I conclude,Tac. de Mo. Germ. 
                  that conſidering the matter
generally, the greateſt ſtrength is in footmen.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  That both horſemen and footmen ought to be valiant, otherwiſe
the armie is to ſmall purpoſe. That they are made couragious
two waies, by election and diſcipline, which is at this day neglected,
where vpon he frameth aiuſt and true complaint.
               
               
                  THeſe are the differences of men of war, which
neuertheleſſe I haue ſhewed in vaine,Rather deſire to haue good ſoldiers. except
they be valiant men. For to what vſe ſhould
we put a great number of horſemen and footmē
together, if they be cowards, without skill,
and only a multitude?Sen. 6. de Ben. 31. Liu. 9. Syneſius ep. 79. Know this,Then many in number. 
                  that they
are no ſtrength, but a heauie burthen. And rather a let & hinderance
then an aid. Syneſius did rightly admoniſh vs, that in
warre, hands were more neceſſarie then many names. Aboliſh all
theſe vaine thinges which ſeeme great in the ſight of the
common people:But a few, which are alwaies victorious. becauſe in euery conflict,*Vig. 1. ca. 8. 
                  the number dooth
not ſo much auaile, as the vertue of the men.*Tac. 14. An. 
                  Yea in many
bands of men, there are very few, vvhich know how to fight a
battaile.
               
               We are driuen to come vnto vertue, I meane that thy men
be honeſt and couragious, which thou ſhalt neuer accompliſh,
except thou vſe theſe two inſtruments, Election, and
Diſcipline, the one in getting them, the other in framing
them after they are gotten. Wherein I ſee it will come to
paſſe, that I muſt perſuade many things that are rather out
of vſe, then in vſe.Our warre is moſt corrupt. Without any conſider at aduiſe. What ſhall I do? I do behold our war at
this day with ſorrow, which we may lament and bee aſhamed
of, and the enemie laugh and contemne it. Therefore I
am conſtrained with open voice to lament,Tac. 1. An. and openly to
hate the miſchiefe incident to our war, and to ſet before thee
the image thereof in ſuch ſort, as I would not reproch, but
remedie this our age.
               Firſt of all, what forme haue we of election?For they leuie the moſt abiect perſons, or the worſer ſort of men. Surely
none at all,Ex Galbi dicto 1. Hiſt 
                  They buy the ſoldior, they chuſe him not. A little
money is offered them, the drum ſtriketh vp, and then ſome

few ignorant people meet, which know not one another.*Liu. 21. 
                  They
are the execrements of the places they dwell in.*Curt. 9. Tac. 3. An. 
                  Who cannot
but do euill thorow pouertie, and the many crimes they are charged
with:*Egeſip. 4. c. 4 Pſeud. Sal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Being accuſtomed to theft, and inſolent in warre.
And that I may knit vp all in a word,Corrupted with vices. 
                  VVhoſe tongue is vain,
whoſe hands are euer at pillage, whoſe throat is vnſatiable,
whoſe feet are ſtill readie to runne away, which vnhoneſt things
cannot honeſtly be named.
               
               Surely the moſt part of thē are ſuch (God forbid I ſhould
blame al) but if there be any mingled with thē, that are better
marked, they are eaſily withdrawne and corrupted with
the reſt of the dregges, and this may be ſpoken touching election.
               
                  Now what ſhall I ſay concerning diſcipline?
                  Without any diſcipline. therein we
obſerue not ſomuch as the forme thereof,Ci. 5. de rep. nor the verie outward
ſhow.They prouoke one another to do euill. 
                  And as in times paſt they were woont to ſtriue who ſhould
be moſt vertuous and modeſt,Tac. 3. Hiſt. now the quarrell is who ſhall be
moſt impudent and diſſolute.*2. Hiſt. All things now are out of order,
and as though they were ouercome with drinke, more fitter for
the facts and feaſts of Bacchus, then for Mars and militarie
diſcipline,They torment the husbandman. 
                  Yea this is not onely done at the ſieges of townes,3. Hiſt. and
amidſt the armies, but in all garriſons and fortreſſes, they are idle
and ſlouthfull, fearfull to none but to their hoſts.
               They abandon themſelues to luſt,They eat. to gluttonie, and to
riot all the night.*4. Hiſt. Curt. 7. 
                  Then vvhen they are vvell tippled at
the Table, they are readie to beſiege another Alexander:
*They drinke, and then they fight. Then doe they extoll their owne ſtrength,Ibidem. and contemne the
ſmall number of their ennemies.Before the enemie they faint. 
                  But it is a ſhame to ſpeake,
when they are readie to bee aſſayled,
                  Sal. Frag. then neither their
heart, nor their eares, nor their tongue, is able to do their endeuour.They flie.
                  So that in them is verified that ſaying of Homere,
That their heart is in their heele:They are couragious in ſpoile, and cowards in fight. 
                  being indeed as hares
that are armed.*Iliad. 
                        •
                     . Carnificij dictum de ſuis milit. liu. 
                  As they ſhew ſome value, to deſtroy their neighbours
ground, to burne their houſes and take their cattell:
So are they as ſearfull in an armie, vvhere the Enſignes
are diſplayed.Careleſſe of their reputatiō. 
                  For they being thus trouped together,
and choſen after that ſort,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. their is neither glorie in their

victory,Sal. Iug. nor diſhonor in their flight. To be ſhort, this our war,
is an army rather ready to fight with the toung, then with the
hand: which proyeth vppon their friends, and becommeth the
ſpoyle of their ennemies.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Of the choiſe of men of warre: and firſt a queſtion made, whether
ſtrangers, or the natiue ſubiect ought to be preferred?
The ſubiects are by good reaſon to be choſen before ſtrangers.
               
               
                  WHo ſeeth not that theſe foule diſhoneſt
things are the ouerthrowe both of warre,
and of the eſtate?Theſe things ought to be altered. Thou oughteſt ô Prince
to cure theſe ſores, for it is thy part, to inuent
new,
                  Vegeti. 1. Cap. 28. 
                  for the ſafegard of the common wealth,
and restore the olde customes: Wherefore
bring theſe two things in vſe,Call thou them backe by Election, & Diſcipline. What election is. which I haue already noted,
Election, and Diſcipline, the only foundations & vnderprops
of iuſt and true warre. I call Election, A choice made with
iudgement, of thoſe which are fit to beare armes, and that amongſt
thy owne ſubiects.
                  Whether ſtrangers and mercenarie ſouldiers ought to be choſen. I do expreſſely adde, that choice
ſhould be made amongſt thine owne ſubiects. For how can
I allowe of the forraine ſouldier? Or what certaine choice
can be made of them? I confeſſe, that cuſtome hath brought
it in vſe, but not reaſon: and dare alwaies preferre the ſouldier
naturally borne, farre before the ſtranger.The Author conformaable to reaſon doth deny it. For there is ſcarce any truſt in them. Theſe reaſons
inducing me thereunto. Strangers are many times
treacherous, and do turne from thee where they may receaue a
greater pay,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  not regarding what is iuſt and reaſonable. This
ordinarie cuſtome hath gotten hold on them,Lucan. 
                  that they ſet
their hands to ſale, and thinke it lawfull to holde with them who
will geue them moſt money.
               
               They are likewiſe rebellious;Nor any patience. and they do not loue to be
commaunded to be gouerned,
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt 
                        •
                      1. Hiſt. 
                  but to do all things as they liſt: and
oſtentimes, euen at the inſtant and point of execution,
                  In the conflict they are cold
                        •
                     . thou
ſhalt ſee them mutine, and moue ſedition,
                  3. Hiſt. or elſe euen in the

battaile,Or 
                        •
                     earefull. 
                  without any ſhame of cowardiſe,
                  1. Ann. 
                  without any care of
their leaders, to turne their backes, and flie. And what mauaile
is this?In Agric. 
                  ſeeing they are not brideled with that faith and
affection, to leade them in de
                     •
                  de with a will: or to perſwade
them, that they ought expoſe their bloud to eſtabliſh the dominion
of ſtrangers:
                  Ibid. therefore cōmonly,Liu. 6. 
                  they do threaten, more
then hurt. Beſides, they are burthenſome to the husbandman,
and their faſhion is,Hartfull to the ſubiects. 
                  to burne, to waſte,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  to make boote of
all things, as if they were amongſt ſtrangers, or in the enemies
Citties.*Curt. 3. 
                  They are the deſtruction of the countrey, which they
ſhould preſerue from ſpoyle.
                  Oſ great charger. Yea, they will robbe the Prince
himſelfe,Cic. 1. ad Att. being the verie horſeleaches (as it were) of his treaſurie:
whoſe principall exploits at this day,Iuuen. Sat. 8. 
                  is euen to ſucke
the marrowe out of the King bones.
               
               But in the ſouldier naturallie borne,Naturall ſouldiers are more faithfull. More obedient. the matter is a caried
after a better, and milder manner,Curt. 10. 
                  who ſtandeth not ſo much
vppon his courage, as vppon his faith:
                  Ibid. To whome, obedience
and patience to be commaunded, is held more deere, then to ſtrangers.
He is valiant in battaile:More valiant in ſight. 
                  geuing the firſt onſet,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  yeelding
his bodie to woundes, that his Generals Standard may not be
ouerthrowne.
                  Thorow loue or reuerence of their Prince. For by nature,Ibid. in many Nations and Citties, a
certaine generall conſent to defend and loue their Kings, is ingrafted
in them. Which name, thoſe countries that are gouerned
by them,
                  Curt. 10. 
                  do reuerence as a God.
               
               To be ſhort, the naturall ſouldier is more modeſt, and
doth reuerence,More kinde to their countrie. and loue his natiue countrie.
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. And as I doe
deeme, the ſouldier that is borne in thy owne countrie,
                  Curt. 10. is in
euerie reſpect to be preferred before ſtrangers. Yet do not
I altogether ſo condemne them,Yet ſometimes mercenarie ſouldiers are pro
                        •
                     itable. but if a greater force or neceſſitie
were readie to aſſaile thee, I would perſuade thee
to haue recourſe vnto thy neighbours,Tac. 6. An. who are accuſtomed
to yeeld ayde for readie pay.
                  But they ought to be of leſſe number. But I ſo vnderſtand thou ſhouldeſt
receaue ſuccour from them, that the principall ſtrength
and force of thine Army do conſiſt of thine owne ſubiects,
and that ſtrangers do not make the bodie thereof, but ſome
certaine member.Liu. 25. For that is alwayes carefullie to be looked
vnto, by prouident Captaines, and auncient examples, are in

ſtead of inſtructions to them, that they geue no ſuch credit to
forraine force, that they admit a greater power of them in their
army, then their owne proper ſtrength.
                  Where there are many, oftentimes either they leaue, or betray thee. Otherwiſe take heede
leaſt thou be not driuen to lament in earneſt, though too
late:Ariſtophin. in Veſp. and that old prouerbe be proued true, that the ſtake
that vnderpropped the Vine, hath deceaued it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Certaine Obiections, and thoſe things refuted, which are
ſpoken againſt the naturall ſouldier. That the naturall
ſouldier is proper for Kings, that the ſtranger is
ſit for Tyrants.
               
               
                  BVt ſome will ſay,Vege
                        •
                     . 1. Cap. 11. 
                  There are diuers Nations
more fit for warre then other,
                  The firſt obiection concerning the naturall courage of ſome nations. 
                  and the
climate helpeth much, not only to the ſtrength
of bodie, but likewiſe to the courage of the
minde: Therefore it were better, leauing
the naturall ſouldier,The ſecond, concerning feare of rebellion. to hire mercenarie
men out of ſome warlike nation. Moreouer,
there may be danger to the King in his owne ſubiects,Liu. 27.
if he arme them: and it may be doubted, that they will
not perſiſt in their faith and duty:
                  Ibidem. and peraduenture they will
preſume to attempt againſt the maiestie of his perſon and eſtate.
I knowe theſe things are commonly caſt, and blowne into
the eares of Princes: but ſurely it is eyther maliciouſly, or
falſely done. For concerning the firſt, I do not denie but
it is trulie ſpoken,An anſwer
                        •
                      to the firſt. and ſo is this likewiſe, that out of euery
quarter of this our Europe (for which I frame my booke)
if men of wiſedome, and experience, haue the charge of this election,
                  Veget. 2. Cap. 18.
                  men fit for warre, may ſoone be aſſembled together.
For Europe yeeldeth men euery where,Id. lib. 2. Cap. 18. 
                  who in all manner
diſcipline, and arte millitarie, will eaſily equall thoſe old ſouldiers,
who haue conquered the whole world. Let only diſcipline
and good order bee vſed, of the which I will ſhortly
ſpeake.
               
                  
Now as concerning feare,An answere to the ſecond. proceeding of the ſubiects, it
is ſurely altogether vaine, this perſuaſion came from them,
                  Plin. Pane.
                  who committing crueltie and hostilitie, were in continuall feare:
yea I ſay this opinion proceeded from Tyrants:Tirants vnarm
                        •
                      their ſubiects. 
                  For the
Prince which ſtandeth in doubt of his ſubiects,
                  Plato. 8. de legib. 
                  will not willingly
ſuffer them to be honeſt men, to become rich, mightie, couragious,
nor in any ſort geuen to martiall matters.
                  Kings truſt them, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      faith. But our Prince is
free from ſuch conceipt, or ſuſpicion, for whoſe ſake he
being good, his good ſubiects will offer them ſelues to the edge
of the ennemyes ſword:
                  
                     •
                  
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem. 
                  and will hazard them ſelues and their
ſubſtance, whither ſouer the conſeruation of their Prince ſhall
drawe them.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Amongst ſouldiers, who they are wee are to make choiſe of.
That there are two kindes of them, ordinary ſouldiers, and
ſouldiers of aide: and both of them deſcribed by them ſelues.
               
               
                  THerefore make choiſe of thy ſouldiers amōgſt
thine owne ſubiects: but as I added, with
iudgement: which conſiſteth in theſe two
points, whome thou ſhouldeſt chooſe, and in
what ſort.
               Concerning the firſt point this is my opinon, that two
ſorts of ſouldiers ought to be enrolled: ordinary ſouldiers,
& ſouldiers of ayde.
                  The ordinarie ſouldier. I call them ordinary ſouldiers, who make
dayly proſeſſion of armes, as their proper function and vocation:
Souldiers of ayde thoſe, who do rarely goe to warre, and do remayne
ſometimes at home,
                  The ſouldier of ayde. 
                  and are occupied about other matters.
My will is, that thoſe of the firſt ſort, were none other, but
certaine perfect and true ſouldiers,The prayſe and vſe of the firſt. and as I may ſay, the very
nourice children of Mars, who being choſen to this onely
hope, may be framed in the exerciſe and handling of all kinde
of weapons,
                  Veget. 1. Cap. 1. 
                  in the diſcipline, and vſe of warre, who might be as
an inuincible army: and for the moſt part fight for their honor
and reputation.
                  Tac. de Mor. Germ. Ibidem. Such men are moſt neceſſary for a Prince,
and are in peace an honor vnto him,
                  Many of them are not to be enroched for two respects. 
                  in warre his defence. But I
thinke it not needfull, that he entertaine any great number

of them: not only becauſe I diſlike vnneceſſarie charges
(which will growe to an infinite ſumme in the dayly entertainement
of the ordinarie ſouldier, but likewiſe, becauſe it
breedeth commotions. For ſurely, where ſuch a multitude
is,1. Hiſt. they are eaſily drawne to enterpriſe newe matters: both by
their owne diſpoſition, and nature, as alſo in the truſt they
put in their owne ſtrength.
                  Ibid. And it may come to paſſe, that
againſt the order of duty,
                  1. Ann. 
                  againſt the right of diſcipline, ſometimes,
they may meditate on ſome outrage.
               
               Concerning which matters,Neyther likewiſe in peace ought they to be together in one place. there is this caution, that they
be neither too many in multitude, nor alwayes together in
one place.1. Hiſt. My meaning herein is, that when there is no war,
it were ſufficient for them to knowe, what companies and regiments
they were to ſerue vnder:
                  Ibid. For an army ſeperated by great
diſtance of place (which is the ſafeſt way to preſerue the fidelitie
of the ſouldier) can not ſo eaſily conspire miſchiefe, and ioyne
their force together.
               
               But it may be demaunded:How many ought to be choſen according to the opinion of the author. of what number then ought
theſe ordinarie ſouldiers to conſiſt? It can hardly be limited
(the matter depending for the moſt part of the occaſion
of times, as likewiſe of the greatneſſe of euery kingdome)
yet will I in generall tearmes and roughly, preſcribe it after
this manner.
               In a meane eſtate, a legion or band of 6000. footmen, with
three wings of horſemen, euery wing contayning 400. will
ſuffice. In a mightie kingdome as many more. I haue of ſet
purpoſe geuen greater allowance of horſemen then footemen,The chiefeſt care ought to be for horſemen.
becauſe thou mayeſt eaſily ſupply the want of footemen
out of thy ſouldiers of aide, amongſt whome thou ſhalt
finde good & able men: but with thy horſemen it is not ſo,
for they had need of time & leaſure,Liu. 27. 
                  to exerciſe feats of armes,
and to manage their horſes. Let theſe ſerue thee for thy ordinarie
ſouldiers.The deſcription and vſe of ſouldiers of aide. But it is likewiſe neceſſary for thee to fortifie
thy ſelf with thy ſouldiers of aide: for it is manifeſt ſuch
a ſmall company is ouerweake to withſtand euery force the
enemy ſhall make againſt thee. Theſe I ſpeake of, are none
other, then certaine bands of aide, alwayes in a readines, for a

double purpoſe: either, that thou mayſt ioyne them in battaile
with thy ordinarie ſouldiers, or diſtribute them for the
garriſons of thy townes.The
                        ••
                      diſtin
                        •
                     tion fro
                        •
                      ordinarie ſouldiers. They differ from the ordinarie
ſouldiers in this, that they are martiall men all the dayes of
their life,Tacit. de Morib. Germ. 1. Hiſt. and are diſtinct from others for the vſe of skirmiſhes
and battailes onely, as munition and armour is reſerued for war.
The ſouldiers of aid, are yong men, trained vp in martiall exerciſe,
& inſtructed in the order of military diſcipline, for a ſeaſon.
Who in peace,In peace they liue to themſelues. In warre they go to warre. do follow their owne buſines,Sal. ad Caeſ. 
                  and labour in
their ſeuerall vocations, and callings: and in time of warre, are
aſſembled together againe, and do ſerue thee for the ſame or
like vſe that mercenarie ſouldiers do: but ſo much with
more cōmendation,They are obedient. that they will not only obey their leader
with more reuerence,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  and concord: but likewiſe they will be
leſſe charge vnto thee,Not hurtfull. becauſe it is in euery reſpect a matter
of leſſe expence,
                  Veget. 1. Cap. 28. 
                  to traine vp thine own ſubiects in feates of armes,
then to hire ſtrangers with money:
                  More readie then ſtrangers. for that which they cōſume
in comming to thee, and in their returne, if it be employed
in arming & exerciſing thine owne ſubiects, thou ſhalt haue
a principall militarie force in a readineſſe: for the ſtrangers
are to be ſent vnto a farre off, and oftentimes to be expected
with hazard, and loſſe: thy ſubiects are at home, and with
one Proclamation are aſſembled & called together.They are to be leuied out of villages. But frō
whence wilt thou prouide theſe ſouldiers? ſurely out of villages:
for I do exclude great townes for two reſpects. The
firſt is,Cittizens are readie to moue commotions. Thorow the truſt they repoſe in the place of their abode. that the ruſticke husbandman is more fit for war, as
I wil declare in the next Chapter. The ſecond is, becauſe I
do likewiſe prouide for the ſafegard and ſecuritie of the
Prince. For it cannot be denied, that men waxe more fierce
and arrogant by handling weapons, which if thou in euery
place put into the hands of Cittizens, I feare, leaſt they enioying
the commoditie of thoſe places, and the ſtrength of
walles,Being be
                        •
                     t thereunto by nature. do peraduenture begin to rebell:
                  Tac. 3. An. as men are wont
with hate of things preſent,
                  Ibid. 1 Hiſt. 
                  and deſire of alteration: and ſo an
occaſion may be layd open euen againſt thy ſelfe. Which thou
ſhalt not need to dread in men of the countrie,Men of the countrie are not ſo. it being farre
from them, as wel becauſe they are of a more mild nature, as

alſo they being ſcattered, and aſſembled from many places,
they can not ſo ſuddainly make their complot and meet together.
Neither is my meaning otherwiſe, concerning ſouldiers
of aide, then that in euery village, and hamlet (as the
ſame is either inhabited with few, or much people) ſome 5.
ſome 10. or ſome 20. may be enrolled, & inſtructed in militarie
diſcipline, which may in time of war, repaire to their
companies and regimēts.The number of the ſouldiers of aide by the authors iudgement. And I ſee no reaſon why I ſhould
not perſuade, that there ſhould be in a readines a great number
of them,Sal. Iug. for in deed it is the way, both to make prouiſion
for warre, and to ſpare thy treaſurie. If thou makeſt choiſe of
30. or 40. thouſand of theſe in ſeuerall cōpanies (ſo I would
deuide them, & not into legions) I would deeme it very neceſſary:
yea if preparation be made of a greater number,Which for the moſt part he would haue to be footemen. but
this choiſe ſhould only be made of footemen: for I would
not commit or aſſigne a troupe of horſemen to ploughmē,
it befitteth better the Gentleman,Liu. 1. and thoſe of the wealthier
ſort, and is ouergreat a burthen to poore men. Of this moſt profitable
thing, there is more ſpoken, and in more ample maner
in the notes which do immediatly follow.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  That both ordinary ſouldiers, and ſouldiers of aid ought rightly
to be choſen, and fiue obſeruations ſet downe in order, which
ought to be in the ſouldier accompliſhed in vertue.
               
               
                  I Haue told thee whome thou oughteſt to chooſe,Choiſe, election, and iudgement, is the chiefeſt part.
the other part of iudgement remaineth, which
teacheth thee in what manner thou ſhouldeſt
make thine election. Neyther oughteſt thou, at
aduēture, or without diſcretion, accept of al thoſe that offer
thēſelues vnto thee:Sen. Ep. For we ſee euen in an army of martiall mē,
they make ſcruple to chooſe out thoſe, who are to ſuſtaine labour,
and put themſelues in danger. Is it a thing to be maruailed at?
The ſtrength of the ſtate, and the foundation of the name of the
Romaines (as Vigetius ſayth) conſiſteth in the firſt triall of thoſe
that are choſen. By ſo much the more this part of Election is
with great care to be looked vnto,Veg. 1. Ca. 7. Cap. 2. 
                  ſeeing it is manifeſt,
that both cowards, and men of value, are borne in all places.
                  There are certaine true notes of a ſouldier.
                  
Thoſe of the firſt ſort, by diligēt inquiry are to be reiected,
and the other to be accepted, if thou deſireſt thy warre to
be proſperous, and inexpugnable.
               Now there are certaine coniectures to be made, and
as it were infallible markes of an able and ſtout martiall
man, by which thou mayſt make choiſe of him, and not be
deceyued. I reduce them into fiue in number, 1. his Countrie,
2. his age, 3. his ſtature of bodie, 4. his minde, 5. his manner
of life or education.
               
               
                  Vnder the name of his Countrie, it is manifeſt that we
vnderſtand the place where each man is borne,
                  1. His Countrie 
                  and bred:
which with diſcretion, in this election thou oughteſt to
conſider, becauſe indeede, the hardnes of the place doth likewiſe
harden the courage of men. *Curt. 7. Sen. Ep. The valianteſt ſouldier is
bred in craggie and rockie places: Thoſe that are borne in Citties,They that dwel in townes are not good.
and where the ayre is milde, are more faint and ſlouthfull,
wherefore I vtterly refuſe them in eyther ſort of warre:
For that multitude bred vp in Citties,Tac. 1. An. accuſtomed to wantonneſſe,They are wanton.
are impatient of labour: beeing geuen to traffique,
which maketh them effeminate:
                  Effeminate. 
                  and it is alwayes ſeene,
that by how much men are more rich, and geuen to liue at
their pleaſure, by ſo much are they vnfit for warre. *3. Ann. Veg. 1. Ca. 3. Wherefore
according to our iudgement,
                  Men of the Countrie make good ſouldiers. the ſtrength of thy army,
ſeemeth beſt to be ſupplied, out of the fieldes. I allowe of that
oracle of Cato, both ſtrong men, and moſt valiant ſouldiers,1. De re ruſt. Cap. 1.
are borne amongſt huſbandmen.Being painefull. 
                  And by experience wee
proue it true, that the countrie fellowe who is bred in the
open ayre,Veget. 1. Cap. 3. Sal. Iug. and brought vp in trauaile, is moſt fit for warre.
Who is accuſtomed as well to endure the heate of the Sommer,Of an able body.
as the colde of the winter, to ſleepe on the ground, and together
to endure both want, and labour. *Caeſ. 1. de bel. Gall. Marchants do ſeldome
traffique with them,Without traffique. and bring vnto them ſuch things, as do
make the minde of men effeminate. *Sall. Catil. To ſuch, trauaile and paine
is not vnaccuſtomed, no place will ſeeme difficult and weariſome
to them,Without daintineſſe. the armed enemy will not daunt them. *Veget. 1. Cap. 3. For I knowe
not how, but they do after a ſort leaſt feare death, who were leaſt
acquainted with the pleaſures of this life.
               
                  
                  Wherefore of theſe thou ſhalt make thine election,
                  Likewiſe the beſt amongſt them, are they that dwell in ſorteſts or mountains, or neare the ſea. 
                  but
eſpecially of ſuch as dwell in woods and forreſts,Tac. 6. An. who are moſt
accustomed to hardneſſe and pacience. Or elſe they that dwell
furtheſt North,
                  De Morib. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  and towards the ſea, who are with more courage
ſtirred vp, by reaſon of the climate, and the very hardneſſe
of the ſoile.
               
                  The ſecond marke I obſerued,
                  Veg. 1. ca. 4. 
                  is his age,
                  2. His age. 
                  wherein, if the
ancient custome be kept, no man is ignorant but choiſe ſhould bee
made, when he is entring into his full growth, which reaſon it
ſelfe doth teach.
                  Ibidem. For thoſe things which are learned of young
men,Young men are to be choſen. They which are ſo far ſtricken in years, are not fit. are not only conceaued ſooner, but digeſted better. Wherefore
according vnto the rule of the Romanes, I would perſuade
this election to be made at ſeuenteene yeares of age,
or ſomewhat vpwards. For if thou intermingle theſe men
which are elder and more ſtrucken in years with them, thou
doeſt likewiſe make a medlie of inueterat vices, ſuch as are
the proper euils of this our age,Plin. Pane. want of skill, and ſtubbornneſſe,
and contempt in obeying. Surely I am of this opinion in this election,
                  Cic. Philip.
that we ought not ſo much to make choiſe of old men, as
of thoſe, who in time may prooue good old ſoldiers. For it
is not the continuance of age,Veg. 2. c. 23. or the number of years, which doth
teach vs the art of warre, but a continuall meditation of the exerciſe
thereof. *Id. 3. ca. 10. And it is eaſier to inſtruct new ſoldiers in vertue,
then to draw them backe thereto, who are paſt it.
               
                  The third marke is the ſtature of his body,
                  3. His body. 
                  which I know
ſome are delighted to haue very great, and exceeding the
ordinarie ſort of men in height, as C. Marius, who refuſed
thoſe young ſoldiers, who were not ſix feet, or at the leaſt,Veg. 1. ca. 5. Front. 4. Stratag. c. 1 fiue
feet and a halfe in height. And as it is ſayd,
                  Some men approue them of great ſtature. king Pirrhus gaue
charge to his Muſter-maſter, Make thou choiſe (quoth he) of
thoſe that are of a large ſtature, and I will make them valiant.
Neither do I vnconſideratly ſtep aſide, and decline from
theſe great men, yet in my opinion,
                  Veg. 1. ca. 5. Id. cap. 6. there ought not ſo much
regard be had to their ſtature, as to their ſtrength. And it is
more auaileable to haue valiant ſoldiers, then of ſo large and
great bodie. The middle ſize in a ſoldier pleaſeth me well,
                  The Author thoſe of a meane pitch.
                  yet in ſuch ſort, that in the choiſe of them conſideration bee had,Liu. 7.
                  
of their countenaunce,Veg. 1. ca. 6. Tac. de Mo. Germ. their eies, and of all the conformitie of
their members.Rather drawing towards leanneſſe and quick ſpirited, then 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & ſlow. 
                  For in whomſoeuer there is hardneſſe of bodie,
a well knitting together of the mēbers, a threatning countenance,
in him there is greater courage of mind.Veg. 1. ca. 6. 
                  I ſay, a well knitting together
of the bodie, for I do not well allow them that are foggie,
who haue their bodies filled vp with ſuperfluous fleſh. For it
is nimbleneſſe,Id. 1. cap. 7. which ioined with exerciſe, maketh the ſoldier a
ſtout warrier, which thoſe mightie bodies, that are puffed vp,Tac. 2. Hiſt.
                  ſurely cannot attaine vnto.
               
               
                  The fourth marke, is his mind.
                  Veg. 1. ca. 7. 
                  For this is it (as Vigetius
ſayth) wherein the ſafegard of all the common wealth conſiſteth,4 His mind.
that choiſe be made of young ſouldiers, not ſo much in regard of
their bodie, as that they be of an excellent ſpirit. *Cic. 2. de Or. The mind
being quicke and readie, ſubtill and aduiſed, maketh men vnable
to be conquered.
               
                  Make thou then choiſe of them that are bold and full of
courage,
                  Valiaunt men are beſt. that repoſe a ſouldier like confidence in themſelues.
*Veg. 1. ca. 8. Sal. Iug. Luc. 1. To whom ſweat of body, the duſt of the aire, and ſuch things,
may ſeeme more pleaſaunt then feaſts or banquets. *Who are careleſſe of their end. Who do in
no ſort apprehend the greatest feare, the dread of death: which
maketh them willing to runne vpon the edge of the ſword, and
readie to receaue their end.And couetous of honour. 
                  To be ſhort,
                  Sal. Iug. 
                  who feare nothing
but the blot of diſhonour, which aboue all things I would
haue them dread.
                  Modeſt. 
                  The Greeke writer ſayd truly,
                  Plut. in Agi & Cleo. They
which do most of all feare the lawes, are most bold vpon the enemie,
and they vvhich do most ſtand in aw of their reputation,
vvill least feare to endure any thing.Veg. 1. ca. 7. For honestie maketh a
ſouldier well framed, and ſhame while it keepeth him from flying,
giueth him the victorie.
               The laſt marke is his life, that is, with that kind of gaine,
ſcience,5. His life. They which are brought vp in effeminate trades are vnfit. or craft he maintaineth himſelfe with. For this doth
not a little either ſoften or harden them, breed ſlouthfulnes,
or fierceneſſe in them. Therefore I hold this, that all fiſhers,
                  Ibidem.
                  fowlers, cookes, weauers, and all thoſe which do meddle with any
thing belonging to women,
                  They which ſit continually, are vnfit. 
                  are to be expelled from a camp. Moreouer,
the common ſort of trades-men,
                  Liu. 8. 
                  which do get their liuing as
they fit,
                  Likewiſe baſe and defamed perſons. 
                  are vnfit for war. Nay in times paſt, the ſeruants which

were diſmiſſed from their maſters, or condemned by iudgement,
or of a diſfamed ſtocke or life, were not admitted to
ſerue in warre,Veg. 1 ca. 7. but now it is otherwiſe, when ſuch whome no
ma
                        •
                     ſter will entertaine, are choſen to beare armes, which is the
reaſon that your armies now adaies, are ſo diſtayned with
vice,Tac. 15. An. that whatſoeuer may corrupt any thing, and be corrupted,
is ſeene in them.
               
               
                  This is all I had to intreat, concerning election,
                  Apt men are to be choſen in this election. 
                  except
it be that I do likewiſe warne thee of two things. The firſt,
that thou deeme it not an office of ſmall moment,Veg. 1. ca. 7. Ibid. or ſlightly to be
giuen in charge to euery one: But that with great circumſpection
thou take care amongst the worthier ſort, to chuſe the moſt able
young men.
               
                  The ſecond is,
                  Which is to be renewed. 
                  that thou continue often to renue thy election.
For (whether it be by death, by running away, or by
leaue, thy number will be diminiſhed) and except euery yeare,Id 3. ca. 3.
yea euery month, order be giuen that a freſh ſupplie of youth, may
ſucceed and furniſh the place of thoſe that are abſent, how great
ſoeuer thy armie be, it will come to nothing.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  A dicourſe of true and ſeuere diſcipline. The ſame greatly
commended. He maketh foure parts therof, in reſpect
of inſtruction. The ſeuerall expoſition of them.
               
               
                  
                     BVt now I come to Militarie diſcipline,The profit of diſcipline. the
cheefe glorie and eſtabliſhment of an Empire,Val. 2. ca. 7.
which is a moſt ſure bond: *Ibid. Out of vvhoſe boſome
ſo many triumphs haue iſſued.And the neceſſitie thereof. 
                  Of the
which an Emperor ſaid moſt truly vnto
his ſoldiers,
                  Alex. Seu. apud Lamp. the diſcipline of our anceſters doth
conſerue the common wealth, which if it decay, we ſhall loſe both
the name and the Romane Empire.
               For what is election without diſcipline? It dooth at the
leaſt wiſe ſind out ſuch as may become good ſouldiers, but
diſcipline frameth thē to be ſuch, & doth ſtil preſerue thē in
that ſtate of goodnes.Veg. 3. c. 26. 
                  Nature bringeth forth ſome few valiant

men, but good order thorow induſſtrie maketh many more. But at
this day I will not ſay that it languiſheth amongſt vs,It is too much 
                        〈…〉
                     . but it
is euen dead, neither is it only corrupt, but none at all. So
that if we will any whit eſtabliſh it againe, or bring it into
fauour,1. Cap. 8. 
                  the ancient cuſtome is to be drawne from hiſtories and
good authors: and eſpecially from the Romanes. For what
Nation hath in better ſort,It is to be fetched from the Romans. and more firmly reuerenced it?
Yea the diſcipline of warre was of more antiquitie amongſt the
Romanes,
                  Id. 19. de Capt. 
                  and more deere vnto them then the loue of their children.
                  Who vſed it moſt luckily.
By which they receiued great profit, for if we looke into
it, we ſhal find, that that alone being ſeriouſly entertained by
them, got the Romane empire, the dominiō ouer the whole world.
                  Valer. 2. c. 9
For which cauſe, ô worthie Prince,Ibidem. 
                  thou oughtest bend thy
ſelfe, with all thy indeuour, to reuoke this diſcipline vſed in ancient
time of warre, to thy Empire. I according to my power
aiding thee, and marching before thee.
               Now,The deſcriptiō of diſcipline. The parts. & Vſe thereof. I call Diſcipline, a ſeuere conforming of the ſoldier to
value, and vertue. The parts or offices thereof (being diuerſlie
diſperſed, I will reduce into a certaine forme of doctrine)
and do make them foure in number, 1. Exerciſe, 2. Order,
3. Constraint, 4. Examples.
               
                The two formoſt do eſpecially belong to Value, the third
to Vertue, the fourth vnto them both.
               
                  By Exerciſe I vnderſtand, that thou dayly do accuſtome
the choiſe ſoldier to the handling of his weapon, and to labour.
                  The deſcriptiō of diſcipline. The parts. & Vſe thereof.
                  The very name it ſelfe doth moue this: for Exerciſe is
ſayd to be that,Varro. 4. De L. L. which by vſe maketh men the better. The matter
it ſelfe,
                  Exerciſe is required in all things. 
                  and reaſon doth perſuade it. For ſeeing that to
bring al arts to perfection, we had need of ſome vſe and exerciſe,
why ſhould we neglect it in this militarie ſcience,
without the which,Eſpecially in warre. It cauſeth vs to vſe our weapons. It giueth victorie. other arts cannot conſiſt?Veg 3. in praef. Vulcat. in Auid. Caſſio Caſſius was
woont to ſay, It is a miſerable thing to ſee wreſtlers, hunters, and
fencers exerciſe themſelues, & not ſoldiers, whoſe trauaile would
be the leſſe, if they were accuſtomed vnto it. Yea, their labour
would proſper the better. For in all conflicts,Veg. cap. 1. the multitude and
vnskilfull value of men, doth not ſo much giue victorie, as art and
exerciſe doth aſſure it. Wherefore thou oughteſt to haue care,

that thy ſouldiers,2. Cap. 23. whether they be ordinarie, or ſouldiers of aid,
be dayly exerciſed. But in what manner?
               
               
                  Firſt,
                  2. Cap 8. the young ſouldier ought by daily vſe to be trained vp in
the exerciſe of his weapon:Soldiers are to be exerciſed in feat
                        •
                      of armes. 
                  and that according to the ancient
examples,
                  Veg. & alij. by ancient and experienced captains, that they may
with an able ſtrength, caſt their darts aright:1. Cap. 4. 
                  that they may
know how to handle their ſhield, and to auoid and defend the enemies
blowes;Ibidem. 
                  that with a ſouldierlike pace they may learne to
march ſpeedily,And to be accuſtomed to march. And trained vp to euery kind of conflict. and in ranke. In ſuch ſort, that they forſake not
their places,Cap. 9. nor diſturbe thoſe of other ranks. To be ſhort, that
they may before hand in their muſters,Cap. 4. bee acquainted with all
things,Cap. 1. which may happen either in a maine battell, or in skirmiſhes.Liu. 26.
                  Wherein it were auaileable ſometimes,
                  Fained skirmiſhes are neceſſarie. the one did aſſaile
the other, in manner as if two armies gaue the onſet the one to the
other.With ſome reward to thoſe that behaue themſelues well. 
                  Likewiſe there ought ſome prize & reward be giuen
to the troups of horſemen, which do beſt manage their horſe,Xenop. in Ageſilao. and
to the companies of foot, which ſhow themſelues moſt skilfull in
the handling of their weapon. Let this bee the exerciſe of
Armes.
               But I adde that they ſhould be trained vp likewiſe in trauaile,The ſouldier likewiſe is to be exerciſed in labour.
that the young ſouldier may be brought vp to daylie
labour,
                  Veg. 1. c. 3. 
                  to runne, to carrie burthens, and to endure the heat of the
ſunne and the duſt. Theſe things do harden the ſouldier,Which hardneth the ſouldier. and
an armie doth profit by labour,
                  3. Cap. 26. 
                  by ſlouth it decaieth.
               
               
                  The vſe of theſe things hapneth often vnto them,
                  And is of great vſe in warie. 
                  when
as neceſſitie compelleth them in ſome hard voiage,1. Cap. 19. to carrie both
their own victuals and their armour.
               
                  Neither is this onely ſufficient,
                  Eſpecially for the fortifying of a campe. 
                  but the young ſouldier
ought likewiſe to learne to fortifie a campe,Cap. 21. and to that end to be
able to raiſe a trench,Cap. 4. and to haue skill to place his Palliſſadees.
Why ſhould he refuſe this?
                  Cap. 21. there is nothing ſo neceſſarie and
profitable in warre, whether it be in thine owne defence, or
to oppreſſe and circumuent the enemie.
                  Or inuading the enemie. 
                  Surely Domitius
did ſay,
                  Frontin. 4. Strat. cap. 8 that the enemie vvas to be vanquiſhed with the basket
and the Pichaxe, that is, with labour and trauaile.
               But ſome men will ſay, theſe are new things.Theſe things were accuſtomed to the Romains. Nay they are
things that haue bene practiſed long ſince, and not onely

vſed by the Romaines, of whom you ſhall heare what Cic
                        •
                     
                     ro
ſaith, what and how great is the labour in an armie?
                  Cic. 2. Tuſcul. 
                  to carry
victuales for a fortnight: to carry that which is needfull for
other vſes, to be burdened with thoſe things that ſerue for the
neceſsitie of t
                        •
                     enches, and ramparts. As for the ſhield, the heed
peece, and the ſword, our ſoldiers accompt them no otherwiſe
troubleſome then their ſhoulders, their armes, or their handes:
But alſo by the auncient Germaines,To the Germa
                        ••
                     es and others. amongſt whom a certaine
people called Catti did charge their ſoldiers,
                  Tac. de Morib. Germ. 
                  ouer and
aboue their armour, with iron tooles, and with their neceſſarie
baggage. Likewiſe by other nations. And this is the true,
this is the worthy warre:We are ſlouthfull
                        •
                      the more ſhame for vs. ours is not of this ſort, when
thou ſhalt finde in their march more ſtragglers, and lewd
women, then ſoldiers. Good Lord with what ado, we ſeeke
out pioners, and ſuch other labourers and with what experience
do we traine them along with vs!Let vs amend. In the end we
will learne to be wiſe, and will go to warre in ſuch manner
as Pertinax did.Capit. in Pert. Neither will theſe things if they be once in
vre be thought difficult. *Veget. 1. Cap. 19. 2. Cap. 18. 1. Cap. 19. 3. Cap. 10. 1 
                  Euery thing ſeemeth hard before
thou make triall thereof: But there is nothing which dayly practiſe,
will not make moſt eaſie. And why ſhouldeſt thou diſpaire,
that thoſe things may not be brought to paſſe now, which haue
bene done heretofore?
               
               
                  Now I come to Order,Order is neceſſarie in an armie. 
                  the ſecond place of diſcipline,
which is diuerſlie to be obſerued in warre, Firſt in diſtributing
thy force into legions, regiments, and ſquadrons,
which is a thing of great importance,
                  To direct. 
                  becauſe an armie
ſet in good order,Xeno
                        •
                     h. Oecon. is a thing of great ioy to the ſight of thy freinds,
and a terrour to thy enemyes. Yea it is a profitable thing:
becauſe an armie conſiſting more diſtinctlie of many partes,Liu. 9.
may with more caeſe be deuided as occaſion, and neede ſhall require,
and with more eaſe agayne be ioyned together: and it is more
eaſily commaunded,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. Sen. Ep. 
                  when the ſoldier knoweth how to obey
his Serieant, the Serieant his Captaine.To gouerne. 
                  And ſo in order all the
armie doth ſenſiblie feele the commaunde of the generall: and
with a becke do aunſwere thereunto, without any tumult.Ibidem. 
                  For
it is moſt certaine and manifeſt, that all things are not fit

to be done and commaunded to all perſons;
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  But ſuch is the
authoritie of leaders, ſuch is the rigour of diſcipline, that ſome
particular things are commaunded to the quarter maſters, and
other matters to the Captaines.
               Now likewiſe this ought to be conſidered,Veget. 1. Cap. 9. 
                  in a march,
                  To march.
                  or in a ranged battaile, that all generallie keepe their order:
*Cap. 26. 
                  that the ſouldiers be proportionablie,
                  To ſtand in battaile array. 
                  and in due meaſure diſtant,
the one from the other: *Ibidem. and that they do not either
troupe together on a heape, or ſcatter them ſelues wider then
is expedient. Theſe matters are of great waight,Finally to auoide all trouble, and oftentimes
whole armyes haue periſhed by reaſon of ſome ſuch
confuſion:Xenop. Oecon. 
                  and in deede, there is nothing profitable, there is nothing
ſo decent amongſt men, as order. Which likewiſe obſerue
in a ſetled Camp,Order is to be obſerued in a lying Camp. that the ſtreets thereof, be of a meete largeneſſe,
the entries thereto, the market place, and as it were
in forme of a ſmall Cittie.By a certain
                        •
                      quartering of men. Where euerie man ought to be
quartered,
                  Veget. 3. Cap. 8. 
                  the proper bandes of the generall, ſtrangers, horſemen,
footemen, euerie one according to his qualitie, that they
may place, and ſet vp their tentes and pauillions.
                  By diuiding their lodgings. So as it
ſhall be no difficult thing to euerie particular perſon, to
finde his owne place, and his fellow ſoldier. And not onelie
my deſire is, that they be diuided into ſquadrons, but
likewiſe that theſe ſquadrons be parted as it were into particular
chambers,
                  2. Cap. 13. 
                  where ſome ten ſouldiers may lodge, ouer whom
one may as Dicimer haue authoritie, and beare the name of the
chief perſon of that lodging. There are manie other things,
which I can not eaſilie tye together with this corde of ſand:
thou maieſt with ſmall labour finde them, eſpeciallie in
Polybius, and other Romaine authors.
               The third point is Conſtraint,
                  Bridling of manners ought to be vſed. which doth repreſſe and
bridle the manners of the ſouldiers.Caſſiod. 1. Var. Ep. 9. For although, I know
not how it commeth to paſſe that it is a very hard matter, to
cauſe them that hazard their life daylie to keepe a meane in
their behauiour, and manner of life: yet are the ſame in ſome
ſort to be looked vnto, otherwiſe your warre is diſſolued,
nay it is vtterlie ouerthrowne.Eſpecially about three things.
               
               There are three things, without the which there is neither

force, nor order in an armie: Continencie, Modeſtie, Abſtinencie.
Wherefore thou oughteſt to obſerue them.
               
                  Firſt Continencie,Riot is to be auoided ſpeciallie, in two things, from whence ſpringeth, daiutines, and faintneſſe. in meate, and abſtaining frō venerie, that
is, that the ſouldiers be not rioutouſlie geuen,
                  Sal. Iug. to banquets and
to their belly, and to thoſe moſt filthie parts of their body. Both
which doth weaken thē: and by a dayly cuſtome of voluptuouſnes,Tac. 2. Hiſt
doth cauſe the ſoldier to degenerate, from his worthines, and
vertue. *Indidem. If he had any value and fierceneſſe in him it is loſt, by
this ſwilling in of drincke, & gluttony. It was in times paſt ſpokē
in vaine, that one winter was the ouerthrow of Hanniball,Sen. Ep. &
he being vnconquerable in the ſnow, and in the Alpes, the good
fare and cheriſhing he found in Campania, was his ouerthrow.
He that in Armes was alwayes a conquerour, was conquered
by vices.
               
                  Theſe things thou oughteſt to haue regard of, and with
ſeueritie to expel, theſe ſumptuous prouiſions of banquets,Tac. 1. Hiſt. & the
inſtruments of luſt, and pleaſure from thine armie.
               Secondly thou ſhalt exact modeſtie of them,Modeſtie is to be kept. and that by
three manner of wayes, in words, in apparell, in deeds. That
their word be not vaine, and they full mouthed, as they ſay,
like vnto the ſoldiers of Athens:
                  Liu. 32. who at feaſtes and meetings,
when any mention is made of the enemy,
                  Bragging perſons are hatefull. Likewiſe ſlouth full fellowes. 
                  they can ſcarſe containe
their hands, and yet dare not once abide to looke them in the
face. For alwayes it is proued true
                     •
                   
                  that the moſt coward,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  & he
that dareth leaſt to vēture in any dāger, will braue moſt in words,
and with his toung.
                  Vertue kept ſecret is true vertue. And contrarily,Liu. 10. thou ſhalt ſce mē that are
ſoldiers euen from their cradle, who are valiant, and couragious,
whē they come to action, to haue no skill at all to brawle and fight
with their toung.
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. Our author ſaid fitlie to this purpoſe, that
armie which before the battaile ſhewed moſt modeſtie, when it
came to hādie ſtroakes made demonſtration of moſt value. Likewiſe
the Philoſopher left this leſſon in writing,Ariſt. in Ethic. ad Nicom. 
                  valiant men,
are fierce when they come to charge the enemie, but before they
are milde and peaceable.
                  Which he doth, without ſpeach. Who hauing their ſtomacke full of
courage,
                  Liu. 7. 
                  and ſecret furie, do differre to ſhew it, but in hazard
of the battaile.
               
               
                  Thou oughteſt then to bridle theſe vaine toungs, & with
                  
Memnon to teach them,
                  Pl
                        •
                     t. Apoph. Homer. Iliad. 
                        •
                     
                   that thou broughteſt them forth to
fight, not to skolde. *In the Senat houſe we muſt vſe words, in warre blowes. The toung ſheweth his force in counſell,
the hand in fight.
               
                  I likewiſe require modeſtie in apparell,
                  Sumptuouſnes, and pride in apparell is to be auoyded. 
                  and although it
were more meete they ſhould take their pleaſure in rich armour,Sal. Cat.
and horſes fit for warre, then in harlots, and banquets:
yet would I haue them euen to obſerue a meane herein, and
to cut off all ſuperfluous expence. Great Captaines were
of this minde,
                  Li
                        •
                     . 9. 
                  that the ſouldier ought to be fearefull to behold,The ſouldier ſhould be ſ
                        •
                     earne of countenance.
not engraued with golde and ſiluer, but couered with iron, and
armed with courage. *Ibidem. For aſmuch as thoſe things are rather
for a booty, then for the defence of the body: glittering before
they come to execution, vgly and deformed amongſt bloud, and
wounds.Curt. 3. 
                  Such were the auncient Macedonians, not ſhining in
golde, and in a rayment of diuers coulers, but in iron, and braſſe.
Although Caeſar was of another opinion,
                  In this point Caeſar did neglect diſcipline. 
                  who would haue
his ſouldiers ſo neate,Suet. Iul. Cap. 67. that he ſuffered them to weare their armour
decked with golde and ſiluer, as well for the beauty thereof,
as alſo that they might be the more ſtout in battaile, for feare
of looſing it.Truſting in his owne fortune. 
                  But ſurely he obſerued not the olde and ancient
diſcipline,
                  Ibid. 
                  and was wont to make his brags, that his ſouldiers
could fight valiantly, though they were perfumed. Do
thou reiect theſe ſuperfluous things:
                  Tac. in Agric. neyther doth this vaine
ſight, or the ſhining of gold or ſiluer, withhold or terrifie the
enemy, which doth neither ſaue nor wound.The author had rather the ſouldier ſhould be well armed. 
                  Haue then rather
a regard, that they be well armed, then ſet forth to ſhewe.
For it is neceſſary,Veget. 1. Cap. 20. that he which hath his head and breſt defended,
ſhould take the greater courage to himſelfe in fight, when
he feareth not the ſtroake. But now what a ſhame is this,
                  Now adayes to our great domage it is neglected. the
Corſelet,Ibid. and Burgonet, ſeemeth a heauie burthen to the footeman.
*Ibid. So it commeth to paſſe, that they thinke not how to fight,
but imagine how they may runne away, being expoſed in the
battell as men naked to be wounded.
               
                  Laſtly, I would haue Modeſtie in their deedes, that they
be not ſtubborne, but obedient,
                  Patience becommeth a ſouldier. Not enquiry or correction. ready,Curt. 3. not only at euery commaundement
of their Captaine, but at euery becke. I hate theſe
curious,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  and mutinous fellowes, who loue rather to interpret

their Captaynes commaundements, then to accompliſh them.
Aemilius Paulus ſayd well,
                  Three properties of a ſouldier. A ſouldier ought to regard theſe
three things,Liu. 44. 1. his bodie, to haue the ſame ſtrong and luſtie:
2. his Armor, that it be fit for him: 3. his minde, that it be
readie to obey any ſuddaine commaundement. *Ibidem. Tac. 3. Hiſt. Other matters,
God and the Generall ought to haue care of. For the offices, are
deuided amongſt the Captaines,Commaundement is to be left to the Generall. & the ſouldiers. *1. Hiſt. Let weapons
and value belong to the ſouldier, and let them leaue counſaile
and gouernment of their vertue, to the leaders. *Ibidem. Matters
of warre prosper better in obeying, then in enquiring to what
ende their Captaines do commaund this,Performance only to the ſouldiers. A ſhort and ſweete ſaying. or that. The inſtruction
of Braſidas is verie notable,
                  Thuc. 5. Deeme thoſe to be the
markes of a true man of warre (quoth he) to be of a willing
minde, to ſtand in awe, to obey.
               
                  Thirdly, I named Abſtinence,Violence is to be expelled from the ſouldier. 
                  by which I would haue
the ſouldiers refraine from all force, and pillage, and to
haue pure hands. Permit not the ſouldiers to be inſolent againſt
the poſſeſſors of the houſe they lodge in: *Caſſ
                        ••
                     d. 6. Var. Ep. 23. Id. Ep. 4. Let them
liue according to the Ciuill lawe,Leaſt he growe troubleſome to the countreyman. vvith them of the Countrie,
neyther let their minde waxe arrogant, in that they are
armed, becauſe that bu
                     •
                  kler of the army, ought to bring reſt
and quiet,Or take by force euery where. to the huſbandman. *Vopiſc. in Aur. Let no man forciblie take ſo
much as a hen, nor touch a ſheepe, let none take a bunch of
grapes, nor ſpoyle the corne, exact oyle, ſalt, wood, but be
content with his owne pay, and prouiſion. To be ſhort, let
them march in ſuch ſort,
                  Cic. pro leg. Manil. that it may be ſayde, that not only
their hands, but euen their ſteps, hath not ſo much as euer hurt
any man of peace.
               But will they laugh at me thinke you? Surely I beleeue
it, as the faſhion and cuſtome is now adayes: But
with auncient Captaynes this was ſo ſtrictly obſerued,The dutie of thoſe of olde time is wonderfull in this matter. and
in vſe,Frontin. 4. Stra
                        •
                     ag. Cap. 3. that it is reported, that Scaurus, did encloſe an apple tree
in the middeſt of a Camp, the next day the army riſing, the ſame
was left, not any apple being touched.
               
               The laſt part of diſcipline, is Examples, vnder which
name I vnderſtand reward, and puniſhment; for in deede,
both theſe are of much force to ſtirre vp the value and

vertue of the ſouldier:The ſouldier is encouraged by rewards. But eſpecially rewards, if thou beſtowe
them on thoſe that deſerue well, promotions, and
honor; the ſouldier hopeth for wealth, for ſome notable,
and worthie exploite. It is impoſſible, but that he ſhould
fight with more courage,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. Cap. 24. 
                  vvho according to the order of
vvarre, and by the iudgement of the Generall, is exal
                        •
                     ed to
riches, and honor.
                  Liu. 4. It is manifeſt, that men trauaile more, and
doe with more courage expoſe them ſelues to danger, if they
beleeue, to drawe profit, and honor thereby. *Tac. 11. An. And no man
vvill hazard himſelfe, if he foreſeeth not before, the f
                        •
                     uite
that is to redound thereby. Therefore the Romaines that
were a wonder to all the world, did not onely aſſigne
the chiefeſt degrees to men of vertue, but likewiſe publicklie
they did adde thereunto the publiſhing of their
prayſe and honor, and did geue vnto them in open aſſemblies
Speares, horſe trappings, and Garlands.
               
               Now likewiſe puniſhment is moſt neceſſarie to be vſed.And reſtrained by puniſhment.
and Seueritie is of verie great force, to eſtabliſh and aſſure
an army.
               Clearchus was accuſtomed to ſay:
                  Vaeler. 2. Cap. 7. Caeſ. 3. Bel. Ciuil. A Generall ought
rather to be feared of his ſouldiers, then to be a terror to the
enemie.Sufferance is hurtfull. 
                  For ſufferance, and bountiſulneſſe, doth purchaſe thee
preſent coulourable loue of the ſouldiers, but by little and little,
and ſecretly, it diminiſheth militarie diſcipline, and the conſtant
adminiſtring of iuſtice.Tac. 13. An. 
                  But the offences of the ſouldiers, are to
be pardoned by no interceſſion, and by a wholeſome cuſtome it
hath alwayes prooued better then mercie.Armed ſouldiers are ſtrictly to be looked vnto. 
                  Puniſh them therefore:
                  Valer. 2. Cap. 7.
for militarie 
                     〈◊〉
                   hath neede of a ſharpe and reſolute
ſword to correct, becauſe their force is maintayned by
armes: vvhich, if they ſwarue from their right vſe, they vvill
grieue others if they be not oppreſſed.They are pleaſed there with, though they ſeeme not to be ſo. 
                  The right man of
warre is glad thereof,
                  Luc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 5. 
                  and that chaſtiſement maketh youth
more milde and peaceable, and getteth reſt by the ſtroake of ſo
cruell an aliyance. Notwithſtanding, Vigetius maketh ſome
difference herein:
                  Veget. 3. Cap. vl
                        •
                     . Puniſhment and feare (ſayth he) doth correct
the ſouldier while he taketh his eaſe:Yet do thou reſpect time, herein. vvhilſt they are in
action, hope and reward maketh them better.
               
                  
                  I haue ended my diſcourſe of Diſcipline,
                  The Prince ſent againe to the Romaines. 
                  as diſtinctlie
and plainely as I could with other mens words: yet do I
againe commit this to thy memorie, if thou deſire to haue
the ſame abſolute and lawfull,
                  Idem. 1. Cap. 8. thou oughteſt to ſearch out the
Romaine militarie diſcipline, whoſe confines being but ſmall, they
haue extended their Empire almoſt thorough all the regions
vnder the ſunne, and to the ends of the world: and that next
vnto God, by this onely guide.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  He commeth to intreate of the chiefe leaders of armyes. That
they are not onely profitable, but alſo neceſſary. That they are
of two ſorts. That alwayes their experience, is more to be looked
into, then their vertue. And that there ought to be but
one principall Generall in an army.
               
               
                  I Haue brought the matter to that paſſe I
would concerning ſouldiers. Now there are
others that requeſt my pen, and my hand,
that is, Generalls, and Captaines. What
ſhall I ſay,The neceſſitie of leaders. they are only profitable in an
army? nay they are likewiſe neceſſary: for
they are the very ſoule and life of the army, ſo that it is truly
written, a companie of ſouldiers without a Captaine,
                  Curt. 10. Quinct. 5. 
                  are as a
body without a ſoule: And as the mariners can do nothing
without a Pilote, ſo cannot ſouldiers ſtirre without a leader.
And in another place thou ſhalt reade,Such as they are, ſuch is the ſouldier. 
                  that ſuch as the Generall
is, ſuch is the army.
                  Flor. 2. Cap. 18. If he guide it well and skilfully,
they prooue men of courage: if without diſcretion, it goeth
to wracke, which is the cauſe,Tac. de Morib. Ge
                        •
                     m. 
                  why thou putteſt more confidence
in the Generall, then in the whole army (which hapneth
rarely, except it be purchaſed by the meanes of diſcipline.)
Thou ſhalt then eſpecially labour to finde a Generall, ſuch
a man as I will deſcribe vnto thee.
               There are two ſorts of leaders,There is a two-fold difference of them. Thoſe of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      place. they that hold the firſt
or chiefe place, and they that hold the ſecond.
               
                  Thoſe of the firſt place are ſuch, who commaund abſolutely

and by ſoueraigne authoritie, who manage the affaires themſelues,
and as it ſeemeth good vnto them.
               They of the ſecond ſort, are thoſe,Thoſe of the ſecond. 
                  who gouerne vnder the
authoritie of another, and are at his becke, and do diſpatch matters
as he commaundeth. In the firſt rancke,Whether kings ought to be preſent themſelues in warre. euery King and
Prince are in their owne eſtate. In the ſecond, thoſe which
are appointed by them as their miniſters and ambaſſadors
of warre.
               Concerning the firſt,Reaſons on the affirmatiue part. when there is occaſion of warre,Tac. 2. Hiſt.
                  It is a matter in queſtion, whether they ought them ſelues to be
preſent at the battaile, or whether they ſhould abſent themſelues,
and that not without cauſe. Now it ſeemeth they ought to
be preſent themſelues in theſe exploits:Plaut. Amph. For where the ſoueraigne
commaunder aſſiſteth not with his preſence in the army,
that is ſooner done, which needeth not to be vndertaken,
then that which is neceſſarie to be enterpriſed. Hereunto adde
this, that with his preſence he doth breath or inſpire
ſtrength, and value in the ſouldier. Neyther was it vnaptly
ſpoken in times paſt by Antigonus (being in an army by
ſea againſt the Captaines of Ptolemaeus) to one of his principall
commaunders, whome he did ſee begin to faint, and
reaſon vpon the great multitude of the enemies Ships:
quoth he,Plut. Apoph. 
                  In ſteed of how many men doeſt thou recken me, I being
preſent in perſon? He ſayd well.Reaſons one 
                        〈◊〉
                      contrary. But yet on the other ſide
there is likewiſe a deeper cauſe of doubt: becauſe it ſeemeth
a matter of more ſafetie,Tac. 2. Hiſt. that he that is Soueraigne, being
exempt from the hazard of warre, may reſerue himſelfe for ſoueraigne
cauſes, and the ſauegard of the whole eſtate. For, in
the ſouldiers there conſiſteth but the loſſe of one,
                  Egeſip. 5. Cap. 3. 
                  in the Emperour,
the danger of all.
                  The doubt diſſolued. Sometimes he ought to be preſent. I will with a little diſtinction reſolue
this doubt.Tac. 4. Hiſt. For if the whole ſtate of the kingdome, or the ſauegard
of the whole Countrie hang in ſuspence, he ought himſelfe
to be in the field.
                  Ibidem. But I iudge, in warres of leſſe importance, he
may geue the charge thereof to his vnder-captaines. *Sometimes not. 
                  For it is
not a ſeemely thing for a Prince,
                  3. Ann. 
                  at that ſeaſon, when ſome little
towne ſhould moue ſedition, that he ſhould leaue his principall
Citie, whereon the ſauegard of all his ſubiects did depend. Wherfore

ſometimes it were conuenient that he went in his owne
perſon;Many Generals are hurtfull. ſometimes that he ſent other Captaines. But what,
ſhall he ſend many? it importeth not greatly, ſo that the
principall authoritie ouer the army be committed to one.
For thou alwaies ſhalt finde,Thuc. 6. that both the pluralitie of commaunders,
hath alwaies bred much harme, and likewiſe, when
there hath ben no commandement at all, or that it hath ben vncertaine.
Neither is this old prouerbe of no effect,Prouerbialis verſus. that many
commanders were the ouerthrowe of Caria.
                  But alwayes one is to be authoriſed in one warre. Where one alone
is to be choſen, who ought to be a man of experience and
wiſedome:Sal. Iug. leaſt, he to whome thou haſt geuen all authoritie,
be forced for want of skill to ſeeke ſome other, by whome he may
be gouerned.
                  Who ought rather to be regarded for his experience then his vertue. For heere the principall matter is experience:
and Ariſtotle ſayd right well: In the charge of warre,
                  5. Polit. Cap. 9. 
                  greater
reſpect ought to be had to the experience of the Generall, then to
his vertue and conditions.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  The notes and markes of a good Captaine: which ſeeme to be
fiue. The ſame ſeuerally declared by order.
               
               
                  BVt to the end I may the better open this
vnto thee, and that it may more plainely
appeare, who to thy moſt aduantage are to
be choſen; I will paint and ſet forth vnto
thee the pourtrature of true and lawfull
Captaines, in a few coulers, which ſhall not
fade. Only do thou geue care vnto me, and as they were
wont in times paſt in holie matters to ſay, Do this.
               
               I do require theſe fiue things in a lawfull leader:What things are to be expected in a good Captain. 1. Skill, or experience. 1. skill,
2. Vertue, 3. Prouidence, 4. Authoritie, 5. Fortune.
               
               Skill: that he be expert in his arte, and ſuch a one, who
by long vſe, hath gotten skill in warre, not by report, or
reading alone: but I ſay ſuch a one,
                  Tac. 3. Ann. who hath himſelfe taken
pay in diuerſe countries: and that there be no kinde of warre,Cic. pro Manil. Tac. 3. Ann.
wherein Fortune hath not made triall of him: who knoweth,
the order of an army, what care there ought to be, to ſee how the
enemy lieth, what way is beſt, either to prouoke the enemy, or to

drawe the warre in length:1. Ann. 
                  who is expert both in things proſperous,
and in matters dangerous, and doubtfull,Which for the moſt part is gotten by triall of both fortunes. and therefore not
amazed at them. For theſe men pleaſe me not, who haue neuer
taſted aduerſitie:
                  Liu. 30. neyther can he ſuddainely geue order, or
thinke vpon miſchances, whome fortune hath neuer deceaued.
               
                  Secondly I adde Vertue: whereby I vnderſtand a certaine
vigor,
                  2. Vertue. 
                  or liuelineſſe of the body, and wit, conioyned with
goodneſſe of the minde.
                  That he be liuely, & actiue 
                  Which vigor is apparent in theſe
things, that he exerciſe his bands of mē, though there be no war,Tac. 12. Ann.
and by his care, and prouidence, do carry himſelf in that manner,
as if the enemy were at hand.5. Hiſt. 
                  That he himſelfe cōmonly do take
paines in the army, that he be amongſt the common ſouldiers, always
retaining the honor,Let him march before his ſouldiers, and be their true leader. and authoritie of a leader. Who dare
geue the firſt onſet when any worke is to be vndertaken,Sil. 1. and that
he ſhew the way to others. And who may ſpeake this of himſelfe,
                  Liu. 7.
O my ſouldiers, I would haue you follow my deedes, not my
words: and not only learne true diſcipline of me, but likewiſe take
example by me: *Lucan. 9. de Catone. that he with his owne hands carry boords and
planks: that he march breathing before his ſouldiers: that he do
teach them, and not commaund them to endure labour. To be
ſhort, that he take paines in time of neede,Cic. pro leg. Manil. ſhew fortitude in
danger, induſtrie in vndertaking, ſpeedineſſe in executing.
               
                  Likewiſe certaine vertues of the minde are to be added.
                  Let him likewiſe be endued with inward vertues.
For not only warlike vertue is to be required in a ſoueraigne and
perfect Generall,Ibid. but there are many other worthy parts, which
are companions, and miniſters of this vertue: *Ibid. Of what great innocencie
ought commanders to be? of what great temperance in
all things? of what faith? of what affabilitie? of what humanitie?
And except he haue all, or the moſt part of theſe
vertues,
                  Ibid. I can not recken him in any number amongſt worthy
Captaines.
               
                  Now thirdly, I commend Prouidence,3. Prouidence, Let him be wary. 
                  that is, thoſe warie
and aduiſed Captaines,
                  Liu. 22. who in no place, do hazard and commit
them ſelues to fortune, but in as much as neceſſitie compelleth
them.Indid. 
                  Trulie I blame thoſe, who do all things furiouſly and
hastilie:Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  and who are more readie to contemne the enemies, then
to take heed of them. And although that they be oftentimes

pleaſing to the common ſort, becauſe to fooles,
                  6. An
                        •
                     . or barbarous
people,Though the common ſouldier loue firy ſpirits. all ſtay ſeemeth ſeruile, and immediatly to execute, the
part of a King: *Liu. 22. 
                  and ſurely, if the matter may be caried by
the voice of the ſouldier, without all doubt they will preferre
ſome Minutius to their Captaine,But let raſhnes be farre from him. before worthy Fabius. But be
not thou ſo deceaued, and thinke rather with Auguſtus,Sueton. Aug. ca. 25. that
nothing doth leſſe agree with a perfect Captaine, then raſhneſſe,
and temeritie:Let him haue eyes as well behind as before. 
                  And with Sertorius, that a leader ought rather
to looke behinde, then before him: *Plut. in Sert. Cato apud Veget. 1. Cap. 13. Plut. Apop. Liu. 22. For the faults in warre
cannot be amended. And as he ſaid, in battaile it is not lawfull
to faile twiſe.For haſty perſons come ſoone to ruine. 
                  But he that goeth raſhly to worke, faileth in a
manner of neceſſitie. Temeritie, beſides that it is fooliſh, is
likewiſe infortunate: Is it not ſubiect to all traines & ſurpriſes?
Polybius ſayd notably,
                  Lib. 3. haſte, fooliſh hardineſſe, and ſuddaine
paſſions, without reaſon; likewiſe vanitie, and arrogancie,
are moſt auaileable to the enemies, and moſt hurtfull to our
friends. For he that is ſuch a one, is ſubiect to all manner of conſpiracies,They begin, but go not thotowe ſtitch.
deceipts, and guiles. But poſe the caſe he faile not in
his enterpriſe: what doth he effect? Surely no great matter:
and Temeritie, when it hath paſſed the firſt brunt,Curt. 4. like
vnto certaine beaſtes, which haue loſt their ſting, it is ſlowe
and benummed.They which are ſomewhat ſlacke, are more aſſured. 
                  Wherefore learne this by Euripides,Eurip. in Phaenis. An
aduiſed Captaine is better, then he that is deſperately audacious.
*Liu. 22. Care not thou though they call a wary perſon, fearefull; a conſiderate
perſon, ſlacke; an expert ſouldier, no ſtout warrier.Indid. Nor
eſteeme of it that they reioyce with the common people, at thy
fury. *Indid. I had rather that the wiſe enemy ſhould feare thee, then
the fooliſh cittizen prayſe thee. *And of more force. This cloude,Indid. that ſtayeth in
the mountaines, the ſtorme being ſtirred, will in the end ſend a
ſhowre. *Indid. For I do not admoniſh that nothing ſhold be taken in
hand, but that in thy enterpriſe reaſon might guide thee, not fortune,4. Felicitie.
                  albeit I wiſh, that ſhe might be gracious vnto thee:
for fourthly, I require Felicitie in the Captayne. Surely
for the moſt part,
                  Which commeth from aboue. 
                  ſhe is the companion of counſell▪ and
reaſon, but yet more fauourablie geuen to ſome by God.
He is the only author thereof, and no man is able to warrāt
the ſame vnto himſelf. *Cic. pro lege Manil. Prouerbialis verſus. Felicity is a gift of the ſoueraigne God.

                  Wherefore, although prouidence helpeth much to the ſucceſſe
of matters, yet with Plato I deeme,
                  In Epi
                        ••
                     m. that militarie ſcience,
hath great neede of much good fortune. For ſurelie there are
ſome,
                  Euſtath in 2. Illiad. Ex Agel. who are borne in the fourth moode, that is, to misfortune.It is not giuen to ſome.
                  Who haue Seianus vnfortunate horſe at home, that is, with
whom nothing thriues. So that to what thing ſoeuer they applie
their wit, or ſet to their hand, it falleth out croſſelie.
Contrarilie there are others,
                  It is as it were euen borne with others. whom euen the winde,Cic pro Manil. and the
weather fauoureth. Which is the reaſon, that in the choiſe of
Captaines, I haue likewiſe regarde to fortune: and I am of
this opinion,Ibidem. 
                  that in time paſt, Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio,
Marius, and other great Captains, had the more often gouernments
and armies committed to them, not onely in regarde of their
vertue, but likewiſe in reſpect of their fortune.
               
                  Laſtlie,
                  Cic. pro leg. Manil. 
                  I required Authoritie:5. Authoritie. For it is a matter that belongeth
greatlie to the adminiſtration of warre, what opinion
the enemies haue, and what thoſe that are thy confederates, do
thinke of thy Captaines. Authoritie ſeemeth ſpeciallie to be
*Dixi lib. 4. cap. 9. 
                  the childe of felicitie: notwithſtanding, amongſt thy
ſubiects likewiſe, it is to bee gotten, with a certaine ſtrict
forme of gouernement.
                  3. cap. 10. 
                  The precept of Vegetius containeth
wiſedome: ſaith he,
                  Seueritie begetteth it. Let a Captaine by ſeueritie vſurpe the
greateſt authoritie, let him by law puniſh all offences committed
in warre, let it not bee thought of him, that he pardon any that
faile.An ouer gentle Captaine is vnprofitable. 
                  For theſe milde and gentle Captaines, growe contemptible,
Scipio ſaid verie well,
                  Applan. Iberic. theſe leaders which are auſtere and
rough, are best for their owne ſouldiers: and thoſe that are tractable
and readie to forgiue, to the enemies. What is the reaſon
hereof?
                  Ibidem. Trulie the ſouldiers ſeeme to delight in theſe gentle leaders,A contempt to his ſouldiers.
but they do deſpiſe them: & to be grieued, to be commaunded
by auſtere Captaines, but they yeeld dutie and obedience to them
in all things.Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  But in deed they are not diſpleaſant to the ſouldiers,On the other ſide, a ſeuere captaine is eſteemed. And is the rather beloued, if in fit time he ſhowe himſelfe gentle.
wondering at the vertues of him they cannot ſo well brooke:
eſpeciallie, if he can temper himſelfe ſometimes, with ſome
courteſie and meekenes:
                  Indid. For albeit the fauour of the ſouldiers
is not lawfullie gotten by preſents, and ambition, yet is it not to be
diſdained, if it may be purchaſed by any honest meanes. As, to

do ſome exerciſe of the bodie amongst them,Curt. 3. that his apparell be
not much different from a priuate perſon.Tac. 1. Ana. 
                  Likewiſe to giue and
diſtribute apparell and foode to the needie or the wounded: and
to bring this to paſſe, eyther by ſome other gifts of the ſpirit,Curt. 3. or
good parts of the minde, that thou maiest in like maner be loued
and reuerenced of them.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  That conſultations are neceſſarie in warre. A ſhewe, or taſte of
them: Likewiſe, certaine inſtructions, what thinges are neceſſarie
before, and in the fight.
               
               
                  
                     I Haue ended that which I had to ſay of men
in generall.
                  The profit of counſels. 
                  There remaineth conſultations,
the laſt, yet a neceſſarie inſtrument of war.
What is all your prouiſion without counſell?
a ſmoake. What are your men without
it? a funerall. Neither needeth the ſame
to be prooued with wordes:
                  They are neceſſarie for Generals. by danger,Sal. Catil. and in the handling of
affaires, it is pooned, that pollicie auaileth much in warre. And
thou ſhalt ſee,
                  Tac. 2 Ann. 
                  that great Captains haue brought more things
to paſſe by counſell then by ſtrength. Therfore Caeſar reſolued,
that it was no leſſe neceſſarie for an Emperor to ouercome by policie,
then by the ſworde.1. Com. Bel. ciu. 
                  And the Carthaginiens did execute
thoſe Captaines who enterpriſed any warre,Val. 2. ca. 7 led thereto by bad
counſell, though good & proſperous fortune did follow: imputing
whatſoeuer happened well, to be done by the helpe of immortall
God,For the moſt part the euent of matters proceedeth from them. and what ſoeuer chanced ill, to their owne fault: which
they did not vnconſideratelie.
                  Caeſ. com. 6. 
                  For although fortune preuaileth
much in all things, but eſpeciallie in martiall affaires, *Cic. pro Marcel. and
whatſoeuer ſucceedeth proſperouſlie, that ſhe doth almoſt wholly
attribute to her ſelf: yet ſurely counſell hath therin a great &
forcible part: and it is by good aduiſe, for the moſt part that
ſhe is good vnto vs. Wherevpon Attius ſaid,
                  Apud Sal. ad Caeſ. that euery man
was the framer of his owne Fortune: and Fabius was of this
minde,
                  Liu. 22. that Fortune had no great power ouer a good and vertuous
Emperour, but the minde and reaſon did rule ouer him.
               
                  
                  Wherefore counſels ought to be vſed: but what maner of
counſels,
                  Howbelt, it is a hard thing to ſet downe certaine precepts of counſell. 
                  or in what ſorte? It is harde to preſcribe it. For
the occaſions themſelues do rather giue counſell to men,Ibidem. then men
to occaſions: Thou oughteſt rather to applie thy ſelfe to
them: eſpeciallie in warre.
                  Thuc. 1. For warre, leaſt of all other matters
proceedeth not as things are decreed on, but it inuenteth mame
of it ſelfe, and that as the matter falleth out.Which ſome will blame the Author. 
                  Neither can I
aptlie enough ſpeake therereof. May I now,Liu. 22. dwelling in a cittie,
enter into the knowledge of thoſe things, which are to be done
of thee beeing a ſouldier? I ſhall be laughed at, and ſome not
without cauſe, will call me doting Phor
                     •
                  io. Wherefore I
will not vndertake this, as if I were in a Pulpit in my long
gowne, to ſet downe precepts to ſouldiers, being in their
caſſocks and armor: but out of this great heape of counſels,
I will onely gather a fewe, which I will briefly ſet before
thee for example. The which notwithſtanding,
                  Yet he giueth ſome taſte thereof. Counſels are of two ſortes. 
                  that it may
be done diſtinctlie, and with ſome methode, I will deuide
them into direct and indirect counſels. Direct counſels, are
thoſe, which march in the beaten way of warre: Indirect counſels,
which paſſe by the ſecret path of fraud and deceipt.The firſt reaſon ſpringeth from occaſion. 
                  Occaſion
ought to be obſerued in warre: and ſurely it hath power in all
humaine affaires, but eſpeciallie in matter of warre. *Polib. 9. Veg. 3. Cap. 26. Occaſion
is accuſtomed to bring more helpe in warre, then vertue.Which is to be taken holde of. 
                  Wherfore
be thou armed and prepared, that thou for ſake not occaſion
when it is offered thee,Liu. 22. and that thou take the ſame away from
thine enemie. *Id. lib. 28. It is the part of a man, and of a Captaine, not to
refuſe Fortune when ſhe offereth her ſelfe, and when good hap
preſenteth it ſelfe, then to ſit downe to counſell.
               
                  VVe muſt yeeld to Report:Curt. 8. 
                  For warres do conſiſt of report,The ſecond reaſon from report. Which is of importance in warre.
and oftentimes, that which hath falſlie beene beleeued, hath
beene held inſteed of troth.Liu. 27. 
                  Another ſaith, Fame doth finiſh war;
and matters of ſmall moment do driue the mindes of men either
into hope,Tac. 13. or feare: eſpeciallie in the beginning: and report is of a
maruellous force in new enterpriſes.12. Ann. * And feare, or confidence, is
engendered, by the firſt euent of things.In. Agric. 
                  VVhetfore learne this,
that thou oughteſt to ſtay vpon reporte,In Agric. for as thy firſt proceedings
are, the reſidue in like maner wil be conformable therunto.

                  But I ſaie likewiſe,
                  Yet is it not alwaies to be credited. 
                  that we ought not to obey report, euen
in the proceeding vnto warre.
                  Liu. 22. 
                  For thou oughteſt to be reſolute
in this, not to make accoumpt of the rumors and reporte
of the people.But rather ſound reaſon. 
                  And to follow thoſe things which reaſon perſwadeth,Vell. 2.
not ſuch as are likely hereafter to be allowed of.Ibidem. 
                  Neither
ought the Generall at any time, frame his counſels after the
iudgement of the armie, but the armie is to be gouerned by the
prouidence of the Generall. *Sen. Oct. There is an ill gouernement, when
the common ſouldiers commaunde the Captaines. Know this,
that a deſire to fight doth agree with the ſouldiers,Tac. 3. Hiſt. the leaders do
often more good with their prouidence, with their counſell, with
their warineſſe,Securitie is an euill thing in warre. then with raſhneſſe. Ouermuch ſecuritie is to be
auoided. No man is ſooner brought to ruine,Vell. 2. Indid. then he which feareth
nothing. And retchleſneſſe is the common entrance into calamitie.
*Liu. 21. Oftentimes contempt of the enemie,And likewiſe the contempt of the enemie. hath brought
foorth bloudie broiles, and many worthie nations and kings haue
beene ouercome thorow a matter of ſmall importance. *Curt. 6. Nothing
is with ſafetie to be flightlie accoumpted of in the enemie, whome
if thou deſpiſe, thou wilt make him more valiant thorowe thy
negligence.Haue thou a certaine carefull feare. 
                  Therefore, as I giue counſell to feare nothing,Liu. 6. ſo do
I aduiſe, to contemne nothing. *Caeſ. 1. bel. Ciuil. Liu. 25. Manie times in warre, there
hapneth great chances, in things of ſmall moment: and nothing is
of ſo little value,Nothing is of ſmall moment in warre. that the conſequence of a greater matter doth
not ſometimes depend thereon. *Aemil. Prob. in Thraſ. By how much the more this precept
ought to be embraced of all men: That nothing in warre
ought ſlightlie to be ſet by: neither is this ſpoken without cauſe,
that the mother of a warie perſon, knoweth not what belongeth
to teares.Truſt is alwaies hurtefull. To enquire after the enemie is profitable. 
                  It is an incredible thing,
                  Id. in Pelop. how great calamitie, ouermuch
preſumption, hath beene the cauſe of.Liu. 22. 
                  All things are to be
enquired after: thou oughteſt not to be ignorant of thine owne
armie, and the enemies: likewiſe, the ſcituation of places, the nature
of countries. It was a notable ſaying in Hannibal,Ibidem. that all
things belonging to the enemie, were as well knowne vnto him, as
his owne force.Who they are, what they are, how many they are? 
                  That ſaying of the Spartains pleaſeth me not,
                  Plut. in Agi. & Cleo. Veget. 3. cap. 8.
                  who were wonte to aske, not have many they were, but where
they were? It is too great a pride. He is hardlie ouercome, who
can giue a right iudgement of his owne power, and his enemies

forces.Eſpeciallie of what diſpoſition the Generall is. 
                  But eſpeciallie thou oughteſt to learne the humor of
the Generall:
                  Polyb. 3. For if any man deemeth that the proper dutie of
a good Generall be other, then to labour to know, the minde and
condition of the cheefe Captaine of the enemies,And all the enemies campe. he doth not onelie
erre, but he is mad: Inquire after the conditions and nature
of thine enemies.
                  Liu. 7. 
                  For the force of ſome is in a ſodaine motion,
which after a little while becommeth weake. As moſt of
the barbarous people are,
                  Tac. 12. Ann. Ibidem. whoſe violent brunts by delay do either
become faint,Aſſault their faith. or are turned into trecherie. Wherfore make
likewiſe triall of this, do thou vſe delaies, diſlodge from place to
place, and (ſecretlie) ſend ſome to the enemies campe, to bu
                     •
                  e
them, and to trie to winne them vnto thee, and to forſake their
faith:De Morib. Germ. 
                  Or otherwiſe ſeperate,
                  Or elſe worke factions amongſt them. A true ſaying. 
                  and diſioine them. Fortune can
bring no greater thing to paſſe, then to ſowe diſcorde amongst the
enemies: *Veget. 3. Cap. 9. betweene whom the wiſe and aduiſed Captaine ought
to ſowe occaſions of diſcention. For (this is a worthie ſaying)
No nation how ſmall ſoeuer it be, can eaſilie be ouerthrowne by
the enemie, if it deſtroy not it ſelfe by priuate partialities.
               
                  Thou oughteſt conſider the time when to fight;
                  The onſet ought to be giuen in due time. 
                  which
in my opinion ought neuer to be vnaduiſedlie,
                  Claud. That leader
is to be commended, who doth not attempt all things by hazard,
but gouerneth both proſperous matters, and things aduerſe and
contrarie, by ripe deliberation and counſell; who is not throwne
downe by contrarie accidents, nor lifted vp with pride at any good
ſucceſſe, but changing the raines, knoweth howe to prolong the
time, and the meanes to get the victorie. *That is very ſeldome. Paulus Aemilius ſaid;
Come thou very ſeldome to handie ſtroakes,Sempro. apud Agel. Noctium lib. 13. ca. 3. Sueton. Cap. 25. Thuc. 3. although the aſſignation
of the battaile be giuen, if great neceſſitie, or ſome principall
occaſion be not offered, Caeſar Auguſtus ſaid; warre is neuer
to be enterpriſed, but when hope of greater profit then loſſe is
apparant: *If one way be vncertaine. For matters of war are vncertaine, and many things
are made of a little, and for the most part, aſſaults are attempted
with a furie. Many times likewiſe euen the leſſer multitude, marching
in feare, hath giuen the ouerthrow, & conquered the greater,
becauſe that they by reaſon of their deſpiſing the leſſer, haue
beene out of order: *Cit. pro Mil. The euent of fight is vncertaine, and Mars is
indifferent: who oftentimes by him who is conquered doth ſubuert

and vanquiſh another, bragging of his victorie and ſpoile.
Wherefore herein thou oughteſt to proceede with a ſlow
pace,
                  We muſt attempt againſt the enemie by ſome other 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  eſpeciallie against the enemie,Liu. 7. whom time, and the alteration
of the countrie do daily weaken.Id. 22. 
                  He that is in his enemies
countrie, where all things oppoſe themſelues against him, and
ſeeke to croſſe him,Ibidem. 
                  whom no Citties, no walles do receiue: dooſt
thou doubt,The enemie is often to be broken by delaies. but that by ſitting ſtill,Ibidem. Tac. 2 Hiſt. thou ſhalt ouercome ſuch a
one? Manie armes which are very hard to be encountered, by
tract of time and delaies, do vaniſh away and come to nothing.
Notwithſtanding I do not alwaies forbid thee to come to
hand
                        •
                     e ſtroakes:
                  Yet ſometime
                        •
                      by ioyning battaile. 
                  For it is a point of meere foll
                     •
                  e to thinke a
victorie may be gotten by ſitting at eaſe,Liu. 22. and by wiſhes: *Xenop. 7. Paed. and
likewiſe ſometimes in ſtaying, ſome part of the Generals beſt prouiſion
is waſted and ſpent:And that as occaſion & time falleth out. 
                        〈◊〉
                      the caſe thou canſt not long hold out. 
                  but I aduiſe thee with good counſell
and iudgement,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. to hazard he matter. It thy affaires be
in a ſtraight, as if thou hast no victuals, no munition, no money:
then a Gods name ſet forward thine armie, and ſet vpon thine
enemie. *Liu. 22. Indid. Id. lib. 25. In deſperate matters and of little hope, the counſels
that denote most courage, are the ſafeſt. And as the Poet teacheth
vs, in deſperate matters we must go raſhlie to worke.Sen. Agam. 
                  Or
if it be manifeſt,
                  O
                        •
                      if vpon good ground thou expecteſt the victorie. 
                  that thy ſide is the ſtrongeſt, which thou
muſt looke into ſeriouſlie, and without flattering thy ſelfe,
a vigilant,Veget. 3. cap. 9. ſober, and prudent Captaine, entring into conſideration
of the matter, as it were into a ciuill cauſe betweene two parties,
with good aduiſe, will iudge of his owne, and his enemies forces:
and if he finde that he haue the aduantage many vvaies,
let him not differre the battaile, when oportunitie is offered.
Otherwiſe,
                  Otherwiſe to 
                        〈◊〉
                      to handy ſtroakes is alwaies hurtfull. it pleaſeth me not at all,Liu. 7. when thou art no waies
conſtrained thereunto, that thou ſhouldest commit thy ſelfe to
fortune. Surelie theſe men,
                  Indid. Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  who putting more confidence in
their courage, then in their ſtrength, do enter the field, as they
raſhlie began the battaile, ſo with like feare they take themſelues
to flight.We ought to conſider prodigious ſignes. 
                  But what if thou do moderatlie regarde
diuinations? I ſay moderatelie, and without ſuperſtition: it
may ſeeme, that prodigious ſignes in heauen and in earth,1. Hiſt. 
                  perhaps
are not altogether to be reiected: and likewiſe the aduertiſements
of thunder, and the preſagement of things to come, whether

they be ioyfull,And dreames ſometimes. ſad, doubtfull, or manifest. No nor dreames,
ought ſlightly to beſet by.
                  Curt. 3. 
                  For oftentimes when men are preſſed
with cares, which do ſtir vp in their ſleepe, thoſe things which are
neere, whether it be that the deſeaſe of the ſoule, or the mind that
is capable of diuination, foreſeeth and preſenteth them vnto vs.
Surelie I would not haue thee,
                  Tac 1. Hiſt. contemne ſuch things as happening
by chance:Amm. 21. 
                  For the goodneſſe of God dooth loue (whether it
be that men deſerue it, or that he is touched with a care of them)
by theſe meanes to open thoſe dangers to vs which hang ouer vs.
               
                  It behooueth thee to haue regarde,
                  The meanes to begin the skirmiſh. 
                  how, and in what ſort
to fight:
                  Veg. 3. cap. 22. 
                  firſt, time is not to be ouerſlipped, that thou maieſt
ſurpriſe them when they are vnprouided, when they are at meate,
or vvearie vvith trauell, or feeding their horſes, and not thinking
of any ſuch matter. *Id. 3. cap. 9. For it is alwaies the part of a good
Captaine, not to ſet vpon the enemie openly,On the ſodaine or by ambuſhes. vvherein the danger
might be common, but ſecretly and by ſtealth. In which caſe
thy ſouldiers are hardie,
                  Ibidem. 
                  they fearefull: thou oughteſt likewiſe
to beware, least thou do at any time, lead thine armie to
fight, vvhen they are either doubtfull, and not reſolute, or fearefull.
Except it ſometimes be not vnconuenient, that thou
do diſſemble a feare, which were not amiſſe,
                  Tac. 2 Ann. to prouoke the
enemie vnder a hope of victorie, that they may the ſooner be ouercome.2. Hiſt.
                  It is likewiſe profitable to know,
                  Or when the enemie himſelfe miniſtre
                        •
                     h fit oportunitie to thee. vvhen the enemie
thorow follie is falne; and it is a point of wiſdome, to ſtaie vntill a
man hath plaid the foole. *Thuc. 5. Whoſoeuer marketh vvell the faults
his enemie committeth, and at the ſame inſtant anſwerable to his
ſtrength aſſaileth him, not ſo much openly or in ranged battaile,
but as occaſion offereth it ſelfe, for the moſt part it falleth out
proſperouſlie with ſuch a one.
               
                  To be ſhort, when thou maieſt well do it, obſerue times
and ſeaſons,
                  Liu. 25. for if in the moment of occaſion (the oportunitie
whereof ſuddenly ſlideth away) thou dooſt pauſe neuer ſo little, it
is too late afterwards to complaine that thou haſt loſt it. I ſaid
when ſo thou maieſt. For ſurelie,
                  Curt. 7. reaſon giueth place to
neceſſitie, eſpeciallie in warre, in that it ſeldome ſuffereth a
man to make choiſe of time.Regard of the place ought to be had. 
                  Secondlie, the place is to bee
conſidered,
                  Veg. 3. ca. 9. vvhether it ſeeme fit for thee, or thine enemies.

                  For it is a matter of great importance,
                  Cap. 26. 
                  and oftentimes the
place is of more aduantage, then the value of the men. As
for example: If wee are to fight on horſebacke,Cap. 9. wee ought to
make choiſe of the plaine; if on foote; ſtraight and narrow places,
encloſed with ditches, mariſh ground or trees. Many times
likewiſe it auaileth much, if the place be ſuch, that thy ſoldiers
are forced to fight by conſtraint of the place,Tac. 2. that their onely
onely hope is in their vertue, and their onely ſafegard dependeth
vpon their victorie. Surelie when fortreſſes, and places of defence
are nigh, the more hope they giue to flie,3. Hiſt. ſo much are they
wont to put leſſe courage in them to fight.Of the ordering of the battell. 
                  The third thing of
greateſt moment is in the armie it ſelf, which if it be diſcreetlieVeg. 3. Cap. 14.
ſet in order, it is a matter of much helpe: if without skill, although
they be all men of courage, yet for want of order, they
are ſoone ouerthrowne.The order of Homer his armie. 
                  There are diuers precepts concerning
this matter, but what is better then that of Homer?Iliad. 
                        •
                     . In the
vantgard he placed the horſmen and the chariots: in the rereward
he ranged the flowre and force of the footemen; as the
ſtrength and ramparte of the armie, in the middest of the battaile
he put ſuch as were cowards, and the common ſouldier, that they
might be conſtrained to fight though it were against their willes.
Whereunto Vegetius agreeth:
                  Alwaies a ſupply is to be had in a readineſſe. It importeth much (quoth he)
to the obtaining of the victorie,Veg. 3. Cap. 17. that the Generall do appoint
ſome principall force of horſe and foote, in the rereward, to be
readie to ſuccour where neede requireth, as if they lay in ambuſh.
For the Souldiers that do ſecond,Thuc. 5. are more dreadfull to
the enemie, then thoſe that are alreadie at handie ſtroakes, and
fighting.Things vnexpected do terrifie. 
                  The reaſon hereof is, that things vnexpected do
moſt of all trouble vs, and as Vegetius ſaith;
                  Veg. 3. c. 26. Sodaine things
do amaze the enemie, things daylie accuſtomed they dread not▪
                  So that a ſodaine outcrie, or a ſhadowe, or a viſion, hath oftentimes
put a whole armie to flight:
                  Plut. in Catone maiore. And other ſuch like
things, haue ſooner affrighted and ouerthrowne the enemie,
then the ſword. *Note this. In all conflicts,Tac. de Mo. first the eye are diſcouraged:
or the eares, and commonlie we ſee the Souldier,
                  Germ. Curt. 4. is ſooner
mooued vvith vaine and friuolous, then vvith iust cauſes
of feare.
               
                  
Moreouer I note,The army is to be deuided by ſeuerall nanons. that in ranging of a battaile it importeth
much commonlie, to order it ſo, that thoſe of one
Countrie or nation may be martialled together: as well in
regard of other conſiderations,Tac. 3. Hiſt. as principally by this meanes
to diſtinguiſh, men of value from cowards, and that they may
be all enflamed to contend for honor. Which ought to be done
in ſuch ſort, that ſtrangers, and mercenarie ſouldiers, be
put where moſt danger is:In Agric. There redoundeth great glorie
vnto thee, if thou obtaine victorie, without ſhedding of thy ſubiects
bloud.
               
               
                  But alwayes thou oughteſt to labour that thy army be in a
readineſſe before thine enemies:It ought to be 
                        •
                     anged in time. 
                  for two reſpects.
                  Veget. 3. Cap. 18. Ibidem.
               
               
                  Firſt, becauſe thou mayeſt the rather accompliſh, what thou
deemeſt beſt to be done, when there is no man to let thee.
               
                  Next,
                  Ibidem. 
                  that thereby thou encreaſeſt the confidence and courage
of thine owne ſouldiers, and doeſt leſſen the vertue and value
of the enemie, becauſe they ſeeme alwaies to be the ſtrongeſt,
who prouoke others with a reſolution: *Liu. 28. Commonly be that aſſaileth
hath more value in him, then he that is put to defend
himſelfe.
               
                  Likewiſe it helpeth verie much,
                  The Generall ought to be confident and cheerefull. 
                  if both before the battaile,
and in the fight,
                  Vell. 2. 
                  the Generall do cheerefullie ſhew the
value of his minde both in countenance and with his eyes. For
what dare they enterpriſe,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  if they ſee thee ſlouthfull, and as it
were out of thy wits, running with open cries here and there?
Truly,
                  Veget. 3. Cap. 22. of neceſſitie they muſt make themſelues ready to runne
away, when they ſee their Captaine in deſperation.To exhort his ſouldiers. 
                  Thou oughteſt
to ſtirre vp their courage,
                  Liu. 22. 
                  and to inſtruct them, to the
end, that where there is leaſt cauſe of feare, there may be leaſt
aſſurance of danger. *Curt. Who ſo contemneth death, it flieth from
him, and he that feareth it, it followeth him. *Sal. Iugurt. In battaile they
are alwaies in moſt danger, who dread moſt: reſolution is as a
wall or rampart. *Curt. 9. The ſlouthfull frame not the deſtinies vnto
them ſelues as they liſt, but eſteeming long life to be the chiefeſt
felicitie, they are often oppreſſed with death.
               Theſe and ſuch like things (whereof I geue thee ſome
examples) thou ſhalt exhort them vnto as oportunitie

ſerueth, and albeit thou haſt a good confidence in thy vertue,
                  Tac. 14. An. 
                  yet
is it not amiſſe, to ioyne therewith exhortations, and requeſts.
               
               
                  Now thou beginneſt the skirmiſh:
                  In a matter of feare he ought not to faint. 
                  do thy ſouldiers begin
to faint? yet for all that be of good courage.
                  Veget. 3. Cap. 25. The euent
of many battailes (or ſurely of the greater part) do fall out moſt
commonly againſt thoſe, to vvhome at the beginning the victorie
vvas geuen. In this point value eſpecially is to be ſhewed,
and in ſuch an aſtoniſhment,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. that thou leaue not vnperformed
any office or dutie of a reſolute Captaine, or valiant ſouldier.
*Let him ſtay, and encourage his ſouldiers, Stay ſuch which forſake the field for feare:Ibidem. vvhere there is
moſt cauſe of labor, where there is any hope left, ſhew thy vvorthineſſe
to thine enemie, and thy value to thine owne men, by thy
aduice, by thy deedes of armes, by thy vvords. Heare what a
Poet ſayth of Caeſar: He himſelfe vvith his owne hands,Lucan. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 7. bringeth
armour and vveapons to his ſouldiers: He encourageth
his Squadrons to geue the onſet: He forceth thoſe that flie, with
ſtroakes to returne to fight.
               
                  On the other ſide:
                  He ought to worke prouidently in the victorie. 
                  Are thy men victorious? reſtraine
them, that they disband not them ſelues too much.
                  Veget. 3. Cap. 25. Many
times an army flying, recouering their ſtrength, hath conquered
thoſe that purſued them, vvhen they haue ben found out of
order. *Tac. 2. Hiſt. Thou beginneſt thy victorie timely enough, when thou
art ſure not to be ouercome. *In Agrit. Sometime likewiſe they that are
conquered, take courage to them ſelues, eſpeciallie if thou
preſſe them too ſore.
                  He ought not 
                        〈◊〉
                      them 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Hardineſſe encreaſeth thorowe desperation,Veget. 3. Cap. 25.
to thoſe that are compaſſed on euery ſide, and when there
is no hope at all, feare hath recourſe to vveapons: *Curt. 6. and vvhen
they can flie no further, they vvhich are kept from running away,
turne againe to fight.But make them away to flie. 
                  Therefore the opinion of Scipto deſerueth
prayſe,Veget. 3. Cap. 21. make vvay to thine enemies, that they may
runne the faſter. And Pirrhus,Frontin. 2. Cap. 6. amongſt other precepts belonging
to a Captaine, left this to memorie, that vve muſt not obſtinately
vvithſtand the enemie vvhen he flieth: not only leaſt
that he being compelled by neceſſitie, do reſiſt thee vvith more
courage for the preſent: but likewiſe, that hereafter, he may
more eaſily be drawne to leaue the battaile. I knowe that this
laſt aduiſe commeth from experience, and is fit to be obſerued

in all kinde of warre.The ſouldier is to be kept from the pray vntill the victorie be aſſured. 
                  Laſt of all, thy ſouldier is to be
kept from the ſpoile:
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  for ouer often, the dangerous debate for
the ſpoile amongſt the conquerors▪ and the letting goe the enemy,
hath bred much hurt.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  Of Politicke Counſels, or ſtratagemes: whether it be lawfull to
vſe them, or no? That in the iudgement of the author they
are not onely of great profit, but honorable likewiſe.
               
               
                  I 
                  Haue geuen thee a taſt of the firſt ſort of counſell:
                  What ſtratagemes are, and to what end.
                  I come now to the other part thereof, which
is more crooked,
                  Fron. 1. Praef. 
                  and couert▪
                   the force wherof properly
conſiſting in art, and pollicie, is profitable as well
when we ought to withſtād the enemy, as whē he is to be aſſailed.
We call them ſtratagemes by a Greeke words, as I thinke,The occaſion of the word Stratagen
                        ••
                     .
                  becauſe they do either proceed, or are inuēted by the Generall,
or that they are eſpecially worthy of him, if he be good.
Wherein notwithſtanding there ariſeth ſome controuerſie
betweene vs and thoſe ſimple & harmeleſſe natures which
do condemne them:
                  Some men condemne them. 
                  who ſay, it is the part of a true ſouldier,
nay,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. 
                  of a good man, to take reuenge of his enemies, not by deceipt,
nor by ſecret meanes, but openly, and that when he is armed.
Hereunto it ſeemeth the Poet doth agree: there is no man of
a high ſtomacke,Eurip. in Rheſo. who will ſecretly ſlay his enemy.And certaine nations haue reiected them. 
                  And like wiſe
certaine ancient people, and thoſe of freſher memory ſeeme
to aſſent hereunto, as the Achayens in deceiptfull Greece,
whome Polybius in commending doth ſhew,
                  Lib. 13. that they did
abhorre frō theſe ſubtilties and deceipts ſo farre forth, that they
would not by that meanes conquer their enemies.As diſhonorable. 
                  He yeeldeth a
reaſon hereof▪ and ſaith,
                  Ibid. becauſe they thought that no victorie
was either of any renowne or certaintie, except they had in open
ſight ouercome their enemies by an aſſigned battaile. And to ſay
the troth,
                  Claud. in 6. Conſ. Honor. the victorie is neuer ſo great, as when the enemies confeſſe
in their minde,Of ſmall efficacie to obtaine a full victorie. that they are vanquiſhed. For indeed, they
which are ſubdued by ſubtiltie, do eaſily gather ſtrength againe,
                  Tac. Agric.
becauſe they perſuade thēſelus, that they are not ouercome
by value, but by the oportunitie, and pollicie offred the Generall.
               
                  
To be ſhort,And that they are likewiſe againſt true ſaith. a certaine Romaine did write,Flor. 1. Cap. 12. that a holie and
wiſe man knoweth that to be a lawfull victory, which is gotten
without breach of faith, and without diminiſhing of honor. But
they will ſay, are they not both hereby indangered? and
where craft and guile taketh place, there can ſcarſe be any
faith, no, neyther honor can not be without blemiſh.
               Theſe are the arguments which are held by them, againſt
the which I diſpute and reply in this ſort.
               Firſt,The author his opinion on the contrarie. It is lawfull to hurt an enemie by all the meanes we can deuiſe. it is the enemy againſt whome we practiſe theſe
things, that is thoſe, whome we may deſtroy both by cuſtome,
and lawe: and what matter is it by what meanes we
geue them the ouerthrowe? That old ſaying of the Poet, is
well knowne:Virg. 2. 
                  What importeth it, whether the enemy be ouercome
by deceipt, or force? With whome Pindarus agreeth:Pindar.
                  we muſt endeuor all manner wayes,
                  Iſthm. 
                  to breake,
                  Od. 4. 
                  and diſorder the
enemy.
                  The confirmation by a ſimilitude. Thou ſeeſt a huntſinan killeth ſome wilde beaſtes
by force, and with his hand: others, he taketh with ginnes,
and nets: and who reprehendeth him therefore? All theſe
manner of deceipts do ſeeme rather to deſerue commendation,By examples.
then blame. Surely Braſidas, that worthy perſonage,
and valiant Captaine, ſayth thus,Thucid. 5. 
                  Thoſe ſtealthes in warre do
merite no ſmall prayſe, by the which especiallie the enemies are
intrapped, and thoſe that are in league and friendſhip greatly
ayded and aſſiſted. Polybius himſelfe, who alitle before did
wonder at the Achayens, doth openly hold partie with vs,
when he ſayth,Lib. 9. that thoſe martiall deedes which are executed
in the ſight of all the world, and with mayne force, deſerue leſſe
praiſe, then thoſe which are wrought by induſtrie, and the oportunitie
and ſlights. But likewiſe if one nation be to be compared
with another,The opinion of the Spartaines heerein. ſhall I doubt whether the Spartains
may be waighed in one ballance with the Achayens? yea,
they will both in vertue and fortune ouerpoiſe them, and
although they were moſt valiant,
                  Plut. Marcell. 
                  yet they did deeme that thoſe
actions which were brought to paſſe by reaſon and vvit, vvere
more vvorthy,
                  Who preferred this couert, before an open way. 
                  and beſeeming a man, then thoſe, vvhich vvere
effected by force and violence.
                  Ibidem, Therefore, the Spartains vvhen
they did diſmiſſe any Captaine from his office, he vvhich had accompliſhed

that vvhich belonged to his charge by perſuaſion or
deceipt, did ſacrifice an Oxe▪ if by force of armes, a Cocke. To
wit, eyther a great, or leſſe beaſt, as they eſteemed the fact
of importance, or of leſſe moment.
               But they ſay further Euripides denieth,An anſwere to the reaſons that make for the contrarie. A diſtinction of thoſe that are enemies. that it belongeth
to a man of worth. They are deceaued: for he doth not
ſpeake of the common enemy, or of warre: but he meaneth
priuate ennemities, wherein (as he rightly deemeth)
fraude hath no place: In warre the matter goeth otherwiſe.
For euen the auncient Romaines, in other things couetous
and reſolute,Vlpian. 
                        •
                     i. 1. de dolo. to treade this princely path, did affirme,
that there vvas a certaine honeſt ſubtiltie, vvhich paſſed vvith
them vnder the name of pollicie, eſpeciallie if any thing vvere attempted
againſt a common enemy, or a theefe.
                  A Chriſtian precept. What neede there
any more words?Auguſt. in Quaeſt. ſuper Ioſue queſt. 10. Saint Auguſtine reſolueth ths doubt:
When lawfull warre is vndertaken, it importeth nothing in reſpect
of iuſtice, vvhether the enemy be aſſayled openly, or by ambuſh.
                  An anſwere vnto Florus.
For as concerning that which the Romaine writer ſeemeth
to condemne, in verie deede, he doth not blame: he
onely vviſheth that herein faith and honor, may be preſerued.
For who will allowe of fraude to the preiudice of entercourſe,
contract, and friendſhip? who can likewiſe approue
vile, and villanous deceipt? as if any man ſhould bereaue
his enemy of life by poyſon, or ſend and hire a murtherer
ſecretly to make him away.What kinde of deceipts are good. Abhorre theſe things, and ſuch
like,Plut. and with Ageſilaus carry this minde, that it is a wicked
thing iniuſtly to deceaue him, that is entred into alliance vvith
thee: but to begu
                        •
                     le thine enemies, it is not only lawfull, but likewiſe
profitable, and a thing thou mayeſt well reioyce at.
                  An exhortation vnto them. Theſe
men ioyne in opinion with Homere, that it skilleth not whether
we ouercome by craft, or by force of armes. *Odyſ. 
                        •
                     . And in very
deede,Xenop. there is nothing that is more auayleable in warre,Hippar. then
ſtratagemes.The pray of them. Why doeſt thou expect I ſhould in this place
ſet downe the ſeuerall ſorts of them? Amongſt auncient
writers thou haſt Frontinus, and Polyenus: and ſome authors
of this age, haue likewiſe taken great paines therein.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  What ſeemeth beſt to be done after the conflict: and how the
Prince may behaue himſelfe, to his aduantage and honor,
being victorious, or in the purſuite of the enemy.
               
               
                  I Haue by my conuſels, ſufficiently inſtructed
thee how thou ſhouldeſt prepare thy
ſelfe to warre: now I will intreate of thoſe
things, which are neceſſarie to be done after
the battaile, and as it were by a by-way, will
leade thee to that faire mark, I meane peace.
After the battaile, eyther the victorie is abſolute, or elſe
there followeth ſlaughter. In the victorie, I admoniſh thee
of three things:Three precepts for the vſe of victorie. Whereunto a caution is to be added. to vſe it diſcreetlie, moderatlie, and modeſtlie.
It behooueth thee to vſe it diſcreetly,Liu. 21. 
                  becauſe prosperitie
for the moſt part breedeth negligence: and ſo, ſome wound may
be receaued, by ouer-much truſt. *Tac. Agric. 4. Hiſt. 
                  Likewiſe, often loſſes, though
they be but ſmall, do diſmember and empaire the glory of a purchaſed victorie.
               
               Likewiſe thou oughteſt to vſe it Moderately,
                  Lenitie. victorie being
by nature cruell, Anger, and a fierce enemy, and victorie,
                  Sen. Tr
                        •
                     ad.
                  and the ſword of the conqueror, can not be bridled, and they
which are once infected therewith, their deſire is without pittie.
Notwithſtanding,Neither is all hope to be cut off from the enemy. it is neceſſarie for thee to ouerrule them,
otherwiſe, it will be a great hinderance to thy proceedings.
For where nothing but extremitie is ſeene,Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  thorowe deſperation
they prepare them ſelues boldly to reſiſt. *Curt. 5. 
                  Likewiſe, neceſſitie
ſetteth an edge vpon ſlouth, and oftentimes deſperation is the
cauſe of hope. *Po
                        •
                     tius latro in Declam. 
                  The bitings of enraged neceſſitie, are moſt dangerous.
Wherefore haue regard to this,Another prouocation to peace. and alwaies leaue
ſomewhat for hope: Shew thy ſelfe ſtill at hand, and terrifie
them, but when thou haſt ſufficiently amaſed them,
                  Tac. Agric. 
                  by ſparing
them againe, ſhew by that meanes prouocations of peace. This
doth ſomwhat pacifie them,The fields are to be ſpared. and cutteth off their ſtubbernes,
                  Indid.
                  in reſpect of thoſe things they haue loſt, in reſpect of their riches,
which I would not haue thee vtterly to diſpoſſeſſe thy
ſelfe of. Archidamus geueth better counſell, when he ſayth,

                  Neyther do thou carry any other eſtimation of thine enemies
Countrie,
                  Th
                        •
                     cid. 1. 
                  then as if it were pawned vnto thee, and ſo much the
more, by how much it is more fertill. We muſt ſpare the greateſt
part thereof, leaſt the enemies being brought to madneſſe and
desperation, become not more vneaſie to be conquered. Beſides,
thou ſhalt cauſe them put great confidence in thee,Sen. Theb. if thou
ſpare them as if they were thine owne. For that which thou
commandeſt to be ruined with fire, to be cut downe with the
ſword, thou holdeſt in reputation as none of thine.
               
               
                  Thirdly,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. 
                  vſe thy victorie modeſtlie: For felicitie doth not
onely in an ill diſpoſition lay open couetouſneſſe,Pride is to be auoyded. pride, and other
hidden euils:2. Hiſt. 
                  but euen worthy Captaines waxe inſolent in proſperitie.
And with that Tantalus, that Pindarus ſpeaketh of,
they can not diſgeſt a large fortune.For warre is doubtfull. 
                  O fooliſh men: He that
exalteth himſelfe for the proſperous ſucceſſe hapned in war, doth
not cōſider vpon how falſe a truſt he magnifieth him ſelfe. *Olymp. Od. 1. Thucid. 1. Publius. Fortune
is made of glaſſe, who when it ſhineth brighteſt, is ſooneſt
broken. *Plin. Pane. The ſtate of mortall men is ſubiect to theſe changes,And oftentimes the conqueror is conquered.
that aduerſitie ſpringeth from proſperitie, and proſperitie from
aduerſitie. *Sen. Agamem. How can a conqueror dread any thing? when he is
voide of feare.
               
                  Now in the ouerthrow, I admoniſh thee of two things,
                  It behooneth thee to conſider thy loſſe.
                  to beare the ſame diſcreetly and ſtoutly; with diſcretion in
this ſence, that thou waight and conſider it ſeriouſlie. For
contrarily there are ſome that do faine that all things happenTac. 3. Hiſt.
well:Ibidem. 
                  and keeping thoſe ſecret who brought newes of the ouerthrowe,Otherwiſe thou canſt apply no remedy,
they do rather, by fooliſh diſſimulation, differre their
meanes to remedy the euill, then to put it from them. They can
alleage no reaſon, why the matter ſhould be ſo carried. For
firſt,
                  Sen. Agamem. He that refuſeth to enter into the knowledge of his loſſe,
encreaſeth feare; and thoſe miſhaps vvhich are doubtfull, do afflict
vs moſt of all.Curt. 4. 
                  As on the other ſide: many times it is a
comfort to one in calamitie, to knowe his owne eſtate. Then
ſurely,
                  Sen. Oed. ignorance is a fruitleſſe remedy of euils: nay, it is no remedie
at all: neyther canſt thou cure a diſeaſe,
                  They ought with all endeuor to be ho
                        •
                     
                     pen. 
                  except thou
knowe it. Be not thou ignorant thereof, but rather
examine it, and waigh it well: If the loſſe be ſmall, it

will rather kindle cour age in thee, then feare: If it be great,
                  Tac. 15. An. 
                  yet
do not in a rage caſt away thy weapons; *Cic. pro Muren. nor be thou terrified
with the euent of one battaile.And better fortune to be hoped for. 
                  Is not Mars common? and doth
it not oftentimes exalt the vanquiſhed, and afflict the conqueror?
*Tac. 2. Hiſt. Liu. 28. Egeſip. 4. Cap. 2. It is a token of a faint hart, for ſome little fall, to be out of
hope to riſe againe, ſeeing that for matters of the leaſt moment,Courage of the minde is to be vſed.
things done in warre, do ſuddainely change. Wherefore it behoueth
thee in this caſe, to beare the matter ſtoutly. I
deeme this the part of a King,Sen. Oedip. to endure aduerſitie: and by
how much the ſtate is doubtfull, and the greatneſſe of a declining
Empire doth threaten ruine, ſo much the more ought a
man of courage ſettle him ſelfe to ſtand more firmely. I haue
learned this,
                  We ought to contend with fortune. that men of worth and value,Tac. 2. Hiſt. do relie vpon hope
againſt Fortune: thoſe that are timerous and cowards, do
thorowe feare ſtep forward to deſperation. Do thou rouſe vp
thy ſelfe,
                  And repaire our broken ſtrength. 
                  and conſider thy forces, which are neere vnto thee,Indid.
and farre off: *Veget. 3. Cap. 25. Tac. Agric. Let a newe choiſe of men be made, and a freſh
aide be ſought: Let thy Citties, or thy Caſtels, be aſſured with
continuall munition, againſt a long ſeige. To conclude, ſo that
thy cauſe be good,
                  Flor. 1. Cap. 15. make triall of all things; after the manner
of Serpents, vvho being hurt in the head, do threaten vvith their
taile. *It is better to die with honor, then to liue with infamie. Though that God withſtand a lawfull warre, yet it is
permitted to men of courage to die honeſtly: *Curt. 5. Sall. So Nature hath
appointed one end to all men, euen to thoſe who are encloſed in
their armor: *Tac. 3. Hiſt. only there is this difference, whether it be better
to yeeld the laſt gaſpe vainely and reprochfully, or vertuouſly.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  An earneſt exhortation to peace. And firſt thoſe that are vanquiſhed,
are perſwaded thereunto: meaning, an aſſured and
honeſt peace.
               
               
                  BVt we haue fought enough,The third part of this booke. yea ſufficientlie:
O profitable peace, when wilt thou
turne thy countenance toward vs? I come
vnto thee, and ſhaking off this duſt of
Mars, I will now take alitle reſt vnder the
fortunate tree of Min
                        •
                     rua.
               
               
                  
                  I haue declared,
                  The world cannot continue if there be continuall warre. 
                  how warre is to be enterpriſed and put
in execution, now I greedelie deſire to ſhowe, after what
manner it ought to be brought to an end.
                  Sen. Herc. Fur. If mortall men
do alwaies entertaine eternall hatred, and that furie once begun
do neuer abandon their hearts; but he that hath good ſucceſſe
do ſtill maintaine warre, and he that hath had the ouerthrowe,
ſeeke ſtill to defend himſelfe; in the end nothing will be left to
nouriſh ſedition: then ſhall the waſte field remaine vvithout tillage,
then ſhall the depth of aſhes as a graue couer the dead
corpes, the houſes being burned.Peace is the end of warre. 
                  Although that the warre be
great,
                  Cic. Phil. 13 
                  although it be practiſed dailie, yet is it to be ended
by peace: whoſe verie name is acceptable,The praiſe of peace. but the effect thereof
bringeth both pleaſure and ſafetie: *Id. de leg. Ag. rar. where at it ſeemeth not
thoſe things do reioyce, to whom nature hath giuen ſence and feeling
onely, but euen the houſes themſelues and the verie fields.
*Sill. 11. Peace is the best thing of all others that man hath the knowledge
of to be giuen to him, which of it felfe is more to be deſired
then any triumphes. I ſay, that as well the vanquiſhed,
                  It is auaileable for both ſides. 
                  as the
conquerors, ought to haue recourſe therevnto, being equallie
profitable to them both:Tac. Agric. 15. Ann. Sen. Hec. Fur. 
                  and it is expedient that the vanquiſher
be brought to deſire it,Eſpeciallie to the vanquiſhed. 
                  and it is neceſſarie for him that is
ouercome. But firſt of all do thou who art vanquiſhed giue
care vnto me. I did a while a goe prouoke thee to take
armes, neither do I now perſwade thee to lay them downe,
                  We muſt not lay our defence away if we will haue peace.
                  for the holding of them, is the readie way to purchaſe peace.
Cicero ſaith,
                  Phil. 7. if we deſire to enioy peace, we muſt make warre, if
we forbeare to take armes, we ſhall neuer enioy peace. *Thuc. 1. For peace
is beſt eſtabliſhed through warre.The enemie is to be put in feare. 
                  But what is the meaning of
this? Surelie leaſt otherwiſe thou ſeeme a ſlouthfull and a
certaine vile kinde of creature, and that the enemie may
know,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt. that thou haſt as yet ſome force left, (which if thou art
reſolute) may ſeeme doubtfull; (if deſperate) furious. Wherefore
ſhewe thy ſelfe of a high and confident courage.4. Ann. Iliad. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  And ſay
with Homer, I haue yet long ſpeares, and round ſhields, head
peeces,Guil. Neub. Rer. Anglic. lib. 2. ca. 12. and ſhining cuiraces. Let not the olde prouerbe deceiue
thee, It is beſt treating of peace, with weapons in ones hand.
               Now in peace, thou oughteſt to conſider theſe two things,Two things to be conſidered
                  
                  that it be Honest,In peace. That it be honeſt. 
                  and without fraude. I vnderſtand peace to
be honeſt,
                  Liu. 25. Ex. Cle. Ph
                        •
                     l. 12. Ad A
                        •
                     t. 7. Ep. 14. 
                  when vnder ſome tollerable condition, thou doost end
thy vvarre. That it may rightly be peace, not a contract of
bondage. For albeit that peace be vniust, yet is it to be preferred
before a most iust warre.It is diſhonourable, when it bringeth open thral dome. 
                  Yet ſurelie that peace is intollerable
in a Prince, that bringeth with it his diſhonour, or
infamie. It is a hard thing,Sen. Theb. from a kingdome to fall into bondage:
and it ſeemeth it vvere better to fall vvith honor,Death is rather to be deſired of a good man. 2. That it be without deceit. then
to ſerue with ſhame.Phil. 3.
               
               
                  Next I deſired it might be without fraude, that is to ſay,
pure, white, and vnſpotted, and verie peace in deed. For I
feare fained and falſe peace,
                  Phil. 7. that vnder the name thereof ſhrowdeth
warre.To the intent it may end, not prolong warre. 
                  Manie times by reaſon of the inward hatred of
great perſonages,
                  Sal. Ep. M
                        •
                     thrid.
thou ſhalt finde, that warre is rather prolonged
then true peace eſtabliſhed. And I am of this opinion,
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt. that
warre is more ſafe,At what time it is beſt to treate thereof. then ſuſpitious peace. Thou oughteſt alwaies
to conſider theſe two things, neither canſt thou alwaies
obtaine thy requeſt, except it be perhaps at the beginning
of the warre.
                  Caeſ. 1. bel. Ciuil. Curt. 7. 
                  For it is the beſt ſeaſon, and almoſt there
is but one time to intreate of peace, whilſt either ſide, truſt in their
ſtrength, and both of them ſeeme of equall force. Moreouer, thoſe
do ſeeme equall, who haue not yet made triall of their forces.
But when thy affaires waxe worſe,
                  Some whiles dignitie yeeldeth. 
                  there is greater reaſon
thou ſhouldeſt rather take another courſe,
                  Cic. 5. ep. 21 
                  and rather to accept
of peace, vnder any condition that may bring thy ſafetie,
then being weaker to contend vvith the ſtronger. *Curt. 5. The Pilcte
when he feareth ſhipwracke, by loſſe redeemeth what ſoeuer may
be ſaued: Thou,Tac. 2. Hiſt. and Fortune, hast made triall together: ſhe
hath beene thine aduerſarie, why dooſt thou differre thy r
                     •
                  ine
any longer?5. Hiſt. 
                  Conſider that with the vanquiſhed commonly there
are more lamentations,2. Hiſt. complaints,Forced thereto by neceſſitie. then ſtrength:3. Hiſt. 
                  and although
they ſpeake fiercely, yet haue they ſmall courage. Wherefore
bite on the bridle,
                  Liu. 9. 
                  and (as one ſaid in the like matter) giue
place to neceſſitie,Neither is it ſometimes but for our good, to yeeld to the enemie without condition. which all the gods cannot force. But now,
euen they which might ouercome thee, deſire peace: what wilt
thou do herein? *Id. 7. Ibidem. But leaue the furie and hope which deceaueth
thee, and commit thy ſelfe and all thy fortune, to their

approoued faith.Tac. 2. Ann. 
                  This hath often pro
                        ••
                     ed, and the humble
haue obtained pardon in all things, when they haue yeelded to
all things.If he carrie honour with him. 
                  For the conquerors (whoſe minde is alwaies
muſing on waightie matters) do eaſilie change their furie
into mercie.Sal. Orat. Lepid.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  The Conquerors exhorted to peace, by a triple reaſon: becauſe
it is honourable, profitable, and ſafe: but to a moderate
peace; excluding deceipt. For the obtaining thereof, he maketh
requeſt to the author of peace.
               
               
                  
                     I Will likewiſe draw theſe conquerers vnto
peace. Come hither O thou conqueror, and
albeit thy ſailes are full with a proſperous
winde, yet land at this hauen. Thou maieſt
be compaſſed with a ſtorme, and ſo be drowned.
For although he ſaid;
                  3. Hiſt. that peace and concord
are auaileable to the vanquiſhed, and onely honourable to
the conquerors: Beleeue it not,
                  Peace is a ſeemely thing for the conqueror. 
                  peace doth not onelie bring
honor with it, but moſt commonlie profit and ſafetie. In the
ſight of the world ſurelie it is honourable,
                  Liu. 30. and when thy affaires
do proſper, and thine enemies matters do wauer and are
doubtfull, it is a magnificent and glorious thing for thee to giue
them peace.Ibidem. 
                  How well dooth it beſeeme a Prince, vvhen the
victorie is almoſt in his hands, not to refuſe peace: that all men
may vnderſtand, that thou knowest both how to vndertake
warre iuſtlie,Lib. 23. and how to bring it to an end. *It is to be accepted when occaſion is offered. If thou ouerſlip the
time, when thou maieſt better giue peace to others then accept of
it, I feare, leaſt this ioy do either drowne thee, or vaniſh away to
nothing.Tac. 15. Ann. 
                  And that this come to paſſe that thou hadſt gotten
ſome glorie, and ſome ſpoiles, if thou haddeſt vſed a meane in
glorie, and beene carefull to haue kept the ſpoile. Surelie a holie
perſonage doth crie out,
                  Bernard. in Ep. they which contemne peace and couet
honour,It is likewiſe profitable to be diſburdened of warre and trouble. do looſe both peace and honour.
               
                  Peace is likewiſe profitable. For if thou ſtill continue

warre, what remaineth there for thee,
                  Tac. 12. An. 
                  but weariſomnes if
thou prolong it, and danger if thou art haſtie? For commonlie,
conſtancie is greateſt with men in miſerie,In Agric. when they are with
moſt violence ſet vpon: *Sil. 1. 
                  and in things declining, the laſt vertue
is of moſt force. *Hor. 2. How mortall and dangerous are the biting of
wilde beaſts when they are neere their death.cap. 15. 
                  I adde herevnto
that the Fortune of warre teacheth the vanquiſhed what they
haue to do.Curt. 3. 
                  Neither was that vnaduiſedlie foreſeene,
                  We ought not often to ſet vpon an enemie. 
                  and foreaduiſed
by Licurgus, who made a law, by vvhich he did forbid,plut. in Lycuig.
that they ſhould not ouer often aſſaile the enemie, fearing
leaſt they being accuſtomed to reſist, did not in the end likewiſe
become ſtout ſouldiers.
               
                  Laſt of all,
                  Peace is ſafe. 
                  peace bringeth ſafetie, becauſe thereby thou
eſcapeſt the vncertaintie of warre.
                  Liu. 30. An aſſured peace is better
and more ſafe, then avictorie hoped, thou haſt the one in thine
owne hands,Fortune vncertaine. the other is in the hand of God. *Ibidem. Thinke vpon the
force of Fortune, and that all the things we enterpriſe, are ſubiect
to a thouſand caſualties. *Sen. Herc. Fur. No man can with ſafetie any long
time offer himſelfe to ſo many dangers. *Liu. 30. Hath fortune neuer
deceaued thoſe,Which oftentimes paieth home at the laſt. who haue moſt ſtoutely vndertaken all things?
For this cauſe dread Fortune ſo much the more, and take
heede leaſt the higher ſhee hath exalted thee,Ibidem. thy fall be ſo much
the more ſhamefull. *Sen. Herc. Oct. When God dooth once begin to oppreſſe
thoſe who haue had the world at will,Therefore it is not to be prouoked. when he hath begun it, he
continueth it, and great things haue this end. Wherefore,
                  Curt. 3. feare
the ſame fortune, vnder whoſe fauour, thou haſt brought things
to paſſe ſo proſperouſlie.Ibidem. 
                  For ſhe is like her ſelfe; and do thou
conſider how variable ſhee is, euen in thoſe things ſhee hath beſtowed
on thee. *Homer. Mars is common, and without partiaitie, and
dooth ſlaie thoſe, who would kill others. *Ilia
                        •
                     . 6. Liu. 45. Which is the reaſon
that thou oughteſt in thy proſperitie to do nothing proudlie, or
violent lie againſt any man, neither yet truſt too much to thy preſent
felicitie, ſeeing thou art vncertaine, what may happen before
the enemie.Mingle wiſdom therewith. 
                  Surelie, if God in our happie eſtate,Liu. 30. did giue vs a good
vnderſtanding, we would not onely enter into conſideration of
thoſe things vvhich haue happened alreadies, but likewiſe of thoſe
vvhich may fall out hereafter. Therfore thou ſhalt giue peace

to others,
                  Ibidem. and not ſo couet other mens goods, that thou bring
thine owne in danger. But what peace ſhalt thou giue them?
                  Let thy peace be tollerable.
                  An eaſie peace.
                  Tac. 12. Ann. 
                  For then the end of warre is to bee deemed
worthie, when by pardoning we paſſe vnto peace.
               
                  Bethinke thy ſelfe of this,
                  Sal. Orat. Philip. In. lug. that the greatnes of the people of
Rome encreaſed by taking pittie. *Yea an eaſie peace. Neither did they take any
thing from thoſe that were vanquiſhed, but the meanes to reuenge
themſelues. What ſhould let thee to imitate them?
Looke how much reſolute value we ſhould vſe against the reſolute
enemie,Tac. 12. Ann. ſo much gentleneſſe ſhould we ſhew to them that ſubmit
themſelues to our mercie. *Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem. Thou oughtest vſe ſo great a
gift of God, as to be able to giue or take away life with great
courage and diſcretion: and ſometimes to be content to take
nothing from a Prince thou hast conquered, but glorie and honour.
This will not onelie redownd to thy renowne,
                  For an euill peace is vn
                        •
                     ure. 
                  but to
thy benefit likewiſe. If thou yeeld them a hard and greeuous
peace, who will obſerue the conditions thereof? Neither
do thou beleeue that any nation or particular perſon,Liu. 8. will remane
in that ſtate of life, which is burdenſome and diſpleaſant
vnto him, longer then he ſhall be forced thereunto. *Lib. 9. Whatſoeuer
it be that preſent neceſſitie conſtraineth them vnto, will alwaie
remaine in their minde. And in the end they will exclaime,
                  Tac. 3. Ann.
that a miſerable peace, is in exchange euen worſe then
warre. Priuernas being asked before the Senate of Rome,
                  Good peace is permanent.
                  what kinde of peace he did expect of them: did freelie and
trulie anſwer thus;
                  Liu. 8. If you giue vs a peace which may be for our
good; we will keepe it faithfullie and perpetuallie: if your peace
be euill for vs, vve are not like to keepe it long. It is a true ſaying,
there peace is faithfullie kept,Ibidem. where voluntaries are pacified;
but no faith is to be expected, where in ſteed of peace they enter
into bondage. Graunt thou then an eaſie peace,
                  Howbeit deceits are to be auoided. 
                  but yet
to ſuch as do with all their hearts deſire it. For if any do
ſubtillie, or treacherouſlie demaund it, keepe thoſe vnder.
For the diſſimulation vſed in contracts of alliances and of peace,Veg. 3. ca. 3.
hath done more harme to thoſe that beleeued them, then warre it
ſelfe.Lib. 3. 
                  This is a golden precept of Polybius;Note this ſaying. It behooueth
them which haue the charge of matters of ſtate, to haue regard

to nothing ſo much, as that they be not ignorant what their intent
is, who do either deſire an end of war, or contract friendſhip:
when they do yeeld to the time, and when they being humbled in
their minde do ſeeke peace in earnest: to the end they may beware
of theſe, as of them that he is in ambuſh, and waite as time
obſeruers: and giue credit to the other, as to thy true ſubiects
or friends, whom thou maieſt rule ouer, and commaund whatſoeuer
hapneth.
               
                  I haue hithervnto perſwaded men;
                  A praier for peace. 
                  now I turne my
ſhort and earneſt praiers vnto thee, O thou eternall eſſence,
who art not the God of diſſention, but of peace.*Paul. 1. ad Cor. Cap. 14. Ierem. O thou ſword
of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou ceaſe? turne againe into
thy ſcabbred, rest, and be ſtill.*Cap. 47. Ex eod. Cap. 29. Thinke thou vpon vs,
with the thoughts of peace and not of affliction, and
we will pray vnto thee to giue vs and end, and
patience, and we ſhall liue.
            
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH BOOKE
OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL
DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtene
by luſtus Lipſius.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  Hee commeth to intreat of ciuill warre: and preſenteth the miſeries
thereof brieflie before our eyes.
               
               
                  
                     I Haue finiſhed my externall warre: and
would to God therewith I could giue an
end to ciuill calamities, the which our age
hath theſe many yeares beene an eye witneſſe
of. For order it ſelfe doth force me to treate
thereof. I define ciuill warre to bee,
                  What ciuill warre is. The
taking of armes by the ſubiects, either againſt the Prince, or
amongst them ſelues.The verie height to all miſerie. 
                  Then the which, nothing is more
miſerable, nothing more diſhonorable, which I may rightlie
terme, the verie ſea of calamities.
                  A fearefull thing to thoſe that are true, Citizens. Homer did trulie
write;
                  Iliad. 1. Let him be accurſed, and liue with no nation nor tribe,
vvho coueteth ciuill diſſention, and cruell vvarre. Whoſe
conceipt Cicero doth more explaine and enlarge:
                  Phil. 12. He whom
the diſcord of the Citizens, their ſlaughter, whom ciuill warre
delighteth, can beare no affection to his owne familie, nor to
publicke lawes, nor to the ſtatutes that concerne the common
libertie:Nay indeed to thoſe that are men. and I eſteeme him vvorthie not to bee accoumpted
amongst the number of men, but vtterlie to be baniſhed from
their companie.It is fraught with miſchiefe. 
                  And in deed what miſchiefe is there in the
world that ciuil warre is exempt of?
                  Sal. Orat. Lepidi. Sen. 2. de Ira. Or what diuine or humaine
things are left vnpolluted?*And impietie. The armies are diſpoſed the
one againſt the other; and the fathers againſt their owne ſonnes,

and the ſonnes against their fathers, haue ſworne, the one to deſtroie
another.Luc. 7. 
                  What a horror is it, to ſee neere kinſmen to become
enemies, brother to fight against brother,*Id. 1. and two armies
ioine battaile, allied together in conſanguinitie?And ſlaughter. 
                  What murther
is there not heere committed?
                  Sal. Orat. Lepid
                        •
                     . the condemnation of innocent
perſons to purchaſe their goods; the torture and torment of noble
men, citties waſte and deſolate, by ſlight and ſlaughter, the
goods of the miſerable cittizens, either giuen or ſolde, as a pray of
the enemie.*Confuſed murther. It is permitted to kill any man openlie:Tac. 1 Hiſt. and lawfull
to pardon none, but to the end thou maiest further intrap them.
*Tac. 3. Hiſt. Neither age, nor honor, can protect any, that rape be not mingled
vvith murther, and murther with rape.*Luc. 1. The nobilitie
goeth to wracke, with the common people, and warre is ſpred
on euery ſide, neither is anie man exempt from the edge of the
ſword.
               
                  Now adde herevnto theſe leſſer euils:
                  Trecherie. the vvauering faithTac. 2. Hiſt. 1. Hiſt.
of the ſouldiers by meanes of diſcention:No diſcipline. 
                  The corruption of diſcipline:
the which in peace being whole and entire, is now diſſolued
by the diſcords of the cittizens, either part ha
                     •
                  ing on their
ſide a deprauer of lawes: Herewith treaſon is left vnpuniſhed:
So that in ciuill diſſentions,2. Hiſt. money is of more force then armed
men.Or obedience. 
                  Wee ſee the Souldiers,
                  Ibidem. coueting all, or ſelling all for
money, whether it be right or vvrong: abſtaining no more from
that vvhich is holie, then that vvhich is prophane. This they
do, in deſpight of their leaders, vvho dare not reſist them:Ibidem. 
                  For
they know,
                  1. Hist. that they are more vvilling lie drawne to vndertake
ciuill vvarre, by the licentiouſneſſe of theſe routes and ſpoiles.
And it is generallie true, that in ciuill vvarres,2. Hiſt. the Souldiers
haue more libertie then the Captaines.*Lu
                        •
                     . 5. Caeſar vvas my Generall,
ſaith the Souldier, by the riuers of Rhine, but in theſe
ciuill commotions, hee is my companion: vvickedneſſe mak
                     •
                  th
all thoſe equall one vvith another vvhom it corrupteth. And
what?
                  The changing of places auaileth nothing. 
                  Thinkeſt thou to finde either anie faith or loue at all,Tac. 1. Hiſt.
                  in thoſe of the Citite, and in thoſe of the Countrie? Euen
they vvith ſeare and neceſſitie do vvauer vvhich vvaie the
vvinde bloweth.*2. Hiſt. They are eaſilie ledde by the ſtronger, and
little do they care for men of the best ſort.
               
                  
                  To be ſhort,
                  Cic. 4. Epiſt. ad Fam. Epiſt. 9. Ibidem. all things are full of miſerie in ciuill warre, but
nothing more miſerable then victorie:*The victory is cruell. The which although it
fall on the worthier ſide, yet doth it make them cruell and ou
                     •
                  ragious:
and albeit that by their naturall diſpoſition they are not
bent thereto, yet are they forced by neceſſitie to become ſuch.
*Tac. 3. Hiſt. Cic. 12. Epiſt. ad 
                        •
                     am. Ep. 18. For theſe Captaines which haue bin cruell in beginning of
ciuill warre,Neyther hath the conqueror power thereof. cannot be moderate in victorie. And this is alwayes
the end of Ciuill warre, that not onely thoſe things are
done, which are commanded by the conqueror, but likewiſe he
muſt obey thoſe, by whoſe fauor and ayde the victorie was
gotten. Many other things may be ſayd in deteſtation of
this peſtilent diſeaſe, which being well knowne vnto vs,
I do ouerſlip.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Of the cauſe of Ciuill warre, which he maketh of two ſorts,
Remote, and neere at hand. Firſt, he diſcourſeth of cauſes
remote.
               
               
                  I Now am come to that place, that leadeth me to
diſcourſe diſtinctlie of the cauſes, and the end of
Ciuill warre. For what neede I to ſpeake of the
meanes to execute it? which are like, and the
ſame, that I taught thee in externall warre.In this matter the principall thing is to let warre. Beſides, a wiſe
Prince ought not ſo much to buſy his thought, how to
practiſe Ciuill warre, as to let, and beware of the ſame,
This is the principall thing he ſhould endeuor, and ſurely
the very ſparkles of Ciuill commotions are to be quenched,
for where they are kindled, no wiſedome can ſaue
thee from harme: of neceſſitie there followeth either ruine,
or alteration of matters. Which is the reaſon, why I will intreate
particularly, and conſiderately of the cauſes of Ciuill
warre, and if it be poſſible for me, I will deſtroy this peſtiferous
fruite in the bud.
               There are two cauſes of Ciuill warre, cauſes Remote,
                  Remote cauſes. and
neere at hand. I call thoſe cauſes remote, which are the firſt,
and the true cauſes, but they are either leſſe tyed to the effect, or
leſſe apparent. The other I call thoſe cauſes,Neere cauſes. 
                  which ſpringing

from the firſt, are ioyned to the euents of matters, and do
openly manifeſt them ſelues. Wiſe men do looke into the
firſt cauſes: the eyes of the common people, are turned to
the latter.
               Amongſt the cauſes remote, I reckoned Deſtinie, and
Riot.
               
               
                  Firſt I name Deſtinie,Deſteny and the order of things do ingender ciuill warre. 
                  becauſe by the euents of all ages
it is certaine, that God doth as it were with ſolemnitie deſtroy
mightie Empires, after this manner.
                  Luc. 1. All great kingdomes
runne to wracke of them ſelues, God appointing this to
be the meanes to ſtay things proſperous.Men of Europe marke this. 
                  Thou mayeſt geue
the like iudgement of all other common wealthes, as Saluſt
did of his.
                  Ad Caeſ. This is mine opinion, ſeeing that all things that
do growe and ſpring vp, do likewiſe periſh, that the deſtinie of
the deſtruction of the citie of Roome will happen, at what time
one cittizen ſhall take armes againſt another, and ſo they being
wearie and faint, ſhall become a pray to ſome other King,
or Nation; otherwiſe, the whole world, nor all Nations
gathered together, can not ſo much as moue, or ſhake this
Empire.
               
                  Now Riot is the ſecond cauſe.
                  Riot doth likewiſe by little and little ingender them. For what other thing hath
engendred ciuill ſury, then ouer
                     •
                  great felicitie?*Flor. 2. Cap. 12. Ibid. Weal
                     •
                  h and
riches haue afflicted the manners of all ages, and haue like vnto
a Pump of a Ship drowned the common wealth with their corruptions.
*Ibid. Sumptuous p
                     •
                  ouiſion of banquets, and our fiberall
rewards, haue they not from abundance, forthwith brought
forth want?For from hence proceedeth deſue of other mens goods. From hence proceedeth new hopes. 
                  Yea ſurely,
                  Tac. 1. Hiſt. when as to euery vnthrift and ſpend-all
there ſhall remaine neither lands, nor reuenue, but only the
inſtruments of vices.Indid. 
                  Theſe perſons, will vndertake to make a
mingle mangle of all things, and to cloſe vp their owne wounds,
with the hurt of the common wealth.*Vell. 2. For thus the world
goeth, that euery one had rather to be troden vnder foote, by
the deſtruction of the common wealth, then their owne priuate
ruine, not regarding that he is to runne like fortune with
them.
               
                  Theſe therefore are the degrees:
                  Luc. 1. There is no meane in riches
and buildings, and the firſt meſſes at tables, are ſo ſumptuous,

that they ſhewe they cannot tollerate hunger.*Ibid. Herehence
proceedeth deuouring Vſurie, and greedie gaine for intereſt:
and decayed faith, and warre which is auaileable to many.
               
                  Now theſe are the two remote cauſes. But what remedie
is there againſt them?
                  A remedie or rather a comfort againſt deſtinie. 
                  Againſt one of them none
at all: Thou doeſt in vaine ſtriue with Deſtinie, that is,
againſt the decree of God.
                  Sen. Conſ. ad Helu. Such was the pleaſure of deſtinie,
that the proſperitie of any thing whatſoeuer, ſhould neuer ſtand
alwayes at one ſtay.*Id. Ep. Nothing is exempt from the danger of
change, not the earth, not the heauens, not this whole frame
of all things: For although it be guided by God, it ſhall not
alwayes hold this order, but time will alter it from his courſe.
*Ibid. All things runne on their prefixed time, they haue time to be
borne, to growe up, and to be extinguiſhed. But concerning
Riot (if thou looke thereunto in time) thou haſt a ſure
remedy therefore, from our*Supra lib. 4. Cap. 11. 
                  cenſuring of manners.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Of the cauſes of ciuill warre which are neere at hand:
which are three. Firſt, faction: The hurt thereof in
euery ſtate. And whether ſeditions may at any time
be profitable?
               
               
                  THeſe then,Lu
                        •
                     . 1. as the Poet ſayth, are the publicke
beginnings of vvarre, vvhich do alwayes
ouerthrow mightie nations. Now I do
come to neere cauſes, which ſhew themſelues
to be three, Faction, Sedition, Tyrannie.
               
               I call Faction, the confederacie of a few,
                  Faction deſined. The founta
                        •
                     ne from whence faction ſpringeth. Hate: or ambition. 
                  or many, amongſt
them ſelues, and their diſcord vvith others. The ſpring whereof
oftentimes iſſueth from the priuate, or publicke hatred
of families: but more often from ambition, whileſt
each one ſeeketh to aduance himſelfe, and to put
backe others, and to this end they do conſpire.
               
                  For ſurely,
                  Sen. Ep. 74. none of them all vvho are conuerſant in the

common wealth, reſpect whome they may put downe, but by
whome they themſelues may be ouerthrowne.*Indid. All ambition
hath this fault:This is the right plague of eſtates. It is not reſpectiue: which is the cauſe why
they, like vnto waues, do driue one another: and from hence
proceedeth ſtrife, hate, warre. Factions haue alwaies ben,Liu. 3. and
will be euer the deſtruction of many nations, ſooner then externall
warres, then famine, then death, and then all other things
which men do conſter to be the wrath of God, and as it were the
extremities of publike miſchiefes.Court counſellers allow thereof. 
                  For whereas ſome bad polliticians
at this day do euen allowe of factions, and denie,
that any thing can be more profitable for the Prince againſt theTac. Agric.
ſubiects,But they take their marke amiſſe. then if they do not regard the common profit; they are
greatly deceaued. For as (in the definition I ſhewed) there
are two ſorts of faction, of a few, or many: both kinds are
hurtfull, and that latter of many is apparently dangerous,
                  The popular faction is hurtfull.
                  who truſting in their ſtrength, do forthwith take armes,
and come to handle ſtrokes:
                  Liu. 34. 
                  and oftentimes that ſide which
is too weake to maintaine their pri
                     •
                  ate quarrell, doth rather
ioyne it ſelfe to forraine force, then yeeld to thoſe of their owne
nation.
               
                  Neyther is the firſt of a few who are mightie, leſſe cruell.
                  The faction of Noble men is likewiſe hurtfull.
                  For by little and little as the Philoſopher doth note, The
faction of Noblemen draweth vnto it likewiſe the whole communaltie
to part-taking: yea,Ariſt. 5. Pol. Cap. 4. Cic. de Aruſp. reſ
                        •
                     . 
                  they are with more difficultie
appeaſed. Neyther commonly hath the diſcord amongſt worthy
and mightie men, ſorted any other effect, but eyther a generall
ruyne, or the ſoueraintie and rule of the conqueror.
               How then are factions profitable? for we are taught
theſe things by dayly examples.
                     
                        •
                     rance ſpeaketh hereof. Howbeit, there is ſome vſe of diſſention. I confeſſe this were not
much amiſſe, that there were ſome ſmall diſſention betweene
ſome townes, or prouinces neere vnto thee: yet
would I haue it a ſlight diſcord, and to this only end, that
thereby they might not conſpire againſt thee.Plut. Caton. 
                  Cato had reſpect
hereof in his familie, who did alwayes ſubtillie ſome
little diſcords,
                  Yet but very ſmall. 
                  or diſagreements amongſt his ſeruants, ſuſpecting
and dr
                        ••
                     ding, leaſt their concord ſhould grow ouer-great.
Neyther do I thinke this vnfitly applied in this place.Sen. Ep. 87. 
                  Our

ſocietie is moſt like to the ſtones of a Vault vvhich vvould fall,
but that they hinder one another, by vvhich meanes it is kept
vp. It may be, I would tollerate ſome ſuch diſcord,And it is allowed amongſt neere borderers. and
wonted hatred amongſt neighbours,
                  Tac. 5. Hiſt. but neuer theſe rooted
diſſentions, eſpeciallie amongſt Noble men.Factions are to be ſuppreſſed by lawes. Yea, the
princely Philoſopher ſayth,Ariſt. 5. Pol. Cap. 8. 
                  We ought to endeuor euen by
lawes to hinder ſtrife and partaking amongſt Noble men.
               
               
                  Neyther ought we to ſuffer any coule
                        ••
                      to be worne,
                  And the ba
                        ••
                     
                     ges thereof.
                  or differences of names, or apparell. This was a profitable
inſtruction ſent long ſince from Maecenas, to Auguſtus.Dio. 52.
Surely, the ſureſt vvay, is vvholie to cut off all
diſcords, and ambitious debates, ſo that, neyther newe names,
or any ſuch things, from vvhence diſſention may ariſe, be permitted.
               
                  And ſuch matters are to be quenched euen in the beginning.
                  And the beginnings thereof.
Order ought to be taken for theſe things at the firſt,Ariſt. 5. Pol. Cap. 4. Curt. 6. Liu. 34.
and the diſcords of Magiſtrates and mightie men, to be diſperſed.
For ſmall ſparckles being neglected, haue kindled a great
fire. And there is alwayes great danger of matters of this
ſort,Aſſemblies are to be forbidde
                        •
                     . if thou ſuffereſt aſſemblies, and counſels, and ſecret conſultations.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  He diſcourſeth of Sedition, the ſecond cauſe. The beginning,
and encreaſe thereof, and the remedies diſtinctlie
applied thereunto.
               
               
                  NOw Sedition likewiſe is another cauſe of
Ciuill warre,The definition of Sedition. which I define to be a ſuddaine,
and violent motion of the multitude againſt
the Prince, or the Magiſtrates. Of
the beginning, proceeding, and remedies
whereof, I will ſpeake that which ſhall be
for thy profit, and ſet it downe in order.The ſprings thereof are many: The beginning
thereof ſpringeth from diuers cauſes.
               
                  Oftentimes men are ſtirred vp to take armes, eyther
                  As
                  
                  thorowe oppreſſion,
                  Oppreſſion. 
                  or feare, when they imagine the verie
dangers them ſelues, to be the remedies of imminent perils.
Ariſtotle touched this cauſe verie diſcreetlie:
                  Or feare. 
                  ſayth he,
they moue ſeditious thorowe feare,5. Pol. Cap. 3. as well ſuch as haue done
wrong dreading puniſhment, as others, who looking to themſelues,
would willinglie preuent it before it hapned.
               
                  Sometimes thorowe ſufferance,
                  Ouer-much looleneſſe. 
                  and ouer-much libertie:
As Appu
                     •
                  s whome L
                     •
                  uie reciteth, ſayd,
                  Liu. 2. that the people
vvere moued, not ſo much vvith vvant, as vvith libertie: and
that they vvere rather geuen to vvantonneſſe, then to crueltie.
               
                  Many times likewiſe, thorowe want and neceſſitie.
                  Miſerie. 
                  For
alwayes in a Cittie, they which haue no ſubſtance at all, do
enuie goodmen,Sal. Iug. hate the eſtate of things that haue continued
long, deſire change, and thorow the loathing of their owne condition
of life, they ſeeke to alter all things.
               Finally, moſt often from their leaders,The courage of the leaders of the common people. when as ſome
principall perſons, who carrie credit with them, do ſtirre.
For the common people, like vnto the Sea, are of themſelues
immoueable,
                  Liu. 27. Ibidem. which theſe Aeol
                        •
                     do ſtirre, and the cauſe
and beginning of this furie remayneth in them, from vvhen
the multitude are infected: whome it is needfull, that I deſcribe
vnto you.
               
                  Firſt, ſome ambitious perſons march formoſt in this
rancke,
                  Whome ambition doth driue. 
                  who in priuate are faint, in publick, hurtfull,Tac. 11. An. Cic. 2. in Caton. hauing
no hope left but that they purchaſe thorowe diſcords. Who do
imagine, they are able to attaine to thoſe honors (the common
wealth being troubled) which they were in diſpaire of (the ſame
being in quiet.)
               
                  Secondly,
                  Matter of debt. 
                  they which are indebted, and haue conſumed
their ſubſtance, whoſe credit in peace is called vpon,Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  who are
toyfull in time of commotion, and moſt ſafe when all things are
vnaſſured.*& Whoſe peace is in diſcord, & whoſe trouble,Sal. Orat. Phil. Ibidem. in peace.
Therefore, they do greedelie endeuour, out of one tumult to
moue another, and warre, out of warre.
               
                  Thirdly likewiſe,
                  Inconſtantneſſe. 
                  certaine vaine, and inconſtant perſons;
Who reioyce not ſo much for any recompence theyTac. 2. Hiſt.
                  
looke to reape by at the common perill, as at the perils themſelues,
preferring newe, doubtfull, and vncertaine matters,
before things certaine, vvhich they haue alreadie the poſſeſſion
of.The proce
                        ••
                     
                     ding and increaſe of ſedition. 
                  Theſe are the beginnings, theſe are the cauſes and
mouers of ciuill diſſention, which hath theſe proceedings
which follow.
               
               
                  Theſe ſorts of men by ſundrie deuiſes,
                  1. Ann. do
                     •
                  ſtirre 
                     •
                  p the
mindes of thoſe who are eaſie to be deceaued. Firſt ſecretly, and
in communication by night,Ibidem. or towards the euening, when thoſe of
the beſt ſort haue withdrawne themſelues, they aſſemble together
the worſt ſort of men.1. Hiſt. 
                  There they ſet quarels abroach, and
hold ſcandalous ſpeaches of the Prince, and ſuch other things as
diſturbe the common people. Immediatly after, they proceede
with more boldneſſe,
                  1. Ann. by the meanes of other miniſters of ſedition
who are in a readineſſe:4. Hiſt. 
                  and do openly couer themſelues
with this word libertie, and other glorious names.They are wo
                        ••
                      to couer themſelues with the vaile of the publicke libertie and ſafegard. The common people are light of beliefe. 
                  But how
falſely is this?
                  16. Ann. 
                  For to the intent they may ouerthrow the eſtate,
they prefer libertie, which if they could get the vpper hand, they
would ſet vpon.*4. Hiſt. Neither was there euer any, who did couet the
thraldome, and rule of others, who hath not vſurped theſe foreſaid
names.1. Ann. 
                  Neuertheleſſe, the common people liſten to them.
               
                  Firſt euery light head,1. Hiſt. careleſſe of the time to come, feeding
themſelues with a vaine hope.Indid. 
                  And, as it hapneth in ſeditions,
where there were but a few aſſembled, by and by, they all runne
together. And theſe fierce, and bold fellowes, do beare rule
amongſt them,
                  3. Hiſt. 
                  and thoſe who voyde of all humanitie,Men of 
                        •
                     irie ſpirits do leade them. are
accuſtomed to riſe againſt their Prince, hauing left no hope to
themſelues,Ibidem. in the middeſt of miſerie. For theſe men ſeeme
openly to take the defence of the cauſe:*Ibidem. being by ſo much the
more acceptable to the multitude, as they make themſelues companions
of puniſhment, or glorie.1. Ann. 
                  To be ſhort,
                  Who are alwayes acceptable to the common people. by how much
euerie man is more forward in boldneſſe, by ſo much do they geue
more credit to him, and he is thought to be more fit for ſterres
and commotions.*Prou. verſ. 1 Likewiſe in theſe burly burlies any wicked
fellow may attaine vnto honor.
               Theſe are the proceedings. But what remedie is there for
them?The remedies to be applied remaine in the Prince. that I will geue thee. I counſel thee to looke vnto the

                  matter in time. For moſt commonly,
                  Tac. 13. An. the firſt motions, are
appeaſed with eaſie remedies. *Cic. Ph. l. 5. Euery euill at the firſt growth
is ſoone ſtopped: when it hath taken further roote, it commonly
gathereth more ſtrength.Tac. 1. Hiſt. 
                  Conſider therefore, whether ſedition
when it beginneth and is not yet come to his right forme,
may not by better counſell be bent after another faſhion. Send
ſome vnto them,
                  Theſe troubleſome perſons are to be appeaſed by ſome admoniſheis. 
                  who may admoniſh them, and perſwade
them, eſpeciallie ſuch,
                  3. Hiſt. 
                  who haue an abilitie of eloquence, and
the arte and authoritie, to winne the common people.
               
                  But ſhall not the Prince him ſelfe goe? not without
great cauſe: and I had rather,
                  1. Hiſt. that his ſoueraigne authoritie,
were reſerued for remedies of more importance.Sometimes by the King himſelfe. 
                  Yet ſometimes
I do not diſallow,
                  1. Ann. Lucan. 5. that he borrowe his aſſurance from
courage. Worthie Caeſar did ſo, and ſtanding on a heape of
turfes, vvith a confident countenance, he procured feare in
others, by fearing nothing him ſelfe. Likewiſe,
                  Tac. 1. An. vvorthie Auguſtus
vvith his countenance and lookes, put feare into the
legions of Actium. Why ſhouldeſt not thou do the like in
a doubtfull matter, and
                  1. Hiſt. vvhere reſt is more dangerous to
thee,Any thing done ſtoutly terrifieth them. then raſhneſſe?Luc. 5. 
                  Dare thou, they will feare: Sedition that
dareth not enterpriſe any thing valiantly, and youth vvhich
onely meditateth how to runne away, diſcouereth their cowardly
mindes.The common people rather begin then goe thorowe. 
                  For thou oughteſt not to be ignorant of
this, that the rude multitude hath more courage to rebell,Ex Liu. 7.
then to fight. And this is ingrafted in them,
                  Id. 6. rather to aſſay
then to defend their libertie.They are eaſily appeaſed. 
                  Geue eare to this diuine ſaying,
Euerie multitude,Curt. 9. especiallie of men of vvarre, is caried
vvith a ſlender violence: ſo that the remedies of ſedition, are
not greater then the beginnings. *Titinnius. A Cooke vvhen his pot beginneth
to boile, ſtirreth it vvith a ladle.
               
                  But now what if Sedition increaſeth,
                  Yet ſometimes to be ſubdued by force. 
                  and wa
                        •
                     eth
ſtrong?
                  Tac. 1. An. 
                  Surely, vve muſt vſe ſtronger remedies. And if they
refuſe to obey thee,Ibidem. thou muſt fight it out. Yet not ſuddainely:
Geue time for the vvicked to repent,Yet by a ſlowe force. for the good to agree
together.1. Hiſt. Liu. 2. 
                  Thinke vppon the matter, peraduenture time and
leaſure it ſelfe vvill mollifie their furie, and bring health to their
diſeaſed mindes.
               
                  
In the meane time giue them diuers hopes, and put them in
                  Tac. 1. Ann.
                  feare. But firſt of all ſeperate and diſioine them by pollicie,They are to be vſed with ſundrie pollicies. To be diſunited.
                  by which remedie the agreement of the multitude is most eaſilie
taken awaie.
                  Tac.
               
               
                  Winne ſome vnto thee by ſecret rewards,
                  To be corrupted. and thou
ſhalt neuer want thoſe who deſire to get the fauour of the
better part,Liu. 2. for the good of the common wealth.To be deceaued. 
                  Send ſome
publikelie vnto them,
                  Tac. 2. 
                  who may faine to deſire the ſame
things they do, to the end the greater accoumpt may be made
of their counſell.To be wonne by faire ſpeeches. 
                  Theſe men ſhall deceiue thee: do thou
likewiſe paie them with words,
                  4. Hiſt. 
                  for faire ſpeach is of much
force vvith them. *Plut. Polit. They ſay the Woolſe is not held by the eare,
but we may most eaſilie draw the common people and citizens
thereby.To be allured with doubtfull promiſes. 
                  Offer them faire things, yea promiſe them doubtfullie,
what matter is it? by this meanes thou ſhalt ſoone
make thoſe things of none effect,Tac. 1 Ann. which thorow ſedition they did
enterpriſe. I do altogether approoue this profitable deceipt.
Do thou beguile them, do thou deceiue them, rather
then proceed to ſlaughter. And if there be any blemiſh
therein, I would haue that wiped awaie with clemencie
and lenitie.
                  But being allured they are to be vſed with gentleneſſe. Do thou onely puniſh the cheefe conſpiratiors. 
                  Are they turned back vnto thee? be not thou
cruell againſt them.
                  Ex. Tac. 1. Though it were a fault committed by them
all,Hiſt. yet puniſh but a few. It will be ſufficient, if the authors of
wretched ſedition,Liu. 28. be executed for their offence.Tac. 4. Ann. 
                  Yet if one or
other, of them that are most mutinous, be put to death, *Luca. 5. the offence
that is committed by many, is without reuenge. *Liu. 28. Where
the fault first ſprang, there let the puniſhment remaine. And
know thou,
                  Ibidem. an example of chaſtiſment, is ſufficient for a multitude.
Neither do thou enquire after thoſe that are acceſſaries.And enquire no further who haue offended.
                  Let all be ſafe vnder the protection of the Prince: and
by the example of Tyberius,Tac. 
                        •
                     . Annal. albeit many are ſaid to haue aided
them with their wealth, and holpen them with their aduiſes,
yet do not thou enquire after them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of Tyrannie; what it is, and wherein it imploieth it ſelfe. The
euils thereof laid open to our view. And a queſtion propoſed,
whether it be to be taken away, or tollerated.
               
               
                  THe third occaſion amongſt the cauſes of ciuill
warre is Tyrannie.
                  The definition of tyrannie. But what is it? A violent
gouernement of one, beſides the cuſtomes and
lawes. I ſay a violent gouernement, becauſe
a tyrant,Force followeth it. being ſubiect to the common hate
of all men,Senec. Here. Fur. runneth to this ſanctuarie: That which he knoweth
he holdeth against the will of the ſubiects, that he defendeth
vvith the naked ſword.
                  And terror. Beſides other things, thou ſhalt
finde this difference, betweene a king and a tyrant, that
                  Sen. 1. de Clem.
                  the one hath armed men, which he vſeth for to maintaine peace;
the other, that by them, by great terror he may appeaſe great
hatreds.
               
               
                  Likewiſe I ſay,
                  It is without law. beſides the cuſtomes and lawes. For with
Tyrants,
                  Sen. Herc. Fur. their right conſiſteth in their weapons, and feare oppreſſeth
the lawes. *Tac. Agric. To take, to kill, to rent from others, they
do by falſe names learne gouernement, and vvhen they haue
brought all to ſolitarineſſe,Without any good cuſtome. they call that peace. They ſubuert
the lawes, vnder ſome apparence of lawes: and for this purpoſe
they haue ſecret accuſers of their ſubiects, which kinde
of men being ſought out for the deſtruction of the common-wealth,Tac. 4. Ann.
who can neuer be thorowly chaſtiſed by any puniſhment,
they draw vnto them by rewards.It loueth informers. 
                  And by how much any is a
more ſharpe accuſer of others,Ibid. by ſo much is he held of them for
a holie perſon: men of ſmall accoumpt, and baſe perſons, are puniſhed.
So that vnder them a man is most ſafe,Defendeth bad perſons. by how much
he is most vvicked. For a tyrant,Sall. holdeth good men in more
ſuſpition,Id. Catil. then bad perſons: and other mens vertue alwaies
putteth him in feare.It hateth and feareth good men, and worthie perſons. 
                  Whence proceedeth a ſiniſter interpretation
against men of most worth,Tac. in Agric. neither is there leſſe danger
to be of a good report,1. Hiſt. then of an ill reputation. Nobilitie,

wealth, dignities, accepted of or refuſed, are accoumpted as a
crime: and for vertue deſtruction is most certaine.Likewiſe men of learning. 
                  Yea euen
for learning. For
                  In Agric. they chaſe from them the profeſſors of wiſdome,
and baniſh all good artes. And what is the reaſon hereof?
                  Ibidem.
Forſooth least any good thing might be in their ſight. For
they themſelues being vicious,
                  Plin. Plut. do thorow vices, ſend thoſe
artes vvhich are enemies to them a farre of, not more thorow
hatred,It is an enemie to good authors and their workes. then the awe they ſtand in of thoſe artes. Nay
thorow feare of reproche with poſteritie, they wreake
their rage againſt their writings, and
                  Tac. Agric. do burne the monuments
of most worthie wittes in the market place, and in the aſſemblie
of the people.Ibidem. 
                  But they do not likewiſe,Which it aboliſheth in vaine. vvith that fire aboliſh
the talke of the people,4. Ann. and the conſciences of men. I cannot but
laugh at their vvant of vvit, vvho do beleeue by meanes of
their preſent authoritie, that they are able likewiſe to quench
the memorie of thoſe that ſhall come after them. *Whom God hath greater care of, and preſerueth better. For on the
other ſide,Ibidem. the maieſtie of artes encreaſeth by ſuch puniſhment:
So that forraine Princes, and they which haue vſed like crueltie,
haue gotten nothing elſe thereby, then diſhonour to themſelues,
and glorie to them.
               Theſe are the deeds of tyrants.It is hatefull to all men. But what fruite ſpringeth
thereof? moſt bitter. For they are hatefull to all men:
and euen they vvho traine them vp in wickedneſſe,
                  Plin. Pan. 
                  detest wicked
Princes.
               
               
                  They are in continuall feare,
                  Tac. 2. Hiſt. In Agric. 
                  and amazed at euery ſuſpition.
Therefore by ſpials they take away the vſe both of ſpeaking
and talking.It likewiſe feareth all men. 
                  They do not onely vvatch mens tongues,
                  Sen. 1. de Clem. 
                  but
mens hands, and do imagine though there be no complot laid for
them, that they are ſought after, and they are no moment free
from feare. *Claud. 4. Conſ. Honor. This condition of life agreeth with tyrants: they
enuie worthy men, murther thoſe that are valiant, they liue garded
with weapons: compaſſed about with poiſon: their places of
defence are ſuſpected of them, and trembling, they threaten.
               
                  Adde hereunto their inward, vexation and torment.
                  A tyrant is tormented with his owne conſcious
                        •
                     . 
                  For
if the hearts of tyrants lay open to view;Tac. 4. An. you might behold
them torne and rent, vvith crueltie, vvith luſts, vvith vvicked
determinations, as the bodie vvith ſtripes. And they

do euen deſire that they had neuer ſhined with their proud ſcepters. *Sil. 13.
So that their wickedneſſe and miſcheife doth turne toTac. 6. Anno.
their owne puniſhment.Followed with misfortune. 
                  But to conclude, what is their end?
either they are depriued of their eſtate or murthered. For
iuſt kings waxe olde,
                  Sen. 1. de Cl
                        •
                     m. and leaue their kingdomes to their children
or their nephues.For they rarely liue long. 
                  But the authoritie of tyrants is hateful
                     •
                  
and ſhort.Laert. in eius vita. Thales being asked, vvhat rare thing he had ſcene?
aunſwered,They ſildome eſcape without murther. an old tyrant. And our Poet ſaid not in vaine:
that few kings did come to their full age without murther,Iuuen. Sat. 10. or
wound, and tyrants without a drie death, that is, without their
bloud ſhedding.
               Thou ſeeſt this cruell beaſt:The remedie againſt them. Some men would haue them made away. Whereunto many agree. but what remedie is there
againſt it? A double remedie. Either to diſpatch it, or tollerate
it. The firſt commeth from a more high ſpirit, to
whom it ſeemeth better to die,
                  Cic. 1. de offic. Id. pro Mil. 
                  then to beholde the countenance
of a tyrant. I do not reprehend him, knowing, that the
Grecians did attribute like honour as they did to their gods, to
him who had ſlaine a tyrant. Likewiſe I heare the tragicall
Poet,Sen. Here. Fur. who ſaith, there can no more liberall nor richer ſacrifice
be offered to Iupiter, then a wicked king.
               
               Howbeit, I deeme the other rather agreeing with the rule
of wiſdome,But they ſeeme rather to be tollerated. and more often for the common profit. What
ſubiect ſoeuer thou art,Ex. Liu. 3. if thou beleeue me, take thy ſhield to
thee, rather then thy ſword. Yea I ſay, this ſhield of ſufferance.Becauſe God ſendeth them.
For do not kings come from God? Therefore it is a
doubtfull matter,Tac. 15. 
                  to bloudie thy ſelfe with the death of the
Prince.
                  Aur. Homer. Odiſs. 
                        •
                     . The chiefe light of the Poets ſaid, It is a heauie matter,
to put to death the kings race.
                  Neither is the kings bloud lightly to be ſhed. Yea ſurelie an ouer-heauie
matter it is. It is a heauie thing, yea and for the moſt part a
thing vnfortunate: if we giue credit to examples of all ages.
Behold, priuatly there followeth immediatlie reuenge,It ſeldome falleth out for any mans good in priuate.
and whoſoeuer ſucceedeth is a reuenger of ſo hainous
a crime.Tac. 1. Hiſt. Ibidem. For vengeance hath beene by cuſtome taught to all
Princes as their ſafegard; for the preſent time, and for the time
to come. Euen for example ſake,Sen. Oed. the ſafetie of kings belongeth
eſpeciallie to kings.Much leſſe in publike. And publikelie what followeth but
murther? and it ſeldome hapneth,Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  that ſo great a waight can

be taken away, without the preſſing to death of the remoouer
thereof. Herehence do ſpring factions,And it is alwaies the cauſe of ſlaughter. diſſentions, and ciuill
warre.Plutar. in Brut
                        •
                     . And I do with 
                     
                        •
                     auonius affirme, that ciuill warre
is worſe and more miſerable then tyrannie, or iniust gouernement.
Wherefore ſhould it not be more praiſe worthy,It were better to tollerate them. to
tollerate our Prince as hee is?Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  Wee ought to remember the
time wherein we are borne, and to pray to God to ſend vs good
Princes, and how ſoeuer they are,
                  As all euils comming from aboue. 
                  to beare with them. For ſuch
things come from God,Indid. and from aboue, and as we endure
ſcarſitie, or tempeſtuous ſhowres in great aboundance, and other
euils comming from nature, ſo ought we to ſuffer riot,
                  Plaut. 
                  and the
couetouſneſſe of ſuch as beare rule ouer vs. *For it belongeth to ſubiects to obay. 
                  Thoſe diſhonourable
things a king doth, are to be accoumpted honorable. Why
doſt thou ſpurne againſt thy Prince?Tac. 4. An. 
                  God hath giuen him the
ſoueraigne iudgement of all things, and hath left the glorie of obedience
to ſubiects. *Egeſip. lib. 2. cap. 9. Ibidem. 
                  Nothing doth more exaſperate the griefe
of a vvound, then the impatience of ſuffering. *It is hurtfull to ſtriue with ones yoake. 
                  In wilde beaſts,
if they ſtirre their ſtraight collers, they leaue a print behinde
them; if they be quiet, they receaue eaſe. But conſider euen
thy ſelfe, if thou be not culpable of a more hard gouernment.Alex. apud Curt. lib. 8.
For as that great Monarque ſaid,Modeſtie appeaſeth princes. 
                  The clemencie of
kings and leaders, conſiſteth not ſo much in themſelues, as in
their diſpoſition who do obey. *Indid. 
                  Gouernement is mitigated by obedience.
One being asked,Theopompo. tribuit Plu. 
                  what was the reaſon that Sparta
did ſo flouriſh? whether it was becauſe their kings did know well
how to beare rule? Nay rather, quoth he, becauſe the Cittizens
know how to obay well.
                  Stubburneſſe maketh them more cruell. O ſurelie it was well ſaid: and do
thou the like.Tac. Agric. For thou doſt often draw backe, and thorow
ſtubberneſſe and vaine boaſting, prouoke the deſtinies, and call
thy credit in queſtion.
                  And when they ſeeke ouer much libertie. Thou doſt aſpire to a full and perfect
libertie.14. Hiſt. Art thou ignorant, that as a gouernment that hath no
meane doth pleaſe the vvorst ſort of Princes, ſo a temperate
libertie doth not content thoſe of the best ſort. And neceſſarilie,16. Ann.
                  by the reſiſtance of thoſe that obey, the lenitie of thoſe that
commaund is diminiſhed.
                  In Agric. Shake of theſe affections,A warning for ſubiects. 
                  and refraine
thy furie, learne to obey, and be inſtructed to mingle thoſe things
that are profitable, vvith matters that are honeſt. *4. Hist. 
                  Deſire

not rather to be ſtubburne to thy heart, thē to obay for thy good.
Thinke on this daily,Plin. Pan. 
                  that it is farre better for thoſe that are
vnder the yoake of bondage to ſerue one, then to be at libertie and
to liue with diſcention.
                  Who are giuen to quarels and reproches. I confeſſe, that Princes oftentimes
are euill, and am greeued thereat: but likewiſe in ſlandering
them we make them worſe. Such is the diſpoſition of
the common people, they dare be bolde, and it reioyceth
them by little & little,Statius. Theb. 
                  to offend great men, by a ſubtill venime:
neither can they endure thoſe that are ſet to commaund ouer
them vvith a vvilling obedience.
                  Thuc. 1. And as Thucidides ſaid, the
preſent gouernement is alwaies greeuous to the ſubiects. But
what if it were after another ſort?Let them endure things preſent, in hope of amendment. It is all one. For while
there are men,
                  Tac. 4. Hiſt. 
                  there be vices: neither yet doth this laſt alwaies,
and recompence is made by the change of thoſe that are better.
Wherefore I conclude,12. Ann. 
                  the diſpoſition of kings is to be borne
withall, neither are often changes profitable.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  A little queſtion inſerted by occaſion: vvhether a good man
ought to make one in ciuill warres? The ſame handled on
both ſides: and defined, with ſome diſtinction of perſons.
               
               
                  THeſe are the beginnings, and theſe are the
cauſes of ciuill warre. The meanes to execute
it ſhould follow: but with reaſon I
haue excuſed my ſelfe to ſpeake thereof.Whether a good man ſhould make one in ciuill warre? It ſeemeth he ſhould not. In
this place I wil only enquire how an honeſt
man ought to behaue himſelfe in this ciuill
warre. Shall he ſit ſtill, or ſhall he ioyne himſelfe to one ſide
or other? Reaſons and examples ſeeme to perſwade him,
that he ſhould not ſtirre.
               Reaſon induceth him thereto,Becauſe it is euill. becauſe ciuill warre, cannot
honeſtlie be enterpriſed.
                  Tac. 1. Ann. And likewiſe for the moſt part the
end of taking armes is wicked:Becauſe the end thereof is euill. and the leaders vnder a pretext
of the publike profit,
                  Sall. Iug. 
                  do each of them ſtriue for their priuate
authoritie.
                  Id. Orat. Macri Trib. Pleb. 
                  Salluſt ſaith, in theſe ciuill diſſentions, their words
ſeeme other, but on either ſide they fight who ſhall gouerne. What

then is more fit for an honeſt man and peaceable cittizen,
                  Caeſ. inter Ep. ad Att. 10. Ep. 7. 
                  then to
abſent himſelfe from theſe ciuill broiles?
                  Becauſe it is practi
                        •
                     ed with crueltie. Adde hereunto, that a
certaine crueltie and rigor is annexed to theſe warres: from
the which ſurelie, an honeſt man doth vtterly abhorre. In
regarde whereof Cicero exclaimeth,Ad Att. 9. Ep. 4. 
                  I do ſurely deeme it the
part of a good cittizen, and honeſt man, rather to endure any
kinde of puniſhment, then not onely to be aiding to ſo great crueltie,
but likewiſe not to be preſent threat.
               
               
                  Now if we looke into examples,
                  And great perſonages haue abhorred it. 
                  they are moſt notable.
The report is,Id. ad Fam. 2. Ep. 16. Vell. 2. that Q. Hortenſius was wont to bragge, that he
was neuer preſent at any ciuill vvarre. Likewiſe there remaineth
that memorable deed, and ſaying of Aſinius Pollio. For
vvhen Caeſar asked him, if he would go with him to the vvarre
of Actium: quoth he, I will ſeperate my ſelfe from your ſtrife, and
become the proy of the conquerour. Thou maieſt finde many
ſuch other examples.
               
               
                  Yet on the other ſide,
                  On the other ſide, it ſeemeth he ſhould. For it is the part of a good man, to follow good men. And Solon made prouiſion thereof by a law. 
                  there are both reaſons and examples.
The reaſons are theſe. Where there is diſſention, why
ſhould an honeſt man leaue his friends?
                  Cic. ad Att. 7. Ep. 7. Yea euen as the Oxe
followeth the whole droue, ſo ſhould he follow goodmen, or thoſe
who are reputed to be ſuch. Wiſe Solon by a law baniſhed
thoſe quiet perſons which followed neither partie.
                  Agel. Noct. Att. lib. 2. cap. 12. In matter
of ciuill diſſention, ſaith he, he that doth not ioyne himſelfe to one
ſide or other, but being alone, and ſeperate from other, doth withdraw
himſelfe from the publicke loſſe of his cittie, let him be depriued
of his houſe, of his countrie, and of all his ſubſtance, let him
be baniſhed and exiled. What did Cato the Romaine,
                  And worthie men haue done the like. the liuelie
patterne oſ vertue, *Sen. 1. de Tranquil. 2. de Tranquil. a more certaine example of wiſdom, then
either Hercules or Vliſſes. Did not he in ciuill warre ſhew
himſelfe, not onely a follower, but a leader? The matter is
manifeſt. Therefore an honeſt man ſhall do the like, and
howſoeuer the chance ſhal fall out,Cic. ad. Att. 8. Ep. 1. he ought rather to runne fortune
with thoſe that haue the opinion to be honeſt men, then
ſeeme to diſſent from them that are honest.
               Thou ſeeſt the difference of opinions:A difference therein. Men of action and dignitie ought to be a partie. what ſhall wee
deſire? Peace. Wee hold both opinions to bee good, yet
with a certaine diſtinction of perſons. Is hee a man of

renowne,Id. pro Sex. and worthy? Hee ought to employ him in the common
wealth, and endeuour to behaue himſelfe therein, with ſo
much the more excellencie. He ought to holde the laſt opinion,
and do as cattell are vvont,
                  Id. ad Att. 7. Ep. 7. 
                  vvhich being driuen, do follow
the heard that is of their kinde. What couler, or reaſon is
there, when the weather is calme to ſit at the Stearne, and to
forſake it, and lay it from thee in a tempeſt? Thou maieſt
not. Wee know theſe kinde of men,Id. pro. Sex. 
                  ought to be ſubiect
to their dignitie, that they are to procure the good of the common-wealth,
and that in the whole courſe of their life, they ought
to do their dutie.
               
               Intermingle and ioyne thy ſelfe to ſome:Yet with modeſtie. but with this
condition, that it may appeare, that like a vviſe and good cittizen,
                  Id. ad Fam. 4. Ep. 7.
                  thou doſt against thy vvill enter into the beginning of ciuill
vvarre, and that thou doſt vnwillinglie proſecute it to the end.
If thou referreſt thy counſels to peace, if in the heate of
warre thou doſt temper thy rage, and thy victorie: thou
ſhalt be held in the reputation of an honeſt man, and of a
cittizen.Men of leſſe worth, who medle with nothing may be quiet. But on the other ſide, is there any that hideth
himſelfe? and is of that ſort of men, who refuſe honour,
                  Id. pro. Sex. 
                  nor
do intermedle vvith the common-wealth? Such a one in my
opinion, ought in like maner not to haue any thing to do
with ciuill warre. Why ſhould he now venture himſelfe in
that turbulent ſea; who neuer tried it, when it was calme?
Surelie,Caeſ. inijs ad Att. 10. he ſhall neither finde any thing more fafe, or honest, then
to abſent himſelfe from all diſſention. *Ep. 7. 
                  I am of opinion he vvere
better to remaine in ſome towne free from vvarre,
                  Cel. ad Cic. lib. 10. ad Att. 
                  vntill thoſe
broiles were decided.
                  Yet ought they ſtand affected to good men. Notwithſtanding with this condition,
that he ſeeme not more enclined to the diſhoneſt cauſe. For who
would not helpe his countrie,Cic. ad Att. 7. Ep. 25. at the leaſt with his goodwill?We ought to imitate the worthie example of Atticus.
Take example by Titus Atticus the ſonne of modeſtie
and wiſdome,Nepos in eius vita. who did ſo behaue himſelfe in the common-wealth,
that he held alwaies, and ſo vvas deemed, on the
ſide of the vvorthieſt men: neither did hee euer commit himſelfe
to theſe ciuill vvaues: becauſe he eſteemed that they that
applied them ſelues thereto, had no more power of themſelues
then they, vvho caſt themſelues into the ſea.
               
               
                  
                  I ſalute that worthie and allowed perſon of renowmed
Caeſar,S
                        •
                     eion. Iul. Cap. 75. 
                  who when Pompey declared them to be his enemies, who
ſhewed not them ſelues in the common wealth;The modeſtie of Caeſar ought to be imitated of Princes. Thoſe of the
middle ſort, and newters, Caeſar ſayd, he would accoumpt to be
of his ſide. We are of the like iudgement in a matter litigious,
wherein,
                  Cic. in ijs ad Att. 8. Epiſt. 15. Id. pro Marcel. I plainely geue thee to vnderſtand, I will not ſatisfie
thoſe men, who are deſirous of warre. But let them conſider
my calling, and let them knowe, that our counſels
are the companions of peace, and the gowne not of warre, and
weapons.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Of the end of Ciuill warre, and therewithall the end of
this booke.
               
               
                  BVt now I do with all earneſtneſſe reioyce,
and as Mariners,Plaut. Menec. 
                  when as a farre at ſea they
eſpie land, are glad with all their heart, euen
ſo am I, who do not only ſee land, but touch
it. There is onely a little diſtance betweene
me, and it, the finiſhing of Ciuill warre,
which I will runne out in one and the ſame courſe, without
turning ſaile.
               Ciuill diſcord is ended two manner of wayes,Two waies to end ciuill war
                        •
                      agreement is the beſt. by agreement,
or victorie. I chuſe the way of agreement, and it is
in euerie reſpect better,Cic. Phil. 5. 
                  rather to quench it by wiſedome, then
to bring the matter in danger, by force of armes, and by the
ſword. *Id. Phil. 2. 
                  All kinde of peace with the Cittizens ſeemeth vnto
me more profitable then ciuill warre: yea euen that temporarie
peace, which hath no ſure ground.The daie, and time, maketh alwayes for Kings. May not the diſagreeing
minds of men in the meane time, be reduced to
concord? They are deceaued, who heere would haue all
things done exactly, and brought to perfection. Curtius
ſayd both well,Lib. 6. and wittily: Neyther did the countenances of
thoſe who congratulated Antipater deceaue him, they diſagreed
from him in their hearts, but it was neceſſarie that he

ſhould be deceaued,A long warre is hurtfull. who deſired to make an end of Ciuill warre.
A wiſe King doth oftentimes feare delay more then warre.
                  Lin. 21.
               
               Howbeit, I ſee the other waie of finiſhing Ciuill warre
better pleaſing to many,Flor. 2. Cap. 18. who deſire a true victorie that
may be without exception,
                  A full victorie doth ſcarſe auaile herein. which many times is more glorious,
then profitable, except thou moderate it with great
wiſedome.Cic. ad Att. 7. Epiſt. 5. For, whereas many miſchiefes grow of the victorie,
tyrannie especiallie ſpringeth thereof.
                  Except it be handled with great aduiſe. Take thou heed
hereunto, and herein geue care to polliticke Mucianus:
The beginnings of Ciuill warres are to be left to fortune,
                  Tac. 3. Hiſt.
                  but the end is to be brought to paſſe by counſell, and reaſon.
Do thou make triall of this,The authors of Commotions are to be executed. yet firſt of all take away the
cauſers of ſedition. Send men of dignitie vnto them, vnder
a couler of honor and reward,16. Ann. to the end their Captaine
and author who deſire nouations, may be withdrawne from them.
Diſperſe the ſouldiers,And their meanes taken away. whome I would haue thee ſcatter in
diuerſe prouinces,
                  3. Hiſt. 
                  and tie to ſome forraine warre, let this be the
part of counſels and peace.
                  5. Hiſt. Oftentimes warre abroade, hath
engendred 
                        •
                      ſure peace at home.
                  Others are to be vſed with fauor. But aboue all things tread
the ſteps of clemencie:Sal. ad Caeſ. neyther geue thou eare to thoſe importunate
kinde of men, who could neuer be glutted with the
bloud of the miſerable Cittizens, *Theſe bloud-ſuckers are not to be heard. 
                  who draweth thee on to ſome
cruell kinde of puniſhment,
                  Indid. 
                  or ſome ſeuere ſentence, to the end
that they may drawe,Indid. and draine vnto them ſelues, and as if
it were at the ſacking of a Cittie, and vſe their luſt, and licence,
as lawes.
               
               
                  No,
                  Profitable counſell. 
                  no, Brutus inſtructeth thee better, whoſe wholeſome
counſell is this,
                  Cic. ad Ciuill warre ought to be with more violence
reſiſted, then to exerciſe wrath vpon the vanquiſhed. *Brut. Ep. 2. Id. pro Marcel. Imagine
rather that many vndertooke Ciuill warre, thorowe ignorance,
and falſe and vaine feare, then thorowe couetouſneſſe or crueltie.
This is the meanes to increaſe thy ſubſtance, and thy
reputation: and thou ſhalt hereby bring to paſſe,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. that euen
thine enemies dare complaine of nothing, but of thy greatneſſe.Sen. 1. de Clem.
* The Prince can weare no more bewitifull ornament on his
head,Clemencie is the ornament of Kings. then his Crowne, with this deuiſe engrauen: Hauing preſerued
my ſubiects.
               
                  
                  But hitherunto ô Prince,
                  Sal. ad Caeſ. I haue in as fewe words as I
could,The Concluſion. written thoſe things which ſeemed vnto me to be moſt for
thy auaile, and which I thought moſt profitable for thee to be
practiſed.A prayer for Princes. 
                  Now I am to end my worke with prayers: And do
beſeech thy confederates,Vell. 2. Tac. 4 An. thy ſubiects, and God himſelfe, to geue
thee euen to the laſt end of thy life, a minde that hath vnderſtanding,
both of the lawe of God, and man. And to
them, that whenſoeuer thou ſhalt depart this
world, that they may with praiſe and
worthie memorie, record the acts
and renowne of thy
name.
               The which graunt thou
O King of kings.
               
               FINIS
            
         
      
   