
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE GODLY
MANS IOVRNEY
TO HEAVEN:
CONTAINING TEN SEVERALL
TREATISES.
                  
                     Viz.
                     1. An Heauenly Chariot the first part.
                     2. An Heauenly Chariot the second part.
                     3. The blessed Chariots man.
                     4. The Lanthorne for the Chariot.
                     5. The skilfull Chariot Driuer.
                     6. The gard of the Chariot.
                     7. The sixe Robbers of the Chariot.
                     8. The three Rocks layd in the way.
                     9. The onely Inne Gods babes aime at.
                     10. The Guests of the Inne.
                  
                  By Maister DAVID LINDSEY Minister
of Gods word at Leith.
                  
                     HEB. 13. 14.
                     For here we haue no continuing Citie, but we seeke one to come.
                  
                  
                     COL. 3. 1.
                     If ye be risen with Christ, seeke the things which are aboue, &c.
                  
                  
                     LONDON,
Printed by R. F. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop
at the signe of the Bible in Cheapside. 1625.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE TRVLY
RELIGIOVS AND
right noble Ladie ANNA CARR,
Ladie BALMERINOTH, Grace,
mercie, and peace through Iesus
Christ our Lord and
onely Sauiour.
                  
                     SEeing in this last
and most dead age
of the world (most
noble Ladie) there
be not a few, liuing not onely
vnder the blinding darknesse
and corrupting superstition of
abhominable Poperie: but also
vnder the shining Lanterne of
that sauing Gospell, which leadeth

men directly towards that
bright morning Starre Christ
Iesus, blessed for euermore,
who holding this earth for
their home do neuer dreame
that they must be remoued frō
it: & so who cannot be moued
so much as to begin to thinke
vpon another habitation; but
passe by to fit themselues for
it. Notwithstanding that nonesparing
sword of death killing
daily, without respect of persons,
men of all rankes, in euery
place may sensibly cleare vnto
them the truth of that golden
sentence:Heb 13. 14. 
                     Here we haue no continuall
citie. I the meanest in all respect,
my Lord and Maister
hath imployed about the building

of his tabernacle, longing
now to be dissolued and to be
with him whom my soule loueth;
haue out of the affection
which I carrie to all such as call
vpon his name, bene bold (ouercomming
at length manie
difficulties) to offer these few
lines vnto the view of others;
that if it were possible some one
simple soule or two might be
moued by them (God being
happily with them) to loose
their affections from things
here beneath, and to set them
on things which are aboue. I
haue dedicated them vnto
your Honor whom God hath
so happily weaned from the
deceitfull milke of all things

earthly, and so graciously married
vnto his blessed Sonne;
that now your Honor can wisely
account of nothing but in so
far as it leadeth vnto him, who
out of loue gaue himselfe for
you. Accept these lines Madame
as a testimonie of that
loue & reuerence which I must
carrie to that speciall grace of
God bestowed happily vpon
you, and vpon your religious
worthy Lord, set among many
yong Noble men, and shining
as a most bright light aboue so
many, if pietie, prudence, veritie,
grauitie, chastitie, 
                        •
                     emperance,
may make a yong Lord
shine. For the continuance and
encrease whereof, I shall neuer

ceasse to put vp my simple
prayers vnto that God who is
readie to heare all men, who
call to him in truth, and able to
keepe your Honor with your
truly honorable Lord vnto his
euerlasting kingdome.
                  
                     Your Ladiships in our
blessed Sauiour,
D. L.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE CONTENTS OF
the first part containing
thirtie meditations.
                  
                     1.
LEt man behold that vnspeakable
loue wherewith God loued him, and
that rare accompt his God maketh of
him in that shining glasse of the creation
of the world. pag. 1.
                     2. That holy vse man dearely beloloued
and farre honoured of God should
make of that wise order kept by God
in bringing forth the worke of creation.
pag. 3.
                     3. Let man remember how he was
made to the Image of God, after deliberation
as it were, and let him not forget
what his God would teach him thereby.
pag. 6.
                     
                        
4. That rare heauenly felicitie and
more then royall magnificence of man,
made in Adam, and standing in Adam
by his God; and with this, mans wofull
condition, an
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        ore then slauish pouertie,
falling in Adam and with Adam,
from God. pag. 10.
                     5. Sinne is a monstrous foule thing
defiling euerie thing it toucheth, so that
our holy God can vpon no condition ioyne
with it. pag. 16.
                     6. Let man consider the fearefulnesse
of the dogge of sinne; and if he would
not be destroyed by him, let him not sleepe
till he haue throwne him out, if he be
in; and keepe him out, if he be not entered
within his house. pag. 26.
                     7. Let the sense of that death which
is the wages of sinne, and of that shame
which is the reward of sinne, make man
to shunne sinne. pag. 33.
                     8. The bitter temporall and eternall
fruite of sinne; with the sweetest temporall
and eternall fruite of righteousnes.
pag. 38.
                     
                        
9. Let not man thinke shame to shame
himselfe (as men speake) for his sinnes
in time, by confessing and forsaking
them; if he would eschue that endlesse
shame shall lye on him for sinne in eternitie.
pag. 42.
                     10. Let man learne to accuse himselfe
before God for his sinnes to his conuersion,
lest that accuser of Christs brethren,
accuse him vnto God to his condemnation.
pag. 44.
                     11. Let none beside thy God teaching
thee by his written word, be thy Master
and leader on earth, if thou wouldst
walke here before him, and walke hereafter
with him. pag. 47.
                     12. Let all sicke in foule because of
sinne, to whose eares the sound of the
sweete name of that great Physitian Iesus
is come, by the meanes of the Gospell
seeke to him for medicine, whom they
cannot find but in his word. pag. 51.
                     13. That white shining lilie Iesus is
not to be found, but among pricking
thornes. pag. 57.
                     
                        
14. Sweet, wise, Iesus will crosse
thee first, if he be to crowne thee afterward.
pag. 61.
                     15. Euerie Christian will confesse
that the Crosse belongeth to him, and yet
euen the best Christians when the Crosse
commeth neare them, and lieth on them,
are both affraid thereof and murmure
vnder it. pag. 66.
                     16. While thou liuest here, desire
not to liue, but to that God and for that
God, who made thee, and sent thee
hither. pag. 76.
                     17. Long not for death, but to the
end that thou may ceasse to sin and to be
with Christ. If thou wouldest not after
the first death die that second death
also. pag. 77.
                     18. Let man studie before he die
to know of whom he holdeth his life, lest
after death he repent, albeit out of time
that euer he liued. pag. 80.
                     19. Let man consider how dearely
sweete Iesus hath loued him. pag. 83.
                     20. Let no man giue sleepe to his

eyes, till he be certified that Iesus, the
loue of Gods elect, loueth him. p. 88.
                     21. Seeing no sinne is committed behinde
his backe, but in his face, who
knoweth the thoughts of man a farre off,
let no man attempt to commit sinne vppon
hope of secrecie. pag. 92.
                     22. Sinne and euill haue euer bene
ioyned together, albeit none be hurt by
sinne besides man who commits it. p. 101.
                     23. Let man grauely consider that
fearefull haruest of most bitter sheaues,
which the poysoning seede of sinne
bringeth forth. pag. 103.
                     24. Sinne is onely committed against
God, and therefore euerie sinner who
findeth not Gods mercie pardoning him
his sinne; shall find Gods Maiestie, his
partie, and aduersarie for sinne. p. 111.
                     25. Let no man communicate with
sinne or sinners, who would not be made
partaker of that punishment which is
due vnto sinne and sinners. p. 115.
                     26. Let Satan vent sinne as he
pleaseth, let men couer sinne as they can,

sonne is a monstrous cruell thing, therefore
beware to commit it, to continue
in it. p. 120.
                     27 
                           〈…〉
                        , precious, and forcible
beyond measure is that cleane and
cleansing bloud of Iesus, blessed for
euermore. p. 132.
                     28. Cleane 
                           •
                        osus will not wash thee in

                           〈◊〉
                         cleane clean
                           •
                        ing bloo
                           •
                        , to the end that
thou mayest proue a swine, but a swanne,
a fithie dogge, but a cleane turtle loue
and 
                           〈◊〉
                         not a bond slaue to sinne and Satan,
but a free king to God his 
                           〈◊〉
                        
father. p. 134.
                     29. Louing, and liberall 
                           ••
                        sus communicates
all his riches, and priviledges
to all his kingly, and cleane
members. p. 136.
                     30. H
                           •
                         whom blessed 
                           •
                        osus hath

                           〈…〉
                         unto God, to serue his
Maiestie for a while; shall also be made
by 
                           •
                        esus a King unto God to reig
                           •
                        e

                           〈◊〉
                         him for euer.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  AN
HEAVENLY
CHARIOT.
                  
                     1. 
                           •
                        ehold ô man that vnspeakable
loue wherewith God loued thee, and
that rare accompt thy God maketh of
thee, in that shining glasse of the
Creation.
                     
                        O My soule wast thou not sent
downe here in time by that
blessed wise Creator, to
seeke after that eternitie
which is aboue? O my soule
couldest thou learne to know with what
loue thy God loued thee, in what accomp
                           •
                         thy
God hath thee, busily wouldest
thou while this euersliding time remaineth,
seeke after that euer-abiding eternitie.
Oh ô my soule, when shall I begin,
grauely to consider that admirable order
kept by my God in bringing foorth that

great worke of Creation, presented to my
eyes in the first Chapter of holy Scripture.
Wouldest thou, ô my soule, leisurely
paine thy selfe a little to meditate aright
vpon that order; ô with what a loue
wouldst thou loue thy God: and so ô with
how swift feete wouldest thou endeauour
to runne through fleeting sinfull time, towards
that euer continuing eternitie, in
the which dwelleth righteousnesse! Yea, ô
my soule, I must tell thee, could that order
be well taken to heart by thee, were I warming
my selfe in my parlour, at the refreshing
fire of greatest honor, pleasures, and
daintiest cheare, euen with my dearest
companions, thou wouldest be easily able
by a very small signe to draw me out of
doores, making me with Peter to seeke
after some secret place, that there I might
weepe bitterly, because I cannot be moued
to seek him who could not be stayed
from seeking of me; because I cannot
learne to account of him, who could willingly
account of nothing till he did find
me. The worke of Creation is begun the
first day, the worke of creation is prosecuted
till the sixt day, and a number of
good creatures of diuerse kinds aboue vs,

about vs, and beneath vs; in the heauens,
in the seas, and in the earth brought forth:
but can our louing wise God ceasse to
worke, till he haue made man? And when
he had made him, did he go any further?
Yea, rested he not then? O my soule, I
charge thee before God, that thou remember
this; I command thee, as thou
wilt be answerable to God, that thou forget
not this.
                  
                  
                     2 Behold that holy vse, man, dearely
beloued and farre honoured of God,
should make of that wise order kept by
God in bringing foorth the worke of
Creation.
                     BVt, ô my soule, what would thy God
tell thee by this comely admirable order
kept by his Maiestie, in bringing fo
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        
that worke of Creation? Surely that he
made all the other creatures for thee,
which he made before thee, and that he
made thee for himselfe, whom he made
after them. And what would thy God, ô
my soule, teach thee hereby? Surely that
all other creatures could not content him
vntill he found man. And darest thou, ô

my soule, attempt to thinke or alledge
that thou art made for any other vse, besides
this thy onely God? Yea darest thou
rest vpon any of these creatures? were the
sight of them neuer so pleasant to thy
eyes, the sound of them neuer so melodious
to thy eares, the sauour of them neuer
so delicious to thy smelling, the taste
of them neuer so sweet to thy mouth, the
touch of them neuer so alluring to thy other
members? O my soule many seruants
hast thou, for thy Maker hath made all the
other creatures for thee: onely one master
hast thou, euen that good God, who
made thee for himselfe onely. And therefore
see that thou vse all these creatures,
which thine eye seeth, thine eare heareth,
thy smelling sauoureth, thy tasting tasteth,
or any member of thy bodie toucheth; as
pleasant soft cords sent downe from heauen,
to draw thee vpwards towards that
God who made them for thee, and thee
for himselfe: otherwise be assured thou
shalt be conuicted, not onely of grosse vnthankfulnesse,
forgetting the giuer, and
abusing the gift, but of high Treason, for
thrusting y• perishing gift into the throne
of the euerliuing giuer. Augustine saw this

when he writeth thus:Aug. epist. 21. 
                        Potest anima rationalis
etiam temporali & corporali felicitate
bene vti, si non se dederit creaturae, Creatore
neglecto: sed eam potius felicitatem fecerit
seruire Creatori, qui & ipsam suae bonitatis
abundantissimalargitate donauit. Sicut enim
bona sunt omnia quae creaut Deus, ita in his
bene agit anima rationalis, si ordinem seruet
in distinguendo, eligendo, pendendo subdere
minora maioribus, corporalia spiritualibus, inferiora
superioribus, temporalia sempiternis,
ne superiorum neglectus, & appetitu inferiorum,
& se & corpus suum mutet in peius, talibus
bonis non fiunt homines boni, sed aliunde
boni facti, bene vtendo faciunt vt ista sint
bona. The Christian soule may vse euen temporall
and corporall prosperitie aright, if it
giue not ouer it selfe to the perishing creature,
neglecting the euerlasting Creator: but make
this his prosperitie, rather to serue his maker,
who also hath freely enriched him with his
superabundant goodnesse. For as all those
things be good which God hath created, so the
Christian soule vseth them aright, when he
keepes an order, wisely distinguishing, weighing,
and choosing, and so postponing lesse things
to greater, corporall things to spirituall, things
below here, to things which are aboue, and

temporall things to euerlasting, lest otherwise
through the neglect of those things which are
aboue, and through the inordinate desire of
things below here▪ he turne both himselfe and
his bodie to the worst: for by such good things
as the things of the world, men are not made
good; but men being first made good by another,
to wit, by God, by vsing the things of
the world rightly, make them also to become
good.
                     
                  
                  
                     3 Remember ô man how thou wast
made to the Image of God, after deliberation
as it were, and forget not what
thy God would teach thee thereby.
                     HEarken, hearken▪ ô my soule, and beleeue
me speaking vnto thee from
the mouth of thy God, who esteemeth
of thee highly, out of that loue wherewith
he hath loued thee freely. Hadst thou, ô
my soule, that hearing eare to hearken
vnto, and that vnderstanding heart to perceiue,
that which thy blessed maker
would leade thee vnto, by that more then
maiesticke, glorious, and comfortable
Oracle, sounded out of his Maiesties glorious
lips, while he is about to make man

for himselfe, after that he had made the
other creatures for man: Let vs make man
to our owne Image: Beleeue me, ô my soule,
could this Oracle (neuer alas sufficiently
considered by man) be rightly weighed
by thee, thou wouldest begin to learne to
thinke lesse of the other creatures (after
the which so many dote, euen miserably,
and by the which alas there is a very
world grosly bewitched) yea thou wouldest
begin to learne to account of none
but of thy God, yea not to attempt to
loue thy selfe but for Gods cause, and in
so farre as thou findest thy selfe like vnto
him. What, ô my soule, shalt thou be made
to see and heare, if thou wilt compare the
26. verse of the first of Genesis, pointing
at the creation of man, with the 3. 6. 9. 14.
20. and 24. verses of that same Chapter,
leading vs vnto the creation of the other
creatures? True it is, ô my soule, that all
these other creatures were created by that
same God by whom man was created:
yet they and man are not brought foorth
after one and the same manner by this
God. For albeit our God being to create
the light, the firmament, and so forth, be
content to say: Let there be light, Let there

be a firmament, &c. yet it contented not
his wise, mercifull Maiestie, when he is to
make man, barely to say, Let there be a
man: but he must say, Let vs make man to
our owne Image; thus passing from the
creation of the other creatures vnto the
creation of man, not without speciall aduice
and deliberation as it were. And yet
here thou must not thinke, ô my soule,
that thy powerfull God, to whom all
things are easie, brought foorth man with
any greater difficultie then he brought
forth the other creatures, or that he doubted
any wayes about the making of man.
But this is done by him, that hereby his
wise Maiestie, one in substance, three in
persons, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost,
might recommend to our consideration
the excellencie and eminencie of man, beyond
and aboue all other creatures, daining
himselfe to take a speciall consultation
onely about the making of man, as
about his most glorious and excellent
worke. Shall these three sacred persons of
that incomparable deitie, after mature deliberation
concurre, as it were ioyntly
and ioyfully to the making of man, and
shouldest not thou, ô my soule, summoning

all thy powers, with all the members
of my bodie, after due aduice, charge
them all to concurre, for the louing, for
the seeking, and for the seruing of that
blessed God againe? crying aloud, ô my
mind, ô my heart, ô my will, ô my whole
affections, and so ô my loue, ô my hatred,
ô my feare, ô my confidence, ô my ioy, ô
my sorrow, ô my anger, ô my patience,
concurre to seeke him, concurre to serue
him, who concurred to make you. Yea, ô
mine eyes, mine eares, my lips, my hands,
my feete, and remanent members, see you
all concurre with all your might and skill,
to withstand sinne the onely enemie of
that God, who with ioy concurred to
make you; and to prooue your selues alwayes
to be his dutifull seruants, who
hath proued so gracious a Lord to you.
For thou must know, ô my soule, that
God made man to his owne Image, to the
end that man might be an habitation to
his God for euer, as the world was made
to be a soiourning place to man for a
while.Ber ser. india.
eccles. Out of the sense hereof Bernard
could say, Non capit Deum nisi Imago sua,
bonum proinde parat habitaculum Deo, cuius
nec ratio decepta, nec voluntas peruersa, nec

memoria inquinata est: Nothing can receiue
or keepe our God beside his owne Image, and
therefore that man dresseth a fit dwelling
place for God, who hath neither his reason
deceiued, nor his will peruerted, nor his memorie
defiled.
                     
                  
                  
                     4. Behold that rare heauenly felicitie,
and more then royall magnificence of
man made in Adam, and standing in
Adam by his God: and with this man his
wofull condition, and more then slauish
pouertie falling in Adam, and with Adam,
from God.
                     MOurne, mourne, ô my soule! when
thou doest remember what I was
from my God being created by him in
Adam, and what I am now from my father
and mother, hauing fallen with them
in Adam. Was I not created to the very image
of his Maiestie? being so righteous
and so perfect, that in my whole minde,
heart and will, yea in all the powers of my
soule, and members of my bodie, there
was sufficiencie of truth, and power,
whereby I was able to know my God, to
loue my God and my neighbour, according

to that voice of the Law,Mat. 22. 37. 39. 
                        Thou shalt
loue the Lord thy God, with all thy heart,
with all thy soule, and with all thy mind, and
thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe: and
that without any diso
                           •
                        der, rebellion, or
corruption; and so without any darknesse
in the mind, frowardnesse in the will, rebellion
in the heart, or corruption in any
of the remanent powers of the soule, or
members of the bodie. And being thus
spiritually beautified, was I not beside this
that great Emperour (greater then the
Turke, who stileth himselfe the great Emperour)
hauing all the foules of the aire,
all the fishes of the sea, with all which is
here on earth, bound by the very appointment
of God to serue me; yea most readily
willing (by the force of his Maiesties
blessing accompanying me) for to serue
me? But alas, ô my soule! as I am now from
my parents, hauing fallen in Adam, I am
depriued of the Image of that blessed
God to the which I was made, and made
voide of that righteousnesse wherewith I
was then clothed, being shaped and fashioned
as Seth the sonne of Adam and
Euah was shaped and fashioned. And how
was that, ô my soule? Surely in the sinfull

image of his sinfull parents: so that now
my soule is not simply wounded through
sinne,Eph
                              •
                           . 2. 1. but starke dead in sinnes and trespasses.
And therefore no wonder that our God
(who onely knoweth perfectly what euill
sin, alas, hath procured to vs) spake thus
of man:Gen. 6. 
                        All the imaginations of mans heart
are onely euill continually. And lest any man
should haue prooued so bold, as to apply
that saying onely to those of the first
world ouerthrowne by the deluge, it pleased
our wise God, ô my soule, a
                           •
                        ter that
Noah was brought foorth of the Arke, to
replenish the earth againe; to sound ouer
againe his former iudgement touching
man,Gen. 8. 21. saying, The imagination of mans heart
is euill euen from his youth. Oh, ô my soule!
when shall we learne to consider rightly
that third Chapter written to the Romans,
in the which that spirit of truth describing
man vnto vs as he is out of Christ, and so
destitute of the grace of God, proclaimed
him to be nothing but a very masse of vile
and loathsome corruption. Yea is not this
our originall corruption cleared vnto vs
by the holy Scriptures so sensibly, that as
we are acquainted with that good which
we cannot possibly do, because of it, so we

are informed touching y• euill which we
cannot but do by reason of it.1. Cor. 2. 14. 
                        The naturall
man perceiueth not the things which are of
the Spirit of God, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned.
                        2. Cor. 3 5. 
                        We are
not sufficient of our selues, to think any thing as
of our selues.
                        Rom. 7. 18. 
                        I find no meanes to performe that
which is good. The wisedome of the flesh is
enimitie against God,
                        Rom. 8. 7. 
                        for it is not subiect vnto
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Yea,
is not holy Paul couched vnder the tyrannie
of this fearefull originall corruption,
wherewith alas we are all infected, ô my
soule! compelled to make this confession:
I find another law in my members rebelling
against the law of my mind,
                        Rom. 7. 23. 
                        and leading me
captiue vnto the law of sinne, which is in my
members. And after this, bursteth he not
forth in this vehement complaint:Rom. 7. 24. 
                        O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliuer me from
this bodie of death? Beside this, ô my soule!
is not miserable man thus depriued of all
righteousnesse, and corrupted throughout
in bodie and soule, made a miserable
begger being before so great a Monarch,
that he hath not title at all to any of the
creatures of God: so that being now out
of Christ, the very meate which he eateth,

the very clothes which couer his nakednesse,
the very aire wherein he breatheth,
shall procure his condemnation, although
he sinned not otherwayes against
his God. But which is most lamentably
miserable, ô my soule, not onely is man
thus depriued of good, and corrupted
with euill, made a miserable begger▪ but
a monstrous slaue, yea a slaue vnto a fearefull
slaue, euen to Satan that euill one, who
not onely lodgeth,Eph
                              •
                           . 2. 2. but euen worketh in the
children of disobedience, fighting against
man by these his most fearefull champions,
Sinne, the World, Death, and the
Graue. Oh, oh, when shall this be seene
and perceiued by vs ô my soule! The sense
hereof moued Augustine, not to be ashamed
to write thus of himselfe, euen while
he was compassed with shame, Vtrinque
me concludit pudor,
                        Aug. epist. 
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           . 
                        erubesco scribere quod
sum, non audeo pingere quod non sum, odi
quod sum, & non sum quod amo. Shame compasseth
me on both sides, I blush to write what
I am, I dare not paint foorth what I am
not, I hate that which I am, and I am not
that which I loue. And againe, Quis igitur
ego, & qualis ego? quid non mali ego, aut facta
mea, aut si non facta, dicta mea, aut si non

dicta mea, voluntas mea fuerit? Who am I
then, and of what condition? what euill am I
not, or my doings, and if not my doings, yet
my words, and if not my words, yet ô what euill
hath not my will bene? And therefore
making his moane to his God, he can
pray most humbly, most ardently out of
the sense of his owne miserie, because of
sinne:Confes. lib. 9. cap. 2. 
                        Parce mihi Domine, ego cadauer putridum,
osca vermium, vas foetidum. Spare
me ô Lord, euen me who am a rotten carrion,
the meate of wormes, and a s
                              •
                           inking filthie
vessell. Could this be seene by vs, ô my
soule! sinne should be hated by vs with an
vnfained hatred, Satan should be resisted
by vs, as our onely deadly enemie. We
vse to say in a vulgar prouerbe, Burnt barne
fire dreadeth: hath not that fierie dragon
long ago burnt vs all, alas, in our first parents?
Feele we not euen to this day the
fearefull hurt which we receiued by that
burning? Yea carrie we not about with vs
(go where we will) the scarres and marks
of that burning? Should we not then abhorre
to looke vpon that dragon? to obey
any of his counsels, were they neuer so
apparently profitable or pleasant? For albeit
his coate appeareth now and then to

be somewhat friendly, his heart shall remaine
alwayes the heart of an irreconcilable
foe.
                  
                  
                     5. Sinne is a monstrous foule thing,
defiling euery thing it toucheth, so that
our holy God can vpon no condition ioyne
with it.
                     OH▪ my soule! when shall I begin to
know what sinne is? Beleeue me,
could I be perswaded to know sinne to be
that which my blessed God by Scripture
cleares sinne to be, neuer Pilot was more
carefull to haue his ship kept from a rocke
or sand, neuer wayfaring man was more
warie to haue himselfe preserued from the
hands of robbers▪ then thou, ô my soule,
wouldst be to haue thy selfe kept from sin.
Would subiects, being Dukes, Marquisses,
Earles, and so 
                           •
                        orth, refuse to lay aside that
which they were resolued by the Kings
patent vnder his great seale, would depriue
them of his loue, countenance, companie,
and maintenance? Now sinne, saith
my blessed God, speaking to me by Scripture,
is that onely foule thing, vnto the
which that cleane God of heauen cannot
draw neare, is that onely foule thing

which cannot possibly draw neare him,
which cannot possibly abide where he is,
which cannot possibly enter where he is.
Shalt thou neuer begin grauely to consider
with thy selfe, ô my soule, what things
blessed Iesus, clothing himselfe with the
nature of man, was heartily content to
take vpon him, and what that was which
he would no wayes vpon any condition
meddle with? A soule, with all the powers
of it, like vnto thee, ô my soule, Iesus will
take on, a bodie in all the members of it
like vnto this my bodie, he will not refuse
to put on. Yea, am I subiect vnto anie infirmitie
vnto the which he did not willingly
subiect himselfe? Yea, what shall I
say, did he not contentedly vndergo pinching
pouertie in his birth, in the whole
course of his life, and in his death? Did he
refuse to be banished and exiled from his
natiue countrey, while he was yet in his
swadling cloathes? Did he not endure hatred
and fearefull contempt, often weeping,
but neuer laughing, for any thing we
can reade? Yea, did he refuse to be betraied
by one who did eat in the dish with
him, to be deliuered to a strange Iudge by
those of his owne nation, whom he came

to saue, to be accused by them, he many
a day trauelled to haue wonne to God, to
the end that through faith in him they
might haue bene excused before his
barre? And finally did he refuse to haue
his righteous soule propined with the
bitterest cup of Gods wrath, and his sacred
bodie to be scourged, crowned with
thornes, pierced with nailes, yea with the
speare, in the end yeelding vp his holy
blessed soule vpon the very cursed tree,
and that betwixt two malefactors? And
yet when all this is done and suffered by
him, ô my soule, will he be a sinner as I,
alas, am a sinner? No, no, a sinner as I am,
he will not be. He will be content to be
conceiued in the bosome of a woman, to
be borne of a woman, to liue a man among
men, to dye as a man in the sight of
men, to the end that he may saue sinfull
man; but he will no wayes be conceiued
in sinne, be borne in sinne, liue in sinne, or
dye a sinner,Heb. 7. 26. 
                        but separate from sinners. And
therefore he is conceiued without sinne of
the holy Ghost, borne without sinne of
the virgin Marie, liued so without sinne,
that none of his enemies could accuse him
of sinne; yea he dyeth so for sinners that

he who condemned him, behooued to
absolue him,Ioh. 18. 38. saying, I know no fault in him,
I am innocent of the bloud of this iust man.
Must not sinne then, ô my soule, be a vile
foule thing, yea be that onely foule thing
which that cleane God of heauen abhorreth,
and which should be abhorred by all
those who would proue themselues to belong
to God; truly seeing holy, wise, humble,
Iesus would no wayes meddle with it,
as with that which is not only worse then
any thing, but the onely euill? O when
shall Kings, Princes, great men, meane
men, yea beggers, thinke sin to be worse
then pouertie, then banishment, then hatred,
then contempt, then scourging; yea
then crucifying, and that in leud companie?
Could this onely euill thing sinne be
seene by men, as it was seene by sweet Iesus,
sinners would be rarer, who now be
so fearefully frequent. Beside this, ô my
soule, sinne is that which cannot vpon any
condition abide where the God of heauen
abides. Tell me, tell me, must not those
Angels who sometimes possessed the heauens,
Gods dwelling place, be cast out of
them, so soone as this onely euill thing
sinne lights vpon them? Must not Adam
                        
possessing Paradise, defiling himselfe with
sinne, be put out of doores presently with
his sinne? Neither shall euer sinne, ô my
soule, be able to enter where God is; for
that Ierusalem which is aboue,Reuel. 20. 27. can admit
no vncleane thing. As sin is a foule thing,
ô my soule! so sinne is a defiling thing. But
what doth it defile? The soule of the sinner,
the bodie of the sinner, his hall, his
chamber, his boord, his bed, his meate,
his drinke, his clothes; yea the very stones
and timber of his house, and so all which
belongeth to him. Hearest thou not the
Spirit saying vnto thee, ô my soule, Vnto
the pure are all things pure,
                        Tit. 1. 15. 
                        but vnto them
that are defiled and vnbeleeuing is nothing
pure, but euen their minds and consciences are
defiled. Hearest thou not the Spirit saying
to thee againe,Haba. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12. 
                        He that coueteth an euill couetousness
to his house, that he may set his
nest on high, to escape from the power of euill,
thou hast consulted shame to thine owne house
by destroying many people, and hast sinned against
thy owne soule, for the stone shall crie
out of the wall, & the beame out of the timber
shall answer it. Finally, sin is a fearefully and
monstrously defiling thing, for it defileth
not onely sinfull man with all that which

belongeth vnto him, but it defileth euen
the very cleane things of God, when they
are handled by man being defiled: first
thereby making those cleane things of
God not onely to be foule, but to be abhomination
before his Maiestie, who otherwise
hauing commanded them doth
take speciall delight in them. What cleane
thing is more cleane then prayer is in it
selfe, and yet hearest thou not Salomon saying
to thee,Pro. 28. 9. ô my soule, He that turneth away
his eare from hearing the Law, euen his
prayer shall be abhominable. Yea, hearest
thou not Isaiah bringing in the Almighty
God speaking thus in the eares of the
Princes of Iudah, and people of Ierusalem,
What haue I to do with the multitude of your
sacrifices,
                        Isai. 1. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 
                        saith the Lord? I am full of the burnt
offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts,
and I desire not the bloud of bullocks nor of
lambes, nor of goates. When ye come to appeare
before me, who requires this at your
hands, to tread in my courts? Bring no moe
oblations in vaine: incense is an abhomination
vnto me, I cannot suffer your new Moones,
nor Sabbaths, nor solemne dayes (it is iniquitie)
nor solemne assembles. My soule hateth
your new moones, and appointed feasts, they

are a burthen vnto me, I am wearie to beare
them: and when ye shall stretch out your
hands I will hide my eyes from you, and though
ye make many prayers, I will not heare, because
your hands are full of bloud. What if
this could be seene and considered by
men, ô my soule, ô with what an hatred
would sinne be hated, ô with what a care
would sinne be eschued! While I am
without the house of God, sinne defileth
me with all belongs to me, and when I
enter within the house of God, it maketh
me, alas, euen there to defile the very
cleane things of God. Thy God, ô my
soule, may abide to looke vpon the colour
of any thing, may suffer the smell and
fauour of any thing, but the colour and
smell of sinne he may no wayes abide. And
ô would to God that man could learne
in this point to resemble his holy maker.
The basest begger cannot abide the sight
and smell of a priuie, for when he drawes
neare vnto it, he withdrawes his face from
it, and closeth vp his nosthrils: and yet, alas,
euen the brauest courteour can abide
the sight and smell of idolatrie, blasphemie,
oppression, murther, adulterie, drunkennesse,
&c. The men of this world confesse,

ô my soule, that such and such things
haue their owne colour, their owne smell,
but when shall they learne out of that
blessed and onely worthie booke of God
(alas in this dead age drowned in Atheisme,
scoffingly and disdainefully cast
behind backs with this prophane speech,
It is but the Bible) to know, and knowing
to perceiue, that sinne and righteousnesse
want not their owne colour, want not
their owne smell? Those who haue read
and considered that heauenly sweetest
booke of the Canticles, must know that
pietie and righteousnesse be white and fauourie,
and that sinne and iniquitie be
blacke and loathsome, before him who
commands the one and condemnes the other.
Out of this sense Bernard could say,
being carefull to informe vs, heartily willing
to reforme vs:Bern. in Cant. 
                        Habent & mores colores
suos, habent & odores, vitia sunt nigra, virtus
est candida. Euen manners haue their owne
colours, and haue also their owne smell, for
vices be fouly blacke, and vertue shining white.
This moued old Isaacke, speaking of his
blessed sonne, enriched with grace and
clothed with righteousnesse, thus to
speake:Gen. 27. 27. 
                        Behold the smell of my sonne is as the

smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed.
This moued our God, as hath bene alledged,
looking vpon the foule praiers of the
foule Iewes, thus to reiect them both.
When you shall stretch out your hands,
                        Isai. 1. 15. 
                        I will
hide mine eyes from you, and though ye make
many prayers, I will not heare, for your hands
are full of bloud. Could these things be
duly weighed, ô my soule, ô how reuerently
& greedily wouldest thou hearken
vnto, & ô how carefully wouldest thou obey
that wholsome exhortation giuen louingly
by the God vnto the Iewes, polluted
with sinne, and by sinne polluting euen
his whitest things? Wash you, make you
cleane,
                        Isa. 1. 16. 17. 
                        take away the euill of your workes from
before mine eyes: ceasse to do euill, learne to
do well. But what must thou do, ô my soule,
to the end that this so profitable a counsell
may be followed by thee? The Spirit
clearing this point to me, saith: Let vs
change our selues from all filthinesse of the flesh
and spirit, and grow vp to full holinesse in the
feare of God.
                        Iam. 4. 8. And againe, Change your
hands ye sinners: purge your hearts ye wauering
minded. Bernard considering this, can
thus resolue me: Duo nobis purganda sunt,
intellectus & affectus: Intellectus vt nouerit,

affectus vt velit. We haue two things which
we must change, our vnderstanding and our
affection: our vnderstanding to the end that
it may know, our affection that it may learne
to will well. Knowest thou, ô my soule, what
maketh men to commit sinne with pleasure,
and what is that which moues them
first to neglect, and then to despise holinesse?
Surely nothing beside the want of
true heauenly light in their mindes, and
the want of true loue and hatred in their
hearts: for if they could see sinne to be
sinne as it is, and perceiue holinesse to be
holinesse as it is: would they not, seeing
sinne thus, hate sinne, would they not perceiuing
holinesse thus, loue holinesse? And
if their heart could truly hate sinne, would
their hand attempt to commit sinne? If
their hearts could truly loue holinesse,
would their hands be stayed from the exercising
of holinesse? The sense hereof
moued Bernard to say:Bern. ser. 58. Cant. 
                        Non parum profecit
anima tua cuius immutata voluntas, cuius illuminata
ratio est, vt bonum & velit & nouerit.
In altero vitam, in altero visum recepit.
Nam & malum volendo mortua erat, &
bonum ignorando coeca. Thy soule hath not
profited a little, whose will is changed, whose
                        
reason is enlightened, so that it both knoweth
and willeth that which is good. By the one it
hath receiued life, and by the other sight. For
by willing that which is euill, it was dead, and
by being ignorant of that which is good, it was
blind. Could this be considered, ô my
soule, ô then that wholesome counsell louingly
giuen to thee by that meeke
Lambe, who came to saue thee, would
heartily be embraced by thee:
                        Reuel. 3. 18 I counsell
thee to annoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that
thou mayest see. Yea could this be well regarded
by thee, thou wouldest alwayes
crie with Dauid:Psal. 119. 18. 34. Open my eyes that I may
see the wonders of thy Law, giue me vnderstanding
and I shall keepe thy Law, yea I shall
keepe it with my whole heart.Psal. 51. 10. Create in me a
cleane heart ô God, and renew a right spirit
within me.
                  
                  
                     6 Behold the fearefulnesse of the dog
of sinne, and if thou wouldest not be destroyed
by him, sleepe not till thou throw
him out, if he be in; and keepe him out
if he be not entered within thy house.
                     WHen I reade holy Scripture, ô my
soule, I meet with two sentences

touching sinne registred by his golden
pen, who can neither lie nor faine, who
no wayes can sinne, and against whom
sinne is onely committed. The sound of
the which two sentences coming to my
eares, the sense of the which two sentences
happily brought to my heart, makes sinne
to be vile in mine eyes, loathsome to my
taste and smelling, and altogether deadly
vnto my touching. And no wonder, for
by these two sentences my blessed God
trauelleth to acquaint foolish sinfull man
with the nature of sinne, and with that to
make the bold and presumptuous sinner
abstaine from medling with sinne. Cain
did cast downe his countenance vpon his
brother Abel, our God who from the heauens
beholdeth all men, and all the doings
of men, reproouing him for this,
sayeth to him:Genes. 4. 7. 
                        If thou do well thou shalt be
accepted, but if thou do not well sinne lyeth at
the doore. Where thy wise God, ô my soule,
compareth sinne to an house dog, lying
before a mans doore, attending it, lest his
house be broken, to the hurt of the owner,
either in his goods, or in his person. But
here thou must know, ô my soule, that this
dog of sinne is a strange fearefull dog, of

a wonderfull, yea of a monstrous vnnaturall
kind. Ordinarie dogs, which be the
handie worke of God, attending mens
houses and persons, do neither barke against
nor bite the maister, the mistresse,
the children, or seruants of that house
they attend and keepe, but do delight to
see them, to faine vpon them, and most
kindly do play with them: onely they
barke against and bite strangers, who be
vnknowne to them, and do not ordinarily
haunt their maisters house and companie.
But that dog of sinne, ô my soule, which is
from the diuell, will not barke against,
nor bite any stranger liuing without that
house where it lodgeth and is entertained,
but barkes at, but bites, yea and furiously
eats vp and deuoures the maister,
the mistresse, the children, the seruants infected
with it, with all that belongeth to
that house in the which it is bred, brought
vp and fostered.Numb. 16. If Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
were liuing, would they not confesse
this? Were Achan liuing, would he
denie this?Iosu. 7. But what speake I of Corah,
Dathan, Abiram, and Achan? had not our
God, ô my soule, a pleasant dwelling
house in Shiloh for some yeares, and yet

was it not turned to a filthie iakes, by the
dog of sinne fostered in it? Had not our
God a house at Ierusalem, which was the
ioy of the whole earth; yea a matter of admiration
and astonishment to the Princes
of it, and yet is it not first turned into
heapes of stones for seuentie yeares, and
afterwards made a spectacle of Gods
fearefull, yet iust vengeance, without any
expectation euer to be set vp againe, and
that by that fearefull dog of sinne, too
long and too louingly, alas, fostered in it,
and maintained by it? Moses being carefull
to haue the Reubenites, Gadites, and
the halfe tribe of Manasses, mindfull of
that promise which they solemnly made
before the Lord vnto him, touching their
going armed before their brethren towards
the land of Canaan on the other
side of Iordan, till they should be peaceably
possessed with that land, sounding a
sharpe watchword in their eares, sayes
vnto them:Numb. 32. 23. 
                        But if ye will not do so, behold
ye haue sinned against the Lord, and be sure
that your sinne shall find you out. Here comparing
sinne to a bloud-hound, which is
entertained and kept by men, for finding
out of things which are stolen, and of persons

which do flie and cannot be found,
till their footsteps being sented and traced
by the dog, the seeker of them be
brought vnto the place whereunto they
betooke themselues. Now hereby Moses
would teach thee, ô my soule, that howbeit
there be no eyes of man vpon the sinner
seeing him while he sinneth, no eare
hearing him, no hand able to take him or
punish him, no foote able to ouertake
him: yet the sinner cleauing to his sinne,
and his sinne to him, shall assuredly at
length be found out, be brought in publicke,
and be punished for his sinnes, in respect
that euen his sinnes shall sent and
trace his leud steps where euer he goeth,
and at length ouertaking him, shall send
him backe to him from whom be fled, euen
vnto God, to be censured for his sin,
and afterward vnto him from whom his
sinne came, and so to the diuell, vnlesse in
time he quit himselfe of sin by vnfained
repentance. This is that Salomon would
cleare,Prou. 5. 22. when he saith: His owne iniquities
shall take the wicked himselfe, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his owne sinne. Iosephs
brethren, committing a grosse sinne
against the Lord their God, by selling

most secretly their young brother, and
stealing away (as it had bene) with this
their sinne from the sight of Iacob their father,
& all the world, saw this at length to
be true, when coming to Egypt, & being
knowne of Ioseph, albeit they knew not
him, they were made to say one to another
(being roughly entertained of Ioseph)
We haue verily sinned against our brother,
                        Gen. 42. 21. 22. 
                        in
that we saw the anguish of his soule when he
besought vs, and we would not heare him,
therefore is this trouble come vpon vs. Reuben
answering them, and saying: Warned I
not you, saying: sinne not against the child, and
ye would not heare, and loe his bloud is now
required. Oh, oh, that men would hearken
to that:Hab. 2. 11. 12, 13. 
                        The stone shall crie out of the wall,
the beame out of the timber shall answer it:
Woe vnto him that buildeth a towne by bloud,
and erecteth a Citie by iniquitie. Woe vnto
him that giueth his neighbour drinke. Thou
ioynest thy heart, & makest him drunken also,
that thou mayst see his priuities. O would
to God that that remembred by Zachariah
could be beleeued by vs:Zach. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. 
                        Then I turned
me, and lifted vp mine eyes, and looked,
and behold a flying booke, and he said vnto
me: What seest thou? and I answered, I see

a flying booke, the length thereof twentie cubits,
and the breadth thereof ten cubits, then
said he vnto me: This is the curse that goeth
ouer the face of the whole earth, euery one
that stealeth shall be cut off, as well on this side
as on that. I will bring it foorth, saith the
Lord of hostes, and it shall enter into the house
of the thiefe, and into the house of him that
falsly sweareth by my Name, and it shall remaine
in his house, and shall consume it, with
the timber thereof, and stones thereof. Oh,
oh, ô my soule, when shall the grosse auowed
fosterers of abominable villanous
wickednesse amongst vs, find eyes to see,
and hearts to perceiue the truth of this! O
how many Noble mens houses, gentlemens
houses, and citizens houses, haue
lodged this strange dogge of sinne, haue
warmed this dog of sin by their fire, haue
entertained him daintily at their table, &
delicately layd him in their softest beds,
which now be so ouerthrowne and deuoured
by this dog of sinne, that their
houses and their lands neither know them
nor theirs, so that they cannot find so
much as an entrie at those gates which
their predecessors and themselues did
build: for strangers now do lodge within

them. It were good therefore, 
                           •
                         my soule,
that those by whom such houses be now
possessed, would change those houses
from those old sins fostered within them,
and so put that dog out of doores, which
slue their former indwellers, lest they (by
communicating with their sinnes, and
cherishing that dog which first found out
their predecessors, and then slue them) be
found out at last, and slaine by that same
dog, which dare spare no sinner, being so
directed by that great iust Iudge, who is
neither a respecter of persons,2. Chr. 19. 7 nor receiuer
of rewards.
                  
                  
                     7. Let the sense of that death which
is the wages of sinne, and of that shame
which is the reward of sinne, make thee
to shunne sinne.
                     ABhorre, abhorre, ô my soule, sinne
as thou louest thy God and thy selfe:
for hath not thy God, who loued thee
with a great loue, with a wise loue, told
thee, that whosoeuer sinneth against him,
must not onely receiue wages for his sins,
but besides & with his wages, that reward
which is due vnto sin also? The wages

of sinne,Rom. 6. 23. ô my soule, as thou knowest,
is death, euen that first death, with all
those diseases which leade a man vnto it,
separating the soule from the bodie and
the bodie from the soule; and that second
death, banishing soule and body from the
comfortable sight of Gods onely amiable
face, onely gracious presence, and onely
sweetest companie, for euer and for euer.
And wherefore wouldest thou die thus, ô
my soule? The reward of sinne againe is
shame, procuring such confusion to man,
that he dare not lift vp his head before
God,Rom. 6. 21. before Angels, before men, vnlesse
in soule he be sensl
                           •
                        sse, both of his God,
and of his sinne. This shame was that reward,
ô my soule, wherewith our iust God
propined our first parents, the first sinners,
so soone as they medled with sinne. For
howbeit Adam and Eua being free of
sinne, were altogether naked, in respect of
materiall corporall seene clothes, yet they
were not ashamed, but could stand before
their God, and looke one vpon another
with a very good heart, and most chearefull
countenance: so glorious were they
through the rare shining beautie of that
Image of God, which then couered them

as a most royall robe. But no sooner, ô my
soule, were they infected with sinne, by
disobeying the voyce of their God, but
immediatly they were couered with
shame, that they durst not looke vpon
their God, and were confounded while
they looked one vpon another.
                  
                  
                     8. Behold, the bitter, temporall, and
eternall fruit of sinne, with the sweetest
temporall and eternall fruit of
righteousnesse.
                     COuld that death which is the wages
of sinne, could that shame which is
the reward of sinne, clearely discouered in
Scripture, which cannot lie nor deceiue,
be possibly foreseene by men (sinning,
alas, being fearefully abused by that deceiuing
lyer Satan against God) before
they ioyne heart or hand with it; sure I
am, that a man being weake, would rather
with the lambe enter within a denne
where lyons are, and being ouerloaden
with honour, wealth & pleasures worldly,
as Moses sometimes was, would rather
depriue himselfe of them all, and become
some wounded begging Lazarus, then

enter in couenant with sin, and so condescend
to commit it. Canst thou think, ô my
soule, that if Cain, being reproued of God
when his countenance was cast downe
vpon his brother Abel, could haue hearkened▪
vnto that weightie watch-word
brought to his eares by our God: If thou
do well, thou shalt be accepted, if thou do not
well, sinne lyeth before thy doore: that he afterwards
durst haue slaine his brother, defying
all that could be spoken or done to
him for slaying of him? Could those young
men who should haue married Lots
daughters, beleeued Lots speeches vnto
them, touching the ouerthrow of Sodome?
would they haue mocked him,
when he hauing Gods word for his warrand
was speaking to them? Could Achan
acquainted with that decree pronounced
by God touching Iericho, haue foreseene
that wrath which afterward ouertooke
him and his, would he haue attempted to
haue transgressed it? Yea, what shall I say?
could euen Dauid (blinded, alas, for a
while, by the thicke clould of his owne
lusts) haue foreseene that fearefull desolation
which fell on his house before
men: Ammon his owne sonne defiling

                        Tamar his owne daughter: Absolom one
of his sonnes slaying Ammon another of
his sonnes: yea Absolom his sonne, putting
him his aged father, bare footed and bare
headed out of ye gates of Ierusalem, taking
his crowne vpon his head, and afterwards
defyling his concubines before the Sun,
vpon the roofe of his house: would he
haue first committed adulterie, and thereafter
defiled himselfe with bloud? Againe,
could men, ô my soule, (hearkening vnto
the voice of the good word of God, and
beleeuing it) consider the vnspeakable
aduantage, comfort, and ioy, begunne in
time, but neuer ending, vnto the which
they haue the vndoubted right, and shall
assuredly find and feele in some measure
in time, and beyond all measure enioy and
possesse in eternitie, who get grace from
God to walke here in his wayes, and to
keepe themselues vnspotted of the world;
ô with what earnest care, ô with what
heartie pleasure would they seeke and
serue the Lord, would they flie and eschue
sinne, mocking all rewards could
be offered vnto them for alluring them to
the contrarie, defying all extremitie could
be threatened, or executed against them,

for affraying them from that holy course.
Enoch getteth grace from God, to walke
with God, and did not Enoch find a day
in the which he had great cause to blesse
his God, tha
                           •
                         euer he walked with him?
For, ô how gloriously is he glorified, euen
before men, when he was taken vp vnto
heauen, and not suffered to see death!
While the whole world wearieth, alas, of
God and of his seruice, and reioyceth to
fight against him vnder Satans colours,
Noah getteth grace from God to walke
vprightly before him, and did he not find
a day that made him to reioyce that his
God was so mercifull to him? For ô how
farre is Noah honoured by God, euen before
men, when he is not onely sent forth
to preach repentance to that wicked age,
but to build an Arke, in the which, with
himselfe all his houshold should be saued,
while the whole remnant of the world
were to be drowned? One Lot amongst
many, yea amongst many auowed vnnaturall
vile sinners, graced and guarded by
God, can keepe himselfe alwayes in
God his presence, hauing his righteous
soule grieued and vexed with that which
he heard and saw.2 Pet. 2. 8. But thinkest thou not,

ô my soule, that Lot behooued greatly to
reioyce in this his God, when the very
Angell of God must not onely come to
him, charging him to go out of Sodome,
but must say:Gen. 19. 22. 
                        Haste thee, saue thee there,
for I can do nothing vntill thou come thither.
There were a number at Ierusalem, who
being happily kept of God did mourne
for the abominations of the Citie, which
they were not able to amend. Alwayes is
not their bitter mourning turned into
melodious mitth, when the Lord being to
destroy the Citie, will haue them first to
be marked in their foreheads,Ezec. 9. 3. 4. that so they
might be spared, and thereafter the rest to
be destroyed? Yea, heare I not Dauid crying
out with a loud voyce, desiring to be
heard of all:Psal. 31. 19. 
                        How great is thy goodnesse, that
thou hast layd vp for them that serue thee,
and done to them that trust in thee, euen before
the sonnes of men? Sure I am, ô my soule,
were the rich glutton sent backe from
hell, he would neuer trade those vile
wayes againe in the which he sometimes
liued and died, though some Nabuchadnezzer
should threaten to cast him into a
a hote fierie fornace if he refused, or some
Balthaesar, offer vnto him neuer so many

rich rewards, to do so. Sure I am, were
Lazarus sent backe from Abraham his
bosome, to soiourne but some moneths
here, that he would proue more carefull
by a thousand degrees, in seeking and
seruing of his God, then euer he was before,
hauing now happily tasted euen in
God his presence, those sweetest pleasures,
which belong to such who find
grace to seeke and serue God here. In
Scripture I meet with one man, whose
soule being glorified in heauen, was
brought backe to his bodie, for glorifying
of our blessed Sauious Iesus, euen Lazarus
the brother of Marie and Martha:
for he being foure dayes dead, and his
bodie stinking in the graue, (as his sisters
spake, is raised againe, and afterwards
doth he not so carrie himselfe, that in the
Gospel we do not find him and Iesus who
raised him, asunder. Yea find we not, that
the Iewes are so stirred vp against him,
because for him many beleeued in Iesus,
that they hated him as they hated Iesus,
and did conclude to put him to death, as
they resolued to put Iesus to death? Sure I
am,Luke 23. were that thiefe who died on the
left hand of our maister, brought backe

from his torment, that he would repent
that very language spoken by him to blessed
Iesus, and making humble confession
of his sinne, with strong cries and bitter
teares, would crie for mercie. Sure I am,
were that thiefe, who died on our Maisters
right hand, sent downe from that Paradise
of God which now keepeth him, he
would, mocking all worldly honour, profit,
and pleasures; and defying all humane
crueltie and corporall torments, reproue
all those who do reuile Iesus, and exhort
all liuing to kisse that Sonne of God; considering
the miserie belongeth to those against
whom his wrath is kindled, and
that blessednesse is due to such who trust
in him. While it is called to day then, ô my
soule, let me not harden my heart, for I
must tell thee from the mouth of God,
that that man liues not now, who within
a few yeares, shall not either with the rich
glutton be adiudged vnto hels torments,
for deboshing himselfe in sinnes; or aduanced
with Lazarm into Abrahams bosome,
being through faith in Christ iustified,
and by the spirit of grace so sanctified,
that he abhorreth the wayes of wickednesse,
and delighteth in the wayes of

God. Lift vp thine eyes therefore, ô my
soule, and hearken vnto Paul deterring
from euill, and euen with an holy violence
driuing thee towards that which is good.
We must all appeare before the iudgement
seate of Christ,
                        2. Cor. 5. 10 
                        that euery man may receiue
the things that are done in his bodie, according
to that which he hath done whether it be good
or euill.
                     
                  
                  
                     9 Thinke not shame to shame thy
selfe (as men speake) for thy sinnes, ô
man, in time, by confessing and forsaking
them, if thou wouldest eschue that
endlesse shame that shall lye on thee for
sinne in eternitie.
                     VVOuldst thou be freed, ô my soule,
from that death which is the
wages of sinne, and deliuered from that
shame which is the reward of iniquitie?
I beseech thee shake off that shame, which
alas, too manie (misled by Satan) in this
our age are clogged with, albeit it procure
daily matter of new death, and greater
shame vnto them; and with a good
heart and smyling countenance put thou
on that shame wherewith too few, alas,

in this our age are couered: albeit it be able
(God being mercifull vnto vs) not
onely to slay death, and shake off confounding
shame; but also to procure
quickening grace and sauing glorie. Alas,
ô my soule, how many with Vincentius the
hereticke, beside Augustine in his 48 Epistle,
while they thinke shame to amend
their faults, thinke no shame to continue
in their faults. Corah with his companions
lift vp themselues against Moses and Aaron,
and a certaine space was granted to
them to aduise themselues about this their
sinne; but dare they not face the matter
boldly, being as readie vpon the morrow
to present themselues before the Lord as
Moses and Aaron was?Numb. 16. what wonder then,
that our God, iust in all his wayes, couer
them with death and with destruction,
who would not confesse their sinne, and
willingly acknowledge that death and
shame did belong vnto them, because of
it, to their conuersion? Few sinners, alas, ô
my soule, in these our dayes, with Moses,
with Dauid, with Daniel, with that great
Apostle Paul, can acknowledge and confesse
their sinnes, crying, yea crying aloud,
that shame, yea open shame, belongeth

vnto them, and that glorie and righteousnesse
belongeth to their God. And therefore
what wonder that amongst our sinners,
there be few that haue our blessed
God to locke their eyes with Moses,
                        Deut. 34. 6. to
put away their sinnes with Dauid,
                        Psal. 2. 12. to heare
them with Daniel,
                        Dan. 9. and to receiue them to
mercie with Paul.
                        1. Tim. 1. Pronounce thy selfe
therefore, ô my soule, worthie of death,
because of thy sinnes, that God through
his Christ, may receiue thee to life. Take
the coate of shame to thee for thy sinne, ô
my soule, to the end that thy God for thy
Sauiours sake, who for a while was couered
with shame for thee, may clothe thee
with grace here, and glorie hereafter for
euer.
                  
                  
                     10. Learne, ô man, to accuse thy selfe
before God for thy sinnes to thy conuersion,
lest that bold accuser of Christs
brethren accuse thee to God to thy condemnation.
                     FOrget not, ô my soule, to giue in a bill
of complaint against thy selfe to thy
God, accusing thy selfe, and condemning
thy selfe before his Maiestie, for the secret

sinnes committed by thee, hid from the
world, yet knowne to him: and with this
forget not to giue in the like bill against
thy selfe, before God, before Angels, yea
before men, for thy manifest and knowne
sinnes, seene by that Sunne which shineth
by day, and not kept secret from that
Moone which gouerneth by night. For if
thou, ô my soule, deceiued by that old
cunning deceiuer, who as yet taketh pleasure
to deceiue, shalt attempt to refuse
(for any alluring promise made vnto thee,
or any threatning harme pronounced against
thee) to giue in these bils against
thy selfe, to the end that thou happily
iudging thy selfe, be not iustly condemned
with the world, I know one (taught
of my God) who will both boldly and
confidently giue in his bill against thee,
aiming at no lesse then thy comfortlesse
confusion and remedilesse condemnation.
Alas, alas, ô my soule, when shall the
dead senslesse sinners of this age, reade
with attention, and consider with meditation,
the fearefull style which that good
Spirit of God our teacher, giueth to that
euill spirit the diuell our irreconciliable
aduersarie? Is not that euill spirit styled by

that good Spirit,Reu. 12. 10 
                        The accuser of the brethren?
Whereby thy teacher, ô my soule,
the Spirit of thy Father, & of thy Sauiour,
would teach thee, that no sooner doth any
of the children of God commit sinne, especially
any knowne grosse sinne, against
his Maiestie, but incontinent that euill
one presenteth, craftily and ma
                           •
                        iciously,
the names and surnames of those with
their sinnes before God, crying, O Lord!
thy Maiestie made this man to thy owne
Image, thy Maiestie deliuered thy Sonne
to the death for him, thy Maiestie was readie
by thy Spirit to renew him; and yet for
all this thy great loue, hath he not defiled
himselfe with abhominable idolatrie,
bloudie murthers, filthie adulteries and
fornications, brutish drunkennesse, mercilesse
oppressions, and wilt thou no
                           •
                         ô
iust Iudge of all the world, rub shame vppon
the face of such a one, who hath so
grosly rubbed shame vpon thy name, and
vpon thy blessed Gospell professed by
him? Yea wilt thou not, ô iust iudge of
the world, ad
                           •
                        udge such a one to be mine
for euer, who hath (after the offer and
proofe of such loue and kindnesse) refused
to be thine? O my soule, wilt thou not be

loath that such an accusation be made against
thee, especially by such an accuser?
Forget not then, forget not, to accuse thy
selfe before thy God; yea to shame thy
selfe before men (as men now account
shame) to the end that his Maiestie may
be moued out of pitie, for thy Sauiours
sake, to excuse thee, euen before and against
the diuell, thine accuser and deadliest
enemie, neuer forgetting that which
is spoken by Hierome:
                        Hieron. ep. 55. 
                        Melius est confundi
coram peccatoribus super terram, quam coram
Angelis sanctis in coelo. It is better to be
ashamed before sinners on earth, then before
Angels in heauen.
                     
                     II. Let none beside thy God, teaching
thee by his written word, be thy Maister
and leader on earth, if thou wouldest
walke here before him, and reigne hereafter
with him.
                     BLind man, leauing the first path in the
which he should stay his steps while
he iourneyeth here, is made to fall from
that high-way in the which alone he
should walke, and to debosh himselfe in
that by-way which leadeth him, alas,

towards that lake, out of the which there
is no redemption. Because man, ô my
soule, cannot seeke after that onely true
director and guide, who neither can deceiue
nor be deceiued; while he looketh
for life, he findeth in the end nothing but
death; yea while delighting himselfe vnhappily
with his present foolish sports, he
promiseth great commodities and comforts
vnto himselfe, confusion, yea condemnation
proue in the end to be his sole
portion. What noble wise man, ô my
soule, hauing his child to put to schoole,
doth not euen after mature deliberation,
make choise both of the maister by whom
he would haue him taught, and of the pedagogue
by whom he would haue him attended?
O man, I must tell thee, were thy
rayment neuer so course, and thy cheere
neuer so small, yet thou lodgest within thy
clay bodie an immortall soule, which
would be wisely committed to some
good maister, well acquainted with heauenly
things, and to some faithfull and
painfull pedagogue. But where shall such
a one be found? Let no man seeke after
man to be his maister, to be his pedagogue,
but after that blessed God, who

onely made man, and is onely able to instruct
man truly, and to gouerne him
rightly. Is a beast able to teach or to guide
another? and must no
                           •
                         a beast haue a man
to teach it, and to guide it? So must man,
seeking after a maister, and after a pedagogue,
seek after one worthier then himselfe,
running to the face of God, running
to the mouth of God, euen to holy Scripture,
by the which he sheweth himselfe
to man, by the which he speaketh to man,
inquiring there to what way he shall take
himselfe, and in what way he shall keepe
himselfe, while he soiourneth here: to the
end when that night of death shall fall
downe vpon him, he may set his feete vppon
the thr
                           •
                        shold of the gate of that
citie,Reu. 21. 
                              •
                           7. within the which no vncleane thing
possibly can e
                           ••
                        er. Oh my soule, when
shall the men of the wo
                           •
                        ld proue so holily
wise about the gouerning of their soules
(which must necessarily either dye, or liue
for euermore) as Manoah the father of
Sampson was about the dressing of the bodie
of his sonne who was onely to liue for
a while with him? He was not present
with his wife, when the Angell of God
appeared vnto him; but did he not come

to his God and say,Iudg. 13. 8. 
                        I pray thee, my Lord,
let the man of God whom thou sentest, come
againe now vnto vs, and teach vs what we
shall do vnto the child when he is borne. Alas,
alas, ô my soule, who runneth thus to
God, who prayeth thus to God, that he
by his Spirit would teach them out of the
blessed booke of his word, what they
should do to their soules, and to the
soules of those who belong vnto them
while they liue here! Oh Lord, when shall
that true answer giuen by thy Maiesties
gracious mouth, and made vnto Dauid
thy scholler, inquiring thy Maiestie about
this purpose, be hearkened vnto by the
men of this age?Psal. 119. 9. 
                        By what meanes shall a yong
man redresse his way, by taking heed thereunto
according to thy word. Oh would to
God that all men could beleeue that
which Ambrose did beleeue when he
wrote thus: Credimus de Deo, rebusque diuinis,
                        Ambr. ep. 31.
                        ad regnum Christi salutemque nostram
pertinentibus; à nemine posse nos melius certiusque
doceri quam à Deo ipso, qui nec falli
nec fallere potest. We beleeue that we cannot
be more assuredly taught touching God and
diuine things, which belong to Christ his
kingdome and our saluation, then by God

himselfe, who neither can be deceiued, nor deceiue.
That which our Maister spake to
the vile Sadduces touching the ground of
their fearefull errour, denying the rising againe
of the dead, may be most truly applyed
vnto all kinde of sinners, swaruing
from the way of pietie, of righteousnesse,
and sobrietie: Thou art an Atheist, an idolater,
a profaner of God his Sabbath, an
oppressour, a murtherer, a false man, an
adulterer, a fornicator, a drunkard; because
thou wilt not know, because thou
wilt not beleeue, that God is thy onely
Maister, and that holy Scripture is that
Booke whereby he teacheth thee, what is
that thou should eschue, and what is that
thou should embrace.
                  
                  
                     12. Let all sicke in soule because of
sinne, to whose eares the sound of the
sweet name of that great Physitian Iesus
is come, by the meanes of the Gospell,
seeke to him for medicine, whom they
cannot find but in his word.
                     IN many respects, ô my soule, is the estate
of man, now, alas, lying vnder sinne to
be pittied, but in this respect specially; that

being naturally sensible of the mortall
clay vessell, he is naturally senslesse of his
immortall heauenly soule. What man hauing
a maimed or diseased bodie, hearing
who can cure him, and knowing where he
may find that cure, seeketh not without
delay for that man, for that cure? yea longeth
not euen with wearinesse to be with
that man, or to haue that man with him?
And yet, alas, while man is not onely
wounded, but dead in soule, through a
greater number of sins lying in him, then
there be haires in his head, he doth not
onely refuse to heare that Physitian Iesus,
and to come to that Physitian Iesus,Psal. 40. 12. who
is onely able to cure him; but he doth euen
find an heart to hate such, a tongue to
reuile such, yea now and then an hand to
strike such as do aduise him to heare that
Physitian▪ to beleeue that Physitian, and
to be content to receiue his potions, and
to haue that his salue applyed to him
which is able to cure his soule. Naaman
the Syrian being infected with leprosie,
informed by that base handmaid who
serued in his house, that there was a man
in Israel able to cure him, did not stint till
he went thither, so desirous was he of corporall

health.2 King. 5. That poore woman, who
was long subiect to a bloudie issue, knowing
and beleeuing what Iesus was able to
do to her, is not afraid to throng through
the people till she come to Iesus, so carefull
was she to be made whole. Did blind
Bartimaeus (knowing that Iesus was comming
by, and that he was able to helpe
him) stay from crying,Mark. 10. 
                        O Sonne of God be
mercifull vnto me. Yea, which thou must
admire ô my soule, no soone
                           •
                         heareth he
this said to him, Be of good comfort, arise,
he calleth thee, but forthwith (albeit he
was blind) he threw away his clothes, and
hastened towards Iesus. Oh Lord God,
when shall the Naamans of this our age,
leprous in soule, by reason of their many
monstrous sinnes, hearkening vnto, and
beleeuing the voyces and counsels of his
Elisaeus, seeke after that water of the Spirit
and of the word▪ which is onely able to
cleanse them? When shall the men, the
women of this age, grosly defiled from
the top of the head to the sole of the foot,
through that continuall running issue of
iniquitie, which maketh them not onely
vncomely, but loathsomely stinking in the
nosthrils of God, of Angels, and of men,

sensible of God, runne, led by faith, towards
that hem of Christs garment, euen
his blessed word, that by it this their running
stinking issue may be happily dried
vp? When shall the blind men of this age
find spirituall feete to runne with courage
and with confidence towards that bright
Sunne of righteousnesse▪
                        Mala. 4. 2. and light of the
world,Ioh. 8. 12. Iesus, to the end that they may see,
that the things which be seene here, are
temporall, and not to be rested vpon, and
that the things which are not seene otherwise
then by faith, are eternall, and onely
to be loued, and longed for? Remember
for thy owne warning and wakening, ô
my soule, that louing inuitation made to
thee by thy Sauiour:Mat. 11. 28. 
                        Come vnto me all ye
that are wearie and loaden, and I will ease
you, and ye shall find rest vnto your soules. And
no wonder that he charge thee thus, ô my
soule, and with this charge ioyne this so
large a promise, for there is all-sufficiency
of medicine with him, to cure all thy diseases
and sores. Bernard looking on this,
doth first make an humble confession touching
mans diseases, and then sound a melodious
song touching Christ his medicine:
Triplici morbo laborat genus humanum,

principio, medio, & fine, id est, natiuitate,
vita, & morte: natiuitate immunda, vita
peruersa, morte periculosa▪ Venit Christus,
& contra hunc triplicem morbum attulit triplex
remedium:
                        Bern. in sent fol. 117 
                        Natus est, vixit, mortuus est.
Natiuitas eius purgat nostram, vita eius instruit
nostram, mors eius destruit nostram.
Mankinde is subiect to a threefold disease, in
the beginning of his life, progresse, and end,
that is, in his birth, in his life, and in his
death; his birth being foule, his life peruerse,
and his death dangerous. Christ came
into the world bringing with him a threefold
remedie against this threefold disease: He
is borne, he liueth, he dyeth, his birth purgeth
our birth, his life directeth our life, and
his death destroyeth our death. And to make
this the more sensible, and comfortable to
thee, ô my soule, doth not Bernard bring
in the Physitian Iesus, thus from the heauens
speaking vnto thee by his owne
sweetest and refreshing lips: Conceptio mea
emundat tuam, vita mea instruit tuam, mors
mea destruit tuam, resurrectio mea praecedit
tuam, ascensio mea praeparat tuam, Spiritus
meus adiuuat infirmitates tuas. My conception
purgeth thine ô Christian, my life directeth
and instructeth thine, my Resurrection

goeth before thine, my Ascension to the heauens
prepareth away whereby thou mayest ascend
thither also; yea my Spirit helpeth thy
infirmities. O when shall our professors of
Christ see and feele sweet Iesus to be that
whom Ambrose happily out of sense founded
vpon cleare Scripture, saw him to be:
Omnis anima accedat ad Christum: quia omnia
Christus est nobis. S
                              •
                            vulnera curare desideras
medicus est, si febribus aestuas fons est,
si grauaris iniquitate,
                        Ambros. 
                        iustitia est, si auxilio indiges
virtus est, si mortē times vita est, si coelū
desideras via est, si tenebras fugis lux est, si cibum
quaeras alimentum est. Let euery soule
draw neare to Christ, because Christ is all
things to vs all. If thou desirest to cure thy
wounds he is a Physitian, if thou be burning in
an hot feauer, he is a pleasant fountaine ready
to yeeld thee abundance of cooling water to
refresh thee, if thou be loaden with iniquity, he
is righteousnes to free thee from that burthen,
if being weake thou findest thy selfe to haue
need of helpe, he is strength to sustaine thee.
If thou feare death, he is life to quicken thee,
if thou desire heauen, he is the way to leade
thee to it, if thou flie darknesse, he is light to
enlighten thee, if being hungrie thou desirest
meate, he is nourishment to feede thee. But if

these louing inuitations will not be able
to allure men carefully to seeke after this
onely blessed and rich Iesus, let that his
iust conuiction pronounced long ago, against
the abusers of his mercie and long
suffering, affray them for attempting to
despise him.Luke 13. 34. 35. 
                        O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, which
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
come to thee, how often would I haue gathered
thy children together, as the henne gathereth
her birds vnder her wings, and ye
would not. Behold your house is left vnto you
desolate.
                        Io. 15. 22. 
                        If I had not come and spoken vnto
them, they should not haue had sinne, but now
haue they no cloake for their sinne.
                     
                  
                  
                     13. That white shining lillie Iesus,
is not to be found but amongst pricking
sharpe thornes.
                     SWeet Iesus, most sweet Iesus, yea Iesus
farre sweeter then the honie and the
honie combe, is that onely rich Iewell
more precious then the finest gold, fined
seuen times, which is onely worthy of thy
loue, ô my soule! as now I hope thou seest
clearely, and perceiuest sensibly, to thy
great contentment and vnspeakable ioy.
Thou art a heauenly spirit, ô my soule,

created by that vncreated Spirit, and redeemed
by that eternall wisedome of
God thy Father, Iesus God-man, & man-God,
to liue, through, before him, and
with him for euermore. And yet I must tel
thee, ô my soule, that this sweetest honie
Iesus, that this only precious golden iewel
Iesus, (who alone being all things to thee,
is onely worthie of thy loue, desire, and
delight) is not to be found, but in a thorny
bush, and amongst pricking bryers, as it
were; so that when thou drawest neare to
see him, to seeke him, & to embrace him,
thou must be content to be pierced to the
very quicke. And yet I must charge thee,
ô my soule, albeit I should be pricked to
the shedding of my bloud in seeking after
him, ceasse not to seeke after him, till
thou find him, for well is that bloud spent,
which is spilt in seeking after him, and in
finding of him. Yea albeit I should die
when thou hast gotten him, ceasse not
to sticke by him, ceasse not to keepe
him. For ô how honourably dieth he,
who dieth resolutely for seeking and
keeping of that blessed Iesus, who
died willingly, to the end that he might

find him, and finding him, might saue him
from that death which onely deserueth
the stile of death? Iesus thy loue, ô my
soule, who is onely worthie of thy loue, is
not to be found, but in the thornie bush of
pricking tentations, and amongst the
sharpe bryers of stinging tribulations.
And therefore if I, bending my eare to the
enchanting voice of Satan, to the flattering
speeches of this world, or to the alluring
stings of my owne lusts) shall refuse
with that selfe-louer in the Gospell to follow
after Iesus,Mat. 8. 19. 20. because I shall want a hole
to hide my selfe in, or a stone to lay my
head vpon; I shall assuredly depriue my
selfe of Iesus. Yea, if I being possessed
with the best things of the earth, euen in
greatest quantitie, shall refuse at the commandement
of Iesus to quit them all, I
shall neuer be partaker of that treasure
which is onely to be found in heauen
through him.Mat. 19. 21. 22. Hast thou forgotten, ô my
soule, that badge and reward wisely prepared
for thee, when thy sweetest liberall
wise Sauiour is measuring out the things
of this earth to thee, after that thou
through his speciall grace, hast forsaken
all things for him: Verily, I say vnto you,

there is no man,
                        Marke 10. 29. 30. 
                        that hath forsaken houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and
the Gospell, but he shall receiue an hundreth
fold now at this present, houses, and brethren,
and sisters, and mother, and children, and
lands with persecutions, and in the world to
come eternall life. Thus haue what sweete
flesh thou canst haue here on earth, ô my
soule, thou must be content to eate it
with the bitter hearbs of persecution, and
yet while thy mouth is filled with nothing
here beside bitternesse, assure thy
selfe of the sweetnesse of glorie afterward:
for as the crosse is Christs badge
below, so the crowne is his reward aboue.
The sense hereof moued Augustine to say,
Non Christus regno terreno decoratus,
                        August. 
                        nec
Christus terrenis opibus diues, nec Christus
vlla terrena felicitate praefulgens, sed Christus
crucifixus 
                              •
                           er totum orbem praedicatur.
Christ is preached throughout the whole
world, not decored with any earthly kingdome,
not enriched with earthly goods, not
shining gloriously through any glorious prosperitie▪
but crucified, and so couered with ignominie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     14. Sweete, wise Iesus, will crosse
thee first, if he be to crowne thee afterward.
                     VVHen thy meeke King and louing
Sauiour Iesus draweth neare
thee, ô my soule, riding vpon that word
of truth, and so vpon that white horse of
the Gospell, to offer himselfe vnto thee,
he hath indeed both his hands full, and
stretched foorth towards thee: yet so, that
his left hand, as it were goeth before
hanging downward, offering somewhat
vnto thee, which thou must not refuse at
any time, not in any place, to receiue from
him; and his right hand staying, as it were
behind, lift vp somewhat on high, and inclining
also towards thee, carying that in
it which thou wilt assuredly receiue sometime
from him, albeit not where, and
when thou wouldest. Thy louing Sauiour
Iesus, ô my soule, carrieth in his left hand
which goeth before, a cup full of bitter
crosses, couered with a thornie crowne:
and this thou must first take in thy hand,
taste with thy mouth, and carrie on thy
head. In his right hand, staying a little behind,
yet lift vp on high, he caryeth a cup

full of sweet pleasures, free of all bitternesse
and paine, compassed and couered
with a soft shining crowne of euerlasting
glorie. Attempt not, ô my soule, passing
by Iesus his left hand, reached foorth first
towards thee, and offering vnto thee that
bitter cup of the crosse, and that pricking
crowne of thornes, to lay hold on his
right hand, to the end thou mayest gripe
and possesse that sweetest cup of sauourie
pleasures, and that shining crowne of desired
glorie: for be sure, as thou shalt find
Iesus to be wise, in setting the crosse before
the crowne, and so bitter pangs before
sweet pleasures; thou shalt find him
to be most strong also, easily able to keepe
thee from the possession and fruition of
the sweet cup of pleasures, & soft crowne
of glorie, because thou refusedst euen at
his command, to take, to drinke, and to
digest with gladnesse and contentment,
that bitter cup of trouble, and weare that
pricking crowne of crosses and calamitie.
For thou canst not find Iesus, vnlesse thou
be content to be crossed with him, and
for him; thou canst not keep Iesus, vnlesse
that thou be content while thou keepest
him, and for keeping of him, to be compassed

and couered with that crowne of
thornie troubles, wherewith he was couered
from his birth to his buriall. Canst
thou forget, ô my soule, that answer giuen
by thy Sauiour, vnto the mother of Zebedeus
his children, longing to haue her
two sonnes Iames and Iohn, propined
with that sweete cup of delicious pleasures,
and crowned with the soft crowne
of shining glorie, euen before men, and
amongst men on earth here, abhorring in
the meane time, that they should taste anie
bitter thing, that they should be couered
with any shew of ignominie:Mat. 10. 22. 23. 
                        Are ye
able to drinke of the cup that I shall drinke
of, and be baptized with the Baptisme that I
shal be baptized with? Shall thy wise father,
ô my soule, propine his onely welbeloued
and dearest sonne Iesus, the sole solace of
his soule, with the cup of trouble and sorrow,
and crowne of pricking griefes, before
he be able to come to his kingdome:
and shalt thou, being filthie through sinne
in Gods presence, and for sinne Gods
enemie, enioy pleasure, and possesse glorie,
before thou fight with Iesus in the
field of affliction? Remember, remember,
ô my soule, the tenor of that sentence,

whereby euen with a speciall spirituall
checke, that holy one thy Sauiour did
iustly reprooue the slownesse and forgetfulnesse
of his disciples:Luke 24. 25. 26. 
                        O fooles, and slow
of heart, to beleeue all that the Prophets
haue spoken, ought not Christ to haue suffered
these things, and to enter into his glorie?
Forget not that ground layed downe by
the Spirit, ô my soule, as thou louest thy
selfe.Rom. 8. 17. 
                        If we be children, we are heires, euen
heires of God, and heires annexed with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that
we may be also glorified with him. The sense
hereof moued Bernard to say,Bernard. 
                        Caput coronatum
spinis, membra coronata rosis habere
non vult. That head which was crowned with
sharpest thornes, will haue vpon no condition
members crowned with soft roses. And againe,Bernard.
                        Nec sine cruce sequi Christum, nec
sine vnctione crucis asperitatem quis ferre
potest. Neither can a man follow Christ without
the crosse, neither can he vndergo contentedly
the bitternesse of the crosse, without
the grace of the Spirit, Since he then died
for me, ô my soule, who bringeth the
crosse to me, who while I lie vnder the
crosse▪ abideth alwayes with me; yea who
by the crosse dresseth me for the crowne,

that where he is, there I may be also. Let
it please thee, ô my soule, to welcome the
crosse gladly when it cometh to thee, to
entertaine it with ioy when it lyeth on
thee. For be sure, when thy Sauiour shall
ceasse to crosse thee, he shall not forget to
crowne thee, if thou can any wayes be
content to be crossed with him and for
him, who was most heartily contented,
being blessednesse it selfe, to be made a
very curse for thee. The fierce Lyon will
be smitten by his keeper, and not repine,
but if a stranger attempt to strike him
(being within his reach) he will teare
him in peeces. While Christ strikes me, ô
my soule, he strikes me who made me,
who was striken for me, who keepes me,
who feeds me. Shall I, quoth a foole, dare
I prooue a rebell, ô my soule! A foole I
am, if I know not, if I confesse not, that
all my crosses come from him who was
cursed for me. A rebell I am, if knowing
this, if confessing this, I dare refuse to be
patient, yea to reioyce vnder them. And
therefore Bernard did truly say,Bernard. 
                        Grataignominia
crucis ei qui crucifixo ingratus non
est. O how thankefully welcometh that man
the shame of the crosse, who is not altogether

vnthankefull to him, who was crucified for
him! Oh, ô my soule, when shall that of
Augustine be duly thought vpon by our
soft daintie professors, who are not content
to endure any hardnesse at all for
him who could scarsly find a hard stone
to lay his blessed head on, when he came
to be borne, to be banished, to become
poore, to be scorned, to be scourged, yea,
to be shamefully slaine for them? Si ipsum
caput nostrum,
                        August. 
                        noluit corpus suum leuari sursum,
quod deorsum accepit nisi per tribulationis
viam, quid audent membra sua sperare
capite suo se magis esse felices? If our very
head would not haue that his bodie which he
tooke on, on earth beneath here, to be lift vp
aboue vnto the heauens, but through the way
of tribulation, how dare the members of this
bodie, attempt to thinke and expect, that they
can be more happie then their head, and so
passe vnto the heauens without any kind of
trouble?
                     
                  
                  
                     15. Euery Christian will confesse,
that the crosse belongeth to him, and yet
euen the best Christians, when the crosse
cometh neare to them, and lyeth on

them, are both afrayd thereof, and murmure
vnder it.
                     ALas, ô my soule, when shalt thou begin
to know thy selfe, and being sensible
of thy owne infirmities, to consider
the nature euen of the children of God,
hearers of that his sweetest voice of the
Gospell, whereby with remission of sins
and life euerlasting, first, comfort vnder
affliction and oppression, and then deliuerie
from them both, is clearely promised
to God his afflicted and oppressed
ones! While the Gospell is sounded in
their eares, they are contented, not onely
to heare that Iesus Christ by his death,
hath freed them from their sinnes, and by
his rising againe, hath conquessed vnto
them euerlasting righteousnesse; and so
that Christ bringeth not onely with him
vnto them, a soft shining crowne of vnspeakable
glorie, to be worne by them in
heauen for euermore, but also a most bitter
cup of diuerse crosses, and a pricking
crowne of thornie troubles, to be drunke
and worne by them on earth here for a
while. Yea not onely are the children of
God content to heare this, ô my soule,

but they be readie also, euen while they
possesse honours, wealth, and pleasures in
great abundance, to professe and confesse,
that as they haue right to a crowne hereafter,
so they must looke for the crosse
here: and yet when this comes to practise,
which they haue heard, which they do
professe, and so when God their Father
layeth that crosse on them, which he foretold
them, and which they confessed, that
he doth lay on all his owne: O then, alas,
ô my soule, euen the child of God beginneth
to murmure against God, to grudge
with his crosse, and to offend with the instrument
of it. And yet, ô what mad follie
is this! Thy Sauiour hath said to thee, ô
my soule: If any man will follow me, let him
forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse and
follow me. Hereupon I answer him againe:
If I shall forsake the crosse, I must want
the sweete Iesus, but I am heartily content
to be crossed, yea to be crossed ten
thousand wayes, to the end that I may
possesse thee. And yet when all this is
done, I dare attempt to murmure euen against
this Christ, when I am crossed with
him, and for him, whom I can neither find
nor keepe without the crosse. Tell me, tell

me, ô my soule, what shalt thou see, if thou
looke backe vnto thy Baptisme, whereby
thou madest thy first acquaintance with
Christ. What eatest thou, what drinkest
thou, when thou presentest thy selfe to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? In
Baptisme I see matter not onely assuring
me that I am throughly washed from all
sinne in the bloud of Christ, but that I
must be contented from the day in the
which I gaue vp my name to Iesus, to the
very minute in the which I shall lay down
my life, to be bedewed and drenched in
the cold waters of grieuous tribulations,
albeit (honour be to God) I cannot be
drowned by them.Isa. 43. 2. When I participate
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I see
and eate bread, yea broken bread, telling
me, that Iesus my Sauiour being that
wholsome and nourishing good wheate,
was contented to be ground betwixt the
heauiest and sharpest milstones of his Fathers
wrath, to the end he might become
foode to me, and that I being fed by him,
should not refuse to be ground betwixt
the weightiest milstones of the sharpest
crosses it pleaseth his Maiestie to trie me
with, in declaration of my thankfulnesse

to him for feeding of me. I see and drinke
wine, yea wine powred out, telling me
that blessed Iesus, being that sweetest
wine grape, full of spirituall iuyce and
nourishing heauenly liquour, was heartily
contented to be pressed in the winepresse
of his Fathers indignation, to the
end that he might become wine, to quicken,
to refresh, and to comfort me. And
should not I be heartily content to be
prest with the heauiest crosses his Maiestie
shall measure out vnto me, in declaration
of my thankfulnesse towards him,
for humbling himselfe to be pressed, to
the end he might become wine, to comfort,
refresh, and quicken me? This moued
the Spirit thus to charge the dispersed
crossed Christians:2. Pet. 4. 12. 13. 
                        Dearely beloued, thinke
it not strange, concerning the fiery triall which
is amongst you, to proue you, as though some
strange thing were come vnto you. But reioyce,
in as much as ye are partakers of Christs sufferings,
that whē his glory shal appeare, ye may be
glad and reioyce. And indeed he must needs
prooue, ô my soule, a man euill schooled
in grace, who dare thinke affliction to be
a strange thing to the child of God. For
can that possibly be iustly counted strange

to a man, which is consonant to the law of
that countrie where he dwelleth, wisely
and well established by his King? Now
hath not thy God, ô my soule, by a very
ancient law appointed all those who be
his, to affliction on earth here? Be not
these the words of that first Euangelicall
Sermon sounded by God to Adam, being
yet in Paradise (hauing established that
new coueuant of grace with him in the
blessed Messiah, promised after that the
old couenant of workes was broken by
him:)Gen. 3. 15. 
                        I will also put enimitie betwixt thee &
the woman, and betwixt thy seed and her seed,
he shall breake thine head, and thou shalt
bruise his heele. Hereby placing as it were
with his owne hands all those he was to
saue by the promised Messiah, in a field to
fight with Satan, while they should soiourne
here, that obtaining the victorie,
through the strength of their head and
brother, they might reigne through him
and with him for euer, hauing Satan trampled
vnder their feere. Yea do not Gods
children endure troubles here by a very
necessitie, seeing the Spirit their teacher,
who cannot lie,Act. 14. 22. speaketh thus: We must
through many afflictions enter into the kingdome

of God.
                        2. Tim 3. 12. 
                        All that will liue godly in Christ
Iesus shall suffer persecution. Againe, can
that be counted strange in any nation,
which being warranted by Gods Law,
agreeth also with daily practise, allowed
of by the most religious and prudent in
the kingdome? Search the old and new
Testament, my soule, and thou shalt see
there the dearest Saints of God, not onely
cloathed with that rough coate of affliction,
but reioycing vnder it, and exhorting
others not to refuse it when it is
offered vnto them. View for thy satisfaction
in this point,Rom. 5. 3. that cloud of witnesses
presented to thine eyes in the 11. Chapter
of the Epistle to the Hebrewes.
Yea, hearest thou not Paul crying: We reioyce
in tribulation:
                        2. Cor. 11. 30. 
                        If I must needs reioyce, I
will reioyce in my infirmities. And yet while
all these things & many moe be brought
vnto our eares by holy Scripture, knowest
thou not, ô my soule, that so soone as our
God, according to his promise and decree,
layes the crosse vpon his owne, that then
they begin to whisper, and whispering to
thinke somewhat hardly of him their Father,
and of the crosse, and to murmure
against the crosse his rod? Moses in the 4.

of Exodus resolued the distressed Israelites
according to that God had put in his
mouth, that they should be deliuered
from the bondage of Pharaoh, notwithstanding
he was to harden Pharaoh his
heart, so that they should not be deliuered
from vnder his hand, but by the strong
arme of God which he was to stretch out
smiting Egypt by it with many plagues,
before Israel his first borne should be
brought out of it. And yet no sooner find
the Israelites (being thus resolued) their
afflictions increased, but incontinent lifting
vp their hearts and voices against
Moses and Aaron, they crie out, The Lord
looke vpon you and iudge,
                        Exod. 5. 21. 
                        for ye haue made
our sauour to stinke before Pharaoh, and before
his seruants, in that ye haue put a sword
into their hands to slay vs. But what speake I
of the children of Israel? No sooner doth
Moses and Aaron the commissioners of
the high God, and deliuerers of the alledged
promise, heare these speeches spoken
to them and of them by the people, but
immediately Moses murmuring against
God,Exod 5. 22. 23. also crieth out, Lord why hast thou
afflicted this people, wherefore hast thou thus
sent me, for since I came to Pharaoh to speake

in thy name, he hath vexed this people, and yet
thou hast not deliuered this people. Paul was
that scholler who kept his Maisters speeches
in better memorie, and who heartily
could submit himselfe alwayes in euerie
place to the good will of his Maister,
knowing what he had told and decreed
touching him. Iesus Paul his Maister being
to make him a Preacher who was before
a persecuter, speaketh of him thus vnto
his seruant Ananias,
                        Act. 9. 15. 16. 
                        He is a chosen vessel
vnto me, to beare my name before the Gentiles,
and kings, and the children of Israel, for
I will shew him how many things he must suffer
for my names sake. And doth not Paul
being resolued hereof through the grace
of his Maister, with a good heart and a
chearfull countenance, expect crosses,
and gladly welcome them when they
come to him? For hearest thou him not
say,Act. 2. 22. 23. ô my soule, Behold I go bound in
the Spirit to Ierusalem, and know not what
things shall come vnto me there, saue that the
holy Ghost witnesseth in euery citie, that
bonds & afflictions abide me. Seest thou not,
ô my soule, the Prophet Agabus taking
Paul his girdle from him, and hauing
bound Paul his hands and feete therewith,

say vnto him,Act. 21. 10. 11. 
                        Thus saith the holy
Ghost, so shall the Iewes at Ierusalem bind the
man that oweth this girdle, and shall deliuer
him into the hands of the Gentiles. Hereupon
hearest thou not those who were
with Paul, beseeching him that he would
not go vp to Ierusalem? And yet, ô my
soule, hearest thou not Paul, as a most valorous
conquerour through him that died
for him, euen with rare courage, out of
heauenly resolution answering them thus,
What do ye weeping and breaking my heart,
for I am readie not to be bound onely, but also
to dye at Ierusalem for the name of the Lord
Iesus. Wilt thou it offend thee, ô my soule,
when after death thy God shall make thee
to rest from all thy wearie labours, & posssesse
thee with life euerlasting? Be offended
therefore as litle with thy God, when
here before death he visits thee with his
corrections, considering yt the same God
who hath promised vnto thee refreshment
after death, hath prepared labours
for thee before death, & therefore as thou
doest expect that endlesse crowne, euen
with ioy before it come, and shalt beyond
measure reioyce when thou shalt enioy it;
so learne to expect crosses while thou liuest

here,Act. 5. 41. & 16. 25. and when they come, tread in
the paths of the holy Apostles, and with
singing and much reioycing welcome
them chearefully.
                  
                  
                     16. While thou liuest here, desire
not to liue, but to that God, and for that
God, who made thee and sent thee hither.
                     EVerie man naturally loueth life, and
louing life desireth to liue: but, alas,
scarce one of a thousand do know and
consider wherefore life should be loued,
and so wherefore man should desire for to
liue.Esth. 5. The ambitious man with Haman, desireth
to liue, to the end his honour may
be increased. The lecherous man with
Ammon,
                        2. Sam. 13. desireth to liue, to the end he may
satisfie his beastly lust. The seditious man
with Achitophel,
                        2. Sam. 15. desireth to liue, to the
end that accomplishing his peruerse and
wicked plots, he may throw downe such
as he hateth, and aduance those that follow
him. The auaritious man with the
foole in the Gospell,Luk. 12. would liue, to the
end he may enlarge his bounds, and augment
his summes.Luk. 16. 16. The bellie-god would

liue, yt with the rich glutton he may please
his taste, and fat his vile bellie with the
daintiest fare. But are not these men, ô my
soule, with their desires, more then abhominable
in the eyes of that holy God who
made all men for himselfe, and no man for
any thing besides his Maiestie? Wherefore
ô my soule, if thou louing life, wouldest
loue it as becommeth the child of God to
loue life, and so if desiring to liue thou
wouldest liue for the right end, I would
aduise thee to learne of that heauenly wise
and graue learning Father Dauid,
                        Psal. 119. that this
life is not to be desired nor loued but for
Gods cause onely; and that no man should
desire to liue, but to the end he may know
the Law of his God, and by keeping of it
may procure honour to his name. This
was that end wherefore man hauing lost
himselfe in Adam,
                        Luk. 1. 74. 75. was redeemed by Iesus
Christ; yea this is that end, for the which
dead vncleane man is quickened,Rom. 8. 11. 12. 13. renewed,
and sanctified by the Spirit of the Father,
and of his dearest Sonne.
                  
                  
                     17. Long not for death, but to the
end that thou mayest ceasse to sin, and be
with Christ, if thou wouldest not after

that first death die that secōd death also.
                     ALas, ô my soule, as men desire to
liue, and in desiring to liue, sinne
grosly, because they desire not to liue for
the right end. So men desire also to dye,
but, alas, they sinne in desiring to dye, because
the grounds of their desire are vile
before God, and no wayes profitable, but
hurtfull to themselues. Could we desire to
liue submitting alwayes humbly and holily
our crooked wills to the good and
straight will of our God, to the end that
with Dauid we might keepe his law,Psal. 6. and
with Ezekiah we might aduance his worship
here;Isa. 38. could we desire to dye, submitting
also herein our will to the good will
of God, to the end that we might ceasse
to breake the law of our God, and so to
sinne against his Maiestie, yea to the end
that we might be with Iesus,Phil. 1. who is our
onely aduantage both in life and death;
holy should this our desire be, and happie
should we prooue, hauing such a desire
wrought in our soules. Vnderstand, vnderstand
ô my soule, that this naturall life is
no benefit vnto man, nor can be any benefit
at all, but only so farre as it goes before

spirituall and eternall life, and so farre
as it hath spirituall and eternall life following
it. For as that old saying abideth
euer true, Nemo renatus qui non prius natus:
No man is borne ouer againe by the Spirit
of God, that he may become the child
of God, but he who was borne first of a
woman to be the child of man: so that
shall hold infallibly true which our Maister
spake of Iudas:
                        Mar. 14. 21. 
                        It had bene good for
that man, who is not borne ouer againe of the
holy Spirit, that he had neuer bene borne of a
woman: for death seising on such a man,
cannot but possibly send him to hell for
euermore. When on the contrarie, that
man who through God his grace is made
to dye to sinne before he dye before the
world, shall after his first death ceasse from
his labours, and rest with his God for euer,
singing sweetly, Well is me that euer
I was borne ouer againe by the Spirit of
my God, to be the child of God, after I
was borne of a woman to be the sonne of
man.Bernard. 
                        Bernard meditating long ago vpon
this, and subscribing vnto the truth of it,
from a renewed humble honest heart,
drew vp this prayer vnto his God: Commoda
mihi tres panes, nempe vt sciam, vt diligam,

vt faciam voluntatem tuam. I beseech
thee, ô Lord▪ my Father, to bestow on me thine
hungrie child three loaues, that I may know,
that I may loue, and that I may do thy will,
so shall I liue: for in these three standeth the
whole life of my soule. And againe. Vulgò dicitur,
qui bene pascit, bene vixit. It is commonly
said among men, He that feedeth well,
liueth well. But herein wickednesse, ô my
God, doth grosly bewray it selfe, for
none can possibly liue well, but he that liueth
ordinately, sociablie, and humblie.
Ordinatly, studying to procure honest
things both before God and men. Sociably,
liuing so that he studie to be loued of
others; and humblie, that while he is made
thus through the grace of his God to carrie
himselfe, he be not puft vp with pride;
as, alas, too many be, but that contrariwise
with the holy Saints of God, yea
with his most blessed Angels, he cast himselfe
alwayes downe before that Maiestie,Reuel. 4. 9. 10.
who hath bene so mercifull and beneficiall
vnto him.
                  
                  
                     18. Endeuor thy selfe, ô man, to know
before thou dye, of whom thou holdest
thy life, lest after death thou repent, albeit

too late, that euer thou liuedst.
                     FOolish man pitying many, cannot, alas,
pitie himselfe: yea he cannot so
much as dreame that he is to be pitied;
and yet what creature is so much to be pitied
as man, who should proue Gods best
creature beneath here? Oh Lord God,
how many men lay downe their liues daily,
and so are remoued from this earth by
death, before they know by whom and
wherefore they were endowed with life,
and placed on this earth: and if man in this
respect be not to be pitied, let all such
who be sensible of humane misery, iudge.
O my soule, if liuing here I know not of
whom I haue my life, and so who is he vnto
whom I should looke, after whom I
should seeke, studying alwayes to serue
& to please him, euen in the whole course
of my life; had it not bene better I had neuer
tasted of life? That man who neuer
was, who neuer shall be, shall neuer indeed
tast of that sweetest milke, and most
wholsome honie, which is in that heauenly
Canaan which is aboue, neither shall he
euer be tormented with that euer burning
fire which is in that deepest gulfe, out of

the which there is no redemption. But as
for that man, ô my soule, who liues and
knowes not him from whom and for
whom he hath his life, be sure if he die before
his minde be enlightened to see his
God, and before his heart be moued to
loue him, and to beleeue in him, and his
life so sanctified, that in some measure he
may serue and please him; not onely shall
he be depriued of that immortall heauenly
inheritance, but also adiudged to remedilesse
and comfortlesse condemnation.
Oh, oh, when shall the inhabitants of the
earth hearken vnto that wise aduice giuen
by that wise Preacher, Remember now
thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth,
                        Eccl. 12. 1. 
                        while
euill dayes come not, nor the yeares approach
in the which thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure
in them. When shall they suffer that
great conclusion to take place in their
hearts, which would quicken the deadest,
and awake the most secure, which the
same Preacher setteth downe in the same
place,Eccl. 12. 13. 14. 
                        Let vs heare the end of all, Feare God
and keepe his comandements, for this is the
whole dutie of man: for God will bring euery
worke vnto iudgement, with euery secret thing
whether it be good or euist. Oh, oh, when

shall Preachers, when shall hearers, out of
a sense thereof learne to crie vnto God
with Dauid:
                        Psal. 119. 
                        Open mine eyes that I may see
the wonders of the law. Teach me O Lord the
way of thy statutes, and I will keepe it to the
end: giue me vnderstanding and I will keepe
thy Law, yea I will keepe it with my whole
heart. Yea would to God that thou, ô my
soule, couldst in this last age see and feele
that which Augustine saw and felt in his
time, to the end that out of that sight and
sense, thou mightest make the like confession
before God which he made, and send
vp the like petition which he sent vp to
him;August. 
                        My bodie, ô Lord, liueth by my soule,
and my soule liueth by thee, ô my God. Be
neare me therefore ô God, neare in my heart,
neare in mine eyes, neare in mine eares; yea
neare in my bodie, and euery member of it,
that they may all serue thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     19. Behold and consider, ô man, how
dearely sweet Iesus hath loued thee.
                     KNewest thou, ô my soule, how blessed
Iesus hath loued thee, be sure thou
wouldest loue him, & out of that thy loue
thou wouldest be carefull to keepe his

commandements,Gen. 43. 11. 12. 13. 
                        Iacob loued Beniamin
dearely, but ô how more dearely hath Iesus
loued thee! Iacob pinched with famine
is compelled for the safetie of his owne
life to part with Beniamin, and to send him
downe to Egypt. But blessed Iesus, to the
end that he might feede thee and keepe
thee, ô my soule, will not onely subiect
himselfe to hunger, but vnto cruell death.
Ionathans loue towards Dauid exceeded
the loue of women.2. Sam. 1. 26. But Iesus his loue towards
thee, ô my soule, exceedeth not
onely the loue of women, but the loue of
Ionathan. Scripture telleth me, and history
likewise,2 King. 28. 29. that mothers haue slaine their
owne children to keepe in their owne
liues: but neither in Scripture nor in historie
is it found,Lam. 4. 10. that any woman euer was
contented to cut and dresse her owne
flesh for the safetie of her child.Iosep. de bello. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 8. And
Scripture largely telleth me, that thy blessed
Iesus, ô my soule, is that kindliest Pellicane,
who was contented to giue his
owne flesh, not onely to be scourged, to be
nailed, to be pierced, but to be crucified,
and die on the tree, to the end that thou, ô
my soule, mightest feed vpon him to eternall
life. Iesus his loue towards thee, ô my

soule, exceedeth also the loue of Ionathan.
Ionathan loued Dauid, so that he incurred
his fathers wrath for Dauid, and was contented
heartily that Dauid should succeed
his father in the Kingdome; yea Ionathan
oftentimes hazarded his very life for
Dauid. Alwayes thy Ionathan Iesus, ô my
soule, being a King, yea that King of
kings, by whom, and vnder whom all
kings do reigne, did not onely become
poore to make thee rich, vndergo that intollerable
weight of his Fathers wrath,
to the end that thou mightest attaine vnto
and enioy his euerlasting fauour, but also
did dye, to the end that thou being
quickened by him mightest be made a
king to reigne and liue with him in heauen
for euer. Yea telleth not Scripture
thee, ô my soule, that Iesus hath loued
thee so, that he hath married thee, tutored
thee, and hath prouided a rich dowrie
for thee.2. Sam. 28. 41. 
                        Abigal is dashed when Dauid
his Ambassadour came vnto her, shewing
her that Dauid would marrie her. It is
holden for a wonder that Salomon king of
Iudah married the king of Aegypts daughter.
But shouldest thou not be much more
astonied, ô my soule, when thou hearest

that euen Iesus that greatest Sonne of Dauid,
and that mightie King of euerlasting
peace did marrie thee,Eze
                              •
                           . 10. 4. 5. while thou wast
dead in sinne, lying in thy bloud in the
very open field, hauing no eye pitying
thee. Hosea speaking of this marriage,
bringeth in thy blessed kinde spouse speaking
thus vnto thee,Ose. 2. 19. 20. ô my soule, I will marrie
thee vnto me, yea I will marrie thee vnto
me, in righteousnesse, in iudgement, in mercie,
and compassion. Men marrie women for a
while, yea for an vncertaine troublesome
while, but Iesus hath married thee, ô my
soule, for euermore, in such sort that neither
distance of place, nor death, nor the
graue, can possibly seuer thee from him,
or him from thee: yea which is more, the
nearer death draweth vnto thee, and thou
approchest vnto the graue, the more strictly
art thou vnited to him, and he ioyned
with thee. Beside this, Iesus hath so loued
thee, ô my soule, that he hath endowed
thee, but wherewith I pray thee? I heare
Saul crauing from Dauid an hundred foreskins
of the Philistines for his daughter.1. Sam. 18. 25. 6. 7.
And I see Dauid laying downe two hundred
for her. Alwaies Iesus hath endowed
thee, ô my soule, not with siluer, nor with

gold, not with precious stones, but with
bloud: and with what bloud, ô my soule!
not with the bloud of rams,Act. 20. 28. of goates, nor
of any man,2. Pet. 2. 18. 19. but with his owne onely most
precious, most honorable and most cleane
bloud. Beside this, ô my soule, Iesus hath
so loued thee, that he hath prouided a
dowrie for thee, but what a dowrie? beare
with me, ô my soule, if here I must confesse
that I cannot tell thee what a dowrie
that is which thy husband hath prouided
for thee, because my God hath not told
me, and who liuing here can possibly acquaint
the child of God sufficiently and
perfectly with the valour and excellencie
of that inheritance which is appointed
for thee? Some sparkes of the excellencie
and maiestie of it are presented indeed to
our consideration by Scripture, but fully it
shall not be knowne till we be where our
dearest spouse Iesus is. Loue this Iesus, ô
my soule, sincerely; seeke this Iesus, ô my
soule, busily; serue this Iesus, ô my soule,
faithfully and chearefully: and let nothing
content thee till thou be where he is who
hath so loued thee. But how shall you loue
this Iesus, ô my soule, lend thine eares vnto
Iesus, cast thine eyes vpon Iesus, and

out of that loue wherewith he hath loued
thee, learne thou, I pray thee, how to loue
him againe. This is that counsell which
Bernard giueth to thee,Benn. ô my soule, Disce
ô Christiano à Christo quomodo diligas
Christum, disce amare dulciter, amare prudenter,
amare fortiter; dulciter, ne illectus;
prudenter, ne deceptus; fortiter, ne oppressus;
ab amore Domini auertaris. Learn ô Christian,
frō Christ, how thou shouldest loue Christ,
learne to loue him sweetly, to loue him wisely,
to loue him strongly; sweetly, lest being allured;
wisely, lest being deceiued; strongly, lest
being oppressed, thou shouldest be drawn away
from the loue of thy Lord. Now, ô my soule,
by whom art thou made to loue this Iesus
thus, who hath so freely loued thee,
and who by louing of thee, hath deserued
to be loued by thee? Angels cannot teach
thee to do this, men cannot teach thee to
do this; none can teach thee this lesson
beside that great teacher of God his children,Rom. 5. 5.
euen the Spirit of the Father and of
his Sonne, by whom alone this loue is
spread abroad in our hearts.
                  
                  
                     20. Giue no sleepe to thine eyes, till
thou be certified that Iesus, the loue of

God his elect, loueth thee.
                     IF thou my soule, wouldest proue truly
wise to that last day, after which there
shall be no day, it were good that thou
were carefull in time to be certified of
the loue of Iesus thy Sauiour and Maister,
as of that first and chiefest thing thou
shouldest be carefull to be certified of
before all things: so that publickly before
God, Angels, and men, and priuately betwixt
God and thine owne heart, thou
mayest say and sing; Blessed be that Iesus
who hath loued me, blessed be that Iesus
who loueth me still. But heare, ô my soule,
three things are wisely to be considered
by thee. First, wherefore should this be
thy first & chiefest care? Secondly, whereby
is that loue wherewith Iesus hath loued
thee, intimated to thee? Thirdly, how
mayest thou be certified that Iesus loueth
thee? Let me possesse all the world, ô my
soule, if Iesus loue me not, woe vnto me:
want what I can, if Iesus loue me, well is
me. I want that honour, that wealth, that
health, those pleasures which sometime I
enioyed, yea I am depriued by death of a
louing father, of kind brethren, of true
friends, of deare companions: alwayes

Iesus loueth me, Iesus is with me, therefore
well is me. And must I not be well, ô
my soule, hauing him who was the sole
solace and desire of that holy man Dauid,
who was a man according to the heart of
God, for did he not, treading all want vnder
foote, and triumphing as one possessing
all wealth, crie out thus: Whom haue
I in the heauens but thee?
                        Psal. 73. 25. 
                        and I haue desired
none in the earth but thee. But, ô my soule,
how happened I to bring Dauid before
thee, when I was speaking to thee touching
the happinesse of that man, who
possesseth Iesus? Was not Iesus, not onely
with God his Father, but ye very daily delight
of God his Father,Prou. 8. 26. 27. 30. when he prepared
the heauens and made the earth? Mephibosheth
hath a worthie speech vnto Dauid,
                        2. Sam. 19. 30.
after he returned to Ierusalem: Let
Ziba take all, seeing my Lord the King is
come home in peace. And wilt thou not be
contented to say, ô my soule, O Lord my
God, let all that I haue be taken from me,
seeing my loue and Lord Iesus is come to
me, euen he, in whom thou ô Lord my
Father art well pleased with me,Mat. 3. 17. euen he,
ô Lord, who is my life, my light, and my
saluation. This loue wherewith Iesus hath

loued thee,Ioh. 8. 12. & 14. 6. ô my soule, is intimated to
thine eares, is sprinkled as it were on thy
bodie, is put into thine hand, is presented
to thy mouth, yea is as it were, eaten,
drunke, and digested by thee. It is intimated
to thine eare by the sweetest voyce
of the Gospell preached to thee. It is
sprinkled as it were vpon thy bodie by
that Sacrament of Baptisme, whereby
thou wast initiated in the house of God.
It is put into thine hand, presented vnto
thy mouth, eaten, drunke, and digested by
thee, a
                           •
                         it were by and in that Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, administred in
broken bread and wine, powred out: telling
thee, ô my soule, that blessed Iesus
being that cleane and wholest wheate,
was heartily content to be ground betwixt
the milstones of his Fathers wrath,
to the end he might become sweete and
pleasant bread to feed thee. Yea that blessed
Iesus being that true vine, full of heauenly
iuyce and liquor, would be pressed
in the wine-presse of his Fathers indignation,
to the end that he might be made a
quickening, refreshing, and comforting
drinke, to quicken thee, ô my soule, being
dead, to refresh thee, ô my soule, being

wearied, and to comfort thee, ô my soule,
being cast downe. Thou mayest be perswaded,
ô my soule, that Iesus loueth
thee if thou louest him, for he neuer loued
God,Ioh. 4. 10. who was not first loued of God.
Now thou shalt know if thou louest Iesus,Ioh. 8. 47. & 14. 15.
if thou louest his word, if thou be
carefull to keepe his commandements,
and if thou delight in the societie of
such as loue him,Psal. 15. 4. and walke in his wayes.
                  
                  
                     21. Seeing no sinne is committed
behind his backe, but in his face who
knowes the thoughts of men afarre off,
let no man attempt to commit sinne,
vpon hope of secresie.
                     ALbeit sinne which is thine onely enemie,
ô my soule, be a most alluring
and sweet potion, yet sinne is a deceiuing
and destroying traitor: and no wonder,
it being the arrow of that euill one,
who is not onely a subtle foxe, but also a
bloudie Lyon. O how easily suffer vile
men themselues to be perswaded that sin
may be committed, yea that sinne is
committed in secret, albeit there was

neuer any sinne committed but in sight. It
may be that sinne be committed behind
the backe of a blind man who seeth nothing,
and of a pore-blind man who seeth
little, yet it is euer committed in the sight
of God, who made man, and who hath
eyes by the which he seeth. Alas, alas, the
blind powers & people of this world, liue
so now, as if the God of heauen had no
eyes, or had blind eyes, either seeing nothing
at all, or seeing nothing afarre off.
Alwayes out of Scripture I haue learned
three things touching this point, ô my
soule. First, that our God hath eyes: Secondly,
that our God hath eyes of a rare
excellent nature: Thirdly, that not without
speciall cause our God hath taken vnto
himselfe such eyes. Speaketh not Scripture
touching our God thus:Psal. 94. 8. 9. 
                        Vnderstand
ye vnwise among the people, and ye fooles when
shall ye be wise, he that planted the eare shall
he not heare, and he that made the eye shall he
not see? And therefore what wonder the
Prophet fals out into this exclamatiō: Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall
I flie from thy presence? If I ascend vnto the
heauen, thou art there; if I lye downe in the
hell, thou art there: Let me take the wings of

the morning, and dwell in the vttermost parts
of the sea,
                        Psal. 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 
                        yet there shall thy hand leade me, &
thy right hād hold me. If I say yet the darknes
shal hide me, euen the night shall be light about
me, yea the darknesse hideth not from thee,
but the night shineth as the day, the darknesse
and light are both alike. Out of the sense of
this,Aug
                              •
                           st. 
                        Augustine is not afraid to say, Deus est
totus oculus. Our God is all eye, seeing before,
seeing behind, on this side, on that
side, aboue, and beneath him, as it were.
But of what nature are the eyes of our
God? ô my soule, Scripture resoluing this
point, telleth me that the eyes of our God
are cleare eyes, are pure eyes, cleare eyes,
vnto the which all men with all things are
open. O how many men haue eyes, and yet
how many men be hidden from the eyes
of men! how many things be hidden from
the eyes of men! But I must tell thee, ô my
soule, that there cannot so much as one
man be hidden from the eyes of God, yea
which is more, there cannot so much as
one thought of one man be hid from the
eyes of God. This is cleared by our God,
saying,Ier. 16. 17. 
                        My eyes are vpon all their wayes, they
are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquitie
hid from my face.
                        Ier. 23. 24. 
                        Can any hide himselfe

in secret places (saith the Lord) do not
I fill heauen and earth,
                        Heb. 4. 13. 
                        saith the Lord? All
things are naked and open to his eyes with
whom we haue to do. O when shall men suffer
yt to sinke into their heart, spoken touching
the eyes of our Maister by Matthew:,
                        Mat. 9. 4.
                        But when Iesus saw their thoughts, he
said, wherefore thinke ye euill things in your
hearts?
                        Reu. 1. 14. And therefore I heare Iohn speaking
thus of Christs eyes, His eyes were as
a flame of fire. Againe Scripture telleth me
that our God hath pure eyes, and therefore
he cannot possibly behold any vncleane
man or matter, vnlesse he hate both, or
punish both. This is that which the Prophet
confesseth,Hab. 1. 13. when speaking of our
God, he saith, Thou art of pure eyes, and
canst not see euill, thou canst not behold wickednesse.
Dauid saw and confessed this,
saying,Psal. 5. 4. 
                        Thou art not a God that loueth wickednesse,
neither shall euill dwell with thee.
Thirdly, Scripture telleth me, ô my soule,
that our God hath cloathed himselfe with
eyes, yea with such eyes, to the end that
he, as that sole supreme Iudge of the
world, may thinke and speake of men, and
do vnto men, as they by their carriage,
priuate and publicke, declare themselues,

either to be obedient to him, or rebellious
against him; and therefore I heare the Spirit
speaking thus to me of God: Thy eyes
are vpon all the wayes of the sonnes of men,
                        Ier. 32. 19. 
                        to
giue euerie man according to the fruite of his
workes. Knowest thou not, ô my soule,
that Abel was slaine in secret, and
yet in sight;Gen. 4. behind the backe of Adam,
the father of his flesh, yet in the sight of
God the Father of his spirit. Vriah was
slaine by Dauid, being farre from Dauid
behind the backe of all Iudah (Dauid and
Ioab being onely excepted) yea behind
the backe of all Ammon,2. Sam. 11. by whose sword
he perished, yet Vriah was slaine by Dauid,
in his sight who filleth the heauens
and the earth, and from whom none can
hide himselfe in secret place, as hath bene
cleared, Ierem. 23. 24. And this I thinke
Dauid was made afterward to know and
confesse, notwithstanding all his shuffles
and policie. Who in all Israel could possibly
thinke that Naboth was cruelly and
vniustly put to death, and so that Achab
the King and Iezabel the Queene (who
should haue prooued his protectours and
keepers) were his fierce persecutors euen
vnto death?1. King. 2. seeing he was conuicted by a

formall Iurie, hauing witnesses admitted
& sworne, testifying that he had blasphemed
God and the King: and yet that blessed
God who searcheth the heart, and
who iudgeth not according to the outward
appearance, but righteous iudgement,
did accuse and conuict Achab of
oppression and murther, and punish him
iustly for them. Oh, ô my soule, when
shall the blind men of this age learne to
hearken vnto, and to beleeue that blessed
Spirit of truth who cannot lye, teaching
vs truly, that no sinne can possibly be committed
in secret. Came euer that vnto thy
eares,Isa. 29. 15. ô my soule, Woe vnto them that
seeke deepe to hide their counsell from the
Lord, for their workes are in darknesse, and
they say, who seeth vs, and who knoweth vs?
I haue seene thy adulterie and thy neyings,
                        Ier. 13. 27.
                        the filthinesse of thy whoredome vpon the hils
in the fields, and thy abhominations. Knowest
thou not him, ô my soule, who saw Nathaniel
before Philip called him, when he
was vnder the figge tree, yea knowest
thou not him who knew the thought of
the very heart of Simeon the Pharisie,Ioh. 1. 48. speaking
thus within himselfe of thy Sauiour:
If this man were a Prophet, he would surely

haue knowne what manner of woman this is
which toucheth him, for she is a sinner. This
moued Bernard (citing that written by
Zephaniah: At that time I will search Ierusalem
with lights,)
                        Zeph. 1. 12. to write thus touching
our God: Acuto visu est, nihil inscrutatum
relinquit oculus eius, nunc videor sed non video:
praesto est oculus cui omnia patent et si non
patet ipse. Our God is a God of sharpe sight,
his eye leaueth nothing vnsearched out: I am
seene but I see not: that eye is present to the
which all things be patent or open, albeit that
eye be not seene by me. The sense hereof moued
Augustine to make this notable confession:Aug. conf.
                        Et tibi quidem Domine cuius oculis
nuda est abyssus humanae conscientiae,
                        lib. 10. ca. 2. 
                        quid occultum
esset in me, etiam si nollem confiteri
tibi? te enim mihi absconderem non me tibi.
Now from thee, ô Lord, vnto whose eyes the
bottomlesse deepe of mans conscience is naked,
what can be hid in me, albeit I would not confesse
my selfe to thee? for I might well preasse
to hide thy Maiestie from me, I could not
possibly hide my selfe from thee. And againe,
Neque enim docet te quid in se agatur,
                        Aug. c
                              •
                           nf. 
                        qui
tibi confitetur,
                        lib. 5. cap. 1. 
                        quia oculum tuum non excludit
cor clausum, nec manum tuam repellit duritia
hominum, sed solus 
                              •
                           am cum voles aut

miserans aut vindicans extendis, & non est
qui se abscondat à calore tuo. For that man
ô Lord, who confesseth himselfe vnto thee,
teacheth thee not by his confession, what he
doth: for the shut and close heart of man cannot
exclude thy eye, neither can the hardnesse
of man put backe thy hand, but thou puttest
it out when thou pleasest, either shewing mercie,
or taking vengeance, and there is none
who can hide himselfe from thy heate. Oh, oh,
my soule, when shall that which was
seene, felt, and confessed by old Bernard,
who liued in that blind age vnder grosse
darknesse, be seene, felt, and confessed by
vs, who liue now hauing that great shining
light of the Gospell continually striking
as it were with hot piercing beames
our eyes so, that we cannot hide our
selues from them, both Lords day, and
weeke day, nay both by day and by night?
Bringeth not Bernard in the grosse wicked
man speaking thus to himselfe:Benn. 
                        Parietes
sunt vndique, quis me videt? I am inclosed
on all sides with strong high walles, who doth
see me? Alwayes how is this wicked man
answered by Bernard? Esto, nemo te videt,
non tamen nullus videt te Angelus bonus, videt
te Angelus malus, videt te bonis & malis

Angelis, maior Deus. Let it be, saith Bernard,
that no man see thee, ô wicked man, yet
canst thou, darest thou say that none seeth
thee? the good Angels see thee, the euill Angels
see thee: and which is more, one who is
greater then all good and euill Angels seeth
thee, to wit, God. When that euill Angell
the diuell, ô my soule, seeth thee, thy irreconcilable
aduersarie and bitter accuser
seeth thee. When God his good Angell
seeth thee, that witnesse seeth thee who
will beare testimonie against thee, yea thy
louing brother seeth thee, whom thou by
thy sinnes grieuest fearefully. And when
thy God seeth thee, that great supreme
Iudge seeth thee, who can neither be possibly
frustrate of his purpose, nor any
wayes corrupted when he goeth to iudgement.
Attempt not therefore, ô my soule,
to commit sinne vpon hope of secrecie,
for I must assure thee from the mouth of
thy God, that if thou sinne against him,
thou shalt be seene by him, and at length
vpon a most publicke scaffold to the sight
of Angels, and men, good and euill, be punished
for thy sinnes.
                  
                  
                     
                     22. Sinne and euill haue euer bene,
and shall euer be ioyned together, albeit
none be hurt by the euill of sinne, beside
man who committeth it.
                     SInne and euill are so ioyntly knit together,
ô my soule, let Satan alledge
what he will, let men misled by Satan alledge
what they please, that whosoeuer
committeth sinne, doth euill, albeit neither
in the eyes of other men, nor in his
owne eyes, yet in the eyes of that God,
before whom sinne yet was neuer good,
before whom sinne shall neuer be good,
yea before whom sinne hath euer bene
euill, sinne shall euer remaine euill, commit
it who so will. I pray thee therefore,
ô my soule, while thou breathest here,
forget not to thinke seriously vpon that
warning and wakening sentence, which is
deliuered by the Spirit, touching Dauid
his adulterie and murther: And when the
wife of Vriah heard that her husband was
dead, she mourned for her husband: So when
the mourning was past, Dauid sent and
tooke her to his house, and she became
his wife. Alwayes hearken, hearken, ô my

soule,2. Sam. 11. 26. 27. vnto that which followed: But the
thing that Dauid had done, was euill in the
sight of the Lord. But left this euill which
euer accompanieth sinne, be mistaken by
thee, ô my soule, thou must know that
howbeit sinne be euill in the sight of the
Lord, yet the euill of sinne is not hurtfull
vnto that Lord against whom it is committed,
but onely to that soule by the
which it is committed: for as man his
goodnesse cannot possibly profite his
God,Iob 3
                              •
                           . 7. 8 so his sinne can no wayes harme his
Maiestie. Oh, ô my soule, when shall the
deboshed Gospellers of this our age, suffer
these oracles to take roote downeward
in their hearts, to the end they may
bring foorth fruite vpwards in their liues!
Do they prouoke me to wrath,
                        Ier. 7. 8. 
                        saith the Lord,
and not themselues to the confusion of their
owne faces?
                        Eccles. 8. 13 
                        It shall not be well with the wicked,
neither shall he prolong his dayes, but he
shall be like a shadow, because he feares not before
God. As thou louest thy selfe then, ô
my soule, strengthen thy selfe against all
sinne, if thou wouldest not haue me to repent
(albeit, alas, out of time) after death
and iudgement, that euer I was borne: for
that euill which euer accompanieth the

sinner because of sinne, must in despite
of diuels and men, at length seise vpon
the sinner, vnlesse by sincere repentance
(God being mercifull to him, for Iesus his
owne Sonnes sake) he quit himselfe in
time and speedily of sinne.
                  
                  
                     23. Consider here seriously, that
fearefull haruest of most bitter sheaues,
that poysoning seed of sinne bringeth
out.
                     THe wise gardner iudgeth of his tree
by the fruite thereof, as the vertuous
husbandman iudgeth of his seed according
to his haruest. But, ô my soule, when
shalt thou, learning to be holily and truly
wise, begin to iudge of sinne thine onely
enemie, by that fruit, by that haruest, alas,
which it bringeth forth! How fearefully
hurtfull is that strange haruest that followeth
it? I must tell thee here, ô my soule,
that that sinne wherein I was conceiued
and borne, and which, alas, I must
keepe alwayes within my bosome while
I liue here, bringeth foorth fruite and
sheaues, which be so fearefully bitter, so
horribly hurtfull, that if this bitternesse

and hurt could be perceiued, euen by vs
who call our selues Gods children, we
should be easily moued with that chosen
vessell of God, vncessantly to crie out: O
miserable man that I am, who shall deliuer
me from this bodie of death! Knowest thou
not, ô my soule, that thou and this my bodie
came ioyntly in one minute, ioyned
together in this world, as two kind twins
louing each other most entirely, embracing
each other most kindly? yea knowest
thou not, ô my soule, that thou and this
my body haue liued since that time of my
birth in this world some yeares together,
as husband and wife, most strictly maried
one to another, euen before God, and by
God? And yet that bitter roote of sinne,
which, alas, was conceiued, was borne, &
which liueth within vs, will haue thee, ô
my soule, (in despite of all we can deuise
or do) separate from this bodie of mine,
and this my bodie separate from thee. But
doth bitter sinne stay here, notwithstanding
this be a sharpe stroke? No, ô my
soule, for sinne euen after this separation
is made, doth make that bodie within the
which sometime it lodged, in regard of
the vile and filthie stinke it sendeth foorth

vnto their nostrils, most odious and abominable,
though sometime pleasant to the
eyes of the beholders, and fragrant vnto
the smell of such as approched neare vnto
it. In such sort, that the louing father cannot
suffer his tender child, being dead, to
abide in one house with him: and the pitifull
hearted mother, is contented that
the dead corps of her dearest child, euen
within some few houres, be put foorth of
her doores. But heare, ô my soule, wonderest
thou not, that a more vile stinke
and loathsome smell floweth from the very
dead corps of Gods children, then
from the dead carions of other creatures,
as of fowles, fishes, and beasts? Ceasse to
wonder at this, ô my soule, and learne to
thinke vpon that loathsome spring from
whence this proceedeth. I must tell thee,
ô my soule, that the bodie of the holiest
man that euer liued on earth here (that
glorious sacred bodie of blessed Iesus being
excepted) lodgeth a more vile and
stinking guest (onely loathsome to God
and his Angels) then euer the bodies of
any fowle, fish, or beast did lodge. I must
confesse indeed, that the bodies of these
creatures do lodge corruption, yea, much

corruption, as may be easily perceiued
while they liue, and especially when they
be dead. Alwayes that stinking loathsome
guest of sinne they do not lodge,
which the very bodies of Abraham, Isaac,
Iacob, Iames, Iohn, Peter, Paul, could not
but lodge. And therefore no wonder that
a more noysome stinke flow from the very
dead bodies of Gods Saints, then from
the carrions of these reasonlesse creatures.
But doth sinne stay here, ô my soule, albeit
this be a deepe stroke? No, no: for
sinne will haue that stinking dead bodie,
in the which it lodgeth, whether it be buried
in the bowels of the earth,Gen. 3. 19. or vnder
the seas,Eccles. 12. 7. to returne to that dust out of the
which it was taken. But doth sinne stay
here, albeit this would seeme to be the
dead stroke, beyond the which none can
go in the child of God? No, no, for telleth
not historie vs, yt out of dead corpses
of men and women, there ariseth most
monstrous and noysome beasts? yea vglie
toades and cruell serpents. Augustine in
his 48. Sermon to his brethren the Hermits,
affirmeth that toades are bred in the
braines of dead corpses, and that serpents
be bred in their kidneyes. Yea writeth not

                        Augustine, that he being at Rome, saw a
toade in the scull of one of their Emperours?
Dare I here forget the like strange
spectacle, (by Gods speciall prouidence I
doubt not (for my better resolution touching
the veritie of the things alledged)
presented to mine owne eyes, being in the
Churchyard of Leith in the moneth of
Iune anno 1615. For being there delighting
to behold for a while those honest
men, who were then busied about the
building of the steeple, I espied within a
grassie bush the scull of some dead corps,
hauing in the vpmost part of it a little
voide. And hauing a purpose to cause the
Sexton put the scull vnder the earth, looking
on it more narrowly, I saw through
the voide part of it (to my great astonishment)
a toade of huge bignesse, whereupon
I called the workemen to consider
this spectacle with me, and hauing made
a little discourse vnto them, of the miseries,
vilenesse, vanitie, and pride of man,
we all began to consider how we might
haue the toade separated from the head,
but that we found altogether impossible,
till the bone was violently broken, so little
was the voide part of it, and so big

was the toade. Let the Reader iudge
where this toade was bred and fostered.
For he who knoweth all things (blessed
be his name) knoweth that I saw it lodged
as said is. O my soule, what if these
things could be considered by men, and
especially by women in this our licentious
foolish age: would they take such
paines and delight to fat their clay bodies
with all sorts of pleasures and pleasant
things as they do? Would they, euen with
the wracke of their estate, feed bellies,
dresse their heads, couer their backs
so daintily, so gloriously, which must be
brought so low, and be made a mother to
conceiue, a nurse to foster, yea a lodging
to keepe such vgly monsters? Yea if this
could be considered, ô my soule, ô with
what an hatred would the child of God
hate sinne! and with what a care would he
arme himselfe against sinne, seeing nothing
beside sinne hath brought all these
euils vpon poore miserable man. Bernard
could no sooner thinke vpon this, but he
behooued, standing amazed, to crie out:
Vnde haec tanta pusillanimitas, vt egregia
creatura, capax aeternae beatitudinis & gloriae
magni Dei, vtpote cuius est inspiratione condita,

similitudine insignita, cruore redempta,
spiritu adoptata, fide dotata, miserum non
erubescat corporeorum sensuum gerere seruitutem,
omittere curam cordis, & curam
carnis gerere, impinguere & fouere cadauer
putridum, quòd paulò post vermium esca futura
nullatenus dubitatur. From whence
cometh this so great basenesse of spirit, that
man, that notable creature, capable of euerlasting
blessednesse, and of the glorie of the great
God, by whose breath he was made, with
whose image he was marked, by whose bloud
he was redeemed, by whose spirit he hath
his adoption sealed vp, and is enriched
by faith, should not, alas, be ashamed to be
a slaue to his corporall senses, to omit all
care of his soule, and to haue a care of his
bodie, to be solist to fat and foster his rotten
carrion, which shortly afterwards is to be
made the meate of wormes. O when shall
we of this loose licentious age, onely
carefull to haue our bodies dressed, and
altogether carelesse of our soules, learne
to confesse that to be true, which Augustine
saw and confessed long ago.August. 
                        Dum infirmitatem
carnis nostrae timemus, salutem
animae negligimus, quia caro si delicate nutritur
occidit spiritum, sicut enim tinea lanam

deuorat & ligna foenum & stipulam ignis
comburit, ita delicata caro animan concremat
& consumit. While we feare the weaknesse of
our body, we neglect the saluation of our soule:
for if the flesh be delicately fed, it slayeth the
spirit, for as the mothe destroyeth the wooll
and timber, and as the fire consumeth hay
and stubble, so a bodie giuen to pleasures
burnes vp and consumes the soule. O when
shall the Christians of this age looke
wisely vpon their soules and bodies,
and looking on them learne to discerne
betwixt them, and discerning aright betwixt
them, begin to spend their time
here, as Bernard well grounded by Scripture,
aduiseth them: Tempus hoc animabus
non corporibus assignatur. Dies salutis est non
voluptatis, cum iudicium carnis ex anima
pendeat. Carni nihil potest vtilius quam saluti
animae prouideri. This time is appointed for
our soules, and not for our bodies, this time is
the day of saluation, not of fleshly delectation:
considering the iudgement of the body depends
vpon the soule; and so man cannot possibly
prouide better for his bodie then by seeking
that which is able to benefit his soule.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     24. Sinne is onely committed against
God, and therefore euery sinner
who findeth not Gods mercie pardoning
him his sinne, shall finde Gods Maiestie
his partie and aduersarie for sinne.
                     IN this last and worst age of the world,
alas, ô my soule, all men almost seeke
after sinne, defile themselues with sinne,
yea, alas, delight themselues in sinne, and
all because few men, alas, studie to acquaint
themselues with the nature of sin.
Men, now adayes, ô my soule, miscarried
by their owne deceiuing lusts, while they
fall into sinne, seeke vnto men, yea vnto
men onely, as if sinne were committed against
man, yea against man onely: and
out of this false ground, blindly, alas, laid
by them, as they thinke of the man with
whom they haue to do, so they thinke of
the sinne which they haue committed. If
that man be such a one who may grieue
and annoy them, then they are grieued for
their sinne. Alwayes not because that
great God is abused by them, but because
a man who may grieue them, is grieued
by them. If that man be such a man who
cannot grieue them, who dare not attempt

to annoy them, by reason of their grandor
and worldly credit, and his basenesse and
lacke of credit with men. Oh then, ô my
soule, they do both digest their sinnes
sweetly, and go on in their sinne peartly
and pleasantly: for can these men possibly
dreame, that any beside man hath any interest
to quarrell them for their sinne? Alwaies
hearken, hearken, ô my soule, would
man suffer that good word of God which
is that word of truth (which neuer deceiued
any man, which neuer shall deceiue
any man) to leade him, he should find that
euery sinne committed on earth beneath
here (be the committer of it Prince or
peasant) looketh not lower then the heauen
of heauens, and so he should find that
sinne committed beneath here, is committed
against none who liueth beneath
here, but against that supreme Maiestie,
who ruling ouer all things hath his throne
set aboue all thrones, euen in the highest
heauens. I will confesse, ô my soule, that
a subiect may offend and grieue his king,
and the king his subiect; that a father may
hurt and grieue his sonne, and a sonne his
father: but Scripture being well considered,
will not suffer me to confesse, that a

subiect can sinne against his king, or a
king against his subiect; that a father can
sinne against his sonne, or a sonne against
his father. Tell me, tell me, ô my soule,
what callest thou sinne? Sinne I know (being
taught of God) is The transgression of
the Law.
                        1. Iob. 3. 4. But of whose law I pray thee? not
of the law of any pettie king, but of the
Law of that King of kings,Iam. 4. 12. who is that
onely supreme Law-giuer, who is able to
saue and destroy. Knowest thou not, ô my
soule, wherefore theft is sinne, and when
theft is sinne, wherefore murther is sinne,
and when murther is sinne, and so forth of
all other sinnes? Because God hath forbidden
them, and when God forbiddeth
them, are they not sinnes, and no otherwise?
Hast thou not heard, ô my soule,
that the Israelites spoyled the Egyptians
of all their iewels,Exod. 11. 2. 3. & 12. 55. 56. yet, I thinke, you will
neither accuse nor conuict them for their
deed, and all because that was done of
them by the speciall command of his
mouth who can command no wrong.
Yea, hast thou not heard, ô my soule, that
Ehud killed Aeglon, yet thou must thinke
that he cannot be reputed a murtherer for
that, it being done by the secret commission

of that supreme Lord, who hath ranged
all liuing so vnder law, that he himselfe
alone doth remaine free from all
law, yea far aboue all law. Dauid againe,
ô my soule, being a great King amongst
men here, hath defiled but the wife of his
meane honest subiect: yea Dauid hath by
the hand of the Ammonites slaine the husband
of this wife defiled by him: alwayes
sinned not Dauid, ô my soule? Yes, yes, he
sinned grosly, albeit not against Bathsheba,
whose chastitie was defiled; albeit not
against Vriah, whose life was taken: yet he
sinned against that mightie King, who
had said,Exod. 20. 
                        Thou shalt not commit adulterie:
Thou shalt do no murther. The sight and
sense of this truth, ô my soule, moued the
enlightened mind, the renewed, and sanctified
heart of this same Dauid, to vntye
his tongue, to open his mouth, and to
proclaime aloud before God, Angels and
men,Psal. 51. 4. that notable confession: Against thee,
against thee onely I haue sinned, and done euill
in thy sight. Hast thou sinned then, ô my
soule, so secretly that no man knoweth
thy sinne? Is that partie whom thou by
thy knowne and publicke sin hast offended,
so base and poore, that either he dare

not quarrell with thee for feare, or may
not for want of meanes? yet let neither of
these I pray thee secure thee, for he is aboue
thee whom thou by thy sin hast offended,
and prouoked to wrath against
thee: whose eyes are vpon all the wayes
of men; and whose hands be sufficiently
able to punish man. O my soule, remember
Naboth, for thy comfort in these euill
dayes, shall not that God who required
his bloud at the hand of his king, make
inquisition for euery sinne committed against
him, by whatsoeuer sinner? though
he suffer euen wicked men for a long time
to runne on in their iniquities.
                  
                  
                     25. Let no man communicate with
sinne, nor sinners, who would not be
made partaker of that punishment
which is due vnto sinne and sinners.
                     IF thou loue thy selfe holily and wisely,
ô my soule, to the benefit of mine estate,
to the comfort of mine heart, euen
when a very world of thornie crosses and
temptations shall prouoke me, and to my
full and finall ioy in heauen, I would heartily
aduise thee, neither to commit sinne,

nor to communicate with it, and so neither
directly to do that euill, which cannot
be called but thine euill; neither any
wayes to ioyne thy selfe with that euill
which thou wouldest not account to be
thine, but to be the euill of another man.
Thus I would counsell thee, ô my soule,
not onely not to be an idolater, but not to
communicate with idolaters; not onely,
not to be an adulterer, but not to take
part with an adulterer: and so forth of all
other sinnes and sinners. But heare, ô my
poore and weake soule, for the better
guarding and strengthening of thee on
all sides, against the poysoned killing arrow
of Satan thy sworne enemie. I would
pray thee, grauely to ponder and weigh
three things: First, wherein doth a man
communicate with the sinnes of others?
Secondly, wherefore should a man be afraid
any way to communicate with the
sinnes of others? Thirdly, what should the
honest wise child of God (who should be
ashamed to be a slaue to sinne, alwayes
taking himselfe to be a strong souldier
subduing it) in this respect resolue to do?
Scripture teacheth me, ô my soule, that
men communicate with the sinnes of others,

by consultation, by direction, by approbation,
by prouocation, by tolleration,
and by confirmation. By consultation,
when they aduise either how he may do
that which is euill, albeit themselues do it
not.2. Sam. 13. 4. 5. Thus vile Ionadab communicated
with the vnnaturall incest of Ammon,
shewing him by what way he might easily
lie with his sister Tamar. Thus vile Achitophel
communicated with the monstrous
vnnaturall incest of Absolon, aduising him
euen before the Sunne to lye with his fathers
concubines.2 Sam. 16. 20. 21. By direction, when men
out of respects knowne to themselues,
will keepe as it were their owne hands
from an euill turne, and yet command another
for to do it. Thus bloudie Saul
communicated with that villaine D
                              •
                           eg,
                        1. Sam. 22. 8. in
slaying the Priests of God. Yea, alas euen
Dauid thus communicated with the murther
of Vriah,
                        2. Sam. 11. 14. 15. for was he not slaine by his
direction? By approbation, when a man
knowing that an euill turne is done by another,
alloweth either of the turne, or of
the doer. Thus the rest of Iacob his sonnes
communicated with the bloud of the Sechemites
murthered by Simeon and Leui.
                        Gen. 34. 28. 29. 30.
By prouocation, when one abusing the

place wherein he is set, or those gifts of
mind, or of bodie wherewith he is beautified,
abuseth others so, that he prouoketh
them to do that which is euill. Thus
Rehoboam communicated with that defection
which Israel made from the house
of Dauid, when he being abused by
young Counsellers, and abusing the
place whereto God aduanced him,
by his austere rigorous speeches, prouoked
them to iust wrath. Thus bloudie
Iezabel communicated with all the
euill done by her husband Achab:
                        1. King. 12. 13. 14. for
speaketh not the Scripture touching him
and her,1. King. 21. 25. thus? But there was none like
Achab, who did sell himselfe to commit
wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, whom
Iezabel his wife prouoked: and in this sense
fathers are counselled by the Spirit, not to
prouoke their children to wrath.Eph. 6. 4. By toleration,
when a man hauing authoritie to
beate downe sin, by punishing the committers
of it, ouerseeth them, not drawing
the sword which God hath put into his
hands against them. And thus, alas, euen
old Eli communicated with the abominations
of his vile sonnes,1. Sam. 2. 29 30. who by their
vncleane liues made the people of God to

abhorre the Lords sacrifice. By confirmation,
when a man haunteth the societie
of wicked men so familiarly, so frequently,
that therby he strengtheneth the
wicked man in his wickednesse. Thus the
religious man, communicateth with the
Atheisme of the Atheist, by haunting the
societie of the Atheist: the true worshipper
of God, communicateth with the superstition
of the Papist, by haunting
kindly the societie of the Papist, euen
when he seeth that he cannot be wonne.
Yea thus, meeke, chast, temperate, true,
and peaceable men, communicate with
murtherers, incestuous persons, adulterers,
fornicators, drunkards, false and seditious
men, by haunting of their companie.
This moued Paul to charge vs who
be Christians,1. Cor. 5. 11 neither to eate with such
men,Eph. 5. 7. nor to be companions vnto them.
Religious Nazianzen kissing and following
this counsell,Naz. or. 31. could say: Nos cum flagitiosissimis
& petulantissimis quibusque sodalium
nostrorum consuetudinem non habebamus,
sed cum optimis & honestissimis, nec
cum pugnacissimis, sed cum tranquillissimis,
ijs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            quorum consuetudo maximos fructus
conferebat. Illud nimirum exploratum habentes,

multo facilius vitium contrahi, quàm
virtutem communicari, quemadmodum etiam
morbus facilius contrahitur, quàm sanitas
impetratur. We had not our societie with any
of the peruersest, or loosest of our companions:
but with the best and most honest, neither
with the most contentious, but with the most
quiet, and those whose companie caused greatest
benefit to vs. Throughly knowing this,
that vice is more easily contracted by a man,
then vertue can be communicated to a man,
euen as sicknesse is more easily contracted, by
haunting the societie of sicke men, then health
is obtained, by resorting vnto those who be
whole and strong. But wherefore, ô my
soule, shouldest thou be loath any way to
communicate with sinne? Remember, ô
my soule, Gods threatnings, and besides
that, Gods execution according to his
threatnings: so sure I am, thou shalt be easily
deterred from attempting any wise to
communicate with sinne: vnlesse vnhappily
thou resolue, euen with Lamech, to
defie the most high God. Are not Gods
children, ô my soule, thus counselled by
their Father:Reuel. 18. 4 
                        Go out of Babel my people, lest
ye be partakers in their sinnes, and that
ye receiue not of her plagues. That lying

murtherer, ô my soule, perswaded my
grandmother Euah, that if she would
communicate with him in transgressing
of Gods commandement, she should find
a shining precious pearle. But that Spirit
of truth, who delighteth to haue thee liuing
for euermore, assureth thee, that if
thou ioyne with a man in his sinnes, thou
shalt not be seuered from him, when he is
plagued for the same. But will not our
God prooue as good as his word? and so
execute as he threatned? especially when
he findeth that his threatnings are mocked?
That will he do, vndoubtedly, ô
my soule: Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
(as thou knowest) are sent downe quicke
to the pit, for attempting to rise vp against
Moses & Aaron. Vpon the morrow all the
multitude of the people of Israell, (alas)
communicating with them in their sinne,
did gather themselues against Moses and
Aaron,
                        Numb. 16. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45 46. crying loudly and boldly, ye haue
killed the people of the Lord. Alwayes,
alwayes, came there not foorth such a
fierce wrath from the Lord, that before
Aaron can come to them (albeit he ranne
with all speed) to make an attonement
for them, there died of that plague fourteene

thousand and seuen hundred. While
the wife of the Leuite was villanously abused
(at Gibea a Citie of Beniamin) to
death, the whole Tribe of Beniamin,
(alas) did communicate with this villanie:
For when the other Tribes, their
brethren besought them to deliuer to
them the committers of that wickednesse,Iudg. 20 & 21.
to the end that the euill might be put away
from Israel; not onely would they
not obey the voice of their brethren, but
they gathered themselues together to
fight against them. Alwayes, turned not
this at length, ô my soule, to the verie ouerthrow
of Beniamin? Now what must
thou do in this respect, ô my soule, for
thine own preseruation, Hearken, hearken,
I pray thee, wouldest thou with that valiant
religious Champion Iosuah, lifting vp
thine head aboue all things earrhly, all
liuing on earth, towards the third heauens,
in the feare of thy God, and by the
especiall grace of his Spirit, conclude thus
with thy selfe: I will seeke and serue my
God with any man; but I will sinne against
my God with no man. Let the
king with his subiects, and the subiect
with his king seeke and serue God, as

                        Dauids subiects with him, and he with
them did. But if all the subiects of the land
forsake God, let the king say with Ioshua,
I and my house will serue the Lord.
                        Ios. 24. 15. If the
king with Saul, will fall away from God,
let the subiects with Sauls courteours
looke to him,1. Sam. 21. 27. and refuse to follow him.
And if he attempt to command them to
forsake their God, let them answer couragiously
with the Apostles,Act. 4. 19. 
                        Whether it be
better to obey God or man, iudge ye. Let the
husband with the wife, and the wife with
husband,2. King. 4. seeke and serue God, as the
Shunamitish Ladie with her husband did.
But if the wife, with Lots wife, will looke
ouer her shoulder to Sodome, let the husband
with Lot keepe his heart and his
eye straight vpon that mountaine of glory
towards the which the Lord hath directed
him.Genes. 19. If the husband with Nabal will
proue profane, and vngratefull, let the
wife with Abigael,
                        2. Sam. 25. remaine religious, and
thankfull. Let the parent with the child,
and the child with the parent, seeke and
serue God, as Abraham and Isaac serued
him ioyntly and sweetly together. But let
the parents with Iacob learne not to sinne
with the child:Gen. 12. 6. 7. 8. 9. for when Simeon and Leui
                        
fell into vile murther who were both his
sonnes,Gen. 49. 5. 6. did he not crie, Simeon and Leui
brethren in euill, the instruments of crueltie,
are in their habitation, into their secret let not
my soule come: my glorie be thou not ioyned
with their assembly. If the father will fall
away from God with Saul, yet let the
sonne cleaue constantly with Ionathan.
Yea, if the mother which brought thee
foorth, fall away from God, not onely
suffer her not, but (if God hath cloathed
thee with authoritie) see that thou take
order with her,2. Chron. 16. 16. as King Aza tooke order
with his mother and her groue. Otherwayes
be assured that God (whom thou
shouldest not onely loue better then thy
mother, but for whose cause thou shouldest
hate all things that belong vnto thee)
at last take order with thee.Luke 14. 16.
                     
                  
                  
                     26. Let Satan farde sinne as he
pleaseth, let men couer sinne as they can,
sinne is a monstrous cruell thing, therefore
beware to commit it, to continue
in it.
                     OH, ô my soule, when shalt thou find
eye salue to cleare thy sight, to the

end that thou mayest once see sinne in the
owne vile colour of it? When shall that
deaw come downe from heauen, which
may happily soften thy heart, and make it
so dilicately tender, that thou mayst once
feele sinne in the owne weight of it, and
so be made at length to know it in thy
owne horrible nature, with all it drawes
after it, and hath ioyned vnto it; and all
to the end, that I before I be made to lay
downe this earthly tabernacle, may be
moued to abhorre it; yea to hate it, and
with the hazard and losse of all I haue, to
arme my selfe against it. Stop thine eares,
ô my soule, against Satan, and close thine
eyes vpon him also, when he speaketh to
thee touching sinne, when he bringeth
thee before sinne, or sinne before thee:
for beleeue me, he will colour and farde
it so, that he will make thee take it for
some sweet, pleasant, wholesome apple,
while it is that onely bitter and destroying
poyson, which slayeth bodie and
soule. Open thy eares, ô my soule, to
heare thy God: enlarge thy heart, ô my
soule, to beleeue thy God when he speaketh
to thee touching sinne, for he will
tell thee, that sinne is an vgly defiling

thing, and a monstrous vgly defiling
thing; yea, that sinne is a cruell, monstrous
defiling thing. Sinne is an vgly defiling
thing, making the sinner foule; yea,
euen foule in his eyes, before whom alone
he hath speciall neede to be cleane; and
so in the eye of God his maker, and iudge.
Sinne is a monstrous, vgly, defiling thing:
for none can possibly wash away that
filth which it draweth vpon man, beside
that cleane one Iesus Christ by his owne
hands. Sinne is a cruell, monstrous, vgly
thing; for euen this cleane one Iesus, cannot
possibly wash away this filth with his
hands, but onely by the lauers of his
precious bloud. Thou thinkest, ô my
soule, that it is a great miracle, when thou
hearest that Naaman the Syrian was cleansed
of his leprosie,1. King. 5. 14. by washing himselfe seuen
times in the riuer Iordan. Thou thinkest
much of that poole, which being
troubled by the Angell, was able to cure
that man who first stepped in into it of
whatsoeuer disease he had.Iohn 5. 4. Yea, thou
meetest (as thou must confesse) with a
strange wonder, when thou seest thy
Maister with his owne hands, powring
out water in a bason,Ioh. 13. 4. 5. and washing his disciples

feete. But ô what a wonder doest
thou finde, ô my soule, beside Matthew
in his 27. Marke in his 14. Luke in his 22.
and Iohn in his 19. for there thou mayest
see blessed Iesus, not rising from any table,
but fixed to a tree, not powring forth water
to wash the feete of any, but yeelding
forth, out of vnspeakable loue, and with
incomparable contentment, his very heart
bloud for the washing of the soules of all
such, who can by a true liuely faith receiue
this his bloud, and retaine the same. The
Papist mixeth this bloud, as not sufficient
for him, and mocketh it, as not onely requisite
for him: yea which is more, he auowedly
controlleth this which we
speake, (being so taught of God) touching
his bloud, as not alwayes requisite
for him. And which I must necessarily
deplore and lament, ô my soule, a very
world of Protestants, in this our time,
abuse this bloud of blessed Iesus, onely
able to wash sinners, as if it were
not so precious, so honourable as holy
Scripture affirmeth it to be. The blind
Papist mixeth this bloud (as not sufficient
to wash away his sinnes) with the
milke of his mother Marie, but spake

                        Isaiah the Prophet so,Isa. 53. 5. when he affirmed
that none beside Iesus was wounded for
our transgressions, and that we are not otherwise
healed but by his stripes? Spake
Zachariah so,Zach. 13. 1. when he saw that great
fountaine opened for the house of Dauid,
and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem for
sinne and for vncleanenesse? Did he who
was sent before blessed Iesus (to shew
what a one Iesus was) see this which the
blind Papist seeth? No, no, ô my soule, for
is not this his testimonie touching him,
Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away
the sinnes of the world:
                        Io
                              •
                           . 1. 29. yea did that man,
who lay nearer our blessed Sauiour then
euer Saint Francis or any Papist did, perceiue
this? No forsooth, for speaketh he
not thus,Ioh. 1. 7. 
                        The bloud of Iesus Christ cleanseth
vs from all sinnes. The blind Papist, ô my
soule, mocketh this also, as if Christs
bloud were not fit onely to wash away
sinne, and therefore he dare maintaine
that those villanous Poenitentiaries (who
are accustomed, with the Priests of Baal,
cruelly to launce thēselues to the effusion
of their bloud) do not lyingly thinke, that
thereby they deserue remission of sinnes
at the hands of that great Maiestie. O vile

Papist! be ashamed here, is not thy bloud
such a bloud as thou thy selfe art? Vile art
thou, for thou art a sinner, and I must think
that thy bloud is as vile, for is it not the
bloud of a sinner? and can the vile bloud
of a vile sinner possibly pacifie the wrath
of that holy God, before whom the heauens
are not cleane, and who found no
stedfastnesse in his Saints?Iob 1. 15. O vile Papist!
was it euer lawfull to sacrifice a man to
God?Iob 15. 15. O wilfull, malitious, ignorāt Papist!
could the very bloud of Iesus haue bene a
sufficient sacrifice for sinne, had it not
bene the bloud of him, who was not man
onely, but God and man also, and therefore
hearest thou not the Spirit affirming,
that euen God by his owne bloud hath
purchased a Church to himselfe?Act. 20. 29. This moued
that Peter (shamed by the Pope Peter,
his alledged, but Iudas his true successor)
to affirme, that we are not redeemed by
any bloud,1. Pet. 18. 19. 
                        But by the precious bloud of Iesus
Christ that Lambe of God, vndefiled and
without spot. O heauens, will ye not take
part with your holy maker here against
the hellish Papists? Much bloud saw that
Sunne, which enlighteneth this earth, shed
betwixt that day that Cain slue Abel, and

that day in which the bloud of Iesus was
shed on the crosse, not preassing to hide
his face: but did he behold the bloud of his
maker, with any kinde of countenance,
when it was shed? No, no, for he couereth
his face from the third houre to the ninth.Mat. 27. 4.
But no wonder, for before that day he neuer
saw, sanguinem purum & purificantem,
cleane and cleansing bloud shed. O hard
earth, wilt thou not here take part with
thy Maister also, against the indurate Papist?
Much bloud drankest thou in betwixt
that day in the which Cain slue Abel, and
that day in the which Iesus his bloud was
shed, abiding in the meane time firme and
stable. But canst thou, ô hard earth, abide
stable when this honorable bloud of Iesus
falleth vpon thee?Mat. 27. 51. 5
                              •
                           . No, no, for the verie
graues open their mouthes, when that
bloud beginneth to bedeaw thee, so that
a great number who were dead arose, and
went into the holy citie. Yea the very hardest
stones did cleaue asunder when this
bloud was shed; albeit the flintie heart of
the Papist, harder then the stone, cannot
be moued to thinke honourably of this
bloud. Alwayes, ô my soule, no wonder it
is, that the hard earth with the hardest

stones were so moued: for to that day she
neuer dranke in any cleane and cleansing
bloud. The Papist also, ô my soule, controlleth
this, as a manifest vntruth; for he
would hold vs in hand, that sinnes may be
washed away where no bloud is shed, for
he is afraid to auow that his reall, externall
vnbloudie sacrifice of the Masse (as he lyingly
and shamefastly, misled by that old
shamelesse lier Satan, and that for his foule
particular speaketh) is a sacrifice propitiatorie,
for the sinnes of the liuing here on
earth, and of the dead in his impure foule
Purgatorie? O Paul, wilt thou (led by the
good Spirit of truth) subscribe with the
Papist to this point? No, no, Paul answers,
I will neuer, either subscribe neare hand,
nor hearken afarre off vnto that abhominable
lye; for as Christ Iesus no otherwise
purchased a Church vnto himselfe then by
bloud, so without bloud there is no remission
(saith Paul.)
                        Heb 9. 
                              •
                           2. Our sensuall Protestants,
alas, ô my soule, turning the grace of God
into damnable wantonnesse in this foule
age, abuse fearefully this onely honorable,
and meritorious bloud of Iesus: for he
holdeth not the shedding of it for sinne,
to be a sufficient meanes to affray him

from the committing of sinne, yea from
wallowing in vncouth sinnes, euen with
delight, as if he were some filthie swine,
made with his face downward, and not a
man whom God hath honored with his
owne Image. Tell me, tell me, ô my soule,
if any man would either of purpose, or
with pleasure, defile his outward garment
with any kinde of filth, if he could be perswaded
that nothing could cleanse it againe,
but a vessell full of his owne best
bloud. Now telleth not the Scripture thee,
ô my soule, that thou being defiled with
sinne, canst not possibly be cleansed frō it,
but by the bloud of Iesus onely. Shalt
thou then at any time attempt to commit
sinne of purpose, and to continue in sinne
of purpose? and if thou darest do so, canst
thou think thy selfe to be one, who either
esteemeth honorably of that honorable
bloud of Iesus, shed to cleanse thee, or reuerently
and honorably of that blessed
God who shed his bloud for thee?
                  
                  
                     27. Honorable, precious, and forcible
beyond measure is that cleane and
cleansing bloud of Iesus, blessed for euermore.
                     
                        
SInne is a filthie thing▪ yea a most cruell
filthie thing, ô my soule, as thou mayst
easily perceiue, and let this humble thee.
Alwayes honorable and precious is that
bloud of Iesus: forcible and strong beyond
measure is that bloud of blessed Iesus, and
let this comfort thee. Iesus his bloud is
honorable and precious, for it can do away
the filth of sinne, making a man euen
cleane in his eyes, before whom the well
informed child of God striueth specially
to be cleane; forcible and strong is that
bloud of Iesus, for it can wash a man, not
from one sinne, but from euery sinne, yea
from all sinnes, were they neuer so monstrous,
so presumptuous. Hast thou not, ô
my soule, considered that first Chapter of
Matthew for thine information, yea for
thy speciall consolation, touching this
point? O blessed Iesus my Sauiour, of
whom art thou come according to the
flesh, and so what fathers, what mothers,
hath thy Maiestie as thou art man? is thy
Maiestie, ô my Sauiour, onely come of Abraham,
and not of Pharez also, whom Iudah
begot on Tamar his daughter in law?
Will thy Maiestie, ô my Sauiour, haue Sarah
onely, the wife of Abraham for thy

mother, and not Rahab the harlot, and
Ruth the Moabitesse also? But wherefore,
ô my soule, would blessed Iesus haue such
fathers and such mothers according to the
flesh? Surely, surely, to testifie before God,
Angels, and men, that he came not to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
were their sinnes neuer so many, and so
monstrous, prouiding that they by a liuely
faith could keepe that bloud which he
hath shed to wash them, and by sincere
repentance accompaning this their faith,
testifie to the world that they haue learned
(being taught by the Spirit) to account
honourably of this his bloud shed
for them?Mark. 2. 17.
                     
                  
                  
                     28. Cleane Iesus, will not wash thee, in
his cleane clensing bloud, to the end that
thou mayest proue a swine, but a swan,
a filthie dogge, but a cleane turtle doue,
and so not a bond slaue to sinne and Satan,
but a free king to God his and thy
father.
                     O my soule, I will tell thee to thy comfort,
were thy sinnes neuer so manie,

nor so monstrous, that precious bloud
of Iesus who hath loued thee, is sufficiently
able to wash thee from them all.
Alwayes, I must tell thee for thine information,
and reformation, that Iesus will
not wash thee in his bloud from thy many
sinnes bypast, from thy vgly sinnes present,
to the end, that thou mayest afterward
defile thy selfe with sinne, or continue
in the trade of thy present sinnes, but
to the end, that thou being washed by
him,Reuel. 1. 5. 6. mayest proue a spirituall King subduing
sinne, and a spirituall Priest, offring vp
thy selfe in bodie and soule, in a liuing
sacrifice, and holy vnto God. Tell me,
tell me,Rom. 12. 1. 2. ô Zacharia the father of Iohn the
Baptist, wherefore came Christ into the
world, bringing cleane and cleansing
bloud with him; was it not that we being
deliuered from the hands of our enemies,
should serue him without feare?Luk. 1. 74. 75. O Paul,
tell me wherefore died my Lord and life
Iesus Christ for me; was it not, that I
henceforth should not attempt to liue to
my selfe, but vnto him who died for me
and rose againe.2. Cor. 5. 15. Yea, tell me ô Paul,
wherfore hath our glorious God appointed
that his blessed Gospell, to be preached

(which I may iustly call that handfull
of hysope, by the which our soules
are sprinkled with that cleansing bloud of
that cleane Lambe, who making that destroying
Angell to passe by vs, while others
die;Tit. 2. 11. 12.) was it not, ô my soule, that we
denying all vngodlinesse, and worldly
lusts, should liue holily, and righteously,
and soberly in this present world?
                  
                  
                     29. Louing, and liberall Iesus communicates
all his riches, and priuiledges
to all his kingly, and cleane
members.
                     HAth that great God, and blessed Sauiour
of the world loued thee, ô my
soule, and louing thee, washed thee from
thy sinnes in his bloud; yea, renewed thee
so by his Spirit, that thou darest not attempt
to liue to thy selfe, seeking such
things as may profit thee, and pleasure
thee, but vnto him that died for thee, studying
alwayes to do those things which
may please him, and conquer glorie vnto
him. Be sure, be sure, ô my soule, that
this blessed one, thy great Sauiour, inioying
all priuiledges, hath no priuiledge

in a manner, whereof he will not gladly
make thee partaker. And must not this
comfort thee against all tentations, and
crosses, if thou canst loue him and cleaue
vnto him? And shall not this confound
thee, knowing this to be true, as thou
must know it to be most true; if thou darest
attempt to forget him, and be vnthankfull
vnto him.Ioh. 20. 17. Iesus hath a God, ô
my soule, and he will haue his God to be
thy God. Iesus hath a Father, and he will
haue his Father to be thy Father. Iesus is
not onely cloathed with an humane nature,
but also with a diuine nature, and he
will haue thee to be partaker of the diuine
nature also.2. Pet. 1. 4. Iesus is the Lord his Christ,
and so that holy one whom the Lord hath
annointed with oyle of gladnesse aboue
his fellowes,Psal. 45. 7. to be the great King and
Priest of the Church, and he will haue
thee made a King and a Priest vnto God
his Father also.Reuel. 1. 6. Iesus is the heire of that
inheritance immortall, and vndefiled, and
which fadeth not away: and he will haue
thee to be an heire of that kingdome annexed
with him. Yea, this Iesus is entered
alreadie into that heauen of heauens,
euen in my nature, sitting at the right

hand of God;Ioh. 17. 24. and he will haue thee, ô my
soule, to be there euen with this my bodie
also. Yea, till I be there in bodie and
soule, and the whole members of Gods
elect with me; that holy one, that blessed
one Jesus, who is loue it selfe, (for otherwayes
he had neuer died for me) will account
himselfe to be imperfect; yea, to be
maimed as it were; such is ye force of that
loue wherewith he loued vs, and so rarely
inestimable are these heauenly priuiledges,
vnto the full fruition and euerlasting
possession whereof he will haue vs necessarily
aduanced. Shouldest not thou then
loue this Iesus, ô my soule, yea, crie to thy
God vncessantly for such an heart as may
loue him, yea, loue him vnfainedly who
hath loued thee so dearely. Yea, shouldest
thou not out of the sense of this, long to be
dead, to the end (that by death being
happily trāslated where he is) thou mayest
liue with him for euermore. Out of the
sense of the force of this loue,Ber. ser. 2. de ad vent. 
                              •
                           
                         
                        Bernard
could say: Vbi bene erit lino Christo? aut
vbi male esse potest cum illo? Where shall a
man be well without Christ? or where shall a
man be euill with Christ? and againe citing
the words of the Apostle. 2. Thes. 4. 17.

                        Bonum mihi tribulari Domine modo ipse
sis mecum, quam regnare sine te; epulari sine
te, sine te gloriari, melius est in canimo habere
te mecum, quam esse sine te vel in coelo. It is
better for me to be afflicted, ô Lord Iesus, if
thou be with me, then to raigne without thee;
then to fare daintily without thee, then to enioy
all glorie and mirth without thee. Yea, it
is better for me to haue thee in a firie fornace
with me, then to be in heauen withou thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     30. He whom blessed Iesus hath
made a sonne vnto God, to serue his
Maiestie for a while; shall also be made
by Iesus a King vnto God, to reigne
with him for euer.
                     BLessed, blessed, ô my soule, beyond
measure, are all those whose father almightie,
God in his dearest Sonne Iesus
hath become. And therefore, I cannot
wonder that that disciple, whom Iesus
loued speaking hereof, was moued with
a shrill voyce thus to crie forth, ressembling
some messenger sounding from a
publicke place some speciall proclamation.
Behold what loue the father hath shewed

on vs, that we should he called the sonnes of
God. Maine sonnes indeed hath his Maiestie:
yea, our God hath a verieworld of
sonnes: blessed for euermore be that his
onely Sonne Iesus,Reuel. 7. 9. who at a great rate
hath purchased these sonnes vnto him.
Alwayes, Scripture telleth me, ô my
soule,Reuel. 1. 6. that God our Father will make all
these his sonnes Kings, and euery one of
them a King, not to reigne for a while,
honoured with a fading crowne, but to
reigne for euermore in that kingdome
which is immortall,1. Pet. 1. 3. and vndefiled, and
which fadeth not away. What earthly
king, ô my soule, hauing many sonnes, is
able to make all his sonnes kings? and yet
foolish men dreame that men be happie
who be the sonnes of kings; yea of great
men: howbeit none can be possibly happie,
but such as being borne ouer againe
by the Spirit, and by the word of God,
be made the sonnes of the most high,Iohn 3. 3. and
so kings, at length to reigne in spite of all
tyrants and tyrannie for euermore. I shall
not offend therefore, ô my soule, albeit my
coate now be course, my bread browne,
my drinke small, my crowne sharpe and
pricking, hauing terrors within, and

troubles without. Knowest thou not, ô
my soule, how thy Lord and Sauiour,
comming to this earth, that by his death
he might draw thee to heauen, was cloathed,
entertained, and crowned heare,
and yet, blessed be his name in despite of
all hellish, and earthly powers, is he not
crowned now in that highest heauens,
with that crowne of incomparable Maiestie,Mat. 28. 18.
hauing all power in heauen and on
earth giuen vnto him; yea, possessing a
name aboue all names which are named
in this world, and vnto the which euerie
knee must bow.Phil. 2. 9. 10 O beleeuing citizen,
countrieman, and beggar; canst thou lift
vp thine eyes aforehand to see? canst
thou bow thine heart aforehand to taste
those vnspeakable ioyes thou shalt possesse,
that incorruptible glorie shall compasse
thy very clay vessel, whē thou being
glorified, through the Lambe, with the
Lambe shalt go in and out before the
Lambe, in that new Ierusalem which is
aboue; hauing on thy head that crowne
of endlesse glorie, clothed with a long
white robe, hauing palmes in thy hand,
and crying ioyfully with a loud voyce.Reuel. 7. 9. 10.
                        Saluation cometh of our God that sitteth on

the throne, and of the Lambe. Let it be thy
meate and drinke then while thou soiournest
here, ô my soule, absent in bodie from
that Lambe of God thy Sauiour, to
thinke vpon this Iesus, to seeke this Iesus,
to serue this Iesus, who hath called
thee vnto this honour, to be the child of
God,Psal. 16. 11. and so to be a King for euer, to possesse
fulnesse of ioy in Gods presence,
and at his right hand pleasures
for euermore.
                     AMEN.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE
SECOND
PART OF THAT
HEAVENLY CHARIOT:
                  Layed open for the weaning of the
foolish hearts of the senslesse Christians
of this our dead time, from the
deceiuing milke of things below
here, and for the winning of them
vnto the knowledge, loue, and obedience
of that onely true God, in
whom, and with whom, all true riches
and pleasures be onely
to be found.
                  1. IOH. 2. 15. 16. 17.
                  Loue not the world, neither the things that
are of the world. If any man loue the world,
the loue of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, (as the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life) is out
of the Father, but is of the world and the
lusts thereof, but he that fulfilleth the
will of God, abideth for euer.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE VERY
SINCERELY RELIGIOVS
AND TRVLY HOnorable,
Sir Robert Carr of Ancrame;
Gentleman of the Bed-chamber, to
Prince CHARLES, Prince of
great Britaine, and one of his
Highnesse priuie Councell.
                  Grace and peace through Iesus Christ
our Lord.
                  
                     HAuing dedicated the
former part of this
heauēly Chariot vnto
that religious worthie
Ladie, Anna Carr, Ladie
Balmermoch, your nearest and
dearest kinswoman: I could find none
vnder whose wings this second part
thereof could passe forth so fitly, so
securely, as vnder your name, being

so neare in nature, but much more in
grace to that religious Ladie. Yea,
these my simple meditations hauing
longed and called in a manner these
monethes by-past, for your patrocinie,
who is fitter for them then they
can possibly be for you? you being
the scholler of that blessed Maister,
the Spirit of grace and truth, who
hath learned what sinne and nature
is, what Christ and grace is, not to be
the naked hearing of the eare, but by
the inward feeling of a true religious
soule, and well informed and reformed
conscience. Sure I am that these,
who had occasion to see and conferre
Abraham after his triall, with Ioseph
after his imprisonment, and with Dauid
after he was brought from the vncircumcised
land, to the royall crown
of Iudah, could not but find rare information,
and wonderfull consolation,
reso
                        •
                     uing them about the condition
of Gods seruants here, and
comforting them against all assaults

could possibly ouertake them, in seeking
and seruing of him: and shall
not these my simple meditations be
acceptable to you, who hauing learned
out of Scripture, from your
youth with Timothie, and since your
youth out of rarest remarkable experiences,
what sound, what colour,
what smell, what taste, what touch
things heauenly haue? So that now
you being presented before all crosses
and tentations, yea, before diuels and
death, can from a chearfull heart and
with a smiling countenance, sing melodiously
with that sweetest singer,
that 71. Psalme. I recommend these
my simple weake meditations to
your fauourable acceptance, and
carefull protection, and your selfe
from my very soule, to the sauing protection,
defence, and consolation of
that blessed God, with whom there
is no shadow of turning, who hath
bene, is, and shall not onely be with
you to the end of your time, but

who shall haue you with him in eternitie
for euer. For the which I shall
not ceasse while I breathe to pray to
God as,
                  
                     Your humbly deuoted in our
common Sauiour:
D. L.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE CONTENTS OF
the second part consisting of
twentie foure Meditations.
                  
                     
                        The summe of the first. HOly and humble would prophane man
studie to be; if he knew how prophane
and vile that stable is which he lodgeth in, euen
his heart. pag. 154
                     
                        The second. Seeke not that which is Gods, but God himselfe;
if thou wouldest possesse Gods blessing
here, and heare that voice, Come thou blessed
of my Father, hereafter. pag. 163
                     
                        The third. Our God, that Iudge of the world, and Father
of his Church, commeth vnto man by
iudgements, by afflictions, by tentations. pag.
170
                     
                        The fourth. The child of God is alwayes readie to suffer
euill for well-doing, or for refusing to do euill;
for he can no wayes consent to do euill, either
for losse or gaine. pag. 182.
                     
                        
                        The fifth. That fountaine out of the which prosperitie
and aduersitie do flow, with that vse the
child of God maketh of them, while he looketh
on this fountaine. p. 187
                     
                        The sixth. Sinne is the onely thing which separateth
man from God, and which maketh God misknow
and denie man. p. 206
                     
                        The seuenth. As man from the earth maketh God to
heare and see; so shall God make man at length
to heare, to see, and to feele. p. 217
                     
                        The eighth. Our God, who neuer sinned, neither can
be hurt by sinne, can sigh for the sinnes of man:
albeit sinfull man onely hurt by sinne dare sing
to his sinnes, which shall make him at length
to weepe for euer. p. 223
                     
                        The ninth. Cursed is he who scatters himselfe from
God by sinne, for he shall be scattered by God
vnto iudgement: blessed is he who is scattered
by man vnto trouble for righteousnesse, for
God shall gather him vp. p. 230
                     
                        The tenth.There be foure sorts of loue, two most corrupt,
and too common, alas, too many; two most

pure and heauenly, few, alas, be inriched with.
pag. 237
                     
                        The eleuenth.What tongue can expresse that incomparable
honour and rare dignitie whereunto
Almightie God hath aduanced the flesh of
man? albeit, alas, a world of men shame their
flesh, presse to shame God, in and by, their flesh,
to their euerlasting shame. p. 242
                     
                        The twelfth. Albeit men offend to be compared with the
diuell, yet a world of men will tread the diuels
pathes. pag. 248
                     
                        The thirteenth. Cast thy care vpon God and he will care
for thee. p. 251
                     
                        The fourteenth. Our most mercifull and mightie God hath
the hearts of all in his hands, and can so alter
them as he hath to do with them: for his glorie,
the comfort of his children, and the confusion
of his and their enemies. p. 254
                     
                        The fifteenth. Satan his cruell taskemaisters sent foorth
against men, to keepe them vnder hellish slauerie
here, and in the end to drowne them in
that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone.
p. 259
                     
                        
                        The sixteenth. Learne so to liue, that thou giue offence to
none by thy life. pag. 263
                     
                        The seuenteenth. All men should so liue in this world, that
they may amend the world, but chiefly those
whom God hath set ouer others. p. 266
                     
                        The eighteenth. Prepare thy mouth for bitter gall after
that God thy Father hath brought his sweetest
honey to thee, and yet see that thou offend
not with the taste of it. p. 273
                     
                        The ninteenth. Let not the wise child of God take euill of
his crosses here, but let him rather wonder
that he is suffered to breath here. p. 276
                     
                        The twentieth. Our strongest God (whom nothing can
bind, whom all men and diuels cannot bind) is
heartily contented to be bound by the prayers
of his owne. pag. 280
                     
                        The one and twentieth. Our he
                           •
                        uenly, louing, wise, holy Father
heares alwayes the prayers of his owne, and
grants their requests; albeit oftentimes not
as they would, yet euermore as God should
heare them, and as their weale requireth. pag.
286
                     
                        
                        The two and twentieth. No person, no thing can possibly content the
sight, the smell, the tast, the touch of that royall
eagle the true Christian, beside that blessed
Iesus who sometime was dead, but now is liuing
blessed for euermore. pag. 339
                     
                        The three and twentieth. Man through sinne in Adam being made
a foule puddle to Satan, to tyrannize in,
through grace in Iesus Christ is made a faire
palace to God, to rule and reigne in. p. 305
                     
                        The foure and twentieth. The last song of Gods child is euer sweetest,
and no wonder, considering that he sees and
feeles before death; and is assuredly perswaded
to possesse after death for euer. p. 3
                           •
                        0
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE SECOND
PART OF AN HEAVENLY
CHARIOT.
                  
                     1. Holy and humble would profane
proud man studie to be; if he knew how
profane and vile that stable is, which he
lodgeth within him, euen his heart.
                     
                        IF man could know what
man is through man his
owne default, ô my soule,
He is not sensible of pietie,
he is not sensible of common
honestie, who would not pitie man,
who would not admire that man could
be such a one as he is? O man thou seest
these feete vpon the which thou walkest,
these hands by the which thou workest,
thou knowest that thou hast eyes by the
which thou seest, eares by the which thou
hearest, a nose by the which thou smellest,

a mouth by the which thou tastest, and a
tongue by the which thou speakest, and
diuerse members by the which thou
touchest. Alwayes, hearken, hearken, ô my
soule, knoweth man, notwithstanding of
all this, that heart that is within him, by
the which, alas, his seeing, his hearing,
his smelling, his tasting, his touching is so
fully corrupted, yea, fully debased that
his whole behauiour is made to be loathsome,
and abhominable before that holy
wise God, who looketh onely vpon the
heart, and according to the heart iudgeth
of the whole man? That house to this day
was neuer praised by any wise man, ô my
soule, which hauing a faire outward shew
in the eyes of man, looking without vpon
it; which hath neither hall, nor chamber
within commodious for mans vse, or
pleasant for mans delight; but contrariwise,
which maketh the owner and professor
of it by day afraide, lest any come to
visit him (considering the naughtinesse of
his lodging) and such as by night is
hurtsome to himselfe, procuring vnto
him grieuous vnease, while others without
thinke him to be at rest. While man,
ô my soule, comparing himselfe with the

other inferiour creatures, liuing and mouing
aboue him in the aire, about him in
the seas beneath, and with him in the
earth here, casting his eyes sharply, sets
his eyes solidly vpon himselfe and them,
and beginnes any way, narrowly to examine
the admirable artifice of the bodie
of man, and the more then commonly
proportion of it, farre surmounting and
excelling these creatures: I wonder not
that he be made to crie out with Dauid.
I will praise, thee o Lord, for I am wonderfully
made, marueilous are thy workes and my
soule knoweth it well. Alwayes sure I am, ô
my soule, that the proud swanne was neuer
so much dashed at the sight of his
blacke feete, (considering the rare beautie
of his faire feathers) as man should be
cast downe, enriched with a reasonable
soule, cloathed with so comely, so formall,
and perfectly consummate a body,
in respect of all the members, and in respect
of euery member of it, situate in their
seuerall places so orderly, and in these
places exercising their diuerse functions
so exquisitely, (that the Phylosopher
doubted not ro call man a very little
world: man being as it were the verie

Epitome and compound of all Gods
workes) if besides these two eyes which
he hath without in his bodie, he had but
one eye in his soule, to looke vpon that
heart his God seeth, albeit his neighbour
see it not, his God perfectly knoweth,
albeit he himselfe can hardly know it;
yea, can hardly be moued to paine himselfe
to learne to know it, notwithstanding
this be the onely chiefe studie a man
liuing here should take himselfe vnto. For
till a mans owne heart be knowne, by a
man himselfe, impossibly is it, that a man
can know his God to saluation. Now to
the effect, ô my soule, that I may moue
thee while I breath here, to paine thy
selfe lesse about my eares, my eyes,
my mouth, my hands, my feete, and in
a word about my backe, and bellie, and
to turne all thy labour vpon that heart
which is within me, deale with thy God
for three things, and neuer ceasse to wearie
him with thy prayers till thou be
heard, and these three things be granted
to thee. Now what be these three, ô my
soule, I pray thee? A spirituall eye to see,
a holy strong memorie to remember, and
with these two graces, to make conscience

of that thou seest, of that thou remembrest.
Eyes to see not the workes of
thy hands, and wandrings of thy feete;
but the workes and wandrings of that
heart that is within me; and so these
thoughts escape me by day, by night; by
day, while thou art waking, yea, waking
not exercised about the things of this
world, in the companie of few, of moe,
or thy selfe alone. But while thou being
a professor and hearer of the good word
of God, art before thy God cast downe
vpon thy knees, speaking to his Maiestie
by prayers in thy owne house, or in his
Sanctuarie, or hearing his Maiestie speaking
to thee by his word. By night when
thou art sleeping vpon thy couch, thy
eares hearing no sound, thy eyes being
closed, thy tongue being silent, thy hand
being idle, thy feete not mouing. Sure I
am, sure I am, ô my soule, had preachers,
had professours eyes to see, what vile,
vgly, monstrous, cruell, bloudie, and
brutish thoughts, ouertakes, and ouershadowes
their soules, while they are sleeping
while they are waking, yea, waking,
and reading; waking, and praying; waking,
and hearing Gods word; yea, deliuering

and receiuing the Sacraments,
and with this, First, a memorie to remember
vpon these thoughts; Secondly, grace
to make conscience of them, (seeing our
God should be loued with thy whole
soule, strength, and minde.) He goes
not to pulpit, he comes not to heare
Gods word preached from the pulpit,
who would not be compelled from one
wounded soule drawing vp deepe grones,
powring out with both his eyes bitter
teares, crying out, ô Lord God how is it
that man inriched with an heauenly, reasonable
soule, with such a comely well
ordered and decked bodie, in proportion
and outward shape, farre surmounting all
the inferiour workes of thy hands, let it
be the gorgeous and glorious cabinates
and places of Kings, and Princes made by
the hands of men, carries not about him
vpon his head, vpon his hands, vpon his
feete, to the view of man; but within
him, to the sight of thy Maiestie, his alseeing
quicke eye, such a foule stable, which
with the raging sea, casteth vp the foule
dirt of vile thoughts continually? Confesse,
confesse, ô my soule, and be not
ashamed to lay that open before God,

Angels, and men, which thou canst denie
to be true. Oftentimes hath my God
who cannot lie, by that holy volume of
sacred Scripture, indited by that Spirit
of truth, and read by me, presented before
me that stinking stable of that vile heart I
carrie about with me. Alwayes, neuer
was I any wayes truly sensible to my humiliation
before God, of the nature of
this stable of my heart, till through thy
grace I was made to reade that touching
my heart, vpon the table of my heart;
which I had read before in the volume of
holy Scriptures. Oh Lord God that euer
man hearkned vnto Satan, and hearkning
vnto him, loosed thy glorious Image, to
the which he was made: for had not man
fallen from thee, such thoughts would
neuer haue fallen vpon him; yea, he
would neuer haue carried about with him
that filthiest stable, the like whereof is
not to be found in the aire among the
foules, in the seas among the fishes, nor
in the earth among the beastes, out of the
which such thoughts do flow. Let the
sight and sense of this, ô my soule, leade
thee mid-day, morning, and euening,
with Dauid towards the throne of the

grace of thy God, leaning strongly vpon
the merits and mediation of thy onely
Mediator, and Sauiour Iesus, begging
with sobbes and teares, the blessed Spirit
of sanctification, by whose mortifying
power this stinking stable of my heart,
may peece and peece be emptied of that
vile matter, (alas, while I am sleeping
while I am waking,) gusheth so abundantly
out of it, to the offence of my God
and to the continuall disquieting of my
poore conscience; and by whose renewing
force, this stinking stable being thus
happily emptied of this vile matter, may
be graciously turned in a cleane shining
cabinet, well decked and hung with heauenly
tapistrie, fit to receiue, fit to retaine
through the working grace of this Spirit,
the changer and keeper of it, euen that
sweet Spirit of the Father, and of his
Sonne; to the end that holy one making
his abode and residence with me, yea,
within me: I may hereafter so carie my
selfe, that my thoughts, my lookes, my
hearing, my smelling, my tasting, my
touching, yea, my whole speeches,
workes, and wandrings, may be such as
may glorifie my Father, edifie my brethren,

and stop the mouthes of my adueruersaries,
and haue thee, ô my soule, assured,
that thy God hath begunne graciously
to giue, and to enrich thee with sauing
grace; and that his Maiestie will not
cease out of that his free loue (which
changeth not) to adde grace vnto grace,
till it please him (perfecting his happily
begun and well prosecuted good worke)
turne begunne grace into perfect and
endlesse glorie. Could I see my heart, ô
my soule, as the maker of it saw it when
he said:Gen. 8. 21. 
                        I will henceforth curse the ground no
more for mans cause, for the imaginations of
the heart of man are euill, euen from his
youth; as the searcher of it saw it when
he said:Ier. 17. 9. 
                        The heart is deceitfull aboue all
things, who can know it. As our Sauiour
saw it when he said:Mat. 15. 18. 19. 
                        These things which
proceed out of the mouth, come from the
heart, and they defile the man. For out of
the heart come euill thoughts, murthers,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
                        Psal. 51. 10.
                        slanders. O then, I would not cease
vncessantly to crie with Dauid: Create in
me a cleane heart, ô God, and renew a right
spirit within me.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     2. Seeke not that which is Gods, but
God himselfe, if thou would possesse
Gods blessing here, and heare that voice;
Come thou blessed of my Father hereafter.
                     HOnest Paul clearing the sinceritie of
his heart towards his Maister, and
before the Corinthians Gods people, the
puritie of that loue wherewith he loued
them, came from a renewed heart, and
with a golden pen drew vp this worthie
speech:1. cor. 12. 4. 
                        I seeke not yours but you. But, alas,
ô my soule, may not our blessed God, looking
downe from that highest mountaine
of his glorie, vpon a very world walking
below here, euen vnder the light of the
Gospell, complaining vpon thousands, cry
aloud and say: Ye seeke not me, but mine.
Lift vp thy eares, ô my soule, and hearken.
Can the couered Hipocrites of this our
time, can the mercenarie slaues of this our
time, either loue God or his word, but as
the greedie oxe loueth his owner, and as
the filthie swine loueth his maister. Let
the owner of the oxe fill his stall, his oxe
shall then attend him carefully; let the
maister of the swine fill his trough, so shall

the swine follow him. While thy God, ô
my soule, fatteth and stuffeth men of this
world with honours, pleasures, wealth and
health, then easily can they say, Blessed be
the name of the Lord. Yea, then they can
tone with a speciall triumph, albeit from
a treacherous heart, with foule lippes, and
for a shamelesse brutish end: that 1. verse
of that most comfortable twentie third
Psame. Thou dost prepare a table before me
in the sight of my aduersaries: thou dost annoint
my head with oyle, and my cup runneth
ouer. So that these who at the first, and
before triall do heare, and see them,
would take them for one of a thousand,
and so for men sincerely louing, and truly
seeking, and seruing God: albeit in the
meane time, neither God, nor Gods
word can find so much as his countenance,
but onely when he hath his proud
backe couered, and his foule bellie filled
by him. When I reade the second of Hosea,
I find that the whole gold, siluer,
corne, wine, oyle, and wooll, in this
world is Gods. When I reade the 76.
Psalme, the 4. of Daniell, and the 5. of
Daniell, I find that all the kingdomes of
the earth are Gods, and that his onely

supremest Maiestie is the onely giuer of
maiestie, glorie, and honour, and ô how
busily, alas, do men euery where seeke after
these things? Alwayes, I would here
assure thee, ô my soule, that whosoeuer
shall find these gifts of God, and finds not
God with them, the giuer of them shall
repent one day that euer he found them,
as these alledged Scriptures may sufficiently
resolue thee. When I reade the sixt
of Iohn, I see my blessed Sa
                           •
                        iour, ô my
soule, attended verie carefully, yea, followed
from shore to shore: but busily
and painefully be a very world of people,
and what man beholding them (being
sensible of that loue, and reuerence, man
should carie vnto that holy one of God,
Iesus blessed for euermore,) would not
for this haue commended them? Alwayes
when this multitude comes where Iesus
is, and not without a speciall admiration
demands him thus: Rabbi when camest thou
hither. Hearken, hearken, ô my soule,
how they are answered, euen by that
sweetest Lambe, who had freely fed thē,
powerfully wrought great workes before
them, and graciously spoken many comfortable
speeches to them. Verily, verily, ye

seeke me not because ye saw the miracles, but
because ye eate of the loaues and were filled.
I must here for necessitie beseech thee, ô
my poore soule, not to cease to search
out, and to trie narrowly, whith
                           •
                        r while
thou appeares to others to be seeking and
seruing thy God, thou art seeking him
onely in shew, to his offence, and to thy
ouerthrow, or truly for himselfe to his
hearts contentment and glorie, and to thy
true weale and wealth, here and for euer.
Hearken, hearken, ô my soule, for now I
must tell thee, that the free honest seruant
of God, who is also his kindly child,
loues his God, loues the word of his God,
not for honour, but for heauen; not for
goods, and gaine, but for grace and glorie;
and so not for his backe, and bellie,
but for his soule; yea, but for his God
whom he must loue, and whom he cannot
cease to loue, albeit there were neither
heauen after this to ease him, nor
hell to grieue him for euer. And so in a
word, Gods child loues him, not for any
thing that is beneath here; but for his
Maiestie who is aboue, & for these things
which do ioyne him with him, and do
conuey him vnto him. Shall Iacob be content

(his God being happily with him)
to serue a verie churle for twentie one
yeares, being consumed now with heate,
now with cold, and hauing his wages
changed ten times. And can it possibly
grieue thee, ô my soule, with the best
heart I haue, to seeke and serue thy blessed
kind true God, all the dayes of my pilgrimage
here, albeit he whippe me not
with one, but with many scourges. It is
an easie thing, ô my soule, yea, a very
easie thing to a man, when his oxen are
plowing, his sheepe and asses feeding, his
corne growing, his summes of money
layd downe before him, his table richly
decked; and his children standing about
it like oliue plants, then to beginne, and
end his dinner and supper, with a grace,
and with a Chapter of Gods booke
read, yea, not to want his Psalme sung
as if his priuate house were some publicke
Temple. Yet I dare not denie, ô my soule,
but it shall proue a very hard thing to
manie, when their oxen and asses are stolen,
their sheepe, and seruants consumed
with fire, their whole children in one
minute smothered, their owne hole and
sicke bodies, turned in a sicke lumpe of

boyles & so their rich table, changed into
a bit of browne bread, and a drop of cold
water; yea, their soft and well decked bed,
in a hard and loathsome stinking midding,
their dearest friends in the meane
time being turned in deadly foes, their
breath being vnsauorie to her, lay sometime
in his bosome; and their speech being
mocked euen by their owne seruants,
then with Iob to crie not counterfeitly
but from an honest heart, louing God, &
reioycing in him euen in the middest of
this hottest firie furnace. The Lord hath giuen,
the Lord hath taken, blessed be the name
of the Lord. Rouse vp, rouse vp, thy selfe
therefore, ô my soule, & crying aloud, demand
of thy selfe thus: Wherefore, wherefore,
is it that I loue my God, that I seeke
my God, that I serue my God; wherefore
is it that I countenance his word and Sacraments;
yea, how long haue I resolued
to loue, to seeke, and to serue him, by
countenancing his word and Sacraments,
euen with pleasure. Haue I resolued onely
to do this while the hot faire Summer of
bloming inriching prosperitie continueth,
and so soone as that cold stormie
Winter, of pinching and pricking aduersitie,

shall approach me to renounce my
God, and turne my backe vpon his word
& Sacraments, without the which he cannot
be found, he cannot be kept. Not so,
not so, I hope ô my soule, a verie small
thing comforted thee, yea, contented Iacob:
and shall not he who made all things,
who giues all things, who commandeth
all things, content thee; ô my soule?
weighedst thou euer that 28. verse of the
45. of Genesis. And Israell said I haue
enough, Ioseph my sonne is yet aliue, I will go
and see him before I die. Shalt thou heare
Iacob speaking thus, ô my soule, and shalt
thou not crie out to the hearing of Angels
and men, euen when thou art bereft
with Iob of all earthly proppes and comforts,
(if thou would not haue Iacob condemning
thee euen to the lowest hells)
I haue enough: God the Father my blessed
Maker, God the Sonne, my kindest
Sauiour, God the holy Ghost my sweetest
and surest sanctifier, comforter and keeper,
is yet aliue; his matter I haue seene alreadie
by the eye of faith, in that glasse of
the word, and mirrour of the Sacraments,
in his chamber of presence beneath here,
to my begunne life and comfort: and his

Maiestie I shall hereafter see in the spite
of all opposition, and aduersaries face to
face, to the perfect consummation of my
begunne life, and comfort in that highest
Pallace of that heauen of heauens for euermore.
Shall Paul account all blooming
things, bitter things: all honouring
things, shaming things: all enriching
things, beggering things; all healing
things wounding things: yea, life, death:
and death, life: for the excellent knowledge
of Iesus Christ his Sauiour. Yea,
shall Paul well enlightened,Phil. 3. 7. 8. and directed,
hold this one Iesus for his sole and sufficient
treasure, and crie aloud, first, to the
hearing of that Church of God at Philippi,
and then to the hearing of all the
world:Phil. 1. 21. 
                        Christ is to me, both in life and death
aduantage. And shall not thou, ô my soule,
heartfully content to be depriued of all
things, to the end thou may be possessed
with him; yea, content to want all other
things, to the end thou haue him, and
keepe him.
                  
                  
                     3. Our God, that Iudge of the world,
and Father of his Church, cōmeth vnto

men by iudgements, by afflictions, by
tentations.
                     SCripture telleth me, ô my soule, that
our God, that iust iudge of the world,
and that wise louing father of his Church,
commeth to men by iudgements, by afflictions,
and by tentations. Iudgements
being most rife, afflictions, being also
common, tentations being most rare.
Iudgements, as they are approued to afflictions,
and tentations being layd vpon
the wicked, Gods enimies: afflictions,
and tentations, as they be taken properly,
seasing onely vpon Gods children, and
dearest seruants. Iudgements layed by
God vpon the wicked his enemies,
proceed from that fearefull spring of
Gods hot consuming wrath; and being
accompanied with that confounding spirit
of bondage, are layed vpon them for
sinnes committed proudly against his Maiestie,
and are nothing else but forerunners
of that euerlasting wrath, vnder the
which they shall lie in hell for euer. And
their iudgements thus inflicted vpon the
wicked, ô my soule, be neither profitable,
nor honourable for them. For, what profite?

what honour, did Cain, Saul, and Iudas
reape, by these iudgements which
ouertooke them before men, and sent
them afterwards to their owne places?
The consideration whereof suffers me
not to wonder, that when these iudgements
approached them they themselues
proued their owne greatest enemies.Ambr. offi. The
knowledge hereof moued Ambrose to
say:1. lib. 1. 
                        Impius ipse sibi poena est.
                        cap. 12. 
                        The wicked man
himselfe is a scurge and punishment to himselfe.
Affliction againe, being inflicted by
God vpon his owne children, debars thē
with the prodigall child from his wayes;
and doth flow from the sweet wholesome
fountaine of Gods fatherly wise loue, being
accompanied with that Spirit of adoption,
who is also that Spirit of sanctification,
by the which God their wise Father,
doth bring them to a sight and
sense of their sinnes, to a sorrowing for
their sinnes, yea, to a forsaking of them,
making them turne homewards to him
by repentance: and their afflictions be
profitable to the child of God, albeit not
honourable; for notwithstanding it was
profitable for Dauid that he (falling in
adulterie and murther) was afflicted as hePsal. 119. 71.
                        
himselfe most freely confesse, yet it was
no wayes honourable to him. Also it
was profitable for the prodigall child, that
he was brought to extremitie after he had
forsaken his fathers house, and wasted
his goods with riotous liuing, (for thereby
God being mercifull with him, he was
made to seeke homeward to his father.)
The sense hereof moued Bernard to say:
Si quid amaritudinis sentio in voce eius, non
sine dulcedine est, quoniam cum iratus fuerit
misericordiae recordabitur, im
                              •
                            & ipsa indignatio
non aliunde quam de misericordia est.
If I perceiue any bitternesse in the speech of my
God, it wants not his owne sweetnesse, for
while he is angrie with me, he cannot but remember
to be mercifull to me, yea, his verie
anger flowes from nothing but from mercie.
O would to God, that euerie man could
speake and thinke, of the afflictions of
the Saints, as that famous Father Augustine
was moued to thinke, and speake of
them.Aug. in Psal. 92. 
                        Duos filios habit homo, alterum
castigat, alterum dimittit; facit vnusmale &
non corripitur a patre, alter mox vt se mouerit
colaphis caeditur. Vnde ille dimittitur &
iste caeditur, nonne quia huic coeli haereditas
obseruatur, ille autem dimissus exhaereditatus

est. A man hath two sonnes, he correcteth
the one, and ouerseeth the other. The one
doth euill, and is not chastened by his father:
the other, so soone as he begins to sturre, is
cuffed by him. Now wherefore is the one ouerseene,
and the other beaten: is it not because
the inheritance is prepared for him, who is
corrected; and he is disinherited who is ouerseene.
                        Reuel. 3. 19.
O hearest thou not my Sauiour saying
to thee, ô my soule, As many as I loue
I rebuke and chastise. Out of the sense
whereof Paul can charge and resolue thee
thus: My sonne despise not the chastenings
of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked
of him. For whom the Lord loueth he
chasteneth, and he scourgeth euerie sonne
that he loueth: if ye endure chastenings, God
offereth himselfe vnto you as vnto sonnes. For
what sonne is it whom the father chasteneth
not. If therefore ye be without correction
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards
and not sonnes. The sense hereof moued
Augustine to say: Cum flagellat Deus filium
currat sub manu patris flagellantis, quia
quando flagellat ad haereditatem erudit, ad
tempus emendat, non in aeternum damnat.
Elige tibi temporalem vis laborem, an sempiternam
poenam, temporalem felicitatem, an

aeternam vitam. Quid minatur Deus, sempiternam
poenam; quid promittit Deus, sempiternam
requiem. In quo flagellat Deus bonos,
temporale est: In quo parcit malis, temporale
est. When God scourgeth his sonne,
let his sonne runne vnder the hand of his father
scurging him, because while he scurgeth
him, he fits him for his inheritance, he amends
him for a while, he condemes him not
for euer. Make thy choise, whither thou wilt
vndergoe trouble for a time, or euerlasting
paine; temporarie happinesse, or euerlasting
life. Wherewith threatneth God thee ô man
with euerlasting paine. What promiseth God
vnto thee ô man? eternall rest. That wherein
God correcteth his owne good children, is
temporarie laying on them for a while; that
wherein God spareth the wicked, is also temporarie,
continuing onely with them for as
short a while. Tentations againe, ó my
soule, for trials are layed by God vpon his
dearest children, and speciall painfull
faithfull seruants, euen while they through
his speciall grace, are carefully studying
to prouide for honest things, both before
God and man. And so when with Enoch,
Noah, and Abraham, they are walking
before God, and amongst men holilie,

righteously, and soberly, abhorring to
consent vnto euill, delighting to do well,
and reioycing to suffer euen greatest extremitie
for well doing. Now their tentations
do flow from yt sweetest spring, of
that feruant old loue wherewith our God
loueth, and of that rarest account his Maiestie
maketh of these his dearest children
and seruants, and of these singular graces
mercifully bestowed by him, vpon them:
and their tentations be layed by God vppon
his children, for the triall of these
graces, yea, for the clearing and manifesting
of them, yet no wayes vnto that
God the onely giuer and keeper of them,
who is perfectly acquainted with that
measure of faith, of hope, of patience,
wherewith he hath inriched his holy
ones, but to themselues and others: to the
end that his tempted child, and with him
others who do see him, and heare tell of
him, may perceiue how farre his God
hath spiritually beautified and inriched
his soule. Thus our God tempting Abraham,
euen while he was walking before
him vprightly, commands him to offer
vp his onely sonne Isaac whom he loued
in a burnt offring to him,Gen. 22. to the end, that

first Abraham himselfe, and then others
might know what a measure of faith he
had bestowed vpon Abraham. Thus our
God to trie iust Iob,
                        Iob 1. 2. who was a man who
feared God, and eschewed euill; bereft
him of his whole goods, children, and
health, his wife, friends, and seruants, in
the meane time, prouing miserable comforters
to him, and all to the end that
with himselfe, others might know with
what a measure of faith, hope, and patience,
his God had blessed him. Thus our
blessed wise God, tempting Dauid euen
after he had annointed him to be King of
Iudah and Israel by the hand of Samuel.
had Saul the King so turned vpon him,
that howbeit he slew Goliah, eased Saul
by his Musicke, when the euill spirit
troubled him, and married his daughter:
yet he may not keepe the court, keepe
his owne house, yea, find a cottage
in all the holy land to hide himselfe in;
but is compelled to flee to Achis King of
Gath,2. Sam. 27. and all to the end, that his wise, louing
Father might make it knowne, first,
to himselfe, and then to others, what store
of grace lodged within his soule. The
Apostles of Iesus are faithfully, aud busily

seruing their Maister, by preaching the
Gospell sincerely,Act. 3. 4. 5. and freely: alwayes are
they not hated, accused, imprisoned beaten,
yea, put to death for this their seruice?
euer reioycing that they suffered such
things and all to the end, that they themselues
might know that it was not onely
giuen to them, to beleeue in Iesus but to
suffer for him. While spices abide whole
in the merchants pocket, they remaine
vnsauorie, but when they are put in the
morter, and beaten with the pestle, all
that be in the house do smell them. That
prouerbe holdeth most true, Apis sine aculio
non mellificat. Bees without the sting make
no honie. In the calme day of blooming
prosperitie, can the graces of the Saints
be knowne? alwayes let the pestle of tentations
seaze vpon them, their spices of
faith, hope, and patience, shall be manifested.
Yea, howbeit while the child of
God is not burthened with the sting of
tentation, he appeare vnprofitable to others,
and to himselfe: yet so soone as he
beginnes to carrie this sting layed vpon
him by his Father, he can make and bring
forth wholesome honie, for the honour of
his God, for the ioy of his owne soule

and for the benefite of others. Augustine
saw this, and could write this most sweetly,
and truly, touching tentation. Omnes
tentatio probatio est,
                        Aug in Psal. 51. 
                        & omnis probationis
effectus habet suum fructum, quia homo plerum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
etiam sibi ignotus est, quid ferat, quidue
nonferat, aliquando praesumit se posse ferre
quod non potest, & aliquando desperat se
posse ferre quod potest. Accedit tentatio, quasi
interrogatio; & inuenitur homo a se ipso, quia
latebat, & se ipsum, sed artificem non latebat.
Euerie tentation is a triall, and the worke of
euerie triall hath his owne fruite, because a
man is euen oftentimes vnknowne to himselfe
not knowne what he may endure, or what he
may not endure. Now he presumes that he
may endure that which he may not, and sometimes
he despaires that he can endure that
which he may endure, in this meane time
in comes tentation as a question demanding
him and saying as it were what mayst
thou suffer, what mayst thou not suffer? and
hereupon the man is found out by himselfe,
who knew not himselfe before, albeit
before that he was not vnknowne to
his maker. And againe, Perfectio nostra
per tentationem fit, nec sibi quisquam innotescit
nisi tentatus, nec potest coronari nisi vicerit,

nec potest vincere nisi certauerit,
                        Aug. in Psal. 16. 
                        nec potest
certare, nisi inimicum, & tentationes habuerit.
We are ledde forwards to perfection by
tentation, neither is any man vnknowne to
himselfe vnlesse he be tempted, neither can a
man be crowned, vnlesse 
                              •
                           e ouercome, neither
can he ouercome vnlesse he striue, neither can
he striue, vnlesse he find an aduersarie and
tentations. As their tentations are most
rare, so they are not onely profitable, but
honourable. Shall not all posteritie thinke,
and speake honourably of Abrahams faith,
considering he was readie at the voice
of his God, to slay his onely sonne whom
he loued,Gen. 22. of whom God had said, in Isaac
shall thy seed be called. Shall not all posterities
thinke and speake honourably of
Iob, who being bereft of all outward
comfort; and enuironed, yea, filled with a
verie sea of all extreame crosses and tentations,Iob 1. 21.
could say and sing: The Lord hath
giuen, the Lord hath taken, blessed be the
name of the Lord.
                        Iob. 2. 10. 
                        Thou speakest like a foolish
w
                              •
                           man, shall we receiue good at the hands of
God,
                        Iob 13. 15. 
                        and not receiue euill? Though he slay me
yet shall I trust in him. I am sure that my Redeemer
liueth, and that he shall stand the last
on the earth, though after my skinne wormes

destroy this bodie,
                        Iob 19. 25. 26. 27. 
                        yet shall I see God in my
flesh, whom I my selfe shall see, and mine
eyes shall behold and none other for me.
I know, ô my soule, that the Epicure can
enlarge his heart to mirth and dalliance in
the middest of his cups; but the tempted
child of God, with the Apostles can
dance for ioy, when they are imprisoned
and beaten; yea, can not onely pray, but
sing with Paul and Silas,
                        Act. 5. 6. when they are
fast locked in the stockes. Therefore no
wonder that we here Paul speake thus.
We reioyce in tribulations,
                        Rom. 5. 4. 5. 
                        knowing that tribulation
bringeth forth patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope
maketh not ashamed; because the loue of God
is shed abroad in our hearts,
                        Iam. 3. 4. 1
                              •
                           
                         
                        by the holy Ghost
which is giuen to vs. Yea, this moued
Iames thus to resolue vs. Count it exceeding
great ioy when ye fall in diuerse tentations,
knowing that the tryall of our faith bringeth
forth patience, and let patience haue her perfect
worke that we may be perfect and intire,
lacking nothing. Blessed is the man that endureth
tentations, for when he is tried he shall
receiue the crowne of life which the Lord
hath promised to them that loue him. The
sense hereof moued Cyprian to say.Cypr. ser. of mort. 
                        Calamitates

non sunt offendicula sed praelia; nisi
praecellerit pugna non potest esse victoria: hoc
interest inter nos, & eos qui Deum ignorant
quod illi in aduersis queruntur & murmurant,
nos aduersa non auocant a virtutis &
fidei veritate. Troubles are not offences, but
fightes; vnlesse the fight go before, the victorie
cannot follow: in this we differ from those
that know not God, that while they complaine
and murmor vnder aduersitie, no aduersitie
can draw vs away from that truth which we
constantly beleeue. The sense here of moued
Iraeneus also thus to write.Iraen. lib. 4. cap. 22. 
                        Interea dum hic
sumus necessaria est pijs tribulatio vt contriti
per patientiam & igniti apti sint ad conuiuium
regis. Trouble is necessarie for the godly
while they liue here, to the end that they being
grinded and fried by patience may be fit
for the banquet of the great King.
                     
                  
                  
                     4. The child of God is alwayes readie
to suffer euill for well-doing, or for
refusing to do euill, but he can no wayes
consent to do euill either for losse or
gaine.
                     HE who alledging himselfe to be the
child of God, would proue himselfe

to be an Israelite indeed, must resolue to
strengthen himselfe through the grace of
his God, which is onely able to make him
stand against the euill of affliction, and
tentation with a great measure of faith,
and rare patience: for he must alwayes be
readie to suffer euill, and not to do euill.
Pharoah by his taskemaisters withdrew
from the dispersed Israelites that wanted
straw which was furnished vnto them, &
yet kept ouer their head their former tale
of bricke alwayes: yet attempted the Israelites
Gods children to make any insurrection
against these taskmaisters, executors
of that bloudie decree, notwithstanding
they were many in number, or pressed
they by any secret plot to cut off that
Pharoah by whom that bloudie and cruell
decree was deuised and published? No,
no; but yeelding to both, they runne vp
and downe, gathering stubble in stead of
straw, and the rest sit downe making as
many bricke euerie day as possibly they
could.1. Sam. 13. 30. 31. I will euer loue a Samuel who
can honour euerie wicked Saul before
the people;2. Sam. 4. 6. 7. but I will neuer loue a Rechab
and Baanah who can come secretly
into the house where their maister lyes

sleeping on his bed and smite him, slay
him, and behead him. I will euer loue a
Dauid whose heart will smite him if he
cut off but the lappe of Sauls garment, and
who resolued neuer to put his hand on the
Lords annointed, albeit he had done him
many wrongs; yea, had wronged Church
had wronged common-wealth.2. Sam. 24. 16. But I will
neuer loue an Athalia who dare cut off all
the Kings Linage to make a roome for
her selfe:2. Chron. 22. 10. neither a Bigtan, nor a Teres,
who being keepers of the King of Persias
chamber-doore, sought to slay him. But I
shall euer loue a Mordecay who knowng
such a conspiracie albeit he was a stranger,Ester 1. 21. 22.
cannot keepe it vp, but reueale it presently
to the ouerthrow of the traitors,
& safetie of the King. Alwayes thou must
not wonder, ô my soule, that the child
of God can thus behaue himselfe, for being
no scholer to the false bloudie Iesuite,
(who hath stolen from men that cleare
lanterne of the booke of God and put in
their hand the cutthroate lanterne of their
owne traditions,) but being well taught
of God his Maister out of the booke of
truth, which cānot but direct man rightly,
he is throughly resolued about the truth of

two grounds which alwayes stand infallible.
For first he knoweth, that vengance
belongeth not vnto man, but vnto God;
therefore out of a sense and reuerence of
this, not daring attempt to detrude his
God out of his chaire, and intrude himselfe
in his Maiesties throne,Deut. 22. 35. he will not,
yea, he dare not (being stayed by his
conscience, enlightened with the lanterne
of Gods truth) by his owne hand auenge
himselfe. Againe well knoweth he, that
the weake aduised child of God hauing
his written word for his booke and lesson,
dare not attempt to do that which is euill,
to the end that good may come thereby;
but that he must alwayes do that which
his God commanded, and is commended
by his God,Rom. 3. 8. referring euer the euent to his
mercifull, wise, powerfull Maiestie: not
being ignorant that God his Father will
neuer accompanie any curse with his
blessing, which is repugnant to his written
word, albeit it take some feete, and
appeare to go on for a while. Yea, the
child of God being strengthened from
aboue, is alwayes readie to suffer for desiring
to do good, and for refusing to do
euill. The three holy children cannot be

readie notwithstanding of Nebuchadnezars
commandement to fall downe and
worship that golden image which he had
set vp: and yet they can be readie at the
commandement of the said King to be
cast in the hot firie furnace for refusing to
worship it.Dan. 3. 
                        Daniel can refuse to draw vp
his suite for the space of three dayes to any
besides the Persian King, notwithstanding
of the Kings decree,Dan. 6. commanding
him to do so; and yet he can be readie to
go and enter within the denne of lions
for refusing to obey it.Act. 5. 40. 41. 42. The Apostles of
Iesus can refuse to ceasse to preach to the
people in the name of Iesus, albeit the
Councell of Ierusalem charge them so:
and yet they can reioyce to be beaten by
the Councell for preaching vnto them in
his name. The sense hereof moued Tatian
to speake thus,Tatian. ô my soule, Sirex iubet
tributum pendere paretus sum, si Dominus
seruire, seruitutem agnosco. Solum Deum si
quis negare iubet non agnosco. If my King
command me to pay tribute I am readie, if
my Maister command me to serue him, I acknowledge
his seruice. But if any command
me to denie my God him I will not know. And
therefore it was wondrous well said of

old, Dicit tyrannus martiri pone ceruicem,
ponit; dicit obserua missam, reculat: iubet ire
in vincula, it; & iubet adorare sanctos, negat:
Impia facere reculat, iniqua facere non reculat.
The tyrant saith to the martyr of God,
lay downe thy necke, he layeth it downe; he
commands him to go to Masse, that he refuseth:
he chargeth him to go to prison and
bands, he goeth; he commands him to worship
the Saints, that he refuseth: wicked things
he refuseth to do, vniust troubles he refuseth
not to suffer. Were this considered, ô my
soule, many who be thought to be obedient
and loyall subiects, should be found
to be rebels, and many who be counted
to be disobedient seruants, yea, grosse
traitors, should proue to be true seruants,
not onely to inferior Iudges, but also to
that King of kings, who is that sole great
law-giuer; who hath onely power to
saue and to destroy.
                  
                  
                     5. Behold that fountaine out of the
which prosperitie and aduersitie do flow
with that vse the wise child of God maketh
of them when he looketh on this
fountaine.
                     
                        
VVHen shall I begin, ô my soule,
to profit aright, by spirituall and
temporarie prosperitie, by inward and
outward aduersitie? either when the hand
of God is lying heauie and sad vpon me,
or when it is afarre off shaken on me, telling
me that it is drawing neere me? Oh
my soule, here I must assure thee from the
blessed true mouth of that God who can
deceiue none, that that monstrous mountaine
Inconsideration, blinding the eyes
of thy vnderstanding, is that onely chiefe
thing whereby that subtle enemie trauelleth
to hinder, and doth hinder the soule
of man from profiting to saluation, by
prosperitie, by aduersitie. Thou canst tell
me, ô my soule, what I haue, but canst
thou tell me from whom and for whom
I haue that which I haue, and so canst
thou tel me first how thou shouldst vse thy
selfe, who hath that which thou hast, towards
him, for whom and from whom
thou hast it. Secondly, canst thou tell me
how thou shouldst imploy & bestow that
which thou hast from him and for him. Againe,
in the day hast thou seene and felt,
or foreseene sharpe tentations and troubles?
thou canst tell me, ô my soule, what

is that which lieth vpon thee, what is that
thou fearest shall light vpon thee? but
canst thou tell me whose hand layed that
vpon thee, which lyeth on thee; wherefore
was that layed on thee, which lyeth
on thee; and what thou mightest assuredly
expect if thou hadst grace thus to carrie
thy selfe? Oh, ô my soule, when shall men
haue their eyes enlightened, to see that
heauenly rich treasure which is to be
found in these foure Scriptures, which
may serue as eye-salue, to cure thy spirituall
blindnesse, and to free thee of that alledged
monstrous mountaine, Inconsideration.
One of them penned by Isaiah in his
45. Chapter, and by Amos in his 3. The
second penned by Ieremie in the 3. of his
Lamentations. The third by Hosea in his
5. and the fourth by Isaiah in his 1. Chapter.
Also thy God, ô my soule, by the
mouth of Isaiah, in the 7. verse of his 47.
Chapter saith: I forme the light and create
darkenesse; I make peace and create euill. Amos
in the 6. verse of his 3. Chapter saith.
Shall there be euill in the Citie, and the Lord
hath not done i
                              •
                           ? Ieremie in the 39. verse
of his Lamentations saith. Man suffereth
for his sinne. Hosea in his 14. and 15.

verses of his 5. Chapter bringeth in our
God speaking thus. I will spoile and go away,
and none shall rescue it, I will go and
turne to my place, till they acknowledge
their fault and seeke me. In their afflictions,
they will seeke me diligently. Isaiah in the 19.
and 20. verses of his 1. Chapter, bringeth
in the Lord saying. If ye consent and obey,
ye shall eate the good things of the land: but
if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be deuoured
by the sword; for the mouth of the Lord
hath spoken it. Euen the mouth of that
Lord, ô my soule, who can falsifie no
promise made to them that feare him, and
who can as easily execute iudgement as
he doth threaten iudgement against those
who abuse him. Now, ô my soule, what
if men, inioying peace, and good things
spirituall, temporarie, had eyes to see that
they had that peace, and these good
things of God, and for God; ô what
would the sense hereof put vndoubtedly
out of their hearts, banish strongly from
their hearts, breed and conceiue happily
in their hearts. Beleeue me, ô my soule,
the true sense hereof would put vndoubtedly
out of, and banish strongly
from that garden of the heart of Gods

child, two most fearefull euill weedes,
(as we speake, whereeuer they enter and
remaine for any space) too well: alas,
To wit, Pride the diuells sinne, and Securitie,
the proud mans snare. The sense
hereof would put out and banish Pride
the diuells sinne, out of the heart of Gods
child, neither suffer him looking on the
shining spirituall estate of his soule,
well beautified, and inriched with spirituall
graces: neither permitting him, beholding
his outward blooming condition,
by reason of his estate of his bodie,
and goods, to lift vp himselfe, either against
his God, the giuer of all these, or
against his neighbour (not so liberally
delt with) for whose benefite he must
know that these things were bestowed
on him. The sense of this would put out
and banish Securitie, the proud mans
snare from the heart of Gods child, not
suffering him with these foolish Israelites,
first, to set vp a golden calfe to himselfe,
and there after banquet delicately, and
to play merily before it; till wrath come
from God turning their vntimely & vnthākfull
mirth, vnto fearefull bitter mourning,
nor suffering him strongly, yet secure

                        Sampson,
                        Iud. 16. to lie sleeping vpon the
knees of Dalilah, till the seuen lockes of
his head are shauen off, and so his God
being moued to depart from him, he be
first taken, and thereafter be fully abused
and mocked by these vncircumcised Philistins,
whom he had subdued before valiantly.
The sense hereof would breed and
conserue in that garden of the heart of
Gods child, fiue most pleasant, sweet and
holesome herbes. Humilitie, Charitie,
Diligence, Thankfulnesse, and Feare,
Humilitie, considering that he hath nothing
but that which he hath receiued,1. Cor. 4. 7.
and this could not but affright him from
bragging of that which he had, as if he
had not receiued it. Charitie, making
him to employ that which he hath
for the good of others, considering
that he is not Lord of that which he
hath, but a steward onely; who one
day must giue an account to that Lord,
who hath sent him all he hath. Diligence,
making him painfull to trauell by these
good things of God, to glorifie his
God, the giuer of them, through the
right vsing of his gifts; yea, by increasing
them, lest in the day of reckokoning

(he hauing put Gods money to
the exchangers) haue that one talent
which he had taken from him, and giuen
to him that had ten.Mat. 25. 26. Thankfulnesse, stirring
vp the child of God, (led by the
cord of the gifts towards the giue
                           •
                        ) wisely
to cast one of his eyes vpon himselfe,
beholding how naked and poore he is in
Adam, how miserable and wretched a
spectacle he is, and at length could not
but haue proued in the eyes of Angels,
and men by reason of that nakednesse
and pouertie; and to cast his other eye
vpon his God, and these graces and
benefites, freely without merit, beside
merite, contrarie to all merites, his Maiestie
hath inriched him with; and out of
this sight and sense, the child of God, ô
my soule, is moued from his heart, and
with his whole behauiour, to blesse and
to glorifie his God for them: crying euen
aloud before Angels and men with
Dauid:
                        Psal. 116. 12. 13. 14. 
                        What shall I render to the Lord, for
all his benefites are aboue me? I will take the
cup of saluation, and call vpon the name
of the Lord, euen now in presence of all his
people. Feare, making the child of God
inriched, and busied as is said, with the

good things of God his Father, considering
Satan his policie, and strength, and
his owne simplicitie, and weakenesse: not
to play himselfe with these good things
of God, but to tremble while he inioyes
them, loath to lose his humilitie, and become
proud; his charitie, and turne if not
a bloudie oppressor, yet a vile self-louer;
his diligence, and proue secure; his thankfulnesse,
and shew himselfe both forgetfull
of, and vngratefull vnto, that God
who hath bene freely, and aboundantly
liberall vnto him. The sense of this moued
the Spirit thus to counsell the child of
God:Psal. 2. 11. 
                        Serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce in
trembling,
                        Rom. 11. 20. 
                        thou standest by faith, be not highminded
but feare: make an end of your saluation
in feare and trembling.
                        Phil. 2. 12. Againe, ô my
soule, what if men lying vnder any seene
sharpe crosse or affliction, had eyes to see yt
the hand of God had layed that on them
which lieth on them, and that his Maiestie
had layed on that his hand for their
sinnes: Yea, that he had done this to the
end, that he might draw them as it were
by a certaine violence, turning their backe
vpon their sinnes to seeke homewards to
him, by vnfained repentance? and if that

they could thus seeke home to him, they
should both find comfort vnder yt crosse,
able to sweeten it to them till the day of
their deliuerie should come, and in the end
be fully freed of it. Would not the sense
of this put vndoubtedly out of the heart
of Gods child, and banish strongly from
it, three most noysome, yet common
weeds, and breed and conserue happily in
it fiue most sweet and holesome herbes,
making Gods child pleasant in the eyes,
and sauorie of the nostriles of God his
Father. Can I, ô my soule, possibly see that
all my crosses (who euer be the instrument,
whatsoeuer be the meanes by the which
they be brought towards me) comes
from no hand, but from the hand of my
God, for my sinnes; and that to pull me
from my sinnes towards my God, to the
effect that in the end, it may go well with
me; vnlesse my heart be freed from three
weeds, kept from three weeds diuelish
and fearefull. My heart must be freed
from the weede of murmuring impatience,
from the weede of furious and cruell
vengeance, and from that fearefull poysoning,
yea, slaying weede, of comfortlesse
despaire; especially when thy crosses be

manie be sharpe and with this do lie long
on me. Dauids eyes being somewhat
blinded, not perceiuing by whom the
mouth of Nabal was opened against him,
can giue place to these two fearefull
weeds, Impatieuce, and Reuenge; admitting
them to enter in the garden of his
heart, and being led by them moue him
to crie out; so, and more also do God vnto
the enemies of Dauid,
                        1. Sam▪ 25. 12. 
                        for surely I will not
leaue of all that he hath, by the dawning of
the day, any that pisseth against the wall.
Alwayes this same Dauid, hauing his eyes
happily annointed with that clearing
cleane eye-salue, that Amen, that faithfull
and true witnesse,Reuel. 3. 14. the beginning of
the creatures of God, propines Gods elect
with; and so seeing clearely by whom
the mouth of Shimei was opened to curse
him, and his cruell hands armed with
stones (as if he had bene some dogge and
not a man, much lesse a King) in his contrarie;
cas
                           •
                        ing out, and holding out these
two fearefull weedes, Impatience, and
Reuenge say:2. Sam. 16. 10. 
                        He curseth euen because the
Lord hath had him curse Dauid, who shall
then say wherefore hast thou done so? fie vppon
thee, fie vpon thee, ô King of Israell,

darke was that schoole in which thou
wast brought vp; for while Samaria is
besiedged by Aram, and left to that
slaying sword of famine, canst thou
crie out desperatly:2▪ King. 6. 35. 
                        This euill cometh of
the Lord, should I attend the Lord any longer.
Where thou shouldst haue vttered the
flat contrarie thus: This euill cometh of
the Lord, therefore I will attend on him
constantly, and seeke home to him by repentance
betimes, till this euill which is
from him iustly, for mine, and his peoples
many sinnes, be remoued by him, from
me, and from them most gratiously. O
what glorious light did shine aboundantly
in that schoole, wherein iust Iob (whom
God is not afflicting for sinne, but trying
for the manifestation of his graces) was
happily brought vp? for when he hath
nothing left vnto him but his life, being
depriued of all his substance, of all his
children, of health, and enuironed with a
world of inwa
                           •
                        d and outward griefes; he
can see it was not the hand of the diuell,
it was not the hand of man, yea, it was
not neither wind nor fire, which had depriued
him of all his good things, which
had enuironed him with all these euill

things, but the good hand of his good
God, and therefore he can out of patience
say vnto his God: the Lord hath giuen,
the Lord hath taken;Iob 1. 21. say vnto his wife
touching his God and his crosse which
was from God;Iob 2. 10. 
                        Shall we receiue good at the
hands of God, and not receiue euill? And so
Iob seeing farre better then the blind King
of Israel saw, could see clearely, that
which Bernard afterwards confessed freely:Bern. ser. 
                              •
                           8. fol. 111.
                        Nihil aduersus nos malignus spiritus potest,
nisi missus, aut permissus, vnde cum eius
voluntas sit semper mala, nuuquam potest esse
nisi iusta; nam voluntas mala ex se ipsa sibi
inest: potestatem autem aliunde quam a Deo
non habet, quam potestatem sēper moderatur
Deus. That wicked spirit hath no power ouer
vs, but either being sent, or suffered; whereof it
commeth: that while his will is euer wicked,
his power is neuer but iust; for his euill will
which is from himselfe, is in himselfe; but
he hath no power at all, but from God; the
which power our God doth alwayes moderate,
and gouerne to a good end. Besides this, ô my
soule, the sense hereof breedeth and conserueth
in the heart of Gods child: fiue
most pleasant sweet and wholesome
herbes: euen Humilitie, Patience, Repentance,

Thankfulnesse, and Confidence. It
breedeth iointly Humilitie, Patience, and
Repentance: for can the well reformed
child of God possibly see, that no hand
beside the hand of God his Father is lying
on him, and that not vniustly, but iustly,
euen because by sinne he hath prouoked
him to wrath, and yet that notwithstanding
of his sinnes, this his hand is layed
on him, and suffered to lie on him, not to
vndoe him, but to winne him; not to
driue him from him, but to draw him
to him: and not be moued to shew himselfe
before his God, & among men humble,
patient, and penitent. The sense hereof
moued Ieremie thus to cōplaine vpon the
sinful man,Lament. 3. 39. 28. 29. 30. to the sinfull man▪ 
                        Wherof is the
liuing man sorrowful? man suffereth for his 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
Yea this made Ieremie in that same place
to speake thus, touching the humble, patient
and penitent sinner: He sitteth alone,
and keepeth silence, he putteth his mouth in
the dust, he giueth his cheekes to them that
smiteth him. Yea, the sense hereof opened
the mouth of that thiefe, who was crucified
on the right hand of our Maister, thus
to reproue the other, crucified on his left
side, when he durst attempt to reuile that

holy one:Luk. 23. 39. 40. 41. 
                        Fearest thou not God, seeing we
are in that same condemnation, we are indeed
righteouslie here, for we receiue things worthie
of that we haue done, but this man hath
done nothing amisse. Shall not old Eli, ô my
soule, who liued vnder the darke shadowes
of the law, condemne, in that great
day, a very world, liuing and giuing themselues
forth for Gods children, vnder this
our shining Sunne of the Gospell? Samuel
hath told Eli very hard newes from the
mouth of God:1. Sam. 3. 11. 12. 13. 14. 
                        Behold I will do a thing in
Israel, whereof whosoeuer shall heare, his two
eares shall tingle. In that day I will raise vp against
Eli all things which I haue spoken concerning
his house; when I begin, I will also
make an end. I will iudge his house for euer,
for the iniquitie which he knoweth, because his
sonnes ranne to a slaunder and he stayed them
not: I haue sworne vnto the house of Eli, that
the wickednesse of Eli his house shall not be
purged with sacrifice, nor with offering for euer.
And yet when these bitter things are
brought from the mouth of God to old
Eli his eare, by the ministerie of a yong
one; his heart knowing, louing, and fearing
that God who sent him; can proue so
humble, so patient, so penitent, that he

can answer most meekly, offering his
checkes most willingly to his smiter: It is
the Lord,
                        1. Sam. 3. 18 
                        let him do what seemeth him good.
O religious king Ezekiah, shall not thy
humble patience and repentance, when
thou art sharpely threatned by thy God,
speaking to thee by the mouth of Isaiah,
condemne the pride, the impatiencie, and
the obstinacie of a great many, not kings
onely, but base men, in these our dayes
crossed, and threatned with the crosse.
Ezekiah hath ouerseene himselfe, in shewing
to the Ambassadours of the king of
Babel all that was in his house, and in his
treasure, for this cause he must heare that
sharpe Sermon brought to his eares:
Heare the word of the Lord of hostes,
                        Isa 39. 5. 6. 7 
                        behold
the dayes come that all that is in thy house, &
which thy fathers have layed vp in store to
this day, shall be carried to Babel, nothing
shall be left, saith the Lord. And of thy sonnes
which shall proceed out of thee, and which thou
shalt beget, shall they take away, and they shall
be Eunuches in the palace of the king of Babel.
But how is this bitter Sermon heard,
and accepted by him? Hearken, hearken, ô
my soule, vnto that brought vnto thy
eares by the eight vers. of the 39. of Isaiah,

Then said Ezekiah vnto Isaiah, the word of
the Lord is good which thou hast spoken. O
admirable humilitie, patience, and repentance,
worthy to be considered grauely,
and imitated carefully, by all kings and
subiects; who with Ezekiah would after
their labours here, rest, and reigne kings
with that King of kings for euer. Shall
Nazianzene aduise me, ô my soule, louingly
to reuerence and embrace the admonition
and correction of a iust man: A viro
iusto castigari praestat, quam vngi ab improbo:
illius enim asperitas propter asperitatem
suauis est, huius autem benignitas quoque
suspecta. It is better to be chastened with
sharpe whips by a iust man, then to be annointed
with soft and sauourie oyle by a wicked
man: for the sharpnesse of a iust man his
strokes is pleasant, because of the benefit
which commeth by them, but euen the liberality
and courtesie of the other is to be suspected.
And should not I, ô my soule, be content
much more to be corrected at the hand
of my God, who is iustice and goodnesse
it selfe? The sense hereof breedeth also,
and conserueth in the heart of Gods
child, that pleasant, sweet, and wholsome
herbe of heauenly thankfulnesse, making

Gods child not onely to be humble, to be
patient, to be penitent vnder the crosse,
but also thankfull for the crosse. Yea,
yea, ô soule, Gods afflicted child, can
euen from his very heart, both with his
heart & with his voyce, chearfully thanke
the Lord his God for his crosses layed on
him; and no wonder that he do so, he being
well acquainted with that fountaine
out of the which his afflictions flown; with
that proclamation his afflictions sounds in
his eares, and conueyes to his heart; and
with that fruite they bring forth at length
to him. The afflictions of Gods child flow
from the sweetest fountaine of God his
fatherly loue, for as our God correcteth
not where he hateth, so he forgetteth not
to correct where he loueth. And therefore
the Angell of the Church of Laodicea
must heare this spoken vnto him:Reuel. 3. 19. 
                        As many
as I loue, I rebuke and chasten. Yea the Apostle
must tell the Hebrewes,Heb. 12. 26. 
                        Whom the
Lord loueth he chasteneth, and he scourgeth
euery sonne whom he receiueth. Pleasant and
profitable is that proclamation, the afflications
of the children of God soundeth
in their eares, and conueyeth to their
hearts. Considerest thou euer, ô my soule,

that golden rich oracle brought to thy
eares by the seuenth and eight verses of
the 12. to the Hebrewes. If ye induce chastening,
God offereth himselfe vnto you, as
vnto sonnes, what sonne is it whom the father
chasteneth not? if therefore ye be without correction,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards and not sonnes. The sense hereof
moued Bernard to say: Si Deus tecum non
adest per gratiam, adest per vindictam, sed
vae tibi si ita tecum est, imò vae tibi si ita tecum
non adest; illi namque irascitur Deus, quem
peccantem non flagellat: nam quem flagellando
non emendat in futura damnat. If God be
not with thee by his grace, he is with thee by
reuenge, but woe to thee if he be that way with
thee, yea woe to thee if he be not that way
with thee; for God is highly offended with
that man whom he scourgeth not when he
sinnes against him: for whom God amends not
here by correcting of him, that man he damnes
hereafter. While I am lying then vnder
any crosse, were it neuer so sharpe, were it
neuer so tedious, what would my God
sound by it in thy eares, ô my soule, Surely
this would he sound by it, and nothing
but this: Thou art no bastard, (who hath
no title to his fathers inheritance, and who

it at length to be thrust out of his fathers
doores, albeit he be furnished for some
dayes with meate, drinke, and clothed
within it) but thou art my owne well begotten,
and well beloued sonne, through
my onely naturall Sonne Iesus, in whom I
am well pleased, whom I am to keepe
with my selfe for euer: yea, whom I am to
make heire of all that I haue. But, ô my
soule, what fruite at length doth the afflictions
of Gods Saints bring forth? lift
vp thy eyes, and behold I pray thee that
pleasant, plentious, and most profitable
haruest, produced by them, and offered to
thy view by the 11. verse of the 12. Chap.
to the Hebrewes. No chastening for the
present seemeth to be ioyous, but grieuous,
but afterward it bringeth the quiet
fruite of righteousnesse to those who be
therby exercised. Shall the sicke or wounded
patient, not onely be readie by words
to thanke, but according to his abilitie, by
deeds to reward that Physitian who presents
to his mouth potions which be bitter
to his taste, and repugnant to his naturall
appetite, prouiding that they do
cure him. And that Chirurgion who doth
launce him to the effusion of his bloud;

yea, who doth cut his flesh in peeces, prouiding
in the meane time he be either
kept from that disease he feared, or freed
of that greater or longer paine he could
but haue layen vnder? and should not the
child of God, knowing his afflictions to
be speciall tokens of Gods loue towards
him; yea, to be those forcible meanes;
whereby he is diuourced from that stinking
whoore of sin, by the which he was
snared; yea, to be very medicines whereby
his soule is preserued, and deliuered
from the deadly sicknesse of sinne, and be
brought home to his blessed Father, trauelling
afterwards to haue himselfe made
holy as God his Father is holy. The sense
hereof moued Dauid to make that notable
confession:Psal. 119. 71. 
                        It is good for me that I haue
bene afflicted, that I may learne thy statutes.
This moued the Apostle thus to informe
vs: We haue had the fathers of our bodie
which corrected vs and we gaue them reuerence;
should we not much more be in subiection
to the Father of spirits that we
might liue: for they verily for a few dayes
chastened vs after their owne pleasures,
                        Heb. 12. 9. 10. 
                        but
he chasteneth vs for our profit, that we may
be partakers of his holinesse. Finally the sense

hereof breeds and conserues in the heart
of Gods child Confidence; neither suffering
him with the Israelites to murmure
against his God, as if there were some
wrong done to him; neither with Saul to
despaire as one altogether cast off from
God: but making him leasurely awaiting
vpon his God, to possesse his soule in patience;
being assured that his God will find
out a time, in the which, and meanes, by
the which, he shall be deliuered. And
therefore as God his afflicted child, casting
himselfe willingly vnder the hand
of God his Father correcting him, can cry
with Dauid,
                        2. Sam. 16. 11. 12. 
                        Behold my sonne which came
out of my owne bellie seeketh my life, then how
much more may this sonne of Iemini, suffer
him to curse, for the Lord hath bidden him.
So not despairing, but putting his confidence
in his God, when his hand is lying
heauie vpon him, and striking him sore, he
can crie with this same Dauid, It may be
the Lord will looke vpon my affliction, and do
me good for his cursing this day. I am afflicted
then, ô my soule, let me beware of murmuring,
impatience, of cruell raging, and
furious reuenge, and of destroying comfortlesse
despaire. Yea, let me bring forth

humilitie, patience, repentance, thankfulnesse,
and confidence; seeing not onely
prosperitie commeth from my God, but
aduersitie also: yea, seeing my God is not
onely my friend and Father, when he giueth
and crowneth, but also when he taketh
and crosseth. The sense hereof moued
Augustine to crie out with ioy:August. 
                        Quid non
misericorditer praestatur hominibus à Domino
Deo à quo etiam tribulatio beneficium est;
nam res prospera donum est consolantis, res
aduersa donum est admonentis Dei. What▪ ô
man is▪ not mercifully giuen by the Lord our
God vnto men, from whom euen affliction is a
benefit; for prosperous things be the gifts of
God comforting men, and aduersitie the gift
of God admonishing and warning them. Yea,
the sense hereof mooued Bernard to say:
Nulla nocebit aduersitas,
                        Bern. Psal. 91. 
                        si non dominetur
iniquitas. No aduersitie can possibly annoy
thee, if iniquitie domineere not ouer thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     6. Sinne is the onely thing which separateth
man from God, and maketh
God misknow and denie man.
                     AM I lying, ô my soule, vnder any
presently felt, or foreseene feared

trouble, and yet neither comforted vnder
this my trouble, neither deliuered nor thē
kept from that I feele, from that I feare.
Attempt not to challenge that Almighty,
that al-sufficient Maiestie, either of impotencie
and weaknesse, or of vnrighteousnesse
and rigour, but see that thou accuse
thy selfe, conuict thy selfe for sinne and
iniquitie; for that golden Axiome shall euer
abide inuiolably true, sounded by that
herauld of God Isaiah, not without any
noyse going before it, proclaiming, with
the truth, the excellencie and worthinesse
of it:Isa. 59. 1. 2. 
                        Behold the Lord his hand is not shortened
that it cannot saue, neither is his eare heauie
that it cannot heare, but your iniquities
haue separated betwixt you and your God,
and your sinnes haue hid his face from you.
And so I must haue thee, ô my soule, suffering
thy selfe to be resolued, that that long
and strong hand of God is neither put vp
in his bosome, and so stayed from helping
of thee in the day of thy need, nor put
forth against thee, to strike thee. And with
this, that his eare is not closed vp from
thy grones and prayers, till thou by sinne
haue separate thy selfe from his Maiestie,
and thereby haue depriued thy selfe of

that helpe, his hand otherwayes should
haue made thee; and of that comfort thou
shouldest haue found from his hearing
eare. Tell me, tell me, ô my soule, if thou
canst, how name 
                           •
                         thou him, or her, to
whom euer that blessed God failed: first,
I trow these first sinners, my grand-father
and mother failed to their God before he
failed to them. I thinke that second sinner
Cain depriued himselfe of Gods helpe
and comfort by a most cruell vnnaturall
murther, before either Gods mouth was
opened, or hand armed against him. If
these of the first world, who perished by
the floud were alone, sure I am they would
confesse this to be true. If these inhabitants
of Ierusalem who fel vnder the king
of Babel, and of the Romanes were aliue,
they could not denie this. Alwayes here,
ô my soule, I will pray thee grauely to
consider one point; wouldst thou haue thy
God comming to thee, or darest thou
thinke that he will come vnto thee when
thou thinkest that he should come to
thee, and as thou dreamest that he may
come to thee? No, no, thou must vnderstand,
ô my soule, that God will not come
vnto thee, but as he hath promised to

come vnto his owne, and as his owne
haue found him to come vnto them. Thou
mayest thinke, ô my soule, that God will
come vnto thee when any thing troubles
thee, to pitie, to comfort, yea, to deliuer
thee; albeit thou in the meane time stay
from him, going on in thy former and
present sinnes, yea adding new sinnes to
old sinnes, and grosse sinnes to lesse sins.
Alwayes thou must know, ô my soule,
that it cannot be so, that it ought not be
so. Hearest thou not thy God speaking
thus to Abraham,
                        Gen. 17. 1. 
                        I am thy God al-sufficient,
walke thou before me, and be thou vpright.
Thus not onely shewing Abraham what a
God and Maister he will be vnto him, but
telling Abraham what a sonne and seruant
he must prooue to his Maiestie againe.
Speakes not Dauid thus to thee touching
thy God:Psal. 18. 25. 26. 
                        With the godly thou wilt shew thy
selfe godly, with the vpright man thou wilt
shew thy selfe vpright: with the pure thou wilt
shew thy selfe pure, and with the forward thou
wilt shew thy selfe forward. And againe. The
eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and
his eares are open to his crie:
                        Psal 34. 15. 16. 
                        but the face of
the Lord is against them that do euill, to cut
off their remembrance from the earth. Oh

when shall that question and answer made
by Isaiah be taken to heart by the made
professors of this time: Who among vs shall
dwell with the deuouring fire?
                        Isa. 33. 14. 15. 16. 
                        who among vs
shall dwell with the euerlasting burnings? He
that walketh in iustice, and speaketh vpright
things, refusing gaine of oppression, shaking
his hands from taking of gifts, stopping his
eares from hearing of bloud, and shutting his
eyes from seeing of euill, he shall dwell on high,
his defence shall be the munition of rockes,
bread shall be giuen him, and his water shall be
sweet. Draw neare & hearken, ô my soule,
neuer shall I thinke vpon that oracle
sounded by Isaiah alreadie alledged here,
(Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that
it cannot saue, neither is his eare heauie that
it cannot heare, but your iniquities haue separate
betwixt you and your God, and your sins
haue hid his face from you) but alas, oft I
shall crie out to the hearing of God, Angels
and men: ô the fearefull vglinesse of
sinne, the vnspeakable hurt comes to man
by iniquitie! Woe is my soule, that euer
man was infected with sinne, and ô would
to God that all men were quite of iniquitie.
But wherefore alledge I, ô my soule,
that sinne is a fearefull vglie thing, and

wherfore out of this sense of sinne lament
I, that euer man was infected with it, and
wish I that all men were rid of it? Iniquity
and sinne, saith Isaiah, is that onely partition-wall
which diuideth betwixt God and man:
and so that sole and foule abhominable
adulterie, whereby that marriage, bound
vp betwixt God & man, is disanulled, and
made voide; so that, as a religious generous
husband cannot looke vpon his wife
when she hath defiled his bed; our blessed
God, holinesse, wisedome, and courage it
selfe, cannot abide that soule which dareth
attempt by sinne to abuse him. What
Gentleman hauing nothing (as we speak)
but his horse and saddle, being married to
some Gentlewoman, may spend by yeare
fiue or sixe thousand markes, kindly in the
meane time entertaining him, and prouiding
him of all things requisite for his necessitie
and pleasure, will wittingly and
willingly (his bedfellow being wise and
of any spirit as we say) commit adulterie
in the open fields, to the sight of men of
conscience and credit, knowing that his
wife will then easily by diuorcement quit
her selfe of him, and send him backe to
his wonted miserie. And yet, alas, is man

(married by God to God) feareth not in
close corners onely, but euen in the publicke
streetes as it were, yea, and in the
very open fields to commit spirituall adulteries,
to the sight of Angels and men, against
that blessed God: here running
with speed after that sinne, there committing
with greedinesse another sinne, albeit
neuer gentlewoman found a man so
bare (as we say) when she married him,
as our God found vs, all and euery one of
vs when he married vs O Ezekiel tell me
what was our estate when our God married
vs. Thy father was an Amorite, and
thy mother an Hittite, thy nauell was not
cut, thou wast not washed with water to
soften thee, thou was not salted in salt, nor
swadled in clouts, no eye pittied thee to
do these things to thee; but thou wast cast
out in the open field to the contempt of
thy person, in the day that thou wast
borne: and when I passed by thee, I saw
thee polluted in thy owne bloud,Ezech. 16. 3. 4. 5. 6. I said
vnto thee, when thou wast in thy bloud
thou shalt liue. Euen when thou wast in
thy bloud I said vnto thee thou shalt liue.
O Paul hast thou any more to say to this
purpose, yes, yes, for he tels me that when

our God married vs, we were all dead in
sinnes and trespasses, walking according
to the course of this world, and after the
prince which ruleth in the aire,Ephes. 1. 2. euen the
spirit which now worke
                           •
                        h in the children
of disobedience. Beside this, ô my soule,
neuer shall I call to minde that sentence
sounded in the eares of Moses by my God,
Exod. 32. and 7. Thy people whom thou hast
brought from the land of Egypt haue corrupted
their wayes, and compare it with that
speech spoken by that same God to this
Moses touching the same people:Exod. 4. 21. 
                        Israel
is my sonne, euen my first borne. But of new
againe I must crie out, ô the vilenesse of
sinne, ô the hurt cometh to man by sinne!
Sinne is so vile before God, sinne is so
hurtfull to man, that it can make our God
do that, which nothing beside sinne can
possibly make him to do. And what is that
I pray thee, ô my soule, consider it, consider
it, for Iesus sake I beseech thee, ô my
dearest soule, as thou louest thy selfe and
me: feare at Moses speaking to thee by
that alledged Scripture, and he will tell
thee, that sinne is that which maketh our
God misknow his child, deny his child;
albeit nothing beside this vile sinne, can

make his Maiestie rather misknow or deny
him▪ for I must tel thee, ô my soule, were
thy estate neuer so miserable to the eyes,
& in the iudgement of men, as long as my
heart resetteth not sin with greedinesse,
God will not misknow me, God will not
denie me.Gen. 29. Were I seruing a cruell Laban
farre from father and mother with Iacob.
Were I working in clay not like a man,Eodus 1.
but like a beast, hauing my fee
                           •
                        e, my
hands, my armes, and face so couered with
filthy mudde, that none of my acquaintāce
could take me for the man I am, with
the Israelites in Egypt; were I cast out
of my house by oppression; or through
pouertie, or sicknesse, to lie vpon some
dunghill, or vnder some open staire with
Iob;
                        Iob 2. yea, were I couered from top to toe
with boyles as Lazarus was, hauing none
among men to visite me;Luke 16. my God can
know me for his owne, and can gratiously
keepe my soule by his Spirit, and attend
my bodie by his Angels, in the meane
time reprouing greater, and smaller men,
yea, euen Kings for me when they abuse
me. Onely if I loue sinne, if I commit
sinne with delight,Gen. 31. 24. will he misknow me,
will he denie me. Cain Adams eldest

sonne, and so the Prince of the whole
world, alwayes is he not cast out from the
presence of God, when defyling his fingers
with his brothers bloud, he dare
meddle with sinne his deadly enemie.
Cham is carefully kept, by the Lord our
God, in the Arke with Noah his father,
and Sem and Iaphet his brethren. Alwayes
is he not afterwards euen cursed by
that God who sometime kept him? and all
because medling with sinne, (which had
destroyed the whole world before him)
he dare mocke his religious old father.
Saul of a begger is made a King by God:
alwayes, when Saul dare lift vp himselfe
against that Maiestie, who had cloathed
him with Maiestie, who had treaden vnder
his feete, Church and policie, by making
his owne will the rule of his doing;
is not Saul of a King ruling euen ouer
Israel, God his eldest Sonne, made a slaue
to be ouerruled by the diuell for euermore.
Iesus that Lord of glorie by whom
the world was made, comming into the
world to saue the world, will assume to
himselfe 12. men to be witnesses of these
things he spake, and suffered; Iudas Iscariot
must not onely be one of them, but

must carrie the bag, and beare that which
was giuen.Iohn 12. 4. 5. 6. Alwayes, when he dare proue a
thiefe and be content to lose a Sauiour for
some siluer (as, alas, too many do) first, Satan
must enter within him, and afterwards
he must enter in hell, there to abide with
Satan for euermore.Iohn 13. 3. Wilt thou not then,
ô my soule, but delay and with all thy
strength arme thy selfe against sinne,
which onely armeth God against thee?
Wilt thou not misknow sinne altogether,
neither lending a looke to it when it
drawes neare vnto thee, neither giuing an
eare to it when it speaketh to thee, neither
denying it with an answer, when it
beginneth sweetly to flatter thee, or louingly
to embrace thee, except it be with
a disdaining answer thus: go behinde me
Satan? Seeing sinne is the onely thing maketh
God to misknow thee, yea, to denie
thee. And in a word, ô my soule, wilt thou
not rather lay downe thy necke to the
axe, then lift vp thy heart against thy will
by committing of sinne; seeing sinne is
the onely thing which cannot suffer his
Maiestie to lift thee vpward towards the
highest heauens, where in his presence
there is fulnesse of ioy, and at his right

hand pleasures for euermore;Psal. 16. 11. and which
cannot but cause him to throw thee
downe towards the lowest hells, out of
the which there is no redemption; notwithstanding
that worme which biteth
there,Esay 66. 14 shall neuer die, neither that fire
which burneth there shall euer be quenched?Bern.
The sense hereof moued Bernard
thus to aduise one of his speciall brethren.
O homo Dei, ne trepides exuere hominem
illum qui de terraest, & conatur deprimere
vsque ad inferos: iste est qui de terra est
qui vexat, qui onerat, qui oppugnat. O man
of God be not affrayed to shake off that man
which is from the earth, euen that
man which presseth thee downe to the
earth, and labours to presse thee downe euen
to the verie helles: that is that man which
vexeth thee, which burthens thee, which visiteth
and fightest against thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     7. As man from the earth, maketh
God to heare and see: so shall God make
man at length to heare, to see, and to
feele.
                     WO is me, wo is me, ô my
soule, that I should heare my

God thus speaking vnto Moses touching
his Israel. Let me alone that my wrath may
waxe hot against them, for I will surely consume
them. Sure I am, ô my soule, would a
man (sensible of God) compare that resolution
taken by our God against Israel
heere, with that resolution taken by his
Maiestie about them in the 8. verse of the
3. of Exodus; it will draw some heauie
groanes out of his heart, and some bitter
teares out of his eyes. Speakes not our
God Exodus, 3. 8. thus vnto Moses. I am
come downe to deliuer them out of the hands
of the Egyptians & to bring them out of that
land into a good land and a large: and saith
not the same God vnto the same Moses
touching the same Israel Exodus 32. 10.
I will consume them.
                        Exod. 32. 10. O what an alteration,
ye, ô what a fearefull change, ô what a
fearefull alteration? Surely, surely, could
this change be well considered, it would
assuredly confound men, and make them
to stand amazed. Whereof alwayes
comes this, ô my soule? for sure I am
with Abraham that the Iudge of the
world cannot do but right. Hearken,
hearken, ô my soule, I pray thee: there is
not a greater difference betwixt that resolution

taken by our God concerning Israel,
Exodus 3. 8. and that he takes concerning
them, Exodus 32. 10. then there is
betwixt that sight our God saw when he
looked on them, Exodus 3. and that sight
he saw when he looked on them, Exodus
32. Yea, sure I am there is not a greater
difference betweene the one resolution
and the other, then there is betwixt that
noyse our God hearkening vnto Israel
Exod. 3. heard, and that to one, his Maiestie
hearkening vnto him, Exod. 32.
heard. In the 3. of Exodus our God
looking vpon Israel, sees their oppression
and trouble. In the 32. of Exodus our God
looking on him sees a molten calfe made
by them, worshipped by them, sacrificed
vnto, by them. In the third of Exodus our
God hearkning to Israel, heares the tune
and sound of their bitter cries and
groanes, because of their fierce task-makers,
but in the 32. of Exodus he heares
his Israel blasphemously crying touching
the calfe. These be the Gods ô Israel that
brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Yea,
he heares the noise of the Israelites licentiously
and wantonly pyping and dancing
before their calfe. In the 3. of Exodus it is

no wonder that the God of pitie and mercie,
and power, seeing the trouble, and
hearing the groanes of his distressed children
comes downe to deliuer them▪ and it
cannot be thought a wonder that our
God who is truth, iustice, and strength it
selfe, in the 32. of Exodus seeing the calfe
set vp by them, and hearing the pyping
about it, resolued to come downe to destroy
these he concluded before to saue.
Would to God herefore, ô my soule, that
all these who dwell beneath here vnder
the peofession of the Gospell, could in
time learne to make conscience of that
which they make their great God from
the heauens to see, from the heauens to
heare: for as they make his Maiestie to
heare and to see; so shall his Maiestie
make them to heare, to see, and to find
afterwards. Againe, when I reade the 28.
verse of the 1. of Genesis, I see and heare
our God reioycing in man, and aduancing
him aboue all the workes of his
hands saying: Bring forth fruite and multiplie
and fill the earth and subdue it, and
rule ouer the fish of the sea, and ouer the foules
of the heauen, and ouer euerie beast that moueth
vpon the earth. But when I reade the

6. verse of the 6. of Genesis, I heare Moses
warranted by God, speaking thus touching
man: It repented the Lord that he had
made man vpon the earth, and he was sorie
in his heart. But wherof came this so great
an alteration? When our God looked vppon
man in the 1. of Genesis he was
cloathed with his image, and therefore
with him all the workes of his hands are
verie good in his eyes, when he saw him
and them. But when he looked on him as
Moses speakes of man in the 6. of Exodus,
he was depriued of Gods image within,
all the imaginations of the thoughts of
his heart were onely euill continually; and
without he was fearefully and foully couered
with that red coate of crueltie, and
blacke coate of lecherie; and therefore no
wonder that the God of pietie, and pouertie,
repented that he had made him.
In the 17. verse of the 9. Chapter of the 1.
of Samuel, I heare God speaking to Samuel
touching Saul. This is the man of
whom I spake to thee, he shall rule my people.
But how speakes our God to the same
Samuel touching the same Saul, 1. of Samuel
13. 35. It repent
                              •
                           th me that I haue
made Saul King ouer Israe
                              •
                           . Alwayes no

wonder: for did not Saul stubbornely
lift vp himselfe against the Lord, disdaining
to hearken to his voice, and licentiously
following his owne conceites, dreaming
that his owne foolish imaginations
would proue a better rule to serue God
by, and to procure peace and wealth to
himselfe, then the verie word of God
brought to his eares by Samuel. Oh, ô my
soule, when shall the presumptuous sinners
of this our time, learne to make vse
of this? O when shall that sentence be
so heard by the eares of men, that it may
take some roote in their hearts.Gen. 18. 10 
                        I will go
downe and see whither they of Sodome and
Gomorrha haue done altogether according to
that crie which is come to me. For heere I
must tell thee, ô my soule, albeit the Atheist
be silent, yet his Atheisme cries to
heauen for vengeance; albeit the whoremaister,
and the whore be quiet, yet their
whoredome crieth; albeit the drunkard
drinke till he can neither go, nor stand,
nor speake; yet his drunkennesse fleeth vp
to heauen, and standing there before God
cries out against him; and so in a word,
albeit all the sinners of the earth should
couenant and agree among themselues to

lay their hands vpon their mouthes, neuer
speaking one word of their sinne, and albeit
they should take themselues to the secretest
deepe holes when they commit
their sinnes, to the end, that others not
seeing them, be not able to speake of
them, yet sinne committed by them, in
despite of their couenant shall crie out vppon
them, and draw downe God against
them. The sense of this, ô my soule, moued
Crysostome to say,Chrysost. 
                        Peccatum nemine arguente
hominem prodit: nemine accusante
condemnat. Sinne betrayes a man albeit no
man reproue him: sinne condemnes a man albeit
no man accuse him.
                     
                  
                  
                     8. Our God who neuer sinned neither
can he hurt by sinne, can sigh for
the sinnes of man; albeit sinfull man
onely hurt by sinne, dare sing to his
sinnes, which shall make him at length
to weepe for euer.
                     VVHen I reade and consider Scripture
with any spirituall sight,
with any holy sense, ô my soule, I must be
moued, and being moued, I must lament

my owne estate, and the estate of others
in many respects, and for this especially;
that I heare him sighing for sinnes, that I
see him wetting his cheekes with salt
teares for sinners, (considering what mercie
and good things by sinne they depriue
themselues of, and what wrath and
iudgement they procure vnto themselues
by sinne) who neuer sinned
                           •
                        , who neuer
was hurt, who neuer shall be hurt by sinne.
He who shall reade and consider Scripture,
shall beare and see, not onely brutish
creatures void of immortall soules,
and wanting reason; but also dead sensles
creatures void of life and motions, moued
at the confused voice of Gods workes:
while men and women, who do lodge
immortall soules within their mortall bodies,
and in the bosome of their soules;
reason, and discretion; can no wayes be
moued with that cleare, and distinct voice
of the word of God, sounding softly mercie
if they content and obey, sounding
fearefully, and yet most iustly wrath; if
they refuse and be rebellious: when I
reade that first of Isaiah, I heare thy blessed
God, ô my soule, who neuer sinned,
who cannot be hurt by sinne, sighing for

the obstinate Iewes, brutishly vnkind to
his Maiestie, while the oxe and the asse
are dutifull to their owner and maister;
yea, with this drawing vp a most heauie
iust complaint against the Iewes, because
of their vnkindnesse, and yet wanting a
man (notwithstanding of the manie men
were in the world) before whom he
might poure forth his complaint against
them, summoning the verie deafest heauens,
and senslesse earth to heare him,
euen with groaning making this his
complaint. For brings not Isaiah in,
our God speaking thus.Esay 1. 2. 2. 35. 
                        Heare ô heauens,
and hearken ô earth, for the Lord
hath said: I haue nourished and brought vp
children, but they haue rebelled against me.
The oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his
maisters cribbe, but Israel hath not knowne,
my people hath not vnderstood: Ah sinfull nation,
a people loaden with iniquitie, a seed of
the wicked, corrupt children, they haue forsaken
the Lord, they haue prouoked the holy
one of Israel to anger, they are gone backward.
But, alas, ô my soule, I cannot find the
vnkind Iewes, beside Isaiah, sighing for
their vnkindnesse, and lamenting that
they had so grossely abused a gratious

louing father, and an almightie alsufficient
prouisor and protector. When I reade
that 19, of Luke, I see that meekest
Lambe of God, Iesus, whose sworne enemies
would not accuse him for sinne, yea,
whose Iudge was compelled by the verie
force of his conscience to pronounce him
to be innocent shedding bitter teares,
for the blindnesse of the minds, hardnesse
of the hearts, deadnesse of the soules, and
loosenesse of the liues of the people of Ierusalem,
crying out with great griefe of
heart. O if thou haddest euen knowne at the
least in this thy day these things which belong
to thy place. But, alas, beside Luke, can
I find the inhabitants of Ierusalem shedding
out teares for themselues? or can I
heare them lamenting that by their sinnes
they should haue moued that meekest
gentle Lambe to whom they proued furious
and fierce lions, mourne and lament
for them. When I reade the 29. Psalme,
I see the voice of the Lord breaking the
Cedars of Lebanon, making them to leape
like a calfe, yea, like an yong Vnicorne,
diuiding the flames of fire, making the
wildernesse, euen the wilde
                           •
                        nesse of Cadesh
to tremble, yea, making the hyndes

to calfe, and discouering the forrest. But
when I cast my eyes vpon these of this
deadest debauched time, can I heare and
see that two edged sword of that word of
God, making liuing men, liuing reasonable
men, liuing reasonable Christian men (if
their owne workes may be beleeued) to
shake, to tremble, before that great Maiestie
whose word it is, out of a sense of
these sinnes they haue (alas,) euen sold
themselues vnto, and of that miserie and
wrath vnder the which they haue couered
themselues by these sinnes. Now,
ô my soule, canst thou tell me what shall
be the fruite, a man, in this respect more
then miserable, must at length reape.
Sighes thy God ô sinner for thy sinnes,
while thou art making merrie with thy
sinnes. Be sure, be sure, ô sinner, as God
liueth, as Christ is sitting this day in thy
nature, at the right hand of his Father in
heauen,Prou. 1. 25. 26. God shall laugh at thy destruction,
and thou shalt mourne when thy destruction
shall come; and Christ who gladly
would haue saued thee, shall iustly reioyce
in thy condemnation, and thou
shalt weepe and gnash thy teeth in hell for
euermore, because of that remediles condemnation,

vnto the which thou shalt be
adiudged. Be sure, be sure, ô sinner, marke
thou that plaine, cleare, and distinct sauing
voice of Gods blessed word brought to
thy eares, while creatures void of reason
wanting life, can tremble at the hearing
of that confused voice of Gods mightie
workes, when these creatures shall be deliuered
from the bondage of corruption,
thou shalt heare a voice and see a light,
which shal make thee to tremble more
fearefully then Baltasar trembled when
he saw the fingers of a mans hand writing
against the candelsticke vpon the plaister
of the wall;Dan. 5. 5▪ 6. yea, more fearefully then Felix
did when Paul was disputing before
him of righteousnesse and temperance,Acts 24. 26.
and of the iudgement to come. For oh, ô
my soule, what readst thou beside Iohn, in
the Reuelation? Tels not that Scripture
them, that that great day of the Lord, and
sole iudge of all the world being come;
the Kings of the earth, the great men, the
chiefe captaines, the mightie men, and
euery bond man, and euerie free man,
shall hide themselues in dennes amongst
the rockes of the mountaines, saying vnto
the mountaines fall vpon vs, and hide

vs from the presence of him that sitteth
vpon the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lambe, for the great day of his wrath
is come and who can stand. O if these
Princes and people of this our last and
worst time who now dare shew themselues
mala, partly abroade in euerie place
mocking the good word of God, cruelly
persecuting, and murthering his dearest
children, and most faithfull seruants, had
grace afore hand to hearken to this, to
beleeue this, to remember it, to consider
it. Sure I am, ô my soule, that they with
Saul casting their swords from them and
changing their tunes, would crie out;
who art thou Lord whose word we are
mocking, whose children and seruants
we are persecuting, and that they hauing
this answer made vnto them: I am Iesus
whom ye mocke, ye persecute: It is heard
for you to kicke against prickes; would
tremble hand and foote as we speake, and
with wounded hearts and mourning voices
crie and say: O Lord what wilt thou
that we shall do, and so be readie to hate
that they loued, to loue that they hated▪
and to preserue them which they persecuted.
                  
                  
                     
                     9. Cursed is he who scattereth himselfe
from God by sinne, for he shall be
scattered by God vnto iudgement: blessed
is he who is scattered by man into
trouble for righteousnesse, for God shall
gather him.
                     I Cannot cast my eyes ioyntly, ô my soule,
vpon the 2. 3. and 4. verses of that 15.
of Ieremie, and vpon the 10. 11. of the 27.
Psalme, but lifting vp mine eyes, I must
crie out, O the thrise miserable condition
of all such who sinning against God, and
thereby loosing a good conscience, scatter
themselues from that God, who is
onely good, and that sole fountaine out
of the which all goodnesse flowes! Of the
happy and thrise blessed estate of all those
who seruing God, and in doing so, keeping
a good conscience, are scattered towards
this place, towards that place; towards this
trouble, towards that trouble; yea to this
cruell death, to that cruell death; because
they seeke God, because they serue God,
because they will not sinne against God.
Heare I not our great God, that iust Iudge
of the world, speaking thus to his seruant

                        Ieremie, ô my soule, touching the obstinate
Iewes his rebellious children, who
by many grosse sinnes had fearefullly scattered
themselues from him:Ier. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 
                        Cast them out
of my sight and let them depart; and if they
say vnto thee, whither shall we depart? then
tell them, thus saith the Lord. Such as are appointed
to death, vnto death: and such as are
for the sword, to the sword: and such as are
for the famine, to the famine: and such as are
for the captiuitie, to the captiuitie: and I will
appoint ouer them foure kinds, saith the Lord,
the sword to slay, and the dogges to tare in peeces,
and the foules of the heauen, and the beasts
of the earth to deuoure, and to destroy. I will
scatter them also in all kingdomes of the
earth, because of Manasseh the sonne of Ezekiah
king of Iudah, for that which he did in
Ierusalem, who shall then haue pitie vpon thee
ô Ierusalem? or who shall be sorrowfull for
thee? or who shall go to pray for thy peace? Of
this Scripture (worthie of thy consideration,
ô my soule, in this decaying age) is
it not more then manifest, that these who
sinning against the most high God, vnder
the profession of his name, specially by
countenancing idolatrie, adulterie, murther,
and the like abhominations, be more

then miserably accursed? for thereby depriuing
themselues of the onely sauing
shadow of Gods loue and protection,
and couching themselues vnder that heauiest
milstone of his indignatiō, they raise
that strongest stormie wind of his deuouring
wrath against them; which is not only
able to ouertake them, but which hauing
ouertaken them, hath skill with
force to scatter them towards ten thousand
miseries here, and to drowne them
hereafter in that euer burning, yet neuer
consumed lake. When I cast mine eyes againe
vpon the 10. verse of that 27. Psalm.
penned by that sweetest singer of Israel
Dauid: I must say, happie is he who seruing
God, and keeping a good conscience
in euery thing, hath himselfe scattered
from his house, from his kindred, from
his countrey, and so from that honor, those
pleasures, and that wealth he sometimes
possessed, before men and amongst men:
for I assure thee, ô my soule, (being well
taught of God, instructing me by his
word) that this man shall be gathered vp
againe. But who shall gather vp such a
man,Psal. 56. 8. ô my soule, Surely euen that holy
one, loue, pitie, and strength it selfe, who

counts all the wandrings of his owne,
who gathers all their teares in his bottle,Exod. 3. 7.
whose groanes are heard of him, and
whose affliction is seene of him. Yea, let
King or subiect attempt to scatter such a
one from this earth by cruell death, yet he
shall be gathered vp by that God, who alwayes
beholds his owne as signets vpon
his hand,Hag 1. 24. and who makes inquisition for
them when they are dead.1. King. 21. 18. 19. Tell me, tell me,
ô my soule, how sings that sweetest singer
in the place alledged?Psal. 27. 10. 
                        Though my father
and my mother should forsake me, yet the
Lord will gather me vp. The malice of cursed
Esau scatters Iacob, Gods blessed
child, from the louing father and carefull
mother of his flesh. But is he not gathered
vp by God the Father of his spirit? The
malice of Iosephs brethren scatters Ioseph
from his kind father.Gen. 20. 27. 28. The lying tongue of
a shamelesse whore,Gen. 37. and the facile heart
of a credulous vnthankfull maister,Gen. 39. scatters
the same Ioseph once againe from the
house of his maister whom he serued truly,
towards a darke prison where he was
entertained roughly. But is he not in despite
of all these gathered vp againe?Gen. 41. yea,
so gathered vp that he is set aboue all his

brethren, and aduanced more highly then
euer his maister Potipher was. That irreconcilable
hatred which Saul most iniustly,
yea more then brutishly, vnthankfully
conceiued, and fostered in his heart against
religious,1. Sam. 18. & 19. & 27. sincere, honest Dauid,
scattered Dauid from the court, from Dauids
owne house, yea, from the whole holy
land towards the countrey of the vncircumcised
Philistins. But is he not gathered
vp by his God, and not onely
brought backe to the holy land, to his
owne house,2. Sam. 2. 5. to the Kings palace, but with
royall triumph at length (according to
Gods promise made to him) set downe in
that royall chaire of Iudah and Israel? Abel
is scattered from the very earth, and this
earth hath it selfe dewed with the drops
of his bloud; but is he not sought for? yea,
is not his bloud gathered vp againe, and
layed as a most heauie burthen vpon the
shoulders of the sh
                           •
                        dder of it?Gen. 4. Hearest
thou not, ô my soule, that Euangelicke
Prophet bringing in thy God, singing in
thy eares most comfortably and ioyfully
thus?Isa. 54. 7. 8. 
                        For a little while haue I forsaken thee,
but with great compassion will I gather thee:
for a moment in my anger haue I hid my face

from thee for a litle season, but with euerlasting
mercie haue I had compassion vpon thee,
saith the Lord, thy Redeemer. O through
how many sundrie parts of this earth be
the deare children of God scattered! O in
how many sundrie parts of this earth be
they buried! yea, ô how many religious
parents be farre buried from their religious
children? how many religious children
be farre buried from their religious
parents? ô how many religious husbands
be far buried from their religious wiues?
and how many religious wiues be farre
buried from their religious husbands? yea
what shall I say, ô my soule, ô how oft (by
the force of fierce persecution) hath one
and that same child of God, had his verie
dead corps scattered towards diuers parts
of the earth, his head remaining in one
place,Mark. 6. 7. 28. 29. as the head of Iohn the Baptist remained
with the filthie strumpet Herodias,
and his bodie in another, as the body
of Iohn the Baptist was carried from Herod
his prison, and buried by his disciples.
Alwayes, ô my blessed Iesus, thou who
wast heartily contented to be scattered
from thy Father for me for a while, to the
end that I through thy Maiestie might be

gathered to him for euermore. What saith
thy Maiesty to me for my comfort against
all this? Hearken, hearken, ô my soule, vnto
that which Matthew brings from that
sweetest comforting mouth of thy gracious
Sauiour to thy eares: The Sonne of man
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
trumpet,
                        Mat. 14. 21. 
                        and they shall gather together his elect
from the foure winds, and from the one
end of the heauen to the other. Thou seest
then, ô my soule, that it is neither honorable
nor profitable, but alwayes ignominious
and fearefully hurtfull to man, to
scatter himselfe from God by sinne; for
such a man shall assuredly either first or
last be scattered vnto iudgement. And that
it is neither ignominious nor hurtfull, but
very honorable, and euer profitable for the
child of God, to be scattered by fierce
cruell man to trouble, to persecution, yea,
to death it selfe; for louing, for seeking,
and for seruing of his God, and cleauing
to him. I charge thee therfore, ô my soule,
that thou attempt not for the loue of
gaine, for the feare of punishment, or for
any pleasure whatsoeuer to sinne against
thy God, lest he scatter thee from him to
a thousand euils before men here, and to

the hell hereafter with the diuell: and
with this I command thee, that thou loue,
seeke and serue his Maiestie with all thy
strength, euen to the end; were kings, were
subiects set against thee to trouble thee,
to slay thee; for assuredly he who forgat
not to gather vp poore contemned Lazarus,
shall remember to gather thee vp.
                  
                  
                     10. There be foure sorts of loue, two
most corrupt, and too common, alas, too
many: two most pure and heauenly, few,
alas, be inriched with it.
                     VVHen shalt thou beginne, ô my
soule, to loue thy God truly, who
hath loued thee dearely, with that sincere
loue his Maiestie will accept of, as of that
loue which commeth from him, and sendeth
thee backe to him againe? Beleeue
me, ô my soule, albeit there be some, yet
there are not many, who be beautified and
gifted with this sort of loue, for thou must
know, ô my soule, that the heart of man
hath bene, and is clogged and clothed
with a fourefold loue, which would be
considered by our Gospellers, who professe
that they know, and loue that Christ

who hath dearely loued them, if they had
hearts to perceiue his loue toward them.
The first sort of loue is most corrupt in
the corrupt heart of corrupt man: whereby
man loueth himselfe, and beside himselfe
nothing, hunting after nothing while
he liueth, but that which may pleasure
and profit himselfe; yea, not regarding,
suppose the whole world were destroyed
with Sodome, after that his eyes were closed
by death. The second sort of loue, is
corrupt also, in the corrupt heart of corrupt
man, whereby man seeing and considering
that he is not of himselfe sufficiently
able, either to procure vnto himselfe
such things as he accounteth to be good,
or ro defend or deliuer himselfe from such
things he holdeth to be euill, he is moued
not onely to loue himselfe, but to loue his
God also; and yet while he loueth God
thus, he loueth not God for Gods cause,
but God for his owne cause: and so as Demetrius
loued Diana, who liued by making
of siluer shrynes vnto her. This moued
Augustine to say: Quod non propter se
amatur, non amatur. That which is not loued
for the selfe, without any by-respect, is not said
to be loued. The third sort of loue, is holy

and renewed in the sanctified, softened
heart of the regenerate child of God,
whereby he hauing happily (through the
effectuall working of Christs Spirit dwelling
in him) tasted of the sweetnesse,
bountie, and goodnesse of his God, beginneth
to loue God, euen for Gods cause,
and that with a more reuerent loue then
he loueth father, mother, wife, or child, or
any other whatsoeuer. The fourth sort of
loue is altogether spirituall and heauenly,
transporting (euen with exceeding ioy
and alacritie) the soule of man from all
things here beneath, towards the third
heauens, whereby the child of God is not
onely moued to loue God for Gods cause,
but to loue himselfe for Gods cause, and
all other things, besides himselfe, no other
way but in God,Exod. 
                              •
                           . 11. and for God. This was
that loue,Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26. ô my soule, wherewith Moses
loued his God, when he forsooke the
Court of Egypt, and chused to suffer trouble
for Christs cause. This was that loue
wherewith Paul loued God, when he said:
My life is not deare to me,
                        Act. 20. 34. 
                        so that I may fulfill
my course with ioy, I am readie, not to be
bound onely,
                        Act. 21. 13. 
                        but also to dye at Ierusalem for
the name of the Lord Iesus. Bernard thinking

vpon this, was not afraid to say: Sapies
tibi cum te senseris nil habere prorsus vnde
te ames,
                        Bern. serm. in Cant. 50. 
                        nisi quantum Dei es. Thou shalt
then proue wise to thy selfe, when thou shalt
find, that thou hast nothing for thee while thou
shouldst loue thy selfe, but in so far as thou art
Gods. This same moued Augustine to say:
Minus te amat ô Deus,
                        August. 
                        qui tecum aliquid amat,
quod non propter te amat. That man, ô
God, loues thy Maiestie the lesse, who loues
any thing with thee, which he loues not for
thee. Yea, this moued Bernard thus to
counsell vs:Bern. 
                        Quaeramus Dominum veraciter,
frequenter, perseueranter: vt nec pro illo
quaeramus aliud, nec cum illo aliud, nec ab illo
ad aliud conuertamur. Let vs seeke the Lord
our God truly, frequently, constantly: to the
end that we neither seeke any other thing for
him, or any other thing with him: and that
we attempt not to turne from him, to anie
thing beside him. And this sort of loue
which is begun onely here, shall be perfected
in the heauens. Oh Lord God, whē
shall I begin to loue no honour, but that
whereby I may honour thee? no pleasures
but those which may please thee? no
wealth, but wherewith I may haue my
soule enriched by thee, and with thee, for

the better seeking and finding of thee?
yea, when shall I begin onely to liue, to
the end that thy Maiestie may liue in me,
and be glorified by me? yea, Lord, let me
step one step higher; when shall I begin to
delight to be shamed, to the end that thou
mayest be glorified, to delight to be grieued
& pained, to the end that thou mayest
be pleased: to delight to be stripped sta
                           •
                        ke
naked of all the earthly things which I
possesse, or can possesse, to the end that I
may possesse thee? yea, when shall I long,
and desire to dye, to the end that I may
liue with thee? And yet if I could do all
this, what could I do, what should I do? I
could do nothing but proue mindfull, but
proue thankfull, and that not through any
grace in me, which is from me, (for, alas,
ô my soule, forgettest thou not thy God
fearefully, art thou not vnkind to thy God
grosly?) but through thine vnderserued fauour
onely: would not that blessed Sonne
of God, yea, that very God of glorie, thy
Sauiour Iesus, ô my soule, be shamed to
honour thee, be pained to please thee, be
grieued to grace thee, be made poore to
make thee rich? yea, would 
                           •
                        e not dye to
quicken thee? and so, ô my soule, when

thou hast shamed thy self, to whom shame
is due for sinne, when thou hast grieued
thy selfe, to whom griefe is due for sinne,
when thou hast depriued thy selfe of all
things, to whom nothing is due because
of sinne, yea when thou hast layed downe
thy life, whom sinne must bereaue of life,
hauing death for its wages, what hast thou
done? considering that he who neuer sinned,
being that God of glorie vnto whom
all honour, all pleasures, all wealth, and
onely life did belong, depriued himselfe
of all things, and cloathed himselfe willingly
with the contrary euils, and that
for thee? Be mindfull of these things, ô my
soule, and forget not to beg grace at thy
God to proue thankfull for them.
                  
                  
                     11. What tongue can expresse that
incomparable honour, and rare dignitie,
whereunto Almightie God hath aduanced
the flesh of man? albeit, alas, a world
of men shame their flesh, presse to shame
God, in and by their flesh, to their euerlasting
shame.
                     KNewest thou, ô my soule, how farre
that blessed wise God thy Father

hath aduanced the flesh of man, beleeue
me thou couldst not offend? if I should
curse thee, if thou attemptedst so much as
to lust after those euils, wherewith, alas,
a very world of people be now grosly defiled,
and I could not but be ashamed to
be offended, if thou shouldest curse me: if
I should presse to giue thee the members
of my bodie, vnto the committing of
those sinnes, which thousands, alas, do
commit in this our time, euen with delectation
and greedinesse? O my soule, hath
not thy God honoured the flesh of man
very farre, in making it a Cabinate, to
lodge that immortall soule made by his
Maiestie, euen of an heauenly substance?
Hath not our God more highly aduanced
the flesh of man, in making it to be the
temple and dwelling place of his holy
Spirit,1. Cor. 6. 19▪
                         yea, to be that spirituall, immortall,
incorruptible, and glorious plenishing
which must fill and keepe the heauens
for euer? yea, hath not his Maiestie aduanced
it more then highly in his blessed and
onely begotten Son Iesus,
                           
                              •
                            Thess. 4. 17. that holy one,
being content to assume, and vnite it in
one personall vnion with his God-head,
the very flesh of man;Ioh. 1. 14. not onely for a

while walking on earth in that our nature
but transporting that our flesh vnto
the highest heauens. So that he who is
God, equall alwayes with the Father, and
with the holy Ghost, is cloathed with the
flesh of man; and he who is cloathed with
the flesh of man, is God equall with the
Father and with the Spirit. O celestiall spirits,
and heauenly Angels, who serue your
God alwayes readily, busily, faithfully, and
ioyfully! can ye compare with that man
who by a liuely faith is ingrafted into that
God-man, and man-God Iesus? Would
that holy one cloath himselfe with your
nature,Heb. 2. 16. so that you may say, he that is God
is also an Angell, and he who is an Angell
is also God? Or rather tooke he not the
seed of Abraham; so that the beleeuing
man may say, he who is God is man also;
he who is man is God also. O celestiall
spirits, said that blessed God, your and our
glorious maker, euer of any Angell, or to
any Angell the Angell my fellow? and yet
our God can (speaking to and of his Son
in whom we are thus beyond measure
honoured) speake thus of him,Zach. 13. 7. 
                        The man
my fellow. Darest thou then, ô my soule,
dishonour God who hath so farre honored

thee? yea, darest thou attempt to aduise
me being tempted with any deceiueable
lust to abuse this my flesh, or anie
member of it, since his Maiestie hath so
wonderfully aduanced it? The sense hereof
moued Augustine to say:August. de vera relig. cap. 16. 
                        Demonstrauit
nobis Deus quam excelsum locum inter creaturas
habeat humana natura, in hoc, quod
hominibus in vero homine apparuit. God hath
made euident vnto vs how high a place humane
nature hath among his other creatures,
in this, that he denizied himselfe to appeare
vnto men in the true shape of man. Leo likewise
meditating vpon the same subiect,
saith:Leo serm 2. in nat. Dom. 
                        Agnosce Christiane dignitatem tuam,
& diuinae consors factus naturae noli inueterem
vilitatem degeneri conuersatione redire.
                        O Christian consider truly thy owne worth
and excellencie, and being made partaker of
the diuine nature, returne not vnto thy wonted
vilenesse by thy shamelesse and vile conuersation.
We all thinke that Dauid ouersaw
himselfe very grosly to Mephibosheth,
the creeple sonne of dead Ionathan, who
proued constantly rarely kinde to Dauid,
when hauing tried the grosse falshood
and seditious treacherie of that villaine
Zibah, he said to the poore creeple, abused

honest man: Haue I not said thou and
Zibah diuide the land? But when shall
men who hold themselues good Christians,
and consider that they ouersee themselues;
abusing most grossely the Lord
their God, when they crie aloud, albeit
not with their sh
                           •
                        ll voice, yet with their
vile workes (euen to the hearing of that
God to whom they be more obliged in
all respects, but chiefely for aduancing
their flesh so highly which is the onely
ground of mans whole felicitie.) O Lord
God haue I not said, thou and the diuell
diuide betwixt thee. Offend not, ô my
soule, that I speake thus: for if manie professing
Christ among vs may be beleeued
when they speake, they haue appointed
their hearts for God, (& yet if their liues
be narrowly tried) it shal clearly be found
that they haue dedicated their flesh, and
so their eyes, eares, mouth, hands, feete,
and the foule members of their bodies for
the diuell. For (alas) be these their members
employed in the seruice of any beside
the diuels seruice? Is this to be thankfull
to that God, who hath bene kinde to
them? is this to honour God with their
flesh, who hath so honoured mans flesh?

Knowest thou not ô lousie Christian,Reuel. 18. 10. that
the diuell is the accuser of the children of
God, Christs brethren, who first craftily
entiseth them to sinne against God, and
then maliciously accuseth them before
God for sinning against him. Now, ô
how fearefull an occasion shall this be,
(Hearken, hearken, ô my soule,) when
Satan thine accuser, ô lousie Christian,
presenting himself before that great God
vpon the sight of thy loose and lewd life,
shall partly say: ô Lord, It pleased thy
Maiestie, out of thy vnspeakable loue towards
man, to cloath thy owne blessed
Sonne with the flesh of man, euen to the
end, that in that flesh he might suffer for
man, and thereby aduance man to the
highest heauens, who willingly hath made
himselfe my companion through sinne,
should be adiudged to the lowest helles,
with him for euer: and yet Lord, here is a
man, yea, a verie world of men, who haue
defiled themselues with abominable Idolatries,
bowing their knees to the workes
of mens hands, lifting vp their hands, and
sending vp their cries to base creatures,
forgetting the blessed Creator; yea, defiled
in their flesh with fearefull blasphemies,

cruell murthers, filthy incests, adulteries
& fornications, with brutish drunkennesse,
couetuousnesse, and oppression.
O Lord will not thy Maiestie, being
that great iudge of the world, be auenged
vpon such grosse vnthankfulnesse, and adiudge
with the soules the bodies of such
men, to that lake which burneth with fire
and brimstone for euermore; seeing they
haue so grossely shamed their owne flesh,
which thou hast so gratiously honoured?
Thinke vpon this, ô my soule, keeping
thy selfe from all inward filthinesse; forget
not this, ô my soule, but charge me
alwayes in Gods name, to keepe this my
bodie and all the members of it from all
outward vncleanenesse,Rom. 6. 12. neuer suffering
that of Bernard to slip out of thy mind.Bern. ser. 24 in cant.
                        Erubesce anima mea diuinam, in pecuem
commutasse similitudinem, erubesce volutare
in coeno qui de coelo es. Be ashamed, ô my
soule, to change thy diuine image into the
likenesse of a beast: be you ashamed to wallow
in the clay who was bred in the heauens.
                     
                  
                  
                     12. Albeit men offend to be compared
with the diuell, yet a world of men
treade the diuels pathes.
                     
                        
EVen the filthiest debauched liuer,
ô my soule, offendeth when he is
compared to the diuell, and yet euerie
filthie liuer will tread the diuels pathes.
Cānot the diuell, ô my soule, (mala) partly
present himselfe among the children of
God before God, and yet no sooner goeth
he from his Maiesties presence but he
can runne with speed; not onely to ouerthrow
all that belonged to that iust Iob,
but also bereaue him of his health; thinking
thereby to make him blaspheme
God. Euen the filthiest liuer is offended
if he be called a Iudas: and yet as Iudas
went from his Maisters table, to deliuer
him into the hands of his enemies: so many
called Christians, can take their iourney
from Christs chamber (as it were)
to ouerthrow Christ. Alas, alas, ô my
soule, how manie be there who present
themselues with Gods Saints in Gods
house, before God to heare his word; and
yet comming from it debase themselues
in all vncleanenesse. O how manie be
there, who going to prayer, and rising
from prayer, thinke neuer vpon that
which they haue professed, or bound
themselues while they were praying, till

they go backe againe vnto their prayer;
debauching themselues betwixt their
owne prayer, and their other, euen in
these same sinnes; for the which in prayer
they accused themselues, they condemned
themselues crauing God pardon, and
solemnely vowing to abstaine from them.
The iudgement of charitie which suspecteth
the best of all, aduiseth me to thinke
that these knowne murtherers, adulterers,
fornicators, drunkards, and so forth;
When they go to their prayer, do now
and then confesse their sinnes, crauing
pardon for them, and promising to amend
their liues; and yet with the swine, euen
now washing after they haue risen from
their knees, they can turne to the puddle
of their wonted wickednesse. Let all
such thē who do heare God speaking vnto
them by his word, and who do speake
to God by prayer, ioyne repentance with
their hearing, and with their praying; remembring
that he onely is blessed, who
heareth the word of God and doth it;Luk. 11. 28.
and that the prayer of that man who
draweth away his eare from hearing of
the law,Prou. 28. 9. is abominable before God.
                  
                  
                     
                     13. Cast thy care vpon thy God, and
he will care for thee.
                     LEt me not be carefull, ô my soule, for
my selfe, what I shall eate, or what I
shall drinke, or for my bodie what I shall
put on: for thy blessed God, that great
Maister of the houshold of his Church,
wisely prouideth for his owne, euen in
their greatest extremitie: albeit not alwayes
yt which they would be at; yet euer
that which shall serue them, vntill his
good worke be accomplished in them.
The King of Egypt taketh from the Israelites
straw, which before was furnished
vnto them,Exod. 5. the taskmaisters of Egypt resolue
them notwithstanding hereof, that
the number of their brickes must be fulfilled
dayly: when they with wearie hearts,
are carefull to prouide themselues with
straw, they can find none; for the people
of the land will neither giue them any for
request, nor sell them any for siluer. How
then shall they come by it, & where shall
they find it. Blessed be God, ô my soule,
when the King of heauen who was a man
carrying the same shape that the Israelites
carried with their taskmaisters & people,

can refuse all helpe vnto distressed Israel,
can adde affliction vnto afflicted Israel;
that senslesse dead hard earth, which they
trod vpon, will offer her helpe vnto
them, praying them as it were to pull vp
haire, before they should perish, and so
she propined them with that stubble
wherewith she was couered, before they
should want altogether that, wherewith
they should make bricke vnto cruell,
bloudie Pharoah. O Dauid no fauour canst
thou find, notwithstanding of thy humble
carriage, and manie good seruices, in thy
eyes of thy maister Saul, & father-in law;
and yet art thou not louingly embraced,
and kindly entertained by that stranger
Achis,
                        1. Sam. 27. that vncircumcised King of Gath?
Achab and Iezabel do busily seeke thy life
ô Elias; But do not the verie rauens entertaine
it as carefully?1. King. 17. 3. 4. 5. 6. O Nebuchadnezar
thou art so fiercely set against these three
children of God,Dan. 3. who refused to worship
that Image thou madest, that thou wilt
not onely haue them cast into a hot fierie
fornace, but thou wilt haue this fornace
to be hot at that time, seuen times more
then it was wont to be hot. Alwayes,
were not these furious fierce flames mercifull

vnto them, yea, so mercifull vnto
them, that not onely they slew them not,
but the haires of their head were not
burnt, neither were their coates changed,
not any smell of fire vpon them? O abusers
of Darius, ye are so maliciously set
against the seruant of God Daniel,
                        Dan. 6. that
ye will haue him cast into the lions denne,
because he prayed vnto his owne God, as
he was wont, contrarie to the wicked decree
which ye by your malicious subtiltie
made your King to subscribe vnto, and
yet these lions will haue him saued, whom
ye resolued to haue slaine. No refreshment
can hungrie Lazarus find at the
hands of the rich glutton,Luke 10. and yet he
can find ease from the tongues of bloudie
dogges. How many wicked men in this
our time, ô my soule, haue soft downe
beds and pillowes to lie vpon, while the
religious child of God cannot find a feather
bed, no not a fodder bed, and yet
the earth is contented to be a bed vnto
him. But, ô my soule, what if the cruell
Princes of the earth will not so much as
suffer the earth to be a bed vnto thee, ô
then what shalt thou do? what canst thou
looke for? Be sure either this thy prouident,

pitifull, powerfull God, who hath
absolute commandement ouer all, shall
ô my soule, either alter their hearts, and
make them pitifull, or furnish thee with a
strong contented heart, able to beare out
all they can deuise, or do against thee: or
make death (which is a cruell burthen to
the wicked, but a louing friend to his secret
o
                           •
                        es) to finish thy labours and to send
thee to his rest.
                  
                  
                     13. Our most mercifull and mightie
God hath the hearts of all in his hands;
and can alter them as he hath to do with
them, for his glorie, the comfort of his
children, and the confusion of theirs and
his enemies.
                     IOine, ô my soule, the 25. and 36. verses
of the 2. of Exodus, with the 6. and 7.
and 10. verses, of the 5. Chapter of that
same booke, that thou mayest learne, euen
with ioy to put on that head-peece of
hope: possessing alwayes thy selfe in patience,
confidently and leasurely, depending
vpon thy God; euen when the King,
the taskmaisters who commanded vnder

the King, yea, when with the King and
his taskmaisters, the whole people of the
land are set against thee, and busied about
nothing but thy ouerthrow, and destruction.
But wherefore should I do this, ô
my soule, because he who hath the hearts
of all men in his hands, can alter both
courts, and countrie so, that that man,
who that day, who that yeare, would neither
grant thee for begging, nor sell thee
for siluer, a poore sheaue of straw to make
bricke to thy King: will another day, another
yeare, giue thee willingly, and freely,
all his gold chaines, all his bracelets,
all his rings, and so spoile himselfe to
make thee rich. And would ye not thinke
this a wonder of wonders? Liue here not
manie this day, who hauing experience of
this in their owne person may say; that
King who sometime was seeking me to
haue offered my bodie to the gallowes,
my head to the axe; hath since that time
louingly embraced me, gratiously accepted
me to kisse his hand, and set me higher
then euer I was before. Hast thou compared,
ô my soule, the end of the 3. of Ester,
with the end of the 8. of Ester. In the end
of the 3. of Ester, the Scribes writing letters,

the King is signating letters, and the
postes are running and riding through
the countrie with letters. In the end of
the 8. of Ester, the Scribes are writing
letters also, and the postes are running and
riding vpon horses of prize, and dromedaries
with letters. Alwayes tell me what
letters be the Scribes writing, is the King
signating, and are the postes carrying in
the end of the 3. of Ester? and what letters
be these which the Scribes are writing,
the King signating, and the postes
carrying in the end of the 8. of Ester? In
the end of the 3. of Ester, letters are writing,
signating, and carrying by the
Scribes, King, and postes, to roote out
kill, and to destroy all the Iewes, both
yong and old, children and women in one
day. In the end of the 8, of Ester, letters
are writing, signating and carrying by
the same Scribes, by the same King, by
these postes; who wrote, signated, and
carried the former, granting the Iewes in
what Citie soeuer they were, to gather
themselues together, and to stand for
their liues, and to roote out, to kill, and
to destroy all the power of the people, and
the Prouince that vexed them, both children

and women, and to spoile their
goods. Hast thou compared, ô my soule,
the 19. 20. and 21. verses of the 3. of
Daniel with the 28. 29. 30. verses of that
same Chapter. In the 19. 20. and 21. verses,
fierce Nabuchadnezar is furiously set
against Hananiaeh, Mishah, and Azariah,
and that God whom they worshipped:
that he will haue them cast into, and deuoured
by the hot fierie fornace. But in
the 28. 29. and 30. verses, pacified Nabuchadnezar,
thinketh so reuerently of this
God, and is so fauourably disposed, toward
them, that blessing their God, he
maketh a decree, that euerie people and
language which spake any blasphemie
against their God should be drawne in
peeces, and haue their houses made a
iakes: and besides this, he promoted these
three in the prouince of Babel highly,
whom he decreed before to burne cruelly.
We vse to say (and would to God our
tongues were accustomed with such speeches:)
happie are they who can make
friends with strong folke. And when I
consider this, ô my soule, I must say blessed
be he who can make deare friends of
deadly foes. Alwayes what must thou do,

ô my soule, to the end thou mayst find this
to thy comfort and benefite. Let that wise
King Salomon informe thee, as he was informed
by that true Salomon the King of
wisdome.Prou. 16. 7. 
                        When the wayes of a man please
the Lord, he will make his enemies to be at
peace with him. If thou here comparest, ô
my soule, the 41. verse of the 27. of Genesis,
with the 4. of the 33. of Genesis, and
with the 29. verse of the 35. of Genesis,
thou shalt find this to be most true. In the
41. verse of the 27. of Genesis, I heare
cruell Esau threatning to slay his brother
Iacob, when the dayes of mourning for his
father should come; alwayes, not only see
I this same Esau in the 4. verse of the 33. of
Genesis, embracing this Iacob, falling vppon
the necke of this Iacob, but in the 29.
verse of the 35. of Genesis, I see Esau and
Iacob most kindly (as it became brethren)
burying their dead father Isaac, so great
aduantage reaped Iacob, by walking before
God. If a subiect then find that he is
wronged by his King, let him not do that
which may grieue God, and please his
King, to the end he may obtaine his
Kings fauour. If a child find that he is
wronged by his father, let him not do that

which may grieue God and please his father,
that he may obtaine his fathers
fauour. If a husband find that he is wronged
by his wife, let him not do that which
may grieue God and please his wife, to
the end he may obtaine his wifes fauour.
If a wife find that she is wronged by her
husband, let her not do that which may
grieue God and please her husband, to
the end that she may obtaine her husbands
fauour. But let them all sticke constantly
by God, doing that alwayes which
is good in his eyes; so be sure that God
shall either moue king, husband, child,
wife, and so forth; to do that which they
should, or else strengthen subiect, child,
wife, husband, to beare out with contentment
the greatest wrongs that can be
done vnto them; wilt thou not then, ô my
soule, loue this God, seeke this God, serue
this God against all men, whether he clap
thee, or cuffe thee; heal thee, or wound
thee; quicken thee, or slay thee?
                  
                  
                     15. Satan his cruell taskmaisters sent
forth against man to keepe him vnder
hellish slauerie here; and in the end to

drowne him in that lake which burneth
with fire and brimstone.
                     THou canst not be ignorant, ô my
soule, (being acquainted with holy
Scripture) that as cruell Pharoah King of
Egypt, had fierce taskmaisters set by him
ouer the Lords of Israel. So that cruell
Dragon Satan thy greatest enemie, hath
his owne bloudie taskmaisters sent forth
against Gods elect ones to shame them,
and to slay them: and that these his taskmaisters
resemble in one thing especially,
the taskmaisters of Pharoah. Pharoahs
taskmaisters, as holy Scripture testifieth,
are not content to mitigate Pharoahs will
vnto the poore Israelites, but they must
with fierce countenances, sharpe tongues,
and strong hands, hasten them without
all delay to do it: Euen so Satans taskmaisters
do not onely command these, ouer
whom they are set, and in whom they
raigne, to obey the diuels will, but they
hasten them so to obey it, that they can
neither eate nor drinke; no sleepe as it
were, till Satans will be executed by
them. But who be the taskmaisters of Satan,
ô my soule, let that disciple whom

Iesus loued, and in whose bosome he louingly
sometime lay,1. Iohn 2. 16. resolue thee. The lusts
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life. Young Ammon is so boasted, and beaten
by that taskmaister ye lust of his flesh,2. Sam. 13.
lusting after his sister Tamar, yt be pineth
away from day to day, till hauing obeyed
the command of that fierce filthie taskmaister
he defiles his sister vnnaturally.
Young Absolon is so beaten, and boasted
by that alluring taskmaister the pride of
life,2. Sam. 15. longing after a crowne, that he can
take no rest by night, nor by day, till he
put the crowne of his old father vpon his
head, contenting that his father in the
meane time flee out of Ierusalem barefooted
and bare-headed. That vncouth
traitor Iudas is so boasted, and beaten by
that deceiuing taskmaister the lust of the
eyes and so of couetousnesse, that he
cannot possibly be destroyed by all that
his maister hath done vnto him, by all
that his maister hath spoken to him in the
audience of his brethren touching him
that should betray him; from betraying of
him: and all to the end that he may see

                           〈◊〉
                         peeces of siluer deliuered Lament,
lament, herefore, ô my soule, the miserable

estate of those, pitied by others, albeit
not by themselues: who esteeme themselues
to be the greatest amongst men.
Will noble men, will great men be commanded
by that great good God, speaking
vnto them, and hasting them to do
his good will, by these his kinde, by smiling
and meeke taskemaisters, in whose
mouthes he hath put his word, and yet
they dare be content to be commanded
by, and to be (as most miserable slaues)
couched vnder that euill one Satan, and
these his cruell taskemasters hasting them
to do the diuell his euill will. Will our
Gentlemen, ô my soule, be seruants to any
man, content to be schollers, to be tradesmen,
to be craftsmen, and yet they can reioyce
to suffer themselues to be abused by
Satan, and by sinne, by the which in such

                           •
                        ort he fighteth against their soules, that
no slaue roweth in a gall
                           •
                        y so farre against
his will, vnder the vncouth bondage of
that cruell maister the Turke, as a verie
world in this our age, of these men row
with both their hands and feete (as it
were) vnder the diuell, hastened in the
meane time by the foresaid taskemaisters,
and yet not against their will, but willingly;

not with griefe, but with ioy. Let
the adulterer, the idolater, the murtherer,
the fornicator, the drunkard, the seditious
man, the oppressour, the false man, the couetous
man lay his hand to his heart, so
shall he find this to be true. The consideration
hereof moued wise Salomon (acquainting
vs with the nature of the wicked
man, and counselling vs to beware of
him) thus to speake:Prou. 4. 14. 15. 16. 
                        Enter not into the way
of the wicked, and walke not in the way of the
euill man, auoide it, go not by it, turne from it,
and passe by it: for they cannot sleepe except
they haue done euill, and their sleepe departeth
except they cause some to fall.
                     
                  
                  
                     16. Learne so to liue that thou giue
offence to none by thy life.
                     ALas, ô my soule, how many be there,
who misled, alas, by their owne conceits,
more then blind and abhominable
in this last and most leud age, who being
grauely counselled, and louingly requested
by their onely true friends, who do
loue them in God to saluation, to refraine
themselues from some companie, some
pastimes, some speeches, some actions, because

of that aduantage, their malicious
enemies, and most counterfeit friends,
makes thereby; because of the offence
their weake brethren cannot but iustly
take thereby: yea, because of that great
griefe thereby they procure to such who
loues them in God dearely, making them
to weepe in secret bitterly, for their
knowne and seene misbehauiours, and
who being thus counselled, can tauntingly
answer: Tush, tush, I regard not who
speake of me, what be spoken of me, I
may not liue, I cannot liue, yea I will not
liue, to the phantasies of men. True it is, ô
my soule, that the child of God should not
fashion himselfe vnto this world, should
not liue after the lusts of men yet I thinke
that that man can hardly hold himselfe
for the child of God,Rom 12. 2. who will not confesse,1. Pet. 4. 31.
that the child of God should liue after
the will of God his Father.1. Pet. 4. 2. Now is it
not the will of God,2. Sam. 12. 14. ô my soule, that all
his children should liue so,1. Cor. 10. 32 that neither
they giue occasion to his enemies to blaspheme
his truth, nor offence to the poorest
who beleeues in his blessed Sonne, nor
cause the eyes of his holy ones to gush
out riuers of teares with Dauid,
                        Psal. 119. 136. because

they see the Law of God their Father
transgressed? Augments not this thy sinne
and dittie ô Dauid,
                        2. Sam. 12. 14. that by it thou madest
the enemies of God to blaspheme. Are we
not thus resolued by our Sauiour and maister
who cannot lye, and is onely able to
teach vs aright to leade our liues: Whosoeuer
offendeth one of these little ones which beleeue
in me,
                        Mat. 18. 6. 
                        it were better for him that a milstone
were hanged about his necke, and that
he were drowned in the deepe of the sea. Is
not this thy holy prudence, ô Paul (whom
I euer hold for a maister able to instruct
Preachers and hearers of all sorts how to
leade their liues:)2. Cor. 11. 12. 
                        I take away occasion from
such as seeke occasion. Is not this thy holy
pitie and pietie, ô Paul, when thou lookest
vpon thy weake brethren?1. Cor. 8. 13. 
                        If meate offend
my brother, I will not eate flesh while the
world lasteth, that I may not offend my brother.
Shall holy, wise, pitifull Paul, ô my
soule, euen abstaine from lawfull things,
to the end he may not offend his weake
brethren, and darest thou attempt to refuse
(being charged by Christ thy loue,
who to take away offence, was content
to pay custome being free of custome, being
counselled by Christians who in

Christ do loue them) to abstaine from vnlawfull
companie, vnlawfull pastimes, vnlawfull
speeches and actions. I aduise thee
ô my soule, (considering the time) that
thou attempt not to sit in the chaire with
such men who dare liue so loosely in this
world, yt they regard not whose mouthes
be opened to blaspheme Gods truth, what
stranger, or weake knowne brother they
offend, what friend they grieue by their
loose and leud behauiour. For I must tell
thee, ô my soule, that there will be a day
in the which the great Iudge of the world
will bring with euery man euery worke
vnto iudgement,Eccl. 12. 14. yea, euery secret thing
whether it be good or euill.
                  
                  
                     17. All men should so liue in the
world, that they may amend the world;
but chiefly those whom God hath set ouer
others.
                     TRemble, tremble, ô my soule, while
that I hauing my eares opened, am
compelled, alas, against my heart to heare
men, euen set in authoritie ouer others,
some hauing the very charges of soules,
others ruling ouer the bodies and goods

of people, yet both crying to my hearing,
albeit to my great griefe: We came in the
world to liue in the world, and not to amend
the world. Oh, ô my soule, that euer
a man, especially called a Christian, and
set ouer Christians, should haue lodged
an heart within him, finding a tongue to
vtter a speech so grosly sauouring of vncouth
Atheisme. Tell me, tell me, ô godlesse
professour, thinking and speaking
thus: Wherefore were the foules of the
aire, the fishes of the seas, with many other
good creatures of God, wherewith
this earth is plenished, created? I know
thou wilt answer me without any delay,
To feed and serue man. Alwayes did that
wise God create them for man, onely to
the end that man might liue here, and not
to the end that man liuing here, might
seeke and serue that God who made them
for man, and man for himselfe? O Iohn the
Baptist, tell me wherefore thou camest into
the world? was it not to turne the
hearts of the fathers towards the children,
and the disobedient vnto the wisedome
of the iust man, to make readie a people
prepared for the Lord,Luk. 1. 77. 79. 
                        To giue knowledge of
saluation to Gods people, by remission of their

sinnes, to giue light to them that sit in darkenesse,
and in the shadow of death, and to guide
our hearts in the way of peace. O blessed Iesus,
wherefore camest thou in the world?
came not thy Maiestie as a Physitian furnished
with perfect medicines, to quicken
and cure euerie dead and diseased soule,
and to be life to dead men,Mar. 2. 17. to be light to
blind men, yea by calling sinners to repentance,
by seeking the wandring sheepe,
the lost groat, and the prodigall child, not
onely to amend the world which was
hurt,Luk. 1. 5. 4. 8. 20. 21. 22. but to saue the world which was
condemned? O holy Apostles, wherefore
were ye called, and sent forth through the
world by your Lord and Maister, was it
not that ye being witnesses to him, both
in Ierusalem, and in Iudaea, and in Samaria,
and vnto the vttermost parts of the
world, might by preaching of the Gospell
not onely amend, but saue the condemned
I
                           •
                        w, the condemned Gentile, which
should beleeue in Iesus? Tell me, ô Dauid,
wherefore was it that thy God did chuse
thee, and take thee from behind the Ewes
with yong: was it not that thou mightest
feed his sheepe in Iacob,
                        Psal. 78. 70. 71. and his inheritance
in Israel? Yea, tell me, ô Paul, wherefore

be these powers which be of God ordained
by God, is not this done for the
wealth of those who do well,Rom. 13. 3. 4. and to take
vengeance vpon them who do euill? Canst
thou forget, ô my soule, that wholsome
counsell giuen by the Spirit to the Ephesians,
and in their name to all those who
would declare themselues to be such,
whom God hath mercifully called from
damnable darknesse of ignorance, of infidelitie,
and of debaucherie, vnto the sauing
light of knowledge, of faith, and of
holinesse.Ephes. 5. 11 
                        Haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull
workes of darknesse; but euen reproue
them rather. Yea, heare I not Paul thus
speaking, and directing the very meanest
Christian:1. The. 4. 14 
                        We desire you brethren, admonish
them that are vnruly, comfort the feeble minded,
beare with the weake, be patient towards
all men. Yea what shall I say, is not the Iew
long before the incarnation of blessed Iesus
thus charged:Leuit. 19. 17 
                        Thou shalt not hate thy
brother in thy heart, but thou shalt plainly rebuke
thy neighbour, and suffer him not to
sinne. Shall euerie one, ô my soule, who
cals him father (who without respect of
persons, iudgeth according to euery mans
worke) be found so farre as lies in him, to

correct and amend those amongst whom,
and with whom they liue, and shall not the
rulers be much more bound to do this,
who be set ouer them by God, and for
whom they must some day giue an account
to God? I wonder if these blind rulers
of the Church, who maintaine the
alledged vile opinion, hold that for the oracle
of God, or for the inuention of some
braine-sicke man. When I shall say vnto
the wicked, ô wicked man, thou shalt dye
the death, if thou do not speake and admonish
the wicked of his way. That wicked
man shall dye for his iniquitie, but
his bloud will I require at thine hand;Ezech. 33. 8. 9. 
                        Neuerthelesse
if thou warne the wicked of his
way to turne from it, if he turne not from his
way, he shall dye for his iniquitie, but thou
hast deliuered thy soule. Paul saw with a
clearer eye, & spake with a cleaner mouth,
who hauing sent from Miletum to Ephesus,
and called the Elders, he could not
onely remember vnto them his owne
paines and fidelitie, trauelling alwayes by
all meanes to gather in many soules to his
blessed Maister, but grauely charging
them: Take heed to your selues, and to all the
flocke whereof the holy Ghost haue made you

ouerseers,
                        Act. 20. 18. 28. 
                        feede the Church of God, which he
hath purchased by his owne bloud. Sensible
was Moses of that care rulers should haue
to haue Gods people reformed, when before
his death he could say with courage
and authoritie: Behold I haue set before thee
this day, life and good, death and euill, in that
I command thee this day to loue the Lord thy
God, to walke in his wayes, to keepe his commandements,
his ordinances, and his lawes,
that thou mayest liue, and be multiplied, and
that the Lord thy God may blesse thee in the
land whither thou goest to possesse it. But if
thy heart turne away, so that thou wilt not obey,
but shalt be seduced, and worship other
gods and serue them: I pronounce vnto thee
this day, that ye shall surely perish, ye shall not
prolong your dayes in the land, whither thou
passest ouer Iordan to possesse it.
                        Deut 50. 17 16. 17. 18. 19. 
                        I call heauen
and earth to record this day against you, that
I haue set before you, life and death, blessing
and cursing, therefore chuse life that both you
and your seed may liue by louing the Lord thy
God, by obeying his voice, and by cleauing vnto
him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy
dayes, that thou mayst dwell in the land which
the Lord sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham,
Isaac and Iacob to giue them. Religious Iosuah
                        
was sensible of this, when sending
backe Reuben, God, and the halfe tribe of
Manasseh, to the land of their possession,
he could aduise them thus: Take diligent
heed to the commandements and law which
Moses the seruant of the Lord commanded
you:
                        Ios. 22. 5. 
                        that is, that ye loue the Lord your God,
and walke in his wayes, and keepe his commandements,
and cleaue vnto him, and serue
him with all your heart, and with all your
soule. The sense hereof moued Iosuah before
his death (hauing assembled the
whole tribes of Israel to Sechem) thus to
command them: Feare the Lord, and serue
him in vprightnesse, and in truth, and put away
the gods which your fathers serued beyond
the floud, and in Egypt, and serue the
Lord. Yea, this moued him to make a couenant
with the people that day, to write
all the words of that couenant in the
Booke of the Law of God,Ios. 24. 24. 25. 26. 27. and to set vp a
great stone which he pitched vnder an
oake, that was in the sanctuarie of the
Lord, and to say vnto all the people: Behold
this stone shall be a witnesse vnto vs, for
it hath heard all the words of the Lord, which
he spake with vs. It shall be therefore a witnesse
against you, lest ye leaue your God. Let

these rulers then, ô my soule, be accursed,
who dare maintaine that they came in
this world to liue in this world, but not
to amend this world: for if this world had
not need of amendment, it could not possible
haue need of any ruler at all; for the
whole haue no need of the Physitian,Mar. 2. 5. but
the sicke.
                     17. Prepare thy mouth for bitter
gall, after that God the Father hath
brought his sweetest honey to thee; and
yet see thou offend not with the tast of it.
                     HAth thy God, ô my soule, sweetly
this day sounded in thine eares the
soft voice of consolation, promising vnto
thee comfort, deliuerie & his best things:
be not offended if to morrow thine eares
be made to heare the sharpest sound of the
bitter wind of confusion, threatning thee
with greater troubles and griefes, then euer
thou heardest or felt before. O Iacob,
hath not thy God propined thee liberally
with the birthright, inriched thee gloriously
with his blessing: but must thou not
heare afterward that Esau thy brother
hath auowed to kill thee?Gen. 17. 29. wherupon thou

must be contented, not onely to turne thy
backe vpon thy tender parents, but with
paine and griefe to serue a churlish Laban
for twentie and one yeares? O Ioseph, seest
thou not to day thy brethrens sheaues
standing vp and doing reuerence to thy
sheaue, but must thou not be contented
euen after that to see thy brethren stripping
thee naked of thy parti-coloured
coate,Gen. 37. 39. and after, first putting thee in
the ditch, and then selling thee to the Midiani
                           •
                        es,
to be carried downe to Aegypt.
O distressed Israel, hearest thou not Moses
& Aaron, the commissioners of thy God,
to day sweetly telling thee, that they were
sent of God to bring thee out of Aegypt,
that thou mightest celebrate a feast to the
Lord thy God in the wildernesse?Exod. 4. 29 30. 31. Alwayes
must thou not be contented, the
next day to heare Pharoahs taske maisters
speaking thus to thee bitterly? Thus saith
Pharaoh, I will giue you no more straw, go
your selues, get you straw where ye may finde
it, notwithstanding the number of brickes
which you made in time past, shall not be
diminished.
                        1. Sam. 16. 17. O Dauid, telleth not Samuel
thee that thou shalt be king of Iudah, yea,
annointed he thee not with oyle in the

name of the Lord, to certifie thee hereof?
Alwayes after this, must thou not be contented,
not onely not to find a nights lodging
in thine own house, but not so much
as a caue or hole to hide thy selfe in, in all
Iudaea and Israel? Thus he who to day
heareth blessed Iesus, who is loue it selfe,
promising vnto him a crowne, must be
contented to morrow to haue wise Iesus
lodening him with a crosse. But ô wherefore
dealeth our wise God with his owne
thus? for speciall graue reasons, ô my soule,
is this done, I assure thee: for hereby he
trieth the faith, the hope, the patience of
his owne; hereby he stirreth them vp earnestly
to deale with him by earnest praier:
for he will haue his owne to aske that
from him, which he is to giue vnto them:
yea, this he doth to moue his owne, being
set at libertie, to be the more thankfull,
and to vse Gods good things bestowed
on them the better: to make the wicked,
his and their vniust enemies, the more inexcusable;
and to conquise the greater
glorie vnto his owne name, when hauing
in spite of all oppositions performed that
liberalitie which he promised graciously
to his owne, he aduanceth them, and ouerthroweth

his and their enemies.
                  
                  
                     18. Let not the wise child of God
take euill with the crosse here: but let
him rather wonder that he is suffered
to breath here.
                     MAny with the Psalmist, ô my soule,
looking vpon Gods outfield (to
speake so) and so vpon the men of this
world, who haue their portion in this
life, seeing them with Esau feeding themselues
with ioy, in the fattest and largest
medowes of all things their heart can
wish; while Gods infield, and so his verie
faithfull children, and dearest seruants, are
consumed with Iacob by night with cold,
and by day with heate, not hauing wherwith
to refresh themselues, are made, alas,
to crie out certainly:Psal. 73. 13. 
                        I haue cleansed my
heart in vaine, and washed my hands in innocency:
now doubting whether they belong
to God or not, now waxing cold in his
Maiesties seruice, yea, now tempted
through the force of their many troubles,
and pining painfull crosses to thinke that
they must renounce their former profession,
leauing their wonted carriage, and

walking in the broad way with the wicked.
Alwayes wouldst thou, ô my soule,
consider 3. things grauely, thou wouldst
ceasse to wonder that the Saints of God
be crossed on earth here, yea, that they
be now and then euen in great numbers
put to cruell death, and that by those who
(if nature could be hearkened vnto)
should defend and keepe them. And begin
to wonder how it comes to passe, that
so much as one of the Saints of God doth
finde libertie to breath here. It was a
wonder that Eliah was fed of rauens,1▪ King. 17. that
the 3. children liued enuironed with fierie
flames,Dan 3. 6. yt 
                        Daniel put off a nights lodging
with fiercest lions. Thou wouldest thinke,
and confesse, ô my soule, that thou sawst a
wonder worthy to be admired, yea to be
put in register, for the information of the
following ages; if thou seest a woolfe
dwelling with a lambe, a leopard lying
with a kidde, a calfe a lion, and a fed
beast led together by a little child, a cow
feeding with a boare, and their young
ones lying together. And canst thou not
wonder, ô my soule, to see the Saints of
God fed,Isa. 11. or suffered to feede here, lying
in any place, or suffered to lie in any place

here walking, or suffered to walke here.
For 1. knowest thou what manner of persons
Gods children be. 2. Where Gods
children do liue while they do liue here?
3. How they liue while they liue here?
are not Gods Saints his elects sonnes and
daughters, appointed by the speciall ordinance
and decree of their owne wise
Father vnder crosses? for cannot the spirit
our teacher,1. Pet. 2. 21. 22. thus informe vs: you are all
called to sufferings; for Christ also suffered
for vs, leauing vs an example that ye
should follow his steps. Againe, liue they
not here, where the enemie, and enemies
of God their Father, and so where
their enemie, and the enemies of God,
not onely do liue but also do beare sway
imperiously.Iohn 4. For is not Satan the head of
the wicked, the Prince and God of this
world?2. Cor. 4. and do we not proue our selues to
be enemies to him, and all these who do
reuell aud command vnder him. Lastly,
liue they who be the children of God
here, as domestickes in their owne house,
or kind subiects in their owne natiue
countrie, and not as strangers from home,
and pilgrimes wandering abroad from
their owne countrie; how then can

we possibly thinke hardly of crosses here,
yea how can we ceasse alwayes to expect
them while they are here, and take them
kindly when they come? When I read
Scripture, ô my soule, I find that the Israelites
met with many monstrous and sharp
crosses, in the land of Egypt, in the wildernesse,
and in Babel: and shall I now
begin to wonder, that now Gods children
in these our dayes should meete with tentation,
yea, with many tentations, with
sharpe crosses, yea, with many sharpe
crosses in this darke Egypt, wearisome
wildernesse, bloudie Babel of this last age;
wherein Satan, knowing his time to be
short, prouing a subtile foxe, a busie lion,
a cruell dragon, rageth vncessantly against
Gods secret ones, pressing altogether
to ouerthrow them. The sonne of a
Scottish man being at Algyre, farre from
his father, and natiue Prince, would not
wonder, if he were euen monstrously abused,
as if he were some dogge, and not
a man, by the fierce Turke. And shall
thou, ô child of God, absent now in bodie
from thy fathers home, and that Citie
whereof thou art a free Burges, yea, from
that kingdome wherein thou shalt sometime

reigne, as thou art alreadie annointed
for it; soiourning in the meane time
where that euill one, the prince of the
power of darkenesse, with his seruants
and slaues, do rule and raigne, be astoined
at thy crosses and tentations. Possesse thy
selfe therefore in patience, ô my soule,
while thou art absent, a stranger from thy
home liuing amongst thy 
                           •
                        oes: for when
thou shalt be brought to thy home, to
liue a domesticke at home amongst thy
friends, yea with thy great friend, and
onely friend the Father, Sonne, and holy
Ghost; all thy crosses shall be turned into
crownes, and all thy bitter mournings into
sweet melodious musicke, which once
being tuned vp, shall neuer fall downe againe,
according to that of our Sauiour.
Ye now are in sorrow,
                        Iohn 6. 22. 
                        but I will see you againe;
and your hearts shall reioyce, and your
ioy shall no man take from you.
                     
                  
                  
                     20. Our strongest God whom nothing
can bind, whom all men and diuels
cannot bind; is heartily contented
to be bound by the prayers of his owne.
                     
                        
CAnst thou possibly, ô my soule, lend
with my eares, my heart also; vnto
that inhibition serued by the Lord thy
God against his seruant Moses:
                        Exodous 32. 10. 
                        Let me
alone that my wrath may waxe hot, and not
be prouoked (lifting vp thy voice like a
trumpet) to crie wirh some speciall admiration;
yea, with some singular ioy. O the
incomparable honour, ô wonderfull happinesse,
ô the admirable force and valour!
ô that soule which God hath so mercifully
inriched with that blessed spirit of sauing
prayer well grounded, sharply pointed,
and strongly feathered.Iud 14. 15. 16. 
                        Sampson was
a strong man and could do much. Goliah
was a mightie man who could defie and
affray many.2. Sam. 17. 
                        Dauid had sundrie worthies
by whom rare things were effected: yea,
there were seuen hundred in Beniamin all
left handed,2. Sam. 23. who could sling stones at a
haires breadth and not faile.Iudg. 20. Alwayes true
sauing prayer is stronger then all these,
and can do, yea, and doth that which neuer
one of these seuerally, neuer all these
iointly durst haue attēpted to do. But am
I able to cleare this, ô my soule? this by
Gods grace I shall cleare, yea cleare vnto
the sensible: for cannot true prayer (as

these words spoken by our God vnto
Moses ioyned with that which is found
in other Scriptures testifie) bind that great
and onely strong God of heauen, whom
barres of brasse, bands of iron, and cords
seuen times folded cannot bind possibly.
Yea, cannot true sauing prayer loose that
God of heauen with all his creatures,
whom no power in hell, nor in earth can
loose. Prayer can bind the God of heauen,
when his hands is armed against man
for sinne, when he is clothed with hot
wrath to consume man for sinne, making
him to cast his armour from him, and louingly
to embrace these whom he threaned
to destroy. Prayer can loose the God
of heauen with all his creatures when he
appeares to be enclosed within the heauens,
forgetting the miseries and afflictions
of his owne, and suffering his enemies
to triumph ouer them.Gen. 19. 22. Cannot Lot by
prayer bind his God so, that he must say
to him by his Angel. Hast thee, saue thee
there, for I can do nothing till thou come thither.
And cannot Iacob tye his God so to
him, that the Lord must say to him. Let
me go for the morning appeareth,
                        Gen. 32▪ 26. and that
Iacob can answer, I will not let thee go except

thou blesse me. Yea confesseth not our
God himselfe afore hand here to be obliged
to suffer himselfe to be bound by that
prayer which Moses was yet to make to
him,1. King. 17. 18. when he will say to him; Let me alone?
Cannot Eliah by prayer loose the
heauens, and bring raine from them, as
by prayer he had bound them before?
Cannot Elisaeus loose the heauens,2. King. 1. and
bring downe fire from them? Cannot Ezekiah
in the day of his strait, loose the
God of heauen by his prayer, making
him to loose an Angel, to slay in one
night an hundred fourescore and fiue
thousand of his aduersaries?Esay 37. 36. 37. 38. and thereafter
to loose the hands of Adramilech and
Sharisher to slay Senecherib their owne father,
who had opened his mouth to blaspheme
the liuing God, and intended the
ouerthrow of his people? Oh, ô my soule,
when shall the secure professours of this
age, mockers of praier, get grace to weigh
that aright which is written, Gen. 18. 2.
King. 4. Abraham is praying to his God,
euen for Sodome and Gomorrha; alwayes
ceassed not Abraham to pray for them, before
his God ceassed to answer him graciously
while he was praying for them, and

to grant all that he had craued: yea, wants
not that poore widdow emptie vessels to
receiue and to keepe oyle into, before our
gracious God want, oyle to poure into
them. Oh, my soule, if we were sensible of
his excellencie and force of this gift of
prayer, that so we might: learne in time,
delighting our selues in it, to exercise our
selues about it continually. It is that hand
of the Christian which is able to reach
from the earth to the heauens, and to take
euerie manner of good gift out of the
Lords treasurie. It is one of these keyes of
the house of Dauid, whereby we open
the doores of the heauenly Palace, and
go in to take a view of that glorious
mansion prepared for vs. It is that trustie
messenger which goeth with speed from
our soules, saluting no creature by the way,
and entreth straight before the mercie
seate in heauen, reporting to the Lord all
our griefes, and desires, and reporting
backe a fauorable strengthening and
comforting answer vnto vs. Yea, prayer is
to thee, ô my soule, that fierce chariot of
Eliah▪
                         whereby thou art made to mount
vp to the third heauen, and to haue thy
conuersation there with God, who onely

teacheth thee to pray and to whom thou
prayest onely vnto. The sense hereof moued
Cyprian to say:Cypr. 
                        Orationes nostrae arma
coelestia sunt, munimenta spiritualia, & tela
diuina. Our prayers are our heauēly weapons,
our spirituall defenses, and diuine darts whereby
we are made able to fight, to stand, and to
persue in the day of need. I charge thee
therefore, ô my soule, whensoeuer thou
goest to prayer, that thou forget not to
to draw vp this sute amongst others
vnto God. O Lord my God let it please
thy Maiestie, for the sonne of thy loues
sake, to poure downe from day to day, a
greater measure of that blessed and sweetest
spirit of true prayer vpon me, with
some greater measure of the knowledge
of thy will, greater zeale of thy glorie
and loue of thy children, and with all
these a greater measure of faith and of
holinesse, to the end that my prayer being
sharply pointed with a zeale to thy
glorie, and loue to thy children, and
strongly feathered, on the one side with
faith, and one the other with holinesse;
I may be able to draw and transcend the
cloudes, and percing these heauen of heauens,
to enter in before thy Maiestie

prouing the first to accept of them for his
sake in whose name they are drawne vp
to thee and then proue able to binde thy
blessed Maiestie, and to loose thy blessed
Maiestie, with all thy creatures aboue me,
about me, and beneath me as thy glorie,
as thy childrens, and my owne need for
thy glorie craues; and as the pride, insolencie,
and crueltie of thine and their aduersaries
for thee requires.
                  
                  
                     21. Our louing, heauenly, holy, wise
Father, heareth alwayes the prayers of
his owne, and granteth their requests;
albeit oftentimes, not as they would
haue them heard, yet euermore as God
should heare them, and as their will
requireth.
                     I must confesse, ô my soule, yt thou canst
not but be much moued, when considering
Gods fatherly direction plainely
giuen to thee, when weighing Gods gracious
promises clearely made to thee,
thou askest but receiuest not; thou seekest
but findest not; thou knockest but
hath none to open to thee. For as then Satan

cannot but presse to take some aduantage
of thee, so thou canst not at the first
consider this but be much amazed. Alwayes,
ô my soule, I must cha
                           •
                        e thee not
to murmur (so much as in secret) against
thy God, albeit he appeare not to
heare thee when thou callest vnto him.
Yea, I must command thee not to attempt
to suffer that loue wherewith thou
art obliged alwayes to loue thy good
God, any wayes to waxe cold, albeit his
Maiestie do deferre to grant thee that
which thou hast craued, yea, albeit he denie
altogether to giue thee that which
thou hast bene long seeking; yea
which is more, albeit he put into
thy hand and lay vpon thy backe,
that which is flat contrarie vnto that
which thou hast bene, euen with manie
dayes, with many sighes, hauing thy
knees bowed before him, and thy hands
lift vp to him, desiring him to giue thee.
For I must tell thee, ô my soule, that the
frowning lookes of thy God thy Father
are more pleasant in the sight of his well
schooled child, then the smylings of all
liuing can be vnto him; that the hand of
God thy Father taking from his owne,

that which the blind wordling counted
onely to be profitable and honourable for
him, yea that the hand of God thy Father
laying that vpon the backe of his owne,
which the dead worldlings count onely
hurtfull vnto them, is euen then more
kind, more liberall, and more mercifull
vnto him then the hands of all liuing
being opened wide to giue him liberally,
to clap him kindly, possibly
can be.Berna. on Hab. This moued Bernard to make
this notable confession. Si quid amaritudinis
sentio in voce eius, non sine dulcedine
est: quoniam cum iratus est, misericordiae
recordabitur, imo vero & ipsa indignatio,
non aliunde quam de misericordia est.
If I perceiue any bitternesse in his words, that
bitternesse wantes not his owne sweetnesse, because
while our God is angrie he will euen remember
mercie; yea, that his very anger
showne against his owne,
                        Ber. Epist. 2. 
                        flowes from nothing
but from mercie. Shall this Bernard,
speaking of that holy wise loue, which
shineth in the heart of Gods child, speake
thus of it? O bona mater charitas, quae siue
foueat infirmos, siue exerceat prouectos, siue
arguat iniquietos: diuersis diuersa exhibens,
sicut filios diligit vniuersos. O how good and

sweet a mother is loue, which whether she
suffer the weake, or exercise the strong, or reproue
the vnruly, while she giues diuerse
things to diuerse persons, she loueth them all
and euery one of them as her dearest children.
And shalt thou not, ô my soule, hold thy
God alwayes for a louing Father; frowne
he, smile he, giue he, take he, heare he thee,
appeare he not to heare thee, til this world
shall stand; the comfortable oracles shall
alwayes abide inuiolably true.Psal. 34. 15. 16. 
                        The eyes of
the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his
eares are open to their cries.
                        Rom▪ 8. 28. 
                        The lions do
lacke and suffer hunger, but they who seeke
the Lord shall want nothing which is good. All
things worke together for the best, to them
that feare God. And so, ô my soule, I must
assure thee, that thy God cannot but alwayes
heare thee, but alwayes helpe thee,
for he heareth thee, either so that he
granteth thee that which thou crauest, as
thou crauest it, or as good as thou crauest;
albeit not that same which thou wouldest
haue bene at; or a better then that is, or
could haue bene, which thou thoughst to
haue bene onely the best for thee. Anna
the mother of Samuel, maketh a sute to
her God, and is heard in euerie point as

she craued, for as she powred forth her
soule before God for a sonne,1. Sam. 1. so she receiued
a sonne from him.2. Col. 12. 7. 8. 9. 
                        Paul called ouer
and ouer againe to his God, beseeching
him to deliuer him from that Angel of
Satan which buffeted him? Alwayes that
same which Paul craued from God is
not granted to him by God, albeit that
which was as good for him, was not denied
to him; for while he desires to be
freed from that buffeting Angel, he is
not freed from him: but alwayes Gods
grace is sufficient for him, to make him
stand vnder that sharpe assault strongly,
and in the end to triumph ouer it valiantly.2. Sam. 12.
                        Dauid a man after Gods owne heart,
dealeth with his God by prayer, by teares,
and by fasting, for the life of that child
which Bethsheba bare vnto him; alwayes
that is not granted, for that child
died, neuertheles a better child was giuen
to him: for was not that wise Salomon
who built that glorious Temple to the
Lord, brought forth to Dauid by the same
Bethsheba afterwards? for if that child
had liued according to Dauids sute, (being
gotten vpon her by him, while Vriah
her husband was aliue) would he not alwayes

liued as a manifest note of Dauid
his adulterie, and murther; and so be
cast vp vnto him by prophane people,
who could easily gripe his sinne, but no
wayes consider his repentance. Forget
not this, ô my soule, that comfortable
oracle sounded by thy maister and Sauiour.Luke. 11. 11. 12.
                        What man is he amongst you, who if
his sonne aske him bread, would giue him a
stone: or if he aske him a fish, would giue him a
serpent? or if he aske him an egge, will giue
him a scorpion. And shall not thy God, ô
my soule, euen ye God of my spirit, who is
more wise then the father of my flesh can
be: if I craue that which he accounteth to
be a stone, albeit I hold it to be bread;
which he accoūteth to be a serpent, albeit
I esteeme it to be fish; which he accounteth
to be a scorpion, albeit I thinke it to
be an egge? Hearken, hearken vnto me
and grant me that. Thou seekest the
bread of honour from God, and he
knoweth that if thou haddest honour,
that thy honour would proue a stone to
make thee dishonour him first; and in the
end to slay thy selfe. And therefore he refuseth
to giue it vnto thee. Thou crauest
the fish of health, and wealth from God,

but he knoweth that health, and wealth
would proue a serpent to bite thy soule to
death. Thou wouldest be at the white
egges of sweet pleasures, but he knoweth
that they will proue a byting scorpion to
hurt thee: therefore he denieth health,
wealth, and pleasures to thee. Againe,
thou abhorrest ignominie and shame before
men, as a hurtfull stone: but God
knoweth that it will be food, and bread
to thee, and therefore he couereth thee
with it, euen when thou wouldst be faine
quit of it. Thou abhorrest sicknesse, pouertie,
imprisonment, banishment, inward
tentations, and outward crosses,
yea, cruell death it selfe: as biting serpents
and deuouring scorpions able to slay
thee. Alwayes thy God knoweth that euen
these be the onely sauorie, and sweet
fishes, and egges, which are able to saue
thee, and therefore he propines thee with
them. Forget not, ô my soule, that sweet
speech of Augustine,
                        Aug. subscribing vn
                           •
                        o the
truth of these three comfortable alledged
oracles: Bonus Dominus, qui saepe non tribuit
quod volumus, & magis attribuat quod
malimus. O how good a Lord is our God,
who oftentimes giueth not that vnto vs which

we would haue, to the end that he may graciously
giue vs that which we rather should
haue craued from him.
                        Bern. 
                        Bernard embracing
Augustine in this point can say to thee
most sweetly, ô my soule: Saepe multos
Deus non exaudit ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat
adsalutem. Our God oftentimes refuseth
to heare manie of his owne according to their
will, to the end that he may heare them for
their weale. But here, ô my soule, lest thou
decieue thy selfe, thinking that thou hast
right to the hearing eare, to the pitifull
heart, to the helping hand of thy God
and so that he heareth thee, and that he
pittieth thee, and that at length he will
helpe thee. How mayest thou be assured
that thou art euen then heard of him, pitied
of him, and that thou shalt receiue
helpe from him, when in appearance thou
must thinke that he heareth thee not at
all? Hearken, hearken, ô my soule, findest
thou grace while thus thou art vsed, by
thy wise pitifull God, to continue in
praying vnto him while he refuseth, as
thou thinkest to heare? Hast thou grace to
desire to continue in praying vnto him
while he delayes (as thou thinkest) to
heare thee? yea, which is more, findest

thou the smallest measure of griefe, because
thou canst not desire to continue in
praying vnto him as thou wouldest? that
thou canst not pray vnto him as thou
shouldst? be assured that God whom thou
thinkest to be farre from thee, is neare
thee, is with thee, yea he is within thee by
his Spirit as in his temple hearing thee,
albeit thou hearest not that he heareth
thee; pitying thee, albeit thou feelest not
that he pitieth thee; and for to deliuer
thee, albeit th
                           ••
                         thinke that thou canst
not be deliuered. Answer me, answer
me, ô my soule, if thou canst. If thy
God heard thee no way, pittied thee
no way, and were neuer to helpe thee,
couldst thou desire to be heard of him, to
be pitied by him, to be helped by him?
yea, if thy God longed not as it were to
do thee good, couldst thou either long or
lament that thou longest not for good at
his hands. For as he who neuer saw the
Sunne cannot misse the sight of the Sun,
so he who neuer saw God cannot misse
God. Thus it is not nature which misseth
grace, but grace which misseth grace, and
therefore he spake truly who said: Num
oranti beneficia denegabit,
                        August. 
                        qui orantes vt ne

deficiant sua pietate instigat: Can that good
God refuse to grant his good things vuto that
person, who praying vnto him for them, is stirred
vp by his goodnesse not to faint, but to continue
in praying vnto him.
                     
                  
                  
                     22. No person, no thing, can possibly
content the sight, the smell, the taste, the
touch of that kingly eagle the true Christian;
beside that blessed Iesus, who
sometime was dead, but now is liuing
blessed for euermore.
                     VVHen I begin to meditate anie
wayes seriously, ô my soule, vpon
that honour whereunto thy God in thy
Sauiour Iesus Christ hath aduanced thee,
and so vpon these priuiledges and prerogatiues,
wherewith he hath enriched thee,
being now happily made a Christian
through him; I wonder not that that great
and wise Apostle was moued to crie out:
I thought nothing worthie to be knowne amongst
you,
                        1. Cor. 22. 
                        saue Iesus Christ and him crucified.
The things that were aduantage vnto
me, the same I counted losse for Christs sake:
yea, doubtlesse I thinke all things losse, for the
excellent knowledge of Christ Iesus my Lord,

for whom I haue accounted all things to be
losse,
                        Phil. 3. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 
                        and count them to be dung that I might
winne Christ, and might be found in him, not
hauing my owne righteousnesse which is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, euen the righteousnesse which is of
God through faith: that I might know him,
and the vertue of his resurrection, and the fellowship
of his afflictions, and be made conformable
to his death, if by any meanes I might
attaine vnto the resurrection of the dead. Beleeue
me, ô my soule, a man as he is a man,
excelleth not the brutish beast so farre; as
a true Christian, as he is a Christian, surmounteth
a man, as he is a man. A man as
he is a man, liueth but one life beyond the
bruite beasts, to wit, the life of reason; for
euen the bruite beast, moueth, groweth,
feeleth: but I must thinke, that now euen
senfible experience hath taught thee, ô my
soule, that I being happily through Christ
my Sauiour and head made a Christian,
liue that life of grace, whereby thou, ô my
soule, being naturally dead in sinnes and
trespasses, art spiritually quickened; wherby
my mind naturally blind, and destitute
of the knowledge of the true God▪ and of
his Sonne, is enlightened to see and know

him, whereby my will naturally crooked
and auerse from the good will of this my
God, is rectified and conformed to his
will; whereby my soule and fond affections
naturally set onely vpon euill, yea, delighting
in euill, and abhorring all good,
are renewed and vnfainedly made to hate
euill, and sincerely to loue good: yea,
whereby the whole members of this my
bodie, exercised onely about the committing
of sinne, as these which by nature be
the weapons of vnrighteousnesse, are sanctified
and made the weapons of righteousnesse
to serue God in holinesse: yea,
knowest thou not, ô my soule, feelest thou
not, ô my soule, euen alreadie to thy great
and inexpressible ioy, that thou hast begun
through that rare aduantage and singular
benefit of this thy begun life of grace, to
liue alreadie that life of expected glorie,
which shall in despite of diuels, death and
graue (thy sweet Sauiour being thine, and
thou being his) receiue me with a most
smiling and pleasant countenance in the
end of time, and which I shall retaine in
endlesse eternitie? When I reade Scripture
many things moue me to aduance,
yea, to admire the excellencie and happinesse

of the true Christian; sorrowing that
any should be stiled a man beside him: reioycing
from my heart that man is become
a Christian,Act. 26. 29. and with Paul earnestly
wishing, that all men were Christians.
Hearken, hearken, ô my soule, to the most
comfortable words of thy loue Iesus, speaking
vnto thee by the pen of Matthew:
Whersoeuer a dead carkasse is,
                        Mat. 24. 28. 
                        thither will the
eagles resort. Here compareth he himselfe
to a dead carkasse, and a true Christian to
an eagle resorting to this carkasse to feed
vpon it. But what moueth thy Sauiour, ô
my soule, to compare the true Christian to
an eagle, because there is not a naturall
propertie assigned by the naturalists, to
the naturall eagle, wherewith God thy
louing Father in his dearest Sonne Iesus
Christ, by his holy Spirit hath not most
ioyfully, most richly endued, and gloriously
adorned the true Christian soule,
that onely spirituall eagle, which is to be
found in this world. And so the true Christian
is happily for his information, reformation,
consolation, and confirmation,
compared by his wise Lord and Maister
(who onely makes him and knowes him)
vnto an eagle, because of his estate, because

of his sight, because of his smell, because
of his flight, because of his resting
place, where he can onely stay, and staying
refresh and feed himselfe. As for the estate
and condition of a true Christian, I must
tell thee, ô my soule, that the Christian is
not a slaue, is no base bodie, is no vassall,
but euen a most honourable one, a most
mightie one, yea, the onely king amongst
men, and aboue all men dwelling on earth
here as the eagle is the king ouer these
foules which do flie in the aire, and therefore
stiled by the Ethnikes, Iouis ales, as
we who be Christians may be called Iesus
foules. Alwayes thou must know, ô my
soule, that a Christian is not a king by nature
but by grace; by generation, but by
regeneration: and so not as he is from that
first sinfull Adam, but as he is in that second
righteous Adam,
                        2. Cor. 5. who was made
sinne for him, to make him righteous. But
here, ô my soule, I must pray thee to consider
what sort of king is this kingly eagle,
set aboue all men by that King of
kings, and Lord of Lords Iesus, euen this
Christian. A Christian, I must tell thee, ô
my soule, is a king commanded, is a king
commanding, is a king ruled, is a king ruling,

commanded onely by his Father, his
Sauiour, his sanctifier, and ruled onely by
that straight and shining line of that sauing
word of God, contained in holy
Scripture; his mind, his heart, his will, his
affections, and euery member of his body
being so gouerned by that line, and led by
that Spirit whose word it is, that he can
out of knowledge and with ioy approue
that which is agreeable to it, condemne
that which is repugnant to it, eschew that
it forbids and condemnes, embrace that it
commands and commends. Yea, the true
Christian is so farre commanded by that
King who made him a king, and by that
his word acquainting him with the nature
of that kingdome prepared for him, that
if any king or subiect liuing attempt with
the counsell of Ierusalem,Act. 4. 19. command him
either to do that his great king hath forbidden
him to do, or ceasse from doing of
that his Maiestie hath appointed to be
done by him, he can answer with courage
whether it be righter in the sight of God
to obey you rather then God, iudge ye:
yea, he is so farre addicted vnto the commandement
of this his great King, that
before he disobey it he will heartily with

                        Daniel and his companions be readie to
lay downe his life at the feete of any king.Dan. 3. 6.
A Christian is a king of quicke sight who
can see clearly with the owle in the darke
night, and so in the day of tentation and
tribulation, making him to say with Iob:
The Lord hath giuen,
                        Iob 1. 2. 
                        the Lord hath taken,
blessed be the name of the Lord. Who can
see with the eagle vpon the bright shining
day, able to cast his eyes directly towards
the strongest, cleare, piercing beames of
that hote shining sun of blooming prosperitie,
no wayes turning away either his
heart or his eyes from his great King and
blessed Maister, for all the honour, all the
wealth, all the pleasures, can be offered to
him, can be taken from him, for all the persecution
can be deuised, can be executed
against him, in this (triumphantly like a
conquering king, who hath nothing aboue
him beside God) trading the laudable
sauing pathes of Ioseph, Moses, Dauid,
Ezrah, Nehemiah, Daniel, and a verie
world of heauenly Kings, by that Christ
of God made Christs to God. As a Christian
is a king of quicke sight, so is he a
king of most sharpe smelling, with the
eagle, not smelling things neare hand, but

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
things afarre off, in such sort, that he can
finde nothing to be sauorie to him, beside
that blessed glorious King, who made him
a king, and blessed him with this spirituall
sharpe smelling. Yea, I must tell thee, ô
my soule, that the smelling of a Christian
is so spiritually delicate, that he can rest
vpon the sauour of no Angell, of no man,
of no woman, either soiourning here, or
glorified in heauen, much lesse the sauour
of honour, wealth, or pleasure, or whatsoeuer
this earth can possesse. Shall old Isaac
smelling the garment of his blessed sonne
Iacob crie out, not without a speciall triumphing
ioy: Behold the smell of my sonne,
is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath
blessed. And shalt not thou, ô my soule,
made a sharpe smelling eagle by thy Sauiour
Iesus, easily to smell euen things far
remoued from thee, smell this, thy Sauiour
as onely profitably, honorably, and
pleasantly sauorie to thee, and for thee.
The sense hereof moued the Church
Christs spouse, directing her language to
Christ, her onely loue and husband, to
crie out:Psal. 45. 8. 
                        All thy garments smell of myrrhe,
and cassia, when thou camest out of thy yuorie
palaces, where they haue made thee glad.
                        
The sense hereof moued the same Spirit
of Iesus to make this confession:Cant. 1. 3. 
                        Because
of the sauour of thy good ointments, thy name
is as an oyntment powred out, therefore the
virgins do loue thee.
                        Cant. 1. 13. And againe, My welbeloued
is as a bundle of myrrhe vnto me: my
welbeloued is as a cluster of camphire in the
vines of Bengedi. Yea, this moued the
Church (giuing a speciall proofe of the
sharpenesse of her smell and taste) to
speake to her husband thus: The mandrakes
haue giuen a smell, and in our gates are all
sweet things new and old;
                        Cant. 7. 13. 
                        my welbeloued, I
haue kept them for thee. As a Christian is a
kingly eagle seeing quickly, and smelling
sharply, so he is a kingly eagle of wonderfull
flight: for the Christian mans
soule flies not onely swiftly, but also sublimely,
and so both farre and high, and
that in one instant. Can the Christian be
content with the crow, or with the rauen,
to dwell here beneath with men, and amongst
men, flying and building their
nests only a little aboue the heads of men?
No, no, he must necessarily flie farre aboue
the clouds and firmament. But wherof
comes this, ô my soule, euery true Christian
soiourning here, resembleth the

Israelites hasting out of Aegypt,Exod. 22. he had his
dough bound vp in clothes vpon his
shoulders, his loynes girded, and his staffe
in his hand, and so he was altogether readie
at the call of Moses to turne his backe
with heartie contentment vpon Aegypt,
and his face with heauenly gladnesse towards
Gods promised and his expected
Canaan.Colos. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Well knowes the Christian soule
where her husband and home is, her husband,
her home is not beneath here, but is
aboue, and therefore her heart must euer
be vpward: yea, for this cause the true
Christian cannot ceasse euerie minute,
vpon the wings of faith flying thither, to
enter in where Christ is there powring
forth all his necessities. The true Christian
soule knoweth that her husband will
come againe, albeit she know not when
he will come, and therefore the Christian
dare not suffer idolatrie, incest, murther,
adulterie,1. Pet. 1. 13. fornication, oppression, drunkennesse,
couetousnesse, falshood, deceit,
and such abhominations, as also many
long and heauie deluges to hang after
him, lest first they hinder him to take him
to his wings, and then hinder him in his
flight after that he hath taken himselfe to

them. As the true Christian is that kingly
eagle which seeth quickly, smelleth
sharpely, flieth swiftly, and on high, so
he is that kingly eagle, which cannot stay
his flight, till he come where that sometime
dead, blessed, and sweet smelling carrion,
but now gloriously liuing Lord of
life and light, Iesus is. Let a Christian man
meete with a thousand Angels, he will
behaue himselfe as Gehazi the seruant of
Elizaeus did,2. King. 4. 29. being sent by his maister with
his staffe towards the dead sonne of the
Shunamitish Ladie, not daring so much
as to salute one of them by the way, till he
come where Iesus is. And in this the wise
Christian resembleth that diseased woman,
who thronging through the whole
preasse, could not be stayed till she touched
his garment with her finger, who had
touched her heart before with his Spirit,Mat. 9. 20. 21.
and made her by faith to touch him spiritually,
before by her hand she touched
him bodily.
                  
                  
                     23. Man through sinne in Adam
being made a foule puddle to Satan, to
tyrannize in: through grace in Iesus

Christ is made a faire palace to God to
reigne in.
                     OH, ô my soule, when shall the eyes
of men, hauing that blessed lanterne
of Gods blessed word in their mother
tongue presented before them, be enlightened
to see that refreshing resolution,
and singular consolation, offered to their
eares by the 23. and 24. verses of the 3.
of Genesis, compared with the 6. verse of
the third to the Hebrewes? In the 23. and
24. verses of the 3. of Genesis, our blessed
God is so iustly offended with Adam and
Eue (infected, alas, through the manifest
neglect, yea a vowed contempt of his
word with sinne) that he will not suffer
them so much as to lodge one night in
that garden he planted richly for them,
and graciously propined them with. Alwayes
that 6. verse of the 3. to the Hebrewes
tels me, ô my soule, that our God
accounteth so much of man, being ingrafted
in his blessed Sonne Iesus, and so
through him hauing all his sinnes remitted,
that he will haue man not onely to
haue an houfe, but to be a hou
                           •
                        e; but what
an house, but to whom an house, will our

God haue man in Christ to be, ô my soule?
euen an house to his owne Maiestie, by
his own good Spirit to dwell in. And wilt
thou not reioyce when thou hearest and
considerest this, ô my soule, sinfull Adam
(before the Messiah is promised to him,
by faith is griped by him) may not lodge
so much as one houre in that earthly paradise
wherin he lodged before? Alwayes
Adam with his posteritie hauing this
Messiah promised to him, by faith griped
by them, must be a more glorious palace
then euer that earthly paradise was, out of
the which he, and in him, and with him, all
his were cast, yea, he must be a palace no
lesse glorious then that heauen of heauens
is: for must not man ingrafted in
Christ, be an house to receiue, and receiuing
to keepe, and keeping to enioy that
blessed Maiestie who hath his throne in
the third heauens? But here I must aduise
thee, ô my soule, (considering the subtiltie
and strength of thy malicious aduersarie
Satan) grauely to consider two
things: first, vpon what condition will thy
holy God be content yt euen I (clogged,
alas, with sinne) be an house to his Maiestie,
clothed with vnspeakable, incomparable

glorie: secondly, what is that I
should endeuour my selfe to resemble, in
respect of this more then high dignitie
whereunto I am hereby aduanced. Hearken,
ô my soule, to the Spirit, so shalt thou
meet with that condition, whereupon my
God will be content that I be an house to
him, for be not these the Apostles words.
For Christ is as the Sunne ouer his owne
house,
                        Hab. 3. 6. 
                        whose house we are if we hold fast the
confidence and the reioycing of the hope vnto
the end. And so I must tell thee, ô my soule,
if thou wouldst be an house to that onely
glorious King of kings Iesus; thou must
alwayes be decked & trimmed with such
tapistrie and furniture, as onely is able to
make such a Maiestie desire, yea, delight
to come to thee, yea to dwell with thee,
and in thee, that is with effectuall faith,
patient hope, laborious loue, and neuer
wearying perseuerance and constancie.
But how mayest thou know, ô my soule,
that thou art thus deckt in any kinde of
measure? Hearken, hearken vnto that resolution
giuen by Iohn:
                        1. Ioh. 3. 
                        Euerie man that hath
this hope in him, purgeth himselfe euen as he
is pure. Alwayes, euerie houre, in all places,
trauelling to be more and more holy and

iust, to the end that that holy & iust God
may still dwell with him, yea in him. Beside
this, if I would haue my selfe to be an
house to my Lord and King Iesus on earth
here: I must seriously studie to resemble
that his house of glorie which is aboue.
Now what is the nature of that holy house
of thy God, ô my soule, the Spirit clearing
this vnto thee,Reuel. 21. 27. saith: There sball enter into it
no vncleane thing, neither whatsoeuer worketh
abhomination, and lies; but they which
are written in the Lambes booke of life. Let
me carrie my selfe herefore, ô my soule,
in the feare of God so here, that I suffer
nothing approch my bodie, or any member
of my bodie, which is vncleane, and
which is not recommended vnto me by
that cleane booke of the Lambe contained
in holy Scripture, and that nothing
enter within me, or come out of me,
which may defile thee, ô my soule, or this
my bodie: but that making Gods Booke
a square to my affections, and a line to my
life, I studie alwayes by the loue and practise
of holinesse, to keepe my holy God
with me, and within me here, to the end
that hereafter I may be kept with him, and
by him in heauen for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                     24. The last song of Gods child is
euer sweetest; and no wonder, considering
that hee sees and feeles before
death: and is assuredly perswaded to
possesse after death for euer.
                     IT is writen of the swanne, ô my soule,
that his last song is euer sweetest; and
holy Scripture cannot but be a verie
world, and cloud of worthie witnesses,
teaching thee also, yt the last song of Gods
children who happily (of blacke rauens
by nature, hauing no white in them from
top to toe because of sinne) are made
white swannes, hauing washed thēselues
in the bloud of the Lambe is sweetest also.
Thou hast considered Scripture, ô my
soule, and Scripture hath acquainted thee
with the liues and deathes of many notable
swannes. But tell me, art thou not
transported out of thy selfe, and carried as
it were from earth to the heauens presently,
when the sweetest tune of their
last melodie is brought to thy eares? Sang
euer that swanne Iacob so sweetly as vppon
his death-bed, as Moses maketh
cleare by the 29. of Genesis? sang euer

that Moses so sweetly as he did a little before
he was to be taken vp by his God to
the top of mount Pishgal, there to die
and to be buried by his Maiestie, as is
manifested in the 32. of Deuteronomie?
Sang euer that swanne Iosuah so sweetly
as before his death, as the 23. and 24.
Chapter of his booke testifieth? Manie
sweet songs passed through the tongue
and lippes of that sweet singer of Israel
Dauid; alwayes serued euer his spirituall
musicall veine him better, then when he
was to take his good-night from the
kingdome of Iudath, and the Iewes his
subiects, for to be transported by death
vnto the kingdome of Iesus his Sauiour,
as is euident in the 18. Psalme. which iustly
may be called Dauids latter end? Whose
tongue can expresse, whose veine can
discrie the sweetnesse of these speeches
distilled many a day, like as many sweet
cleare honie droppes from the gracious
lippes of that fairest swanne; euer the
heauens, euer the earth, euer the waters
saw, euen white Iesus; white in his conception,
white in his birth, white in his
life, white in his death, yea whitenesse it
selfe. And so farre surmounting the naturall

swanne, who hauing white feathers,
hath blacke feete. Alwayes thou wilt
confesse, ô my soule, that neuer sung his
sweetest lippes so singularly, so wonderfully,
after a more then spirituall, angelicall,
and heauenly sweet manner, then he
did before his apprehension and death, as
is manifest of that more then refreshing
and comforting Sermon sounded by him
frō the 31. verse of the 13. of Iohn to the
end of the 17. Chapter thereof. These
who haue reade the writings of Paul,
must meete with the manie melodious
notes sweetly tuned by him. Alwayes,
when death is brought before him, can
he not starting vp on both his feet as it
were, and putting his hand as a valorous
conqueror on his side, lifting vp his countenance
on high, crie out couragiously.
O death where is thy sting,
                        1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. 57. 
                        ô graue where is
victorie. The sting of death is sinne, and the
strength of sinne is the Law, but thankes be
vnto God who hath giuen vs victorie through
our Lord Iesus Christ. And when he is
brought before death, can he not setting
both his feete vpon the necke of death,
stand ouer it by his word as it were,
striking off the head of death (as Dauid
                        
standing vpon Goliah,
                        1. Sam. 17. 51. 54. could take away
his head with his owne sword, and carrie
it in triumph towards Ierusalem) crie out
to the hearing of others. I haue fought a
good fight,
                        2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. 
                        I haue finished my course, I haue
kept the faith; for henceforth is layed vp for
me the crowne of righteousnesse, which the
Lord the righteous Iudge shall giue to me in
that day, and not to me onely, but to all them
also that loue his appearance. The blind
senslesse worldling, speakes, and thinkes
of Gods children as of monsters, when
he sees them reioycing on their death-bedes,
and heares them singing when that
death approcheth them; but no wonder,
for as these men know not the child of
God so they know not his father, they
know not where his father dwelleth, they
know not by what gate his children enter
into his house, much lesse haue they anie
kind of knowledge or sense, of these vnheard,
vnseene, vnfelt, good things
which be within it? Alwayes, I charge
thee, ô my soule, that thou attempt not
to wonder (vnlesse it be to thy consolation,
and no wayes to thy confusion) when
thou seest the child of God (who hath no
loue beside Iesus, who hath loued him,

and giuen himselfe for him, who hath no
home beside the home of heauen, where
this his loue is sitting in his owne nature
preparing a place for him) filled on his
death-bed with a greater sea of ioy, then
euer it was before, euen there while death
is drawing neare vnto his bodie, and his
bodie is drawing neare vnto the graue,
aduancing more holy the excellencie of
that loue wherewith the Father, Sonne,
and holy Ghost do loue him, proclayming
more largely, the vanitie, of all things
earthly, euer hard, seene, smelled, tasted,
touched, possessed by him, or any other
to his seeing, or hearing; praising more
aboundantly the incomparible value of
these vnspeakeable good things promised
vnto him by his father, purchased vnto
him by his Sauiour, whereof he hath
alreadie receiued the earnest, looking assuredly
after death, for the full payment.
Shall the child of God, ô my soule, crowned
heare with pricking thornes, reioyce
in tribulation, and shall he be confounded
when he drawes neare vnto death,
whereby all these things which possibly
can trouble him are finished, and by the
which he is sent vnto heauen, there to

triumph for euer. Shall Paul and Silas cast
in the inner prison at Philippi, and hauing
their feete fastened in the stockes, sing a
Psalme at mid-night? And shall I not sing
much more continually, when that death
shall draw neare me, which shall not open
a doore to set me free from any outward
prison, to the end I may enter the gates
of any worldly Citie, to liue among and
reioyce with men for a while: but which
shall open that doore to me (by the vertue
of his death, who by dying ouercame
death) whereby I may enter
within the gates of that high and heauenly
Citie, within the which I shall liue
without all suspition, and feare of future
thraldome, among, and with Gods Angels
and Saints in Gods presence, praysing
that Lambe which sitteth on the
throne for euer. Adam for his sinne
being turned forth of that earthly Paradise,
hauing heard his God say to him:
Thou art dust,
                        Gen. 3. 19. 
                        and to dust thou shalt returne
againe, could not but with a heauie
heart go out of it. Alwayes the child of
God, ô my soule, hauing all his sinnes
remitted through faith in the second
Adam, who died for him, and being

through him made the sonne of God the
Father, the brother of God the Sonne,
the temple of God the holy Ghost, hauing
heard this voice (thou art Gods and thou
shalt returne to God againe) cannot but
with ioy of heart be content to haue his
soule remoued frō his bodie, and his bodie
from the sight of men by death. Augustine
meditating vpon this, and citing these
words of Paul.
                        Phil. 1. 13. 
                        I desire to be loosed and to be
with Christ which is best of all, is not affraid
to crie out thus.Aug. 
                        Qui cupit dissolui &
esse cum Christo non patienter moritur, sed
patienter viuit & delectabiliter moritur. He
who desires to be loosed and to be with Christ,
dies not patiently, but liues patiently, and dies
ioyfully and pleasantly. Yea this moued
Bernard citing the 55. verse of the 15.
Chapter of the 1. to the Corinthians to
speake thus.Bern. cant. ser. 26. 
                        Mors non iam stimulus sed iubilus,
iam cantando moritur homo, & moriendo
cantat
                              •
                            vsurparis ad laetitiam mater moeroris,
vsurparis ad gloriā gloriae inimica, mortua es
ô mors, & perforata hamo quem incauta glutisti,
cuius illa vox est in Propheta, ô mors
ero mors tua. Death now is no sting procuring
mourning, but a Iubilee breeding mirth.
Now man dies singing, and dying sings.

O mother of mourning thou art now vsed for
mirth,
                        Hosea. 13. 14. 
                        ô enemie to all glorie thou art now vsed
for rarest glory, yea thou art dead ô death,
and pearced through by that hooke which
thou didst swallow vnawares, whose
voyce speaking by his Prophet is:
ô death I shall be
thy death.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE WAY
TO EVERLASTING
LIFE.
                  CONTAINING SIXE
Treatises. viz.
                  
                     First, the blessed Chariots man.
                     Secondly, the Lanterne for the Chariot.
                     Thirdly, the skilfull Chariot driuer.
                     Fourthly, the driuer of the Chariot.
                     Fifthly, sixe Rockes of the Chariot.
                     Sixthly, sixe Rockes layed in the way.
                     Seuenthly, the onely Inne Gods babes
soiourne at.
                     Eightly, the guestes of the Inne.
                  
                  
                     PSAL. 143. 10.
                     Let thy good spirit leade me vnto the land
of righteousnesse.
                  
                  
                     119. 105.
                     Thy word is a lanterne to my feete, and a
light vnto my pathes.
                  
                  
                     LONDON,
Printed for Robert Bird, and are to be
sold at his shop in Cheape-side.
1625.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO MY VERIE
HONORABLE GOOD
Lords, IAMES Earle of Arran.
GEORGE Earle of Enzie, and IOHN
Earle of Cassils: three noble plants
happily planted by the right hand
of the most High, in that greene
and fruitfull garden of his dearest
Sonne; of speciall religious, vertuous,
and valorous expectation: by
whom the true nobilitie of their
truly Noble Ancestors is not stained
but beautified; is not lessened
but enlarged; through the force of
the grace of God, blessing and
strengthening their Lordships.
                  
                     HOly and wholsome is that
counsell giuen by the
Preacher vnto the yong
man, compassed with a
thousand dangers, and

lodging within him ten thousand enemies:Eccl. 12. 1.
                     Remember thy Creator in the
dayes of thy youth. Alwayes no wonder
was it that the Preacher aduised the
yong man thus, for well knew he (being
instructed by that greatest teacher) that
to be true:Pro. 22. 6. 
                     Teach a child in the trade
of his way, and when he is old he shall
not depart from it. Dauid the father
of this Preacher, knowing the yong man
to be compassed and possessed as is said,
could not possibly finde out away (euen
when he came to the blessed mouth of God
for resolution) to tame a yong man, and
taming him to haue him sanctified for
the seruice of his God, beside the word of
God, for did not Dauid crie out thus to
the hearing of Angels and men:
Wherwith shall a yong man redresse
his way,
                     Psal. 119. 9. 
                     by taking heed vnto it according
to thy word? Nature that common
fostering nurse hauing prudently
ioyned your Lordships nearely; Grace
that rarest mother which bringing
forth children vnto God, fill those

heauens of heauens hauing happily tyed
your Lordship one to another more
strictly, who am I that I should attempt
to seuer your Lordships, for should man
separate those whom God hath coupled?
I haue therefore my very noble good
Lords, out of that sincere loue my soule
in God doth carrie ioyntly to your Lordships
coupled by nature, linked through
grace, and who I hope shall not be separate
in glorie (considering these manie
dangers and fierce aduersaries the children
of God iourneying through the wildernesse
of this world, towards that Canaan
which is aboue doth meete with)
bene bold heartily and humbly to propine
your Lordships with a leader, with
a lanterne, with a guide, with a guard,
alwayes so to direct, and protect your
Lordships in sinful time, that your Lordships
may dwell and reigne after time in
shining eternitie, farre remoted from
sinne, and from sinners. I hope your Lordships
will yeeld them presence, and hauing
once countenanced them, will

lend them your eares, hearts and hands,
chearfully contented while your Lordships
shall breathe here, to be counselled,
gouerned, and kept by them; for I assure
your Lordships they shall (without all
doubt) prooue that, to your Lordships at
length, which that fierie pillar proued to
the Israelites, coming through the wildernesse
towards that promised Canaan.
Let your Lordships Leader be that
blessed Spirit of the Father,Nehe. 9. 20 and of his
dearest Sonne. Let your Lordships Lanterne
be that sacred and vnspotted
Word of God, contained in holy Scripture.
Let your Lordships Guide be the
Man of God,Psal. 119. 105. who being one of a thousand,
hath this Spirit for his maister,
and this written word for his lesson.Act. 8. 31. Let
your Lordships Guard be these celestiall
spirits sent out by God the Father,Heb. 1. 14. Son,
and holy Ghost, for the comfort of those
who be ordained for saluation. This was
that Leader, that Lanterne, that Guide,
that Guard; that sole soueraigne blessed
Leader, Lanterne, Guide, and Guard of

Gods elect, euen our God blessed for euermore,
prepared for his owne Dauid, who
was a man according to his owne heart,
and wherein Dauid did reioyce and triumph
exceedingly: for out of the sense
of this did he not draw vp this suite to
his God?Psal. 1
                           •
                        3. 10. 
                     Let thy good Spirit leade me
vnto the land of righteousnesse. Doth
he not out of the sense of this, euen with
ioy, make this confession vnto God before
the whole world? Thy word is a lanterne
vnto my feete, and a light vnto
my pathes. Out of the sense of this doth
not that religious King and royall Prophet
reuerence and follow the aduice and
counsell of his Seers,1. King. 1. 24. 25. 26. 27. 32. 33. 34. 35. the men of God led
by his Spirit and word in his greatest
affaires?2. Sam. 12. 7 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. & 24 13. 14. And when he (being deceiued
alas, by Satan and his owne lust) fell in
any sinne, can he not reuerently heare
these his Seers charging him with his
sinne, and sharply admonishing and
threatning him for the same? Yea out of
the sense of this,Psal. 34. 7. doth not Dauid sing to
the comfort of his owne soule, and consolation

of others: The Angels of the
Lord pitcheth round about all them
that feare him, and deliuereth them.
My good Lords, delay not to take your
selues vnto the pathes of Dauid, and
wearie neuer, notwithstanding of hellish
and earthly opposition, of kinsmen and
strangers, of friends and foes, to walke
in the wayes of Dauid, till death shall
close your Lordships eyes. For whosoeuer
with Dauid shall finde grace to commit
himselfe to the direction, gouernment,
and protection of the Spirit of the Word,
of the Man, and of the Angels of God,
can men possibly discouer the happinesse
and glorie of such a one? It is a common
thing to be Noble, but it is as rare a
thing to be truly Noble. Many diuerse
Kings giues many diuerse honors, but
that honour which is onely worthie the
stile of Honor, is giuen onely by that one
King who is the King of kings; for he alone
is able to make the sonnes of Adam
to be the sonnes of God: and these alone
who are Gods sonnes, are truly Noble.

The sense hereof moued that sonne of
thunder euen with admiration to crie
out:1. Ioh. 3. 1. 
                     Behold what loue the Father hath
shewed vnto vs, that we should be
called the sonnes of God. That religious
Poet answering this, could sing secretly
thus:
                  Generosa Christi nobilitat secta viros:
                  
                     Cui quisquis seruit ille vere est nobilis.
Now the very God of peace sanctifie
your Lordships throughout, and I pray
God that your Lordships whole spirits
and soules may be kept blamelesse vntill
the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ:1. Thess. 5. 24▪ 23. 24.
                     Faithfull is he which called you,
which will also do it.
                  
                  
                     Your Lordships most
humbly deuoted,
D. L.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE BLESSED CHARIOTS
MAN OF THE
HEAVENLY CHARIOT.
                  
                     THe Soueraigne Coachmaister,
who is also the
onely supreme, and absolute
director, leader, and
keeper of that Chariot,
within the which the babes of God are
transported from sinfull time, towards
eternitie; is that blessed Spirit of the Father,Heb. 10. 19.
and of his dearest sonne Iesus Christ,
ô my soule, who is the Spirit of grace, by
whom the babes of God, depriued of his
grace by sinne in Adam, and with Adam,
are made partakers of that grace which
God the Father hath promised vnto them
by the force of that new couenant made
with them; and God their Soueraigne
hath purchased vnto them according to
the Fathers promise. The spirit of repentance
by whom these babes being of
themselues the verie limmes of the deuill

(whom euerie one of vs do by nature as
liuely resēble as any man doth his parents)
are made the members of Christ, and so
the children of God. And therefore truly
doth our Maister say;Iohn 3. 3. 5. 
                     Except a man be
borne againe he cannot see the kingdome of
God:
                     Eph. 1. 17. and againe; Except a man be borne of
the water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
in the kingdome of God. The spirit of wisedome,
by whom these babes (no wayes
perceiuing the things that be of the Spirit
of God,1. Cor. 2. 14 neither being able to know
them) are made wise to saluation, and
able to discerne all things.Ioh. 14. 17. The Spirit of
truth, by whom vnto the babes of God;
Satans lies, and mens, employed by Satan,
are discouered in their owne colour and
nature, least they should be snared and
entrapped by them; and by whom they
are led to the knowledge of that onely
sauing truth of God, which is able to
saue their soules.Rom. 1. 4. The Spirit of sanctification,
by whom these babes of God poysoned
from their first shaping in their mothers
wombe through sinne, and by reason
of this poyson so defiled within their
soules, and in all the powers of them
without, in their bodies, and in euerie

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
member of them, that there is nothing
whole in them from top to toe, are so
sanctified that they are made to loue that
their God loues, to hate that their God
hates, to will that their God willeth, to
abhorre that their God abhorreth; yea,
that where before their members were
weapons of vnrighteousnesse to sinne,
they are made weapons of righteousnesse
to God.Rom. 6. 13. 
                     The spirit of Promise: by whom
with these maine,1. Cor. 6. 11. large and glorious promises,Eph. 1. 13.
made by God their Father in his
dearest Sonne their sole Sauiour, the
truth of the said promises and so the vndoubted
performance of them in Gods
owne appointed time, is not only brought
to their eares, but settled in their hearts,
for comforting of them against their manie
troubles,Rom. 8. 15. and confirming of them against
their often feares. The spirit of
adoption: by whom these babes of God
haue their royall pterogatiue, hidde vp
from the world, in the minds of all their
inward and outward crosses and griefes
sounded in their eares, whereby they are
made to crie from a ioyfull heart, and
with a chearefull conntenance (defying
all their troubles & griefes) Abba Father.
                     Io. 14. 16.
                     
                     The spirit of comfort: by whō these babes of
God inuironed with all apparēt matter of
confusion, are easedand incouraged vnder
and against all distresses & crosses, for the
which cause also this blessed spirit is stiled
by himselfe.Psal. 45. 7. 
                     The oyle of gladnesse, the spirit of
libertie:
                     Psal 51. 12. by whom these babes of God,
being bound in the iron chaines of Satan,
and of sinne by nature, are not onely loosed
from these irons of sinne, and from
that tyrannie which sometimes detained
them in bondage, but are giuen ouer to
God the Father, and his dearest Sonne
not onely to seeke and to serue him,
but to seeke and serue him with a most
franke,Zach. 12. 10. free, and a readie heart. The
spirit of supplication: because by him alone,
the senslesse and sensuall hearts of
the verie babes of God, naturally frozen
in the foule dregges of sin, and of earthly
things, are stirred vp and made fit to pray
vnto God truly and feruently: And therefore
the Apostle doth say:Rom. 8. 26. 
                     The spirit helpeth
our infirmities for we know not what to
pray as we ought, but the spirit it selfe maketh
requests for vs with sighes that cannot be expressed.
                     Esay 11. 2.
                     The spirit of strength: because by
him alone these babes of God in themselues

beyond measure weake, vnable to
resist euill, vnable to performe any good
thing, subiect with this to a thousand
tentations, and inuironed with a world
of enemies; are strengthened & enabled,
not onely ioyfully to desire to do the
good will of God in their seuerall callings,
but also in some measure to discharge
that debt which their God craues
of them, euen with the hazard and losse of
all that they haue;1. Ioh. 4. 4. this good spirit which
dwelleth in them, being alwayes stronger
then that euill spirit which dwelleth
in the world.2. Tim. 1. 7. The spirit of loue, for it is
by this spirit alone, by whom these babes
are acquainted with, and certified of, that
loue the Father hath vndeseruedly borne
to them, in promising and giuing his
Sonne for them;Rom. 5. 5. by whom, that loue, the
Sonne hath carried to them, in contenting
to be giuen for them, is spread abroad
in their hearts: out of the which
loue alone all these spirituall gifts wherewith
they are inriched for the gracing of
them here, and for the glorifying hereafter,
do flow. For if thou wouldst inquire
me, ô my soule, how it is come to passe,
that thou, dead in sinne, and for sinne

adiudged to endlesse death, are graced,
regenerate, and made wise to saluation,
through the knowledge of that sauing
truth of God, contained in holy Scripture;
in some measure sanctified, acquainted
with, and certified, of the promises of
God; and so that thou art adopted in his
dearest & naturall Sonne, to be his Sonne
through grace, reioycing in the midst of
troubles, glad whensoeuer thou arr seeking
and seruing him, powring prayers
vnto him whensoeuer thou art any
wayes pricked, praysing him whensoeuer
thou art eased; standing in the euill day,
and withstanding Gods & thy owne euill
enemies? behouest thou not to answer,
because God hath loued me, and that
freely and constantly in that blessed
Sonne of his loue, my onely loue Iesus; as
his spirit, by whom this loue is shed abroad
in my heart,Rom. 5. 5. testifies vnto me? Now
this blessed Spirit, ô my soule, is proclaimed
by himselfe, to our cleare resolution
and rarest consolation, to be the verie
fellow and companion of these babes of
God, iourneying towards heauen, accompanying
them in euery estate, and in all
places; and therefore not without his

speciall inspiration, and direction was
that prayer of drawing vp by the Apostle
for the Corinthians:1. Cor. 13. 13. 
                     The grace of our Lord
Iesus Christ, the loue of God, aud the fellowship
of the holy Ghost be with you all.
Yea this Spirit is proclaimed to be that
Ghost who alwayes lodgeth and dwelleth
within these babes of God soiourning
here,1. Cor. 3. 16. as in his temple and cabinate:
yea, he is proclaimed to be the Gouernor,Rom. 8. 9.
and leader of these babes of God;
and good reason since he dwelleth in
them as in his owne house: for the which
cause the Apostle doth say, They that are
the sonnes of God are led by the Spirit.
                     Rom. 8. 14. But
here, ô my soule, I must necessarily require
thee one thing: how canst thou be
certified that this blessed Spirit dwelleth
in thee, accompanies thee, directs thee,
and gouernes thee?Eph. 4. 30. This Spirit, ô my
soule, is a seale, and who can receiue a
seale, and not feele the impression of it?
This Spirit is an earnest,2. Cor. 1. 2
                           •
                        . and who receiuing
an earnest pennie doth not know
that he hath receiued it?Eph. 1. 17. 18. This Spirit is
that heauenly light, by whom our darke
vnderstandings are illuminate, and who
cannot discerne betwixt light and darknesse?

This Spirit is that holy fire, inflaming
our frozen hearts with the zeale of
Gods glorie,Acts 2. 3. and the loue of his children:
and can fire carried by vs in the verie bosome
be hidde? Yea, this Spirit is that
purging fire which purgeth the babes of
God from the drosse of sinne dwelling in
them, to the end that at length they may
proue pure gold, to be layed vp in the
treasure of endlesse glorie?Mat. 3. 11. This Spirit is
that precious oyle wherby our hard stonie
hearts are mollified and made plyable
vnto the good will of God, which before
were so obdured against it,Psal. 45. 7. that they
would rather haue broken then bended
vnto any spirituall dutie.1. Ioh. 27. He is that oyle,
who beside this, supples as it were our
sti
                        ••
                     e members and ioints, making vs
actiue and nimble for the workes of
grace, and so for the seruice of our God.
Yea he is that oyle which maketh the
whole child of God within and without,
so to shine in the eyes of God his Father,
that he can glorie and ioy of them euen
before the diuels,Iob. 1. 8. as he boasted of Iob
when he said to him: Hast thou considered
my seruant Iob, how none is like him in the
earth, an vpright man and one that feareth

God and escheweth euill? And may we not
sensibly perceiue this alteration in vs, vnlesse
we be both dead and senslesse, and
so altogether destitute of this Spirit?Esay 44. 4. 61. 3. Yea,
this Spirit if that water which not onely
washeth vs, but being powred as it were
on the day ground of our hearts, maketh
the good seed of the good word of God
to grow in them as the willowes by the
riuers of waters:Iohn. 3. 5. for the which cause
the babes of God be styled the trees of
righteousnesse, and that planting the
Lord hath appointed for the glorifying of
him.Esay 61. 3. And these trees do bring forth the
fruites of the spirit: which be principally
nine. Loue, ioy, peace, long suffering,
gentlenesse,Gal. 5. 22. 23. goodnesse, faith, meekenesse,
temperance. Hath thy God, ô my
soule, fo farre aduanced thee, that he hath
made this his blessed Spirit to be thy
maister, director, leader, and keeper,
whilst thou so iurneth here. And wilt
thou not crie with Augustine,
                     Aug. in Ps. 91. out of a
sense of this thy estate, and happinesse
which accompanies, and shall alwayes
accompanie thee here? Desideremus, & amemus,
& flagremus, si sponsa sumus, sponsus
abest, sustinemus veiet quem desideramus,

tantum pignus dedit non time at sponsa, ne
desideretur a sponso, Non dimitit pignus suum:
quod pignus dedit? sanguinem suam fudit,
spiritum suum misit, talia pegnor a non amitiet
ille sponsus. Si non amaret talia pignor a non
daret, I am amat, ô si amaremus. If we be the
spouse of Iesus, let vs long for him, let vs loue
him, yea let vs burne in loue after him. Our
husband is absent from vs, if we beare that
patiently, he whom we long for will come. O
how great a pledge of his loue hath he giuen,
let not the spouse be affrayed least the husband
forsake her; he will not leaue his owne
pledge: what pledge hath he giuen? He hath
shed his owne bloud, he hath sent vnto vs his
owne holy Spirit, that our husband will not
leaue, nor forsake such pledges. If he loued
vs not he would not haue giuen vs such
pledges. Now he loues vs, ô
would to God we could
loue him.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THAT LANTERNE
MERCIFVLLY, AND
wisely prouided by this blessed Spirit,
the owner, and leader, director,
and keeper, of these babes of God in
that heauenly Chariot iourneying
towards heauen, is that sacred written
word of God, contained in the
bookes of the old and new Testament.
                  
                     OVr God hauing brought
the Israelites (after manie
wonders wrought by him,
in the land of Egypt, vpon
Pharoah, vpon his people
and countrie,)Exod. 13. 21. 22. out of the land of Egypt,
and set them in their iourney through the
wildernesse towards that promised Canaan,
did mercifully prouide them with a
faire pillar to leade them in their way.
And will his Maiestie, alwayes mindfull
of the wants of his owne, & euer delighting
to be good to them (euen while thee

repine against him) leaue vs, ô my soule,
without a light to guide our pathes
through this darke wildernesse of this
world towards his Canaan which is aboue?
not so, not so, ô my soule. But
what is that light by the which he will
haue our pathes thus directed, not anie
light deuised beneath here, kindled beneath
here by the darke braine of liuing,
deceiuing, and deceiued man? but that
light, which hath that blessed Father of
lights dwelling in that light inaccessible,
which neither man saw, neither shall see
for the author of it, and sent downe by
him from that his highest throne to enlighten
all these, who intended to liue
here for a while before him, looke hereafter
to liue by sight with him for euer?
Now this light is that written word of
God contained in holy Scripture:Mat. 13. 19. which
is seene,1. Pet. 2. 13. not mortall, but immortall seed,
whereby sonnes and daughters are begotten,
and borne againe through the
force of his grace, of these who by nature
are the sonnes and daughters of Adam,
                     1. Pet. 2. 1.
yea, the children of wrath. This word is
milke, yea sincere and pure milke, whereby
the sonnes and daughters of God thus

borne ouer againe are made to grow vp
in grace, till they become perfect men in
Christ Iesus.Deut. 8. 3. This word is Meate, yea
meate whereby these children of God are
strengehened,Ier. 15. 16. and confirmed, and so led
forward in their spirituall growth. This
word is Raine,Deut. 3
                           •
                        . 2. whereby the children are
made fruitefull to the glorie of God,Esay 55. 10. to
the good of their brethren,Heb. 6. 7. and to the
furthering of their owne saluation. This
word is Wine,Esay 55. 1. whereby the soules of Gods
children fainting and falling in a swound
as it were, and dying within them because
of their furious persecutors, and manie
crosses are refreshed, quickned and set
vp againe, making them to crie with Dauid:
Except thy Law had bene my delight I
should haue perished in my affliction.
                     Psal. 19. 92. This
word is Honie,Ezech. 3. 3. whereby all bitter tentations
and crosses are sweetened to the
child of God.Ier. 5. 14. This word is Fire, whereby
the child of God is purged.Ier. 23. 29. This word is
a Hammer, whereby the proud and hard
heart of man with his loftie foolish affections
is broken and brought low. This
word is a Sword,Esay 49. 2. yea a two edged sword,
by the which the children of God are first
spiritually wounded,Eph. 3. 17. Reu. 19. 15. and then happily

healed.Ezech. 4. 7. 12. This word is a Medicine, whereby
all the sicknesse, and sores of Gods
children are cured: yea this word of God
which is that onely lanterne, which directes
the steps of Gods child, yea that
onely Law of God,Psal. 119. 1. whereby he rules his
children:Ibid. that onely testimonie of God
whereby he reuealeth to mans will concerning
his glorie, and mans saluation.
The onely Way of God,Ibid. wherein he will
haue vs to walke, if we would walke
with him here, and rest with him hereafter.
The onely Precept of God, whereby
he informeth vs concerning these
things he would haue vs his children to
do.Ibid. Yea, this lanterne, is the Statures of
God, whereby our God prescribeth vnto
his people the Iewes, vnder the pedigree
of the Law, these outward Ceremonies
which they behoued to obserue in the
worshipping of him, not onely to the end
that by them they might be furthered in
the inward and onely true worship of his
name, but discerned from the rest of the
world aud knowne for his people.Ibid. It is the
Commandement of God, whereby his
Maiestie commands these things his
children should embrace, and forbiddes

these things they should eschew. It is the
Iudgement of God,Ibib. acquainting his children
with these punishments, God their
Father hath appointed for such, who dare
(abusing this lanterne of his word, and
refusing to be led by it) attempt to walke
in the broad way of wickednesse. Yea,
this lanterne is stiled by the verie stile of
the feare of the Lord,Psal. 19. 9. because it is out of
this booke alone, and by this booke alone
of the written word of God; God
the maister, and teacher of his owne,
teacheth them the same lesson of his
sauing feare, whereby they are made
to eschew euill, and to do good. Yea this
lanterne,Psal. 19. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. which is also. The Law, the Testimonie,
the Way, the Precept, the Statute,
the Commandement, and the feare of the
Lord: is so excellently excellent, that it is
Perfect, conuerting the soule; that it is pure,
giuing wisedome vnto the simple; that it is
right, reioycing the heart, that it is pure, giuing
light to the eyes; that it is cleane, and endureth
for euer; that it is true and righteous
altogether: and therefore more to be desired
then gold, yea, then most fine gold; sweeter
also then the honie, and the honie combe; by
the which the seruāt of God is made circumspect,

and in keeping whereof there is great reward.
Further I must tell thee, ô my soule,
that this lanterne of the written word, set
by God before his babes, for leading of
them towards him; is so profitable for
them, that it is able to redresse, and order
the way of a very yong man,Psal. 119. 9. raging
in the feauer of his furious lusts: if he can
be content to take heede to it, and to be
led by it. That it is able so to strengthen
the babe of God, that he cannot sinne against
his God, prouiding he keepe this
lanterne in the estate of his heart.Ibid. 10. 11. And no
wonder, for where this Lanterne is looked
vnto, and followed; it proues a counsellor
to all such as followes it, making
them wise to eschew euill and to do good.
And in a word,Ibid. 24. this Lanterne is the onely
comfort, delight, and meditation, yea,
the verie ioy of the hearts,Ibid. 50. 92 and heritage
of the children of God; making them
stand vnder,97. 111. 148. 162. and against all troubles; and
therfore they shaking off all drowsinesse,
securitie can preuent the night wiches to
meditate therein, reioycing more in it
then that man doth who hath found a
spoile. From my heart I wish, that the
Preachers, and professors of this time

could beginne to thinke of this lanterne
of the word, directing Gods babes towards
heauen,Aug. as Augustine thought, and
write of it long ago: Doctrina Apostolica
tamsalubris est, atque vtilis; vt pro capacitate
vtentium neminem sui exhortem relinquat
quia siue paruuli siue magni, siue infirmi
siue fortes, habent in ea vnde alantur, vnde satientur.
The doctrine of the Apostles, is so
wholesome and profitable, that according to
the capacitie of these who vse it, it leaues no
man without profiting by it; because in it, be
men yong, be they old, be they weake, be they
strong, they haue whereupon they may feede,
and with the which they may be filled. Oh,
Lord God, when shall the loose Christians
of this last age be enlightened, and
quickened in soule by thy Maiestie, in mercie
looking on their dead soules, in the
face of thy well beloued Sonne, begin to
account of that heauenly, and wholesome
poole of thy sacred, and sauing
word (now through the force of thy tender
mercies towards vs) running plentiously
through euerie Citie, euerie village,
euerie cottage? so that all persons
of all rankes (blessed be thy Maiestie for
thy kindnesse) may fully without feare

(in season, and out of season) resort hnto it
as these old Iewes accountd of that perishing
poole of Bethsesda? which was
not to be found but in the holy land, neither
in it euerie where but in the tribe of
Iudah; and that at Ieausalem onely. I must
confesse, ô my soule, that that Iewish
dead poole of Bethsesda, in foure things
resembled our Christian liuely poole of
the blessed word of God, and yet, I dare
affirme before God, Angels, and men,
that our blessed poole of the word surmounteth
that of Bethsesda, so farre in one
thing, that if men could take it to heart;
where one Iew esteemed of this poole,
and resorted vnto it, hundreth thousands
should esteeme of this poole of Gods
word; not onely carefully resorting
vnto it, but induring all their life
here, ioyfully delighting to dwell beside
it. First, whatsoeuer disease bodily a
man was subiect vnto, that Iewish poole
was able to cure: euen so, this our poole
of the word of God is able to cure the
sinner, of whatsoeuer spirituall sicknesse
can ouertake his soule, by reason of anie
sinne he can fall into. Secondly, as none
could be cured in bodie by that Iewish

poole, but such as stepped into it, and were
wet there with; so impossible is it that any
sinner can be freed from his sinnes by the
meane of Gods word, till his soule be bedewed
with it, and so till he be moued
and perswaded to heare, beleeue, and obey
it. Thirdly as that Iewish poole could
not possibly cure so much as one mans
bodie, till the Angell came downe and
troubled the water of it; so this poole of
the word cannot cure the soule of any sinner,1. Cor. 3. 6. 7.
till that blessed vncreated Angell,
euen the Spirit of the Father, and of his
dearest Son come downe as it were to his
soule, ioyning his inward vertue with his
outward word, and that way striking the
heart by his owne finger, as he striketh
the eare by his truth. Fourthly, as among
the Iewes no man knew when the Angell
would come downe & trouble the water
for curing of their diseased bodies,
which moued the sicke persons, looking
and longing for health, resorting to that
poole, constantly to lye still at it, not departing
for many dayes, weekes, moneths,
yea yeares, as is manifest by the practise
of that man who lay there 38. yeares. So
amongst vs Christians, there is neither

Preacher nor hearer, king nor subiect, man
nor woman, old nor yong, can possibly
know what day, what houre, what minute
that blessed Spirit of God will ioyne his
force & vertue with that his word which
is heard, making it effectuall to quicken
the dead, to enlighten the blind, to conuert
such as haue gone astray, to comfort
the broken hearted, and to confirme those
who stand. I would therefore aduise thee,
ô my soule, if thou be sensible of thy spirituall
wants, and if thou long to haue
them supplied, to resort thither where
thou mayest heare his word, crying to thy
God with Dauid.
                     Psal. 27. 4. 
                     One thing haue I desired
of the Lord, that I will require, euen that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
dayes of my life, to behold the beautie of the
Lord, and to visit his temple. Yea, it were
good, ô my soule, in this respect that thou
resolued with Anna,
                     Luk. 2. 36. 37. that religious old
widow neuer to go out of his Temple, but
to serue him there with fasting and prayer
night and day. But, ô my soule, lift vp
thy selfe on high, and hearken euen with
greedinesse, I pray thee, to the end thou
mayest heare, and consider that one thing,
yea, that incomparable, profitable one

thing, wherein this heauenly poole of
Gods word, accompanied by his Spirit,
excelleth, yea, surmounteth that visible
Iewish poole of Bethesda. Could that
Iewish poole, ô my soule, euen being
troubled by the Angell, possibly cure moe
at once, or one onely? one onely, for no
moe at one time were cured by it, beside
that person who first stepped in after the
troubling of it, as the Scripture testifieth.
But as for our poole of the Word (blessed
be that God who hath inriched and honored
thee, ô my soule, with it) it can
cure and make whole at one time scores,
hundreths, thousands, diseased in soule,
what euer sinnes they haue committed. O
Peter, the healing streames of this curing
poole did flow so abundantly out of thy
mouth, that Spirit of Iesus thy Maister
(who came downe vpon thee in the day of
Pentecost) ioyning his vertue with them,
that not one soule onely, nor ten, nor
twentie, nor an hundreth, nor a thousand,
but euen three thousand diseased, yea,
dead soules were that day added vnto the
Church.Act. 2. 41. Could this be considered, ô my
soule, ô how frequently, ô how busily, ô
how ioyfully would men of all rankes and

conditions resort to this blessed poole of
the word of God! O how carefully and
attentiuely would men, resorting to it
with Cornelius,
                     Act. 10. 33. hearken to it! yea, ô how
earnestly would they in their chambers
(awayting for the Spirit of God with the
Apostles) pray for the spirit, to the end
that his vertues being ioyned with that
word, they resolue to heare in the publike
congregation, they might haue their dead
diseased soules cured and quickned thereby!
Woe is me, woe is me, ô my soule, that
so many enioying great peace, hauing neither
forraine nor intestine enemies inuading
them, should so grosly neglect this
Lanterne of the good word of God setled
among them, and shining so clearely
before them, should refuse to eate with
pleasure that nourishing quickening
bread, and to drinke with delight in this
their great peace, that refreshing strengthening
wine offered to them by this
Lanterne; wherewith besides this their
peace, they are inriched and blessed by
that great God, who is the sole giuer and
continuer of spirituall and temporall blessings?
When I begin to compare the 3.
verse of the 8. of Deuteronomie with the

54. 55. 56. & 57. verses of the 28. of Deuteronomie,
with the 28. and 29. verses of
the 6. of the 2. of the Kings; with the 10.
verse of the 4. of the Lamentations of Ieremie,
and with the 11. and 12. verses of
the 8. of Amos; I must deplore the deafenesse
of the eares of men, refusing to
heare, and the hardnesse of the hearts of
men refusing to beleeue; and the leudnesse
of the liues of men refusing to obey, that
onely louing true God, trauelling by the
lanterne of his word to winne them from
sinne to himselfe. Man liueth not by bread
onely,
                     Deut. 8. 3. 
                     but by euerie word which proceedeth
out of the mouth of the Lord. Alwayes because
man cannot be content willingly
to embrace this bread of the word, to eate
this bread of the word, and by faith ioyfully,
not without a speciall sense and triumph
to digest it. Alas, alas, that sweetest
God of rarest mercies who delightes alwayes
to benefit his owne, and cannot
from his heart punish them, is compelled
at length to make the tender and exceeding
daintie husband,Lam. 3. 33. brother, father, mother,
content when peace shall be farre
from them, yea, when they shall be vnder
bloudie warres, to eate euen with greedinesse

the very flesh of their wiues, their
brethren, and their children. Oh, ô my
soule, when shall the eares of those who
in this our great peace neglects, contemnes,
and in a vowed manner mockes,
that wholsome and healing bread, that
comforting wine of the good word of
God; lend with a hearing eare, an vnderstanding
heart, to perceiue that which I
finde written beside Ieremiah?
                     Lam. 4. 10. 
                     The hands
of the pitifull women haue sodden their owne
children, which were their meate in the destruction
of the daughter of my people. Yea,
when shall that complaint made by that
woman vnto the king of Israel vpon her
sister, while Samaria was besiedged hardly
by the king of Aram, be hearkened vnto,
be regarded by our contemners and mockers
of that word of God? This woman
said to me,
                     2. King. 6. 28. 29. 
                     giue thy sonnè that we may eate
him to day, and we will eate my sonne to morrow;
so we sod my sonne, and did eate him: and
I said to her the day after, giue thy sonne that
we may eate him to day, but she hath bid her
sonne. Be wise, be wise, ô my soule, I pray
thee, for he whom thy God hath once, out
of vndeserued loue and mercie, possessed
with that bread and wine of his blessed

word, being in Gods iustice for sinne depriued
of it, shall with griefe of heart, bitter
teares, and laborious paines, be compelled
to seek after it: for is not this threatened,
ô my soule, against the abuses of
that food of the word by thy God: Behold
the dayes commeth,
                     Amos 8. 11. 12. 
                     saith the Lord, that
I will send a famine in the land, not a famine
for bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing
the word of the Lord, and they shall wander
from sea to sea, and from the North euen to
the East shall they runne to and fro, to seeke
the word of the Lord, and shall not finde it.
These of the first world refuse in most
stubborne manner, in the day of their
peace, to drink in these sweetest waters of
the cleansing and cooling word of God,
distilling from the soft lippes of faithfull
Noah, that painfull Preacher of righteousnesse.
But alas, are they not compelled
when their long abused peace is ended,
and iustly turned in fearefull warre, not
onely to swallow in, but to be drowned in
these deuouring waters of that fearefull
deludge,Gen. 6. 7. 8. which they by their contempt of
that sweetest Lanterne & bread of Gods
word (louingly for the space of a hundredth
and twentie yeares with manie

grones and teares offered vnto them)
from the heauens brought vpon themselues?
Those yong men who should haue
married Lots daughter, refuse tauntingly
to admit that purging fire of Gods word,
brought to their eares from God by the
mouth of Lot, which had proued sufficiently
able to haue saued them, if they had
hearkened to him: and therefore consuming
fire must come from the Lord (who
cannot suffer his word and seruants to be
mocked) to destroy them. Ierusalem hath
that two edged sword drawne vnto her
by our sweetest Maister, and his painfull
Apostles; first, to wound and lance her for
her many grosse sinnes, and thereafter to
cure her if she could haue beleeued and
repented. But, alas, is not Ierusalem compelled
within a few yeares afterward to
see that strange sharpest bloudie sword of
the Romane Emperour drawne against
her ancients, her counsellers, her priests,
her people, her infants, to her finall and
most fearefull destruction, as by-gone ages
these sixteene hundred yeares hath
seene, and as we presently may heare? I
tremble, I tremble, when I thinke vpon
this, ô my soule, and shake when looking

vnto God, I remember how gratiously,
how mercifully, and how miraculously
our God hath inriched this kingdome
with that shining lanterne, that wholsome
bread, and purest wine of his word, and
that in despight of the subtiltie of the
power, and of the diligence of hellish and
earthly powers; so that no kingdome, no
Prouince, nor Citie, in this earth had that
Lanterne of Gods word more clearely,
more purely shining among them, then
Scotland had; and yet how grosly, and in a
vowed vnnaturall maner, as if that Booke
of God had neuer bene seene, or hard by
vs, do men giue ouer themselues to the
committing of those sinnes which were
neuer committed by the very Gentiles,
who had no such Lanterne to direct them
but were left to the direction of blind nature
altogether? And therefore I must
thinke, that not onely shall we be depriued
of this Lanterne, but beside it, of that
peace we haue enioyed with it; hauing
our rulers, our people, men, women, old,
yong, cruelly cut in peeces with the bloudie
sword of some mercilesse stranger
dwelling abroad, or of some cruell brethren
lodging amongst our selues; because

we will not suffer our sinnes to be slaine
by that sharpe shearing, and yet happily
sauing sword of that good word of God
our mercifull Father.
               
               
                  THE COACHMAN IN
the wise mercie of that blessed Spirit
of God, appointed to carrie that Lanterne
of the written word of God, before
the babes of God soiourning here,
is the Minister of God: vnder the
Law, now called the Man of God,
the Seer, the Watchman.
                  THat blessed Spirit of God, by whom
that Lanterne of the word is prepared,
for enioying the babes of God towards
that Inne of heauen; knowing that
this Lanterne cannot possibly profit them
vnto saluation, vnlesse it be put in the
hands of some guide, by whom it may be
so holden forth vnto them, that they may
see the light of it, and by seeing the light
of it, may be moued to know that holy
one, to beleeue in that holy one, who gaue
himselfe for them, and by beleeuing in
him may be led to saluation: hath happily

and mercifully found out a bearer to carry
this Lanterne before them, & to discouer
vnto thē that shining, sauing, light which
is offered by it. But hath this blessed wise
Spirit appointed this lanterne to be carried
before the babes of God, by any celestiall
spirit or Angell? not so, not so, ô my soule,
but by one who is like to those babes of
God (before whom this Lanterne is carried)
in all things. And here I must pray
thee, ô my soule, to stay a little, to the end
before I speake any more touching this
point, thou mayest be moued to aduance
the great wisedome of Gods vnspeakable
mercie and compassion towards miserable
man, whom he doth out of vndeserued
loue, transport from this sinfull earth towards
his holy heauens. I am not ignorant,
ô my soule, that these heauenly Angels
be ministring spirits,Heb. 1. 14. sent forth to minister
for their sakes which shall be heires
of saluation, as thou shalt here; but with
this I know that no man liuing were able
to abide the presence of these spirits, if our
God should imploy them to be Carriers
of this Lanterne of his word, & to instruct
vs in the knowledge of it. Did the face of
Moses shine so gloriously when he came

downe from the mount, where he was
with God but for the space of 40. dayes;
that the Israelites were afraid to come
neare him, till he put a vaile vpon his face?
and shall sinfull man be able to abide the
presence of these Angels, who alwayes
stand before God, and who be altogether
free of sinne? I know that an Angell appeared
to Manoah the father of Samson,
but with this I know, that Manoah was so
rauished with the glorie of this Angell,
that he was readie to haue offered a sacrifice
vnto him. I know that that sublime
booke of the Reuelation was put in the
hands of the Apostle Iohn,
                     Iud. 13. by the ministerie
of an Angell: but tels not Scripture
me, that euen this Iohn was moued so
with the presence and sight of the Angell,
that ouer and ouer againe he fell downe
at his feete to worship him. And therefore
our blessed God (onely perfectly acquainted
with the weaknesse and vilenes
of man) pitying sinfull man, will haue euen
a sinfull man like vnto man himselfe,
whose presence he may easily abide,
whose voice without any dashing feare,
or confounding astonishment he may
heare, to be the Carrier of yt Lanterne, by

the which his babes must be led from this
wildernesse to his Canaan. And so this
Coachman of this heauenly Chariot is a
poore Minister, separated by God from among
men, to carrie the Lanterne of the
word before his children, who so soone
as he is separate to this end, must necessarily
denie himselfe, his parents, his brethren,
and all belongeth vnto him, or can
alledge any kinde of interest with him;
hauing no father, mother, wife, brethren,
sisters, friend, or alliance, beside that God
who hath separate him from them for
himselfe:Deut. 33. 8. 9. readie with Leui to say to his
father and his mother,Exod. 31. 27. 
                     I haue not seene him:
yea, not knowing his brethren, nor his
owne children, but with this same Leui
putting his sword by his side to slay his
brother, his companion, and his neighbour;
that so he may resemble that holy
one who hath separate him for himselfe:
who hearing this said to him: Behold thy
mother and thy brethren stand without,
                     Mat. 12. 47. 48. 49. 50. 
                     desiring
to speake with thee: did answer him who
told him that, thus: Who is my mother, and
who are my brethren? And stretching forth
his hands towards his disciples, did say: Behold
my mother, and my brethren, for whosoeuer

shall do my Fathers will which is in heauen,
the same is my brother, my mother, and
my sister. This Minister and Coachman is
so strictly tyed by that spirit the Coachmaister,
who calles and imployes them,
vnto the Lanterne of the written word of
God, put in his hand for ordering the children
of God in their spirituall iourney,
that he doth see nothing to be good, and
embrace it, but that this Lanterne proclaimeth
to be good, and vnderstandeth nothing
to be euill, and refuseth it, but that
this Lanterne proclaimeth to be euill; and
therefore he will not obey any, but these
the Spirit his Maister by this Lanterne put
in his hand, directs him to obey; and dare
disobey all, the spirit his maister by this
Lanterne directs him to disobey. And so,
when king or subiect of any estate or condition,1. King. 22. 13. 14.
doth say vnto him: Behold now the
words of the Prophets declare good vnto the
King with one accord, let thy word therefore
I pray thee be like the word of one of them,
and speake thou good: he answereth them
couragiously with Michaiah: As the
Lord liueth, whatsoeuer the Lord saith vnto
me, that I will speake. The consideration of
this point moued the Spirit speaking of

those ministers, Carriers of this Lanterne
before the babes of God, for their spirituall
benefit to stile them.1. Cor. 4. 15 These sundrie
fathers, who in Christ beget; sonnes and
daughters to God through the Gospell:
and these sundrie mothers,Gal. 4. 19. trauelling in
birth of the children of God till Christ be
borne in them;1. Cor. 4. these stewardes by whom
the secrets of God are dispensed; the
gardiners,Esay 61. 3. by whom the trees of righteousnesse,1. Cor. 3. 6. 7.
Gods children, be planted and
watered; the husbandmen, by whom that
immortall seed of Gods word is sowne
into the hearts of Gods children, bringing
forth, in some thirtie, in some sixtie,
in some a hundredth fold.1. Cor. 39. The spirituall
masons,Mat. 13. 23. by whom the babes of God, as
liuely stones, are layed vpon that true and
onely foundation Christ Iesus,1. Cor. 3. 9. 10. to grow
vp in a spirituall building to God. These
secundarie Sauiours,1. Tim. 4. 16. who faithfully and
painefully holding forth this Lanterne
before Gods babes, and taking heed vnto
themselues, do become Sauiours both
to saue themselues and them that heare
them: yea they be sundrie Mediators who
in the day of the Lords wrath,Num. 6. 16. 47. 48. be bound
with Aaron to offer vp their prayers to

God leading thē to the mediation of that
great mediator Iesus, to the end that feared
plagues may be auerted from the people
of God, and these, which are alreadie,
stayed. But what is that, ô my soule,
vnto the which this Coachman, the
Carrier of this Lanterne of the word
must take heed vnto; to the end
he may proue indeed a father, a mother,
a steward, a gardiner, a husbandman,
a mason, a Sauiour, a Mediator, for
the aduancement of the saluation of Gods
babes, and of his owne? Out of Scripture
I haue learned, that he must necessarily
obiect two points; fearing alwayes to
ouersee himselfe in either of them: to wit,
vnto his doctrine, marking narrowly
what, and how he teacheth; vnto his life,
watching carefully ouer his words, actions,
and carriage. It were good that the
ministers of this our time, Carriers of the
Lanterne of Gods word, keepe a good
eye vpon that Lace, wherewith our wise
God would haue the skirts of Aarons
robe decked, to wit, with a Pomegranat
of blew silke, purple, and scarlot; and
with golden bells: so that round about
the skirts of his robes there was to be

seene, a golden bell, and pomgranate.
The bell making a sound when it was
heard, the pomgranate sauoring deliciously
when it was smelled. So that the
Carriers of the word must sound well
through that doctrine they teach, must
smell well through their holy life, answerable
to this doctrine. Thou hearest thy
Sauiour, ô my soule, directing his Apostles
thus:Mat. 28. 19 20. 
                     Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, the
Sonne, and the holy Ghost; teaching them to
obserue all things whatsoeuer I haue commanded
you. But hearest thou him not also
thus informing them: yea are the salt of the
earth, but if the salt lose his sauour, wherewith
shall the earth be salted;
                     Mat. 5. 13. 14. 
                     it is then good
for nothing, but to be cast out & to be trodden
vnder foote of men: yea are the light of the
world; a citie that is set on a hill cannot be hid?
Hearest thou not Paul thus directing Timothie.
                     1. Tim. 4. 13.
                     Till I come giue attendance to reading,
to exhortation, and to doctrine? But
hearest thou him not in that same place
charging him also:2. Tim. 4. 12. 
                     Let no man despise thy
youth, but be vnto them that beleeue, an ensample,
in word, in conuersation, in loue, in
spirit, infaith, and in purenesse. Hearest thou

not Paul againe thus directing his Timothie:
                     2. Tim. 1. 15.
                     Studie to shew thy selfe approued vnto
God, a workeman that needeth not to be ashamed,
diuiding the word of God aright. But
with this hearest thou him not saying vnto
him? Flee also from the lusts of youth, and
follow after righteousnesse,
                     22. 
                     faith, loue, and
peace; with them that call on the Lord with
pure hearts. As for that doctrine the Carrier
of this Lanterne must teach the children
of God, it must no wayes be inuented
by him; albeit in season, and out of
season, it must be vented by him. Shall
Balaam answer King Balac thus: If Balac
would giue me his house full of siluer, and
gold,
                     Num. 22. 28. 
                     I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord
my God to do lesse or more? And shall anie
who would proue faithfull to him, who
hath called him, speake that in Gods
name with his mouth, which God by his
spirit, and word, hath not put in his mouth?
That spoken by our God to Ezechiel
would be thought vpon.Ezec. 3. 17. 
                     Sonne of man I
haue made thee a watchman in the house of
Israel, therefore heare the word at my
mouth, and giue them warning from me.
This moued Peter thus to direct the
handlers of Gods word.1. Pet. 4. 11. 
                     If anie man speake,

let him speake as the word of God. And therefore
the man of God taking heede to his
doctrine, must not attempt to bring any
thing to the eares of Gods people, his
hearers, but that which he hath receiued
from the mouth of God their Father,
and his maister, speaking vnto him
out of holy Scripture, for our God that
wise Father of his Church, will haue his
children to be fed vpon no meate besides
his owne. Herefore while Moses is raised
vp of God, to gouerne his people Israel,
he did receiue that law from God by, the
which he must gouerne them. Albeit the
Prophets were stirred vp of God to
speake to his people, yet did they begin
and end their Sermons thus.Amos. 1. 13. 15. 
                     Thus saith the
Lord: For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
it.
                     Esay 1. 20. This moued the Apostle not onely to
say; Be ye followers of me euen as I am of
Christ, but also though we, or an Angel
from heauen,
                     1 Cor 11. 1 
                     preach vnto you otherwayes
then that which we haue preached vnto you
let him be accursed.
                     Gal. 1. 8. 
                     Augustine subscribing to
this saith,Aug in Ioan, crast. 5. 
                     Tunc ea, quae dicimus, & nobis, &
vobis vtilia sunt sia Deo sunt; quae autem ab
hominibus sunt, mendacia sunt. Then these
things which we speake, be profitable vnto vs

and you when they are of God, but these
things which be of men be lies. The sense
hereof moued Vincentius Lirinensis,
                     Vincent. thus
to direct the preachers of the Gospell:Lirnien.
                     Quod tibi ceditum, non quod a te inuentum;
non author esse debes sed custos; non institutor,
sed sectator; non ducens, sed sequens: vt cum
dixeris noue, non tamen noua. Preach that
which is committed to thee, not that which
is inuented by thee: thou should stnot be an
Author, but a keeper; not a beginner, but a
follower, not leading, but following; so that
while thou speakest after a new manner, thou
speake no new thing. O would to God yt all
Carriers of this Lanterne could hearken
vnto that deliuered long ago, touching
the ministers of the Gospell, by that famous
Father Augustine:
                     Aug. de postore cap. 1. 
                     Nos quos Dominus
in isto loco de quo periculosa ratio redditur
secundum dignationem suam, non secundum
meritum nostrum constituit, habemus,
duo quaedam: Vnum quod Christiani sumus,
propter nos est; quod autem praepo sti sumus,
propter vos est. In eo quod Christiani sumus,
attenditur vtilit as nostra: in eo quod praepositi
sumus, non nisi vestra. Sunt multi Christiani,
& non praepositi, qui perueniunt ad Deum
facileore fortasse itinere, & tanto expeditius

ambulantes, quanto minorem sarcinam portant;
nos autem excepto quod christiani sumus,
vnde rationem reddemus deo de vita
nostra, sumus etiam praepositi vnde rationem
reddemus deo de dispensatione nostra. We
whom God hath set in this place (whereof
there is a dangerous account to be giuen) according
to his free loue, and not according to
our merit, haue some two things: one that we
are Christians, another that we are Preachers;
That that we are Christians, is for
our selues; but that we are preachers, is for
you. In that we are Christians our profite is
respected; in that that we are Preachers
yours. There be manie Christians, and not
Preachers who perhaps come to God by a
easier iourney, walking so much the more
quickly in so farre as they carrie a lighter
burthen. But we besides this that we are
Christians, for the which we shall giue an account
vnto God of our life; we are also Preachers,
for the which we shall giue an account
of our dispensation and stewardship. Now
while this Carrier of the Gospell, hath
with his doctrine his life to order and
dresse; he must know that it were expedient
for him in a manner, first to take
heed to his life, and therefore to his doctrine:

for he who is not a good Christian
liuing as becomes the child of God to
liue, shall neuer be a good Preacher,
handling the word of God as it becommeth
Gods steward to handle it. The
sense hereof moued Chysostome thus to
speake:Chrysost. hom. 30. 14. 
                     Perquam facile est Philosophari
verbis; doce me vita tua: haec doctrina est optima,
si non habueris opus bonum, non solum
non proderis loquendo, sed etiam plus oberis,
quia sic mihi proponis opus vt esset 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
It is a verie easie thing to discourse in words;
teach me by thy life, that doctrine is best of all.
If thou haue not goodworkes, not onely shalt
thou not profite by speaking, but thou shalt also
more hurt, because that way, thou setst a
good worke before me as if it were impossible
to be done.
                     Ferra. Carthag. This moued Ferrardus Carthaginensis
to write thus Prima Pastoris virtus
est bene viuere; secunda recte docere. The first
vertue of a minister is to liue well: the second
to teach rightly.
                     Bern. 
                     Bernard out of this sense
could speake to Preachers thus. Consonet
vita tua verbis, & statim erit in 
                           •
                        re tuo viuax
& efficax sermo Dei, & penetrabilior
quouis gladio ancipiti. Let thy life be answerable
to thy words, and presently, the word of
God in thy mouth, shall be liuely and powrefull

and sharper then anie two edged sword.
And againe, Pascat minister tripliciter: verbo
praedicationis, exemplo conuersationis, &
fructu orationis. Let the Minister of Gods
word, feed Gods flocke three wayes; by the
word preached by him; by the example of his
life; and by the fruite of his prayers. But to
the loose and lewd Ministers, doth not
Bernard say:Ber. in dectum. 
                     Sumptus ecclesiasticos gratis habere
te putas, cantando, vt aiunt, tibi prouenire
videntur, sed bonum erat magis fodere,
aut etiam mendicare: peccata enim populi comedis,
ac si propria tibi minus sufficere viderē
                        tur:
Vae, vae, tibi clerice mors in ollis mors in olla
carnium, mors in huiusmodi delicijs est. Thou
thinkest that thou hast the Church reuenewes
for nothing: they appeare to come in, as they
say, singing to thee; but it were good for thee
rather to winne thy liuing by digging or begging:
for thou eatest the sinnes of the people, as
if thy owne sinnes were to few too lie vpon thee.
Wo, wo, to thee, ô Church-man, death is in
thy pot, death is in the pots of flesh, death is
in such dainties. It were to be wished that
the liues of all Ministers were agreeable
to their doctrine; and that not so
much as one of them should resemble
these stones which are set vp by the hie

wayes side to direct men in the right
pathes, while they themselues moue neuer
a foote.Phil. 1. 16. 18. But seeing the great wisedome
of our God, (whose wayes are vnsearchable)
hath thought good to employ
both good and bad Ministers to carrie
the Lanterne of his word; and seeing
it falleth oftentimes forth, that God maketh
his word in the mouth of a faithfull
sanctified Minister, the sauour of death
vnto death, and that same word in the
mouth of a hyreling, void of grace and
holinesse, the sauour of life vnto life, to
the end, that Gods wise holy people
should learne not to depend vpon men,
but vpon God who employes them, ascribing
vnto his Maiestie the whole praise
of their conuersation, and saluation, and
not to the instrument. Let no good Christian
be perswaded by Satans subtiltie,
to thinke euill of the cleane and sauing
word of God, because of the corruption
and wickednesse of him that carrieth it;
for this were to refuse a precious rich
iewell, because it were carried in an vncleane
bagge. The consideration hereof
moued our Maister (happily before hand
strenghthening vs against this tentation)

speaking to the multitude, and to his disciples
touching the Scribes and Pharises
to say:Mat. 13. 1. 2. 3. 
                     The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses seate, all therefore whatsoeuer they
bid you obserue; that obserue and do: but after
their workes do not, for they say and do
not.
                     Chrysost. 
                     Chrysostome writing vpon these
words takes directly occasion thus to
speake vnto the hearers of the word of
God touching the Preachers of it: Natura
eorum ipsorum est, ordinatio autem eorum
vestra; si bene vixerint eorum est lucrum, si
bene docuerint vestrum est. Accipite ergo
quod vestrum est, & nolite discutere quod
alienum est: frequenter & de homine malo
bona doctrina procedit. The nature of the
Preachers is their owne, their ordination is
yours: if they liue well that is their profite; if
they teach well that is your profite: take that
which is yours, and meddle not with that
which is anothers: yea, oftentimes good doctrine
comes from an euill man. And againe,
Ecce vilis terra pretiosum aurum producit,
numquid propter terram vilem pretiosum aurum
contemnitur? Non, sed sicut aurum eligitur
& terra relinquitur, sic & vos doctrinam
accipite, & mores relinquite. Nam vt
apibus herbae necessariae non sunt, sed flores
herbarum; flores enim illae colligunt, herbas

vero relinquunt; sic vos flores doctrinae eligite
& conuersationem relinquite, vt quasi inutilis
herba arescat. Behold doth not barren ground
bring forth pretious gold: now is the pretious
gold, contemned for the vile ground? not, but
as the gold is chosen, the ground left; so take
your selues to the doctrine, and leaue his manners:
for as herbes are not necessarie vnto bees
but the floures of the herbes; for they gather
the floures and not the herbes. So gather ye
the floures of the Preachers doctrine, but
leaue his life that it may wither as an vnprofitable
herbe. Alwayes let such Ministers
know that they shall not escape a heauie
wrath; for he who was avenged long ago
vpon Nadab and Abihu,
                     Leuit. 10. vpon Hophne
and Phineas:
                     1. Sam. 4. and who hath informed vs
touching that monstrous end ouertaketh
the vnsauorie salt, shall be auenged vpon
them, and make them to repent that euer
they take vpon them to declare Gods ordinance,
and take his couenant in his
mouth, seeing they hated to be reformed
thereby. O! if these Ministers whose
words be faire, whose workes be foule;
whose doctrine sauoures of God, and
whose doings be alway sinfull, smelling
of that euill one; could hearken vnto that
watch word sounded by Chrysostome in

the place alledged in ye eares of Ministers.
Bene viuendo, & bene docendo, populum instruis
quomodo debeat viuere: Bene autem
docendo, & male viuendo, Deum instruis quomodo
te debeat condemnare. By liuing well, and
teaching well, thou instructs the people of God
how they should liue, but by teaching well, and
liuing wickedly, thou teachest God how he
should condemne thee. Wo is me, wo is me, ô
my soule, y• so many baptized in the name
of Iesus, should thinke and speake of that
good word of Iesus, which is the onely
word of life, as that reprobate Pharoah
thought, and speake of that good word of
God sounded by Moses and Aaron,
                     Exod. 5. 9. vnto
the Israelites, and vnto him selfe; directing
his taskmasters thus to speake to the people:
Let them not regard vaine words. When
we Christians consider this, ô my soule, we
all condemne Pharoah: But (alas) how many
be there among vs, who say not onely
in their hearts, but with their lippes, yea
by their works: The words of God be vaine
words. O Idolaters, blasphemers, adulterers,
and other grosse sinners; if that at
any time ye resort to the house of God,
what whisper yea one to another? and
when ye go forth from his house, what

be your speeches? Let yonder blast go,
yonder winde shaketh no corne. Hearken for
Gods cause, ô my soule, our God hath
not mens cornes in such account, neither
counteth he so basely of his word that he
will daine to shake their cornes with it
for he hath a baser wind, of the which he
counteth not so much; whereby he is
able to shake all the cornes in the world.
Besides this I must tell thee, ô my soule,
albeit that word which the men of God
preach, shaketh not mens cornes, yet it
can shake Kings, and Queenes and subiects
of all estates. That same Pharoah,
who durst open his blasphemous mouth
gainst Gods word found this to be true
by a dolefull experience: for shakes not
him that word of God spoken by Moses
out of his royall Chariot, when he was riding
securely there, in the bottome of the
sea? yea, in the dungeon of hell? Shooke
not that word, spoken by Ieremiah, Zedekiah
King of Iudath, not only out of his
royall palace at Ierusalem, but sent him in
captiuitie into Babel? O poore Iewes
shall eue
                        •
                      a tempestuous whirlewind,
scatter an heape of light chaffe towards
the foure corners of the earth so miserably

as that word of God spoken by Iesus
and his Apostles vnto our fathers, hath
scattered you and your predecessors these
fifteene hundred yeares by one. We reade
that a blast or two of this wind of the
word of God, did shake a king so that it
changed his countenance, it loosed his
loynes, and made his knees the one to
smite against the other, sitting at his owne
table at a banquet royall,Dan. 5. 5. 6. accompanied
with his Queene and his counsellers. We
reade likewise in Scripture, that a blast
of this wind blowne by a man of God,
standing at a barre to be accused, made
his iudge to shake and tremble: for while
Paul is disputing of righteousnesse, and
temperance, and of the iudgement to
come, Felix the iudge trembled so, that he
might abide Pauls presence no longer:Act. 24. 26.
saying, Go thy wayes for this time, and when
I haue a conuenient time I shall call for thee.
Were the desolate houses and old liuings
amongst vs fearefully burthened, and miserably
wracked, and daily changed from
man to man, from surname to surname,
looked vnto, it might serue sufficiently to
make the lewdest amongst vs refraine
from attempting to stile that good word

of God Vanitie or wind. If thou loue thy
selfe herefore, ô my soule, abhorre to
thinke or speak of the word of God with
Pharoah, and learne to thinke and to speak
of it as thy God hath directed thee; and so
thinke thou, and speake you of it, as of that
milke the new borne babes of God are
nourished by; as of that bread wherewith
Gods children are fed; as of that wine
whereby they are refreshed and comforted;1. Pet. 3. 1.
as of that fire whereby the remnant
of the drosse of their sinnes are purged
from them,Deut. 8. 3. and they are purified as pure
gold,Luk. 2. 32. to be layd vp in that cleane treasure
which is aboue;Ier. 23. 29. as of that heauie hammer
which is able to breake and bruise in peeces
all such as dare contemne it: yea, in a
word,Ezec 47. 12 as of that meate whereby their hungrie
soules are fed; and as of that medicine
whereby their sicke and wounded soules
are bound vp and cured. The sense hereof
moued Bernard thus to write:Bern. in Virg. Pet. ser. 2. 
                     Ego vnum
timeo, ne toties audit a verba salutis vilescere
nobis incipiant, tanquam verba aërem verberantia,
& sicut folium quod vento rapitur effluit;
nemo vestrum sic accipiat, fructus vitae
sunt verba Dei, non folia; & si folia, sed aurea,
proinde non parui pendantur, non pertranseunt,

sed colligantur singula, etiam ipsa
fragmenta. This one thing I feare, lest the
words of saluation being so oft heard, become
of no estimation in our account, as words striking
the aire, and as a leafe carried by the
wind flies away: Let none of you take the matter
so, the words of God are fruites of life, and
not leafes; and if they be leafes, yet they are
golden leafes, and therefore not to be lightened
and passed by, but to be gathered vp euen euerie
crumme of them. O Lord God, when
shall men begin to haue the preaching of
the sacred word (though sounded by
heard-men, by fishers, and so by the very
of-scourings of the earth) in any kind of
reuerence? for what heard by mans eare in
this our dead time is so neglected, is so despised
by mans heart, as thy Maiesties
word preached is? Alas, alas, ô Lord God,
that blind man should suffer himselfe willingly
to be deceiued by that great deceiuer
Satan; so farre as to despise that specially
which thy wise Maiestie hath highly
aduanced? Tell me, tell me, ô my soule,
whereby is it that thy mercifull wise God
hath appointed that sauing grace of his to
be conueyed to thee on earth here, which
is onely able to bring thee to that perfect

glorie which is aboue? It is not, ô my
soule, by the touching of thine hand, or
any other member of thy bodie, nor by
the smelling of thy nosthrils, nor by the
sight of thine eyes, that God will grant
vnto thee that grace on earth in time,
which must crowne thee with glorie
when time shall ceasse: but it is by the
hearing of thine eare that thy God will do
this. Let others neglect this, let others
mocke this: alwayes, ô my soule, when
thou hearest this, I charge thee that thou
reioyce; I charge thee that thou leape for
ioy within me: for by this would not thy
blessed powerful God, whose wayes passe
finding out, not onely ouerthrow, but also
mocke the malice and craft of the diuell,
to his Maiesties great glory, to Satans
sensible shame, and to thy euerlasting
comfort? O malitious subtle serpent, who
did cunningly conuey by Euahes eares,
that fearefull poyson towards her soule,
which was able to slay her, her husband,
and their posteritie. But is not my good
God both mercifull and powerfull, able
to conuey to my soule, euen by my eare,
that wholsome salue whereby thy poyson
is not onley made ineffectuall, but I am

made to liue for euer? Thou feest, thou
smellest, thou touchest, thou trustest, yea,
thou readest (ô man) many things. Alwayes
vnderstand, it is not by thy sight, by
thy smelling, by thy touching, by thy tasting,
yea, it is not by thy reading (if thou
attempt to despise hearing, and so to contemne
the word preached) that thou canst
be saued. O when shall that golden chaine
of saluation presented to vs by Paul, first
be reuerenced, and then be embraced and
kept by vs?Rom. 10. 13. 14. 15. 17. 
                     Whosoeuer shall call vpon the
name of the Lord shall be saued: but how shall
they call on him in whom they haue not beleeued?
& how shall they beleeue in him, of whom
they haue not heard? and how shall they heare
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach
except they be sent? then faith is by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Out of this
sense Bernard said most truly:Bern. ser. 28 in Cant. 
                     Aur is prima
mortis ianua, prima aperitur & vitae. The
eare which was the first port of death, is first
opened to life.
                  
                  Woe is me, woe is me, ô my soule, that
so many in this our time should know
where this Lanterne of the word shineth,
and by whom it is carried, and that so few
should resort towards it: yea, that so few

euen of these who resort vnto it, should
profit to saluation by it. Were I demanded
whereof it commeth, that of an hundred
infected in soule with that spirituall
leprosie of sinne, presenting themselues
before the carriers of Gods word, within
Gods house, to be cleansed by that cleane
and cleansing water of his word, scarce
one go backe cleansed and washed in
soule from their sinnes: I durst answer, euen
before that blessed God the searcher
of my heart, that this commeth to passe,
because scarce one of an hundred drawes
neare Gods house, drawes neare Gods seruants
handling his word in his house,
with due premeditation, and holy consideration,
weighing as the child, as the domesticke,
and as the scholler of God
should do; what a God he is before whom
they appeare, what a word that is which
is to be heard there, and what manner of
persons they themselues be, who do present
themselues there. They appeare before
that God who lookes not on the outward
appearance,1. Sam. 15. 7. but who beholdeth the
heart, and who will be sanctified in them
that come neare him.Leuit. 10. 3. That house in which
they appeare is Gods chamber of presence,

within the which he manifests himselfe
clearely, and amiable to his owne secret
ones, who with broken hearts do approach
him, and who approaching do
seeke vnto him for meate and medicine.
The sense hereof moued religious Dauid,
                     2. Sam. 16.
first to be so carefull to haue Gods Arke,
the Sacrament of his presence, dwelling
in one Citie with him, and thereafter to
haue a fit habitation made for it. The
word of God handled there,Psal. 132. 2. 3. 4. 5. is that immortall
seed, whereby sonnes and daughters
be begotten to God, of these who before
(because of sinne) were the children
of wrath. Is that pure milke, whereby
these Gods sons and daughters are made
to grow in that grace, which is able to
make them withstand all tentations and
aduersaries here, to their ioy among men,
and to stand hereafter before the Sonne of
man to their euerlasting glorie.1. Pet. 1. 23. & 2. 2. They
themselues are dust and ashes in respect of
their bodies;Gen. 18. and which is alwayes worse
and monstrously fearefull, dead in sinnes
and trespasses,Ephes. 1. 2. for that is the condition of
their soules naturally. Oh, ô my soule,
when shall the men of this age learne out
of Scripture now in the vnspeakable mercie

of God, layed open to them in their
mother tongue, how to behaue themselues
when they appeare before that God
who made Scripture, to the end that they
may profit to saluation by Scripture? Our
God hath the booke of his Law to put in
his seruant Moses hand, that by him it
might be afterwards taught to his people
the Israelites: our God will haue his people
to be present while he talketh with
his seruant Moses.
                     Exod. 19. 20. Alwayes will our God
haue his people rashly to approach him,
or rather giues he not direction to Moses
to cause his people euen for some dayes
to prepare themselues for so great a work,
sanctifying the people for one day, for two
dayes, that after their clothes was washed
they might be readie on the third day to
present themselues before God? Dauid
did praise his God seuen times a day:Psal. 119. 164. 
                     Dauid
did pray to his God thrise a day: alwayes
will Dauid for all this draw neare
his God without preparation,Psal. 55. 17. without
consideration?Psal. 26. 3. no, no, for he euer washes
his hands in innocencie, before he compasse
the holy Altar of his holy God? Hearest
thou not Salomon out of the sense of
this crying vnto thee, ô my soule, Take

heed vnto thy feete while thou entrest into the
house of God, and be readier to heare then to
giue the sacrifice of fooles; for they know not
that they do euill. Yea, hearest thou not thy
wise Maister (who loues thee dearely, and
would neuer counsell thee but for thy
weale) directing thee thus:Luk. 8. 18. 
                     Take heed how
ye heare? Woe is me, woe is me, ô my
soule, that we who are called Christians
should haue the booke of Esther in our
hand, & being acquainted with it, should
yet attempt without any kinde of preparation
to present our selues before that
supreme King, and Soueraigne: for reade
we not there that Esther before she was
presented before that sinfull mortall king
of Persia (who shortly was to be turned
into the dust,Esth. 2. 12. and to be made meate to
wormes) was purified twelue monethes,
sixe monethes with oyle of myrrhe, and
sixe monethes with sweet odours? Oh, oh,
ô my soule, shall Esther a chast virgine,
who had found fauour in the kings eyes,
and who in beautie excelled all the maids
which were brought together to the
kings palace, purifie her selfe as is said, before
she be presented to this king? And
should I, vile from my conception, vile

from my birth, and vile in my whole life,
attempt without any kind of preparation
and purifying of my selfe, to present my
selfe before that only true glorious King,
who is holinesse and puritie it selfe, before
whom the very Angels do couer their faces?
O what a world of men and women
of this our time, shall this Esther cōdemne
in that great day, when her God shall be
able to speake thus to them touching her:
This woman Esther being a most religious,
beautifull, chast virgin, did not present
her selfe before that sillie weake king
of Persia my vassall, (who could no wayes
know her heart, but onely see her outward
carriage) till for the space of 12. moneths
she purified her selfe carefully. But yea, a
very world of men and women, being to
present your selues before me the great
Monarch of heauen and earth, who made
you, and all men, Angels, and diuels, and
who knowes not onely the wanderings of
your feete, and the workes of your hands,
but all the imaginations of your hearts,
able after I haue slaine the bodies of all rebels
against me, to cast both soules and
bodies in hell for euermore: were neuer
carefull so much as for a minute, let it be

for twelue monethes to prepare your
selues by purging either heart or hand to
appeare before me: and therefore seeing
you presented your selues onely before me
as the diuell did in the dayes of Iob, go
with the diuell to abide with him and his
Angels in that vncleane lake for euer. But
what speake I, ô my soule, of Esther, shall
not bruite beasts, voide of reason, condemne
many a one called Christians in
this point? It is written of the Lionesse
that she hauing coupled her selfe with the
Leopard, doth afterward carefully wash
her selfe in the water before she come
neare to the Lyon againe, lest he by his
smell find out, her adulterie, and so teare
her in peeces. Shall beasts, yea shall cruell
beasts reuerence and stand in awe one of
another, & shouldst not thou, ô my soule,
reuerence and feare that great God thy
Lord and Sauiour? and so being naturally
inclined to all euill, yea, drinking in iniquitie
like water, not attempt to appeare
before that onely Soueraigne Maiestie,
without due, religious, and reuerent preparation,
to the end that thou mayest be
welcomed when thou comest with the
prodigall child,Luk. 15. and haue the fatte calfe

slaine for thee, yea giuen to thee, and thy
garments changed to thy present ioy, and
my endlesse saluation.
               
               
                  THAT GVARD MERCIfully
and happily prepared by that
blessed Spirit, that sole carefull keeper
and wise leader of the babes of
God soiourning here, alwayes to attend,
and in euery place to defend
them;Psal. 24. 7. is that companie of heauenly
spirits and celestiall Angels, pitching
their tents round about those who be
Gods, and feare his name.
                  THat same sweetest Spirit of God, who
is a very deepe sea of loue, mercie,
wisedome, and prouidence; hauing prouided
the babes of God, kept and led by
him, of a shining Lanterne; for the directing
of them in their iourney towards
their heauenly home: hauing found out
also a fit Carrier to beare this Lanterne
before them, and to discouer to them that
light inclosed within it, to the end that
thereby they might be happily helped
homewards: hath also out of his loue,

mercie, wisedome, and prouidence found
out a most fit strong Guard, aboue and
beneath, before and behind, on this side,
and on that side; to attend these babes of
God while they soiourne here, not onely
absent in bodie from their Father and
friends, but who besides this, do liue as in
the lists amongst many monstrous and irreconcilable
foes; to the end that no euill
come vnto them,Psal. 91. 10. or any plague approach
their tabernacle. Now this Guard happily
appointed by this vncreated Spirit, to attend
those babes of God, be not troupes
of footmen, or companies of horsemen,
nor kings and Princes of the earth, who
do greatly brag and boast of their power;
nor chariots wherein those Kings and
Princes with their great men be carried,
but the very chariots of God, for so are
they styled by the Psalmist,Psal. 68. 17. yea the verie
fierie chariots of God: for so they are stiled
by that onely glorious and vncreated
Spirit,2. King. 6. 17. who made them and sends them.
Now the chariots, yea fierie chariots of
God guiding that Chariot wherein the
babes of God be carried towards their
Father, are those heauenly and holy spirits.
Scripture for our confirmation and consolation

honors specially with three glorious
titles: first, with the title of Angels;
hereby acquainting vs, as with that end
wherefore God hath appointed them, so
with that office whereunto they are appointed.
They are appointed to be Legats
and Ambassadours, sent foorth by that
great King who hath made them, and
their office is to carrie and discharge such
commission and message, as shall please
his Maiestie to imploy them about. But
because that these euill spirits, who be the
auowed and irreconcilable aduersaries of
Gods babes, haue this stile of Angels, and
so of messengers giuen to them also; therfore
it is, that these Angels who be sent
out from God to attend and guard his
babes, are honoured by that blessed Spirit
who directs them with some glorious epithites
and stiles, not onely to the end
that they may be discerned from those euill
Angels, but specially that the babes of
God guarded by them, may for their
greatest consolation be informed touching
that rare and inexpressible aduantage
which they do reape by their attending
of them. And so the Angels attending
Gods children be called, The Angels

of God;
                     Act. 10. 3. 22. 
                     the Angels of the Lord, the holy
Angels;
                     Act. 5. 19. 
                     the Angels of light; the elect Angels,
the Angels of the power of God.
                     2. Cor. 11. 14. This moued
Augustine writing on the 104. Psalme thus
to speake of them:1. Tim. 5. 21 
                     Quaeris nomen huius naturae?
                     2. Thes. 27.
                     spiritus est: quaeris officium?
                     August. 
                     Angelus est.
If thou aske after the name of this nature? it
is a spirit: if thou inquire after the office of it?
it is an Angell. Secondly, they be called
Watchmen & Keepers:
                     Dan. 4. 10. for they be appointed
of God to watch ouer and keepe his
children, who liuing here, be not onely
subiect to securitie and carelesnesse, but
also to innumerable bloudie deuouring
enemies, who would vndoubtedly euerie
minute ouerthrow them, if they were not
kept by his Guard, who keeping Israel
doth neither sleepe nor slumber; albeit, alas,
his Israel doth sleepe and slumber continually.
Thirdly, they be called Seruants,
according to that,Psal. 104. 4. 
                     He maketh the spirits his
messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers.
And againe,Heb. 1. 14. 
                     Are they not all ministring spirits,
sent out to minister for their sakes which
shall be heires of saluation? whereof it is manifest,
that these Angels be stiled Seruants
and Ministers, not onely in respect of God
their Soueraigne Lord and Maister, by

whom they are imployed, but in respect
of Gods children whom they do serue, in
guarding them and watching ouer them,
lest they should be suppressed by their aduersaries,
and depriued of that saluation
whereunto they are called. But here, ô my
soule, I must haue thee to vnderstand, that
thy blessed, all-sufficient, and Almightie
God doth not any wayes vse the seruice
and ministerie of these heauenly and holy
Angels, either because of necessitie on his
part, or of any worthinesse on theirs; for as
the Psalmist speaking of that great worke
of Creation, and magnifying the vnspeakable
power of that great Creator,
doth say:Psal. 33. 6. 9 
                     By the word of the Lord were the
heauens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth. He spake and it was done,
he commanded and it stood. So the Apostles
speaking of that no lesse great worke of
preseruation, & conseruation of all things
thus created, magnifying with the Psalmist
the power of the great Gouernour &
preseruer doth say:Heb. 13. 
                     He beareth vp all things
by his mightie word. But this he doth of his
own vndeserued fauour, & free grace only,
and that for 3. most weightie reasons,
which I wil pray thee, ô my soule, grauely

to consider: first, this is done by our God
for the speciall glory of his owne glorious
& blessed name, which all powers in heauen
and on earth should adore and reuerence
to that:Prou. 16. 4. 
                     God made all things for his
own selfe. This moued the Psalmist aduancing
the glorie of his God to crie out:Psal. 68. 17.
                     The Chariots of God are twentie thousand
thousand Angels, and the Lord is among
them as in the Sanctuarie of Sinai. This moued
Daniel giuing vs a view of the glorie
of our God to say:Dan. 7. 4. 10. 
                     I beheld till the
thrones were sit vp, and the ancient of dayes
did sit, whose garment was white as snow,
and the haires of his head like the pure wooll.
His throne was like the fierie flames, and his
wheeles a burning fire; A fierce streame issued
and came forth before him: Thousand, thousands
ministred vnto him, and ten thousand
thousands stood before him.
                     Reuel. 5. 11 
                     Iohn happily
saw this when he said: Then I beheld,
and I heard the voice of manie Angels round
about the Throne, and about the beasts, and
the Elders, and they were thousand thousands.
Whereof it is manifest, ô my soule,
that the first and principall office of the
elect Angels is, to magnifie and praise
the glorie, the grandor, the power, and

the wisedome of God, their glorious and
gracious maker. Therefore what wonder
that Dauid (knowing this to be true)
directs his language vnto these Angels
thus:Psal. 103. 20. 21. 
                     Praise the Lord ye his Angels that excell
in strength, that do his commandement in
obeying the voice of his word: Praise the Lord
all ye his hostes, yea his seruants that do his
pleasure. Againe, it pleased our louing
wise Father, thus to honour these Angels
for their owne speciall honour, and benefit.
Who among men can denie, that subiect

                        •
                     s much honoured by his King, who
he imployes to be his ambassadour to
carrie his will to his neighbour Princes,
and not onely at home to attend him in
his royall Palace? And must not these Angels
thinke and confesse themselues to be
both happie and honourable, whom that
onely soueraigne King of kings hath appointed
not onely alwayes to attend the
throne of his glorious Maiestie, there to
behold him, but also receiuing from him
directions as do please him, are sent forth
of him to do his will vpon earth here. O
how farre was that Angell Gabriel honoured,
when being acquainted with the
blessed time of that glorious incarnation

of that sweetest Sauiour of the world
(long hid vp from the knowledge of Angels
and men) he was sent to the Virgine
Marie to say to her;Luc. 1. 30. 41. 32. 33. 
                     Feare not Marie,
for thou hast found fauour with God, for loe
thou shall conceiue in thy wombe and beare a
Sonne, and shalt call his name Iesus, he shall be
great, and shall be called the sonne of the most
hie, and the Lord God shall giue vnto him the
Throne of his Father Dauid, and he shall
reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of
his kingdome shall be no end? O how farre
was this Angel Gabriel honoured of God,
when he was sent vnto Ioseph, to whom
this Marie was affianced not onely to
shew him that that which was conceiued
in Maries bosome, was conceiued by
the holy Ghost, but with this to bring
vnto Ioseph the name wherewith they
should name the child when he should be
borne, and the reason wherefore he
should be named so, saying to him in a
dreame,Mat. 1. 10. 21. 22. 
                     Ioseph the sonne of Dauid feare
not to take Marie for thy wife, for that which
is conceiued in her is of the holy Ghost and she
shall bring forth a sonne, and thou shalt call
his name Iesus, for he shall saue his people
from their sinnes? O how farre were these

heauenly Spirits honoured of God, when
first one of them being acquainted with
the happie birth of this blessed Iesus, was
directed towards the shepheards keeping
watch by night, because of their flocke
about the place where blessed Iesus was
borne, to intimate vnto them with the
blessed birth of that holy one, the onely
honourable and profitable end wherefore
he was borne,Luc. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. saying vnto them: Be not
affraid, for behold I bring you glad tidings of
great ioy that shall be to all the people: that is
that vnto you is borne this day in the Citie of
Dauid a Sauiour, which is Christ our Lord?
And when after this, there was with this
Angell a multitude of heauenly souldiers
directed from the Throne of God, to
praise the vnsearchable higth, and depth,
length, and breadth of his loue, passing
all finding out, manifested towards men
in making his onely Sonne, sole solace,
and dearest fellow, content to become
man, for the safetie of man: saying, Glorie
be vnto God in the high heauens, and peace in
earth, and towards men good will? O how
farre was that Angel honoured of God
who was directed to attend this blessed
meeke Lambe, drawing neere the place

of expectation, and not onely carrying in
his hand,Luke. 22. 42. 43. 44. but conueying to his head that
bitterest cup of the Lords wrath (so that
his sweat was like drops of bloud trickling
downe to the ground) and to comfort
him in this his agonie? O how farre
were these two Angels honoured of God,
who were directed not onely to attend
the buriall, and resurrection of this glorious
Lambe, sitting one at the head, and
the other at the feete where the bodie of
Iesus had lien,Ioh. 20. 1
                           •
                        . but also to proclaime his
resurrection to the women who came to
the graue of Iesus.Mar. 16. 6. 
                     Be not affraid, ye seeke
Iesus of Nazareth which hath bene crucified,
he is risen, he is not heare, behold the place
where they haue put him? O how farre were
these two Angels honoured of God, who
were sent not onely to attend the glorious
ascension of this mightie God, the Sauiour
of the world, but with that to preach
and proclaime his comming againe from
the heauens to iudgement, saying to his
disciples where they were looking stedfastly
towards heauen, after that a cloud
had taken their most louing kind Maister
out of their sight:Act. 1. 11. 
                     Ye men of Galilee why
stand ye gazing, this Iesus which is taken vp

from you into heauen, shall so come as ye haue
seene him go into heauen. Thirdly, this was
done that hereby our God perfectly acquainted
with the miseries and distresses
of his owne secret ones, lying vnder a
thousand crosses, and subiect to a world
of tentations, might haue a verie sea of
speciall consolation conueyed to them.
Must thou not confesse, ô my soule, that
this must necessarily be a verie infallible
ground of inexpressable ioy to the child
of God, when not onely he knowes (being
taught of Scripture) that the Lord
his God hath such a care of him,Psal. 34. 15. that not
so much as a haire can fall from his head
without his prouidence; that he hath alwayes
his eares open to heare, and his
eyes bended towards him. But that beside
this he hath not onely created and
furnished most plentiously the aire, the
seaes, and the earth for him, but that he
hath made these verie celestiall spirits for
his preseruation while he liueth here, as
is manifested vnto him by that golden
sentence:Psal. 91. 10▪ 1, 12▪
                      
                     For he shall giue his Angels charge
ouer thee to keepe thee in all thy wayes, they
shall beare thee in their hands that thou hurt
not thy foote against a stone. Where the spirit

would directly (knowing the nature
and office of these Angels the gaurd of
Gods babes) compare them to a nurse
to whom the children of some great King
and Prince, are committed to be fostred,
after that they are borne: and besides this
vnto pedagogues, to whom children after
they are come to some few yeares are vncredited,
to the end they may be conueyed
in and out by them, to and from
some schoole, there to be instructed, corrected,
and brought vp in the knowledge
of good letters and honest meanes. Now,
ô my soule, I must tell thee, that these holy
Angels of God, set ouer Gods babes
as their nurses, and pedagogues; discharge
three most notable, and profitable duties
vnto them. For first, so soone as we
are come into this world, they take vs as
it were by the hand, euer keeping, and
defending vs against the diuell, and all
other aduersaries, so that nothing can befall
vs without the speciall prouidence of
our God, & as is expedient for his glorie,
and our good. This moued our Maister
thus to direct vs:Mat. 18. 10. 
                     See that ye despise not one
of these little ones, for I say vnto you that in
heauen, their Angels alwayes behold the face

of my Father which is in heauen. This moued
Dauid to say:Psal. 34. 7. 
                     The Angel of the Lord
pitcheth about thē that feare him, and deliuereth
them.
                     Gen. 19. 22. 
                     Lot had a speciall proofe of this,
hauing an Angel directed from heauen to
send him away from Sodome before the
ouerthrow of Sodome. Hagar had a speciall
proofe of this, when flying from her
mistresse Sarah, and hauing her child Ismael
brought vnto deaths doore through
thirst, she had an Angel readie in her greatest
strait to comfort her, and deliuer him,
saying to her;Gen. 21. 17. 19. 19. 
                     What ayleth thee Hagar?
feare not, God hath heard the voyce of the
child where he is, arise take vp the child and
hold him in thy hand, for I will make of him
a great people, and God opened her eyes and
she saw a well of water.
                     Gen. 32. 2. 
                     Iacob had proofe of
this, when being sore affraid because of
his brother Esau; he tooke himselfe no
sooner to his iourney, then the Angels of
God did meete him, which made Iacob,
when he saw them, to say: This is Gods
host. Elias had a rare speciall proofe of
this when the King of Aram sent horses
and chariots and a mightie host to Dathan
where he was by night to compasse
it, to the end, the poore man of God

might no wayes escape; his God from
the heauens sent horses and fierie chariots,
filling the mountaines round about Elisha,
                     2. King. 6. 14. 15. 16. 17.
so that there was moe with him then
there was with his enemies.Act. 5. 16. The Apostles
found this, when being imprisoned for
preaching in the name of Iesus, they had
the Angel of the Lord by night readie to
open the prison doore, and to bring them
forth. Secondly when death shall approach
the child of God by sea, by land,
in companie, and alone, in the hands of
friends, in the hands of foes; albeit the
husband be absent from his wife, and the
wife from the husband: the child from the
parent, or the parent from the child, and
so forth: yet the poorest distressed loathsome
Lazarus being Gods child,Luk. 16. 22. shall
haue these blessed Angels to attend him,
who shall not be wearie night and day
to stand by his bed till his soule leaue his
body, to the effect by them it may be conueyed
to his fathers house. Thirdly, in the
end of the world these blessed spirits, shall
not refuse to gather the verie dead bones
of the dead bodies of Gods children to
the end that their bodies being ioyned
with their soules; they may in bodie and

soule raigne and rest with these Angels
before God for euermore; according to
that, sweetly sounded by our Maister:
The sonne of man shall come in the cloudes of
heauen with power and great glorie,
                     Mat. 24. 30. 31. 
                     and he
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
trumpet, and they shall gather together his
elect from the foure winds, and from the one
end of the heauen to the other. Oh, ô my
soule, when shall my heart begin to separate
it selfe from earthly and sensuall
thoughts, and meditate a little vpon these
things? Surely, surely, couldst thou, ô my
soule, consider rightly that thy God
would offer by them to thy consideration,
sure I am thou wouldst draw foure seueral
& soueraigne lessons out of this discourse
hath bene brought to thy eares, by him
who made thee, and loueth thee deerely.
And first, thou wilt see that great care the
Lord thy God hath of thee, out of that
great loue wherewith he loued thee,
which moued him to make and appoint
so heauenly a hoast to attend thee, for the
gaurding and keeping of thee. Secondly,
this would stirre thee vp iointly to feare
and loue this God, to feare him, who alwayes
hath in readinesse such a great

armie of spirits to execute his will and to
take his part against all such dare abuse
him or his children in any sort. Knowest
thou not, ô my soule, that thy God in
one night, by an Angel, smote in the
the campe of Ashur an hundredth fourescore
and fiue thousand,Esay 37. 36. who durst rise vp
against him and against his people? Let
this stirre thee vp, ô my soule, 
                        •
                     o loue this
God who hath them all in his hands readie
to be imployed to saue, to comfort,
and to deliuer thee. Thirdly, let the sense
hereof make vs ashamed to speake that,
to do that, either priuately out of companie,
or publickely before others, which is
repugnant to the good will of God, and
which thou wilt be ashamed to speake
before any religious honest man: seeing
thy words, speake them where thou canst;
thy deedes, do them where thou wilt; are
heard or seene by those Angels who alwayes
attends thee. It were good that
both men and women did hearken to that
watch-word vsed by the Apostle.1. Cor. 11. 16. 
                     Therefore
ought the woman to haue power on her
head, because of the Angels. For as these
Angels, being beholders and markers of
our carriage, and actions, are reioyced

and incouraged as it were by our good
behauiour; so are they greeued by our
leud life, and prophane carriage. Finally
and lastly, this would comfort thee, ô my
soule, vnder, and against all our troubles,
considering that our Father, redeemer,
and comforter; hath appointed these heauenly
spirits his messengers, to be our
painfull nurses, and faithfull pedagogues,
whatsoeuer our estate be here to the
iudgement of blind men; but specially
this should strengthen vs against that
fearefull day of death, in the which this
dustie tabernacle must be layed downe,
making thee, ô my soule, thus triumphing
ouer death, to speake to thy selfe; let me
not be cast downe, because death approacheth
me, because these my eares
shall be closed from hearing any more among
men here, because my eyes shall be
stopped, frō seeing any more among men
here, from henceforth neuer shall I heare
that, see that, or do that which may offend
my God, and beside that I shall heare
such things (in that palace to the which
I am going) see such things, feele, and
possesse such things; which in sweetnesse
and excellence, shall farre surmount all

heretofore seene, felt, and possessed by me;
yea, let it not trouble me, that this my
clay bodie, which lieth here vnder sicknesse,
pined sore in euerie member of it,
destitute of father, mother, husband, wife,
brother, sister, or any liuing whatsoeuer,
to care for it; seeing that blessed Spirit
the comforter of Gods elect lodgeth
within me, assuring me that God is mine,
and I am his; and considering these heauenly
spirits, attendeth my sicke and
pained bodie which they shall not
forsake, till breath forsake it; for
howbeit these spirits my attendants, be
nor seene by these my corporall dimme
eyes, yet I am clearely seene of them, and
assuredly granted by them, acorrding to
that charge they haue receiued of that
great Angel of the couenant who
gaue himselfe for me, and who
hath ordained to attend me,
till they bring me
where he is.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  SIXE
CVNNING
AND CRVELL
Robbers, hauing the heads of
Doues, but the tailes of Scorpions:
sent from the bottomlesse pit, by the
arch-enemie of Gods babes, to withdraw
them from the path-way which
leadeth to the paradise of God; and
for drawing them towards and holding
them on, in that by-way which
tendeth downewards vnto that
lake, out of the which there
is no redemption.
                  MAT. 10. 16.
                  Behold I send you as sheepe in the midst of woolues, be
ye therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doues.
                  REVEL. 12. 7. 8.
                  And there was a battell in heauen, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon; and the Dragon
and his Angels fought, but they preuailed not.
                  BERN.
                  
                     Hic mundus, non est nisi nemus, plenum latronibus,
ideo per illud est cautè ambulandum. This world,
is nothing but a wood, layed full of Robbers; and
therefore it is needfull that we walke circumspectly
through it.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE SINCERELY
RELIGIOVS
and truly vpright, Sir GEORGE
HAY of Kinphains Knight; great
Chancellar of Scotland; Counseller
to his most excellent Maiestie in
both the kingdomes.
                  
                     LVke the Euāgelist,Luke 1. 1. 2. 3. knowing
that that most Noble
Theophilus was wel instructed
in that misterie of
Christ; dedicated to him,
First, that sacred Historie of the Incarnation,
life, death, buriall, Resurrection,
and Ascension of that God-man,Acts. 1. 1.
and man-God Iesus blessed for
euermore; and thereafter that heauenly
Historie of the holy Acts of
his faithfull Apostles. And shall anie
thing be able to dash me (treading

the cleane pathes of so wise a leader,
of so holy a Maister) my verie religious
Noble good Lord, in dedicating
this part of my Heauenly Chariot vnto
your Lordship, if it shall please my
blessed good God by his Spirit to
moue your good Lordship to daigne
your selfe to accept of it? Certaine it
is, that since that lamed souldier Ignatius
Layola of abominable memory,
had his orderles bloudie order, first
confirmed at Rome by Paulus the
third,Anno. 1540. by the meanes of Cardinall
Conteran: that these Robbers, his lying
cruell broode, (here offered vnto
your Lordships view) compassed
neuer this kingdome (with Satan that
lier, that murtherer from the beginning
their Maister) so frequently, so
busily, so boldly as they do now at
this present, for the surprising of the
soules, and ouerthrowing of the bodies
of Gods Saints among vs. Alwayes
when I thinke vpon that light
of God which shineth cleerely in

your Lordships vnderstanding, I see
(to the great comfort of all such louers
of Christ among vs) one able to
take them vp a far off, and to discerne
them. When I thinke vpon that loue
and zeale of God (which burneth
strongly in your Lordships heart) I
meet one, readily willing, seeing them
and discouering them, to pursue them
till they be apprehended. And when
I cast my eyes vpon that high chaire
(in the which not mortal weake man,
but that immortall strong Monarch,
hath euen at such a time placed your
Lordship) I lay hold on one, carying
an armed hand, able exemplarlie
to punish them being apprehended,
and who knoweth whither your
Lordship be come to this chaire,Esth. 4. 14. at
such a time for this end? These Robbers
being that Goliah, your Lordships
good and wise guide hath most
wisely cast in your Lordships way,
to reuile your Lordship, to defie your
Lordship, yea to reuile, and to defie

to your Lordships hearing, the host
of the Lord: to the end that your
Lordship as his Dauid, sent out by
him against them, may haue them
falling downe dead at your Lordships
feete: and thereafter haue their heads
carried in triumph before your Lordship,
as a manifest euidence to the
world, that that God of hosts, euen
the God of the host of Israel (vpon
whom they haue too long railed) is
with your Lordship. The by-gone
proofes of your Lordships carriage,
and vpright dealing in euery thing,
hath bred such hopes in the hearts of
all feares God, that they expect this:
hath brought such astonishment to
the contrarie minded, that they looke
for this. My good Lord, let not your
Lordships sincere true friends be disappointed,
let not your Lordships
periured, lying, aduersaries be frustrated.
Cleon the Lacedaemonian being
set ouer the Commonwealth to gouerne
it, sent for all his friends, and

discharged himselfe of their friendship,
knowing that friendship hath
made many men oftentimes to erre
in iudgement: and shall your Lordships
kinsmen and acquaintances offend
(if your Lordship resembling in
your happie gouernment, that holy
one who gaue himselfe for you) shall
say to these who shall come to your
Lordship in chamber, in counsell, or
in Session:Mat. 12. 49. 50. 
                     Behold my mother, and my
brother, for whosoeuer shall do the will
of God (and so haue a good action) the
same shall be my brother, my mother, and
my sister. The Emperour Vitellus hauing
refused the petition of one of his
speciall friends which was vnreasonable,
and hearing him (waxing angry)
said to him: What auaileth thy friendship
to me, since I cannot obtaine that
which I craue? did answer religiously,
prudently, and calmely. And what
auaileth thy friendship to me, if for thee
I must do that which is vnlawfull? And
shall your Lordship hold these for

your Lordships friends, or account
these worthie of your Lordships fauor,
who shall attempt to desire your
Lordship to speake or to do that for
them which may prouoke your Lordships
good God to wrath? My deare
Lord, if diuels shall afterward assault
your Lordship, if men shall be bold,
either by faire promises to allure your
Lordship from good vnto euill, or by
sharpe threatenings to menace your
Lordship to refuse good, and to embrace
euill? let that holily & happily
spoken by Iosaphat to these Iudges
deputed by him, be alwayes remembred
by your Lordship:2. Chron. 19. 6. 7. 
                     Take heede
what ye do, for ye execute not the iudgement
of men, but of the Lord, and he will
be with you in the cause and iudgement.
Wherefore now let the feare of the Lord
be vpon you. Take heede and do it, for
there is no iniquitie with the Lord your
God, neither respect of persons, nor receiuing
of rewards. Suffer me, my verie
Noble good Lord, here to present my

blessed Lord and loue, euen that great
Angell of the couenant before your
Lordship, setting your Lordship to
this his worke, strengthening your
Lordship for this his worke, and fully
incouraging your Lordship against
all difficulties your Lordship possibly
can meete with, in vndergoing
and vnderlying this his worke. The
Lord is with thee thou valiant man.
                     Iud. 6. 12. 14. 16. 
                     Go
in this thy might, and thou shalt saue
my Israel, in Scotland out of the
hāds of these bloudy robbing Midianites,
the Iesuites: haue not I sent thee,
I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite
them as one man. He who made an
house to the midwiues of Egypt, shal
not forget to build an house to your
Lordship. He who iustly made the
names of Doeg, Sanballat, Tobiah, and
Haman to stinke, and who mercifully
made the names of Nehemiah, Esdrah,
and Mordecai to smell sweetly, shall in
despight of all hellish and earthly
powers, keepe your Lordships name

from all infection, and made it to be
sweet and fragrant to all future ages;
yea, shall write it in the Lambes book
of life, that after your Lordship hath
serued your King and Soueraigne
Lord here for a while, your Lordship
may be hereafter, for euer, where that
your Lordships Lord & Soueraigne
is:Ioh. 13. 16. for the which till I breathe, I shall
not ceasse heartily and humbly to
draw vp my simple prayers to God.
                  
                     Your Lordships most
humbly deuoted,
D. L.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     THE FIRST ROBBER IS
the Popish Seminarie obscuring from
the child of God, that shining Lanterne
of Gods written word (presented
before him for leading of him towards
the heauens his Fathers house)
vnder an vnknowne language.
                     
                        HE is not sensible of God
who reading that third of
Genesis, ô my soule, laments
not that Euah
hearkening vnto the Serpent,
should haue so easily
condescended to neglect, and forget
that vndoubted true solid lesson brought
to her eares by the louing voice of God,
her gracious maker, and onely true friend;
and contented her selfe, first to haue hearkened
vnto a lying lesson, and thereafter
to embrace it, brought from his deceitfull
lippes who prooued her deadly foe; first
betraying her, and then destroying her.

When we reade the 13. and 16. Chapters
of Iudges, we all cōdemne Samson of folly
& rashnesse, who knowing that Almighty
God had ordained no rasor to come
on his head (but that he should remaine a
Nazareth to the Lord) was moued by the
importunate dealing of his deceiuing Dalilah,
to shew her, that if he were shauen
his strength would go from him, and that
he would be weake and like vnto other
men. And yet when shall we begin, ô my
soule, to pitie not one Euah, but a world
of Euahs: not one Samson, but a very world
of Samsons: who content themselues in
these our dayes, alas, to passe by and neglect,
yea, to despise and reuile those onely
wholsome, and onely true sauing lessons
which flowes from the mouth of yt their
Father, which neither can deceiue, nor
lie; hearkening in the meane time 
                           •
                        o those
poysoned and poysoning lessons, inuented
by the deceitfull heart of that man of sin,
and his followers, and vented by the treacherous,
smooth, yet slaying lippes of his
busie agents; yea, not onely hearkening
to them when they come towards them,
but longing for them, yea, waiting for
them, if they appeare to stay for any space

from them, and which is more, heartily
contented to begger their children, and
ruine their houses, to the end they may
feed and nourish them Knowest thou not,
ô my soule, that Satan by that serpent the
Pope, and his agents, by that Dalilah the
Pope, and his suffragants (knowing what
fruite is able to feed the child of God, and
what fruite doth slay him; what wil make
the child of God strong and able to withstand
him, and his vncircumcised confederates,
and what will make the child of
God first weake, and then a prey to him
that in the end he may mocke him) these
many yeares by-past, hath bene withdrawing
the world from the mouth of
God, and the mouth of God from the
world,The light of the word couched by the Papists vnder an vnknowne language. speaking to it by holy written
Scripture, by couching this cleare Lanterne
of Gods word vnder an vncouth
and vnknowne language: and yet he hath
so farre preuailed by this his busie double
dealing, that now our Euahs, that is, our
women who would be reputed noble and
wise; that now our Samsons, that is, our
men who would be accounted valorous;
cannot be moued to looke vpon that sacred
Booke of God, being translated in

their mother tongue, but abhorre to see it,
to reade it, or to heare it read vnto them,
as if it were the inditement of some infernall
spirit: for do these men or women abhorre
so much any vaine or profane pamphlet,
as they do the Bible in the vulgar
tongue? But will our God, informing vs
by Scripture, subscribe with the Pope his
aduersarie (exalting himselfe against all
that is called God,
                           
                              •
                           . Thes. 2. 4. or is worshipped, so that
he doth sit as God in the Temple of God,
shewing himselfe that he is God) in this
point?Our God speaketh to the Iewes in the Iewish language. no, no, our God, saith Scripture, is
to speake to his people the Iewes, & hath
them to instruct and direct about his worship,
and their saluation: alwayes in what
language will he speake vnto them? by
what language will he instruct them?
those who haue read the writings of Moses,
the Psalmes and the Prophets, yea, in a
word that whole volume of the old Testament,
do know and must confesse that our
wise God spake to the Iewes in the Iewish
language, and instructed the Iewes by the
Iewish language; for tell me, ô effronted
Seminarie, in what language were these
oracles of God,Rom. 3. 2. committed by God, vnto
the circumcised Iewes sounded, yea put

in Register. When the fulnesse of time
comes, our God hath not onely the Iewes
to speake vnto, and to instruct, but the
Gentiles also. Alwayes will he speake to
them in the Hebrew & Greeke language.
O robbing Seminarie, readest thou euer,
considerest thou euer, that direction
with the warrant thereof giuen by our
Maister vnto his disciples, Act. 1. 4. Considerest
thou euer that which according
to this promise befell the disciples▪ Act. 2.
1. 2. 3. 4? Iesus (blessed for euermore) who
came into the world to saue Jew and
Gentile, and so who by perswading Iaphet
to dwell in the tents of Sem, to make of
both one, must haue some men to be witnesses
both in Ierusalem, and in all Iudaea,
and Samaria, and vnto the vttermost part
of the earth. But must these men speake
one language or two? or onely these three
canonized by the Pope, Hebrew, Greeke,
and Latine, which the lying Papist doth
hold that our God hath separate for his
sacred and heauenly things? Not so, not
so, ô my soule, I trow, for in the day of
Pentecost not onely were the Apostles
heard by the Iewes in the Iewish tongue,
by the Grecians in their tongue, by the

Romanes in their tongue, but by the Parthians,
Medes, Elemites, Inhabitants of
Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia,
Phrygia,Act. 2. 9. 10. 11. Pamphilia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyren,
Cretes, and Arabians: all these, saith Scripture,
heard the Apostles speake the wonderous
workes of God in their owne
tongues.Wherefore were the Apostles gifted with the gift of tongues. And so it pleased our God that
day miraculously (yet most graciously) to
gift the Apostles his seruants with the gift
of tongues, to the end that they by speaking
euery language, might be able to discouer
the hid mysteries of Gods blessed
word to all people of euerie language, to
the end they might be saued.Obiect. But I know
that here the robbing cunning Seminarie
will alledge, that we do him great wrong,
and lye vpon him grosly, saying: We neither
condemne the vulgar translations of
Scripture, neither debarre we men from
the reading of them. Remember thy selfe,
ô tricking Seminarie,Answer. so shalt thou finde
that while thou appearest by the one hand
slowly to put holy Scripture in the hands
of Gods children, translated in their own
mother tongue; thou forgettest not
with both thy hands subtilly to pull it
from them againe. Know I not, ô Seminarie,

that these blind leaders of that troubled
conuenticle at Trent,The decree of the Cō
                           uenticle at Trent about the vulgar trāslation. in their 22. Session,
and by the 8. and 9. Canons pronounced
in it, will not forbid the vulgar translation
of the Scripture, and yet they forget
not to forbid the diu
                           •
                        lgating of these
translations? And can any vulgar translation
possibly haue any vse, to the benefit
of Gods people, vnlesse it be di
                           ••••
                        lgate,
and so spread abroad to the world, to the
end it may be heard and read?Vpon what condition grant the P
                              •
                           pists libertie to reade the vulgar trāslation. I know also
beside this, ô my soule, that the same blind
leaders giues libertie to the people to
reade this vulgar translation tolerated by
them. But to what people, ô my soule, I
pray thee is this libertie granted? not vnto
all people indifferently, but onely vnto
such who profitably & without hurt may
& can reade thē. And who be these I pray
thee? The parts of the ordinance of Trent
about this matter be foure, ô my soule:
first, that it is lawfull to none to reade the
Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, but vnto
them who haue liberty gra
                           •
                        ted vnto them
by their Bishop and Inquisitor.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                         Secondly,
that the Bishop giuing libertie, they take
aduice and counsel of their ordinarie professors.
Thirdly, that the Bishops suffer

them not to reade indifferently all vulgar
translations, but those onely which Catholicke
Romanes haue set forth. Fourthly,
that libertie be not granted to all men
to reade those, but to such as by the
iudgement of their confessor will receiue
no hurt by them, that is, to be plaine with
the cunning Seminarie, but to such whom
they hold as obstinate Papists, bond slaues
to the Pope, and auowed aduersaries to
the sauing truth of God, as they themselues
be. Now of these foure grounds
layed by the Tridentine councellers, two
things do follow: first, that these blind
leaders of the Romish Synagogue admit
verie few to reade the vulgar translations
of the holy Scripture. Secondly, that those
whom they admit to reade them, are none
beside their owne sworne men, who refusing
to heare the voice of that true shepheard
Iesus, haue sold themselues to depend
vpon these mercenary cruell wolues,
in the verie matter of their saluation. O
ancient Iewes, were you thus limited and
bounded by that doctrine which Moses
learned of God in the mountaine of God,The papists conditions are not by Scripture.
and which he brought from the mountaine
to you? O you sometimes the auditors

of that great Bishop of your soules,
Iesus, were you thus marked by that great
Bishop? yea, ô you ancient hearers of Paul,
who held backe from Gods people, name
of God, his sauing counsell, were you thus
tyed? I know that Philip heard the Eunuch
alacke, as the Papists speake reading a
portion of the Prophet Isaiah, but I heare
not Philip either magnifying him by what
Bishop and confessors aduice did he that,
or reprouing him for doing of it. Yea,
what shall I 
                           •
                        ay, ô my soule, I wonder if
those noble Bereans aduised with any Bishop,
Inquisitor, or confessour, before they
attempted not onely to reade the Scripture,
but by reading of it euen to trie whether
those things spoken to them by the
Apostles were conformable to Scripture,
or no? for well had they learned these two
directions, the one giuen by Iesus: Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye thinke to haue
eternall life, for they are they which testifie of
me. The other giuen by Iohn Iesus his dearest
disciple in Iesus name:Ioh 5. 39. 
                        Dearely beloued,
beleeue not euery spirit,
                        1. Ioh. 4. 1. 
                        but tri
                              •
                            the spirits
whether they are of God. O fathers of the
families of the Iewes, how are ye charged
by the Lord your God, are ye drawne by

him from Scripture as the Papists now do,God sends his to Scripture.
or driuen by him towards Scripture
which the Papists cannot suffer? from
Scripture I am not driuen, but towards
Scripture I am driuen by the Lord my
God, would these fathers say, for be they
not thus directed by him: And these words
which I command thee this day,
                        Deut. 6. 6. 7. 8. 9. 
                        shall be in
thine heart, and thou shalt rehearse them continually
to thy children and shalt talke of them
when thou tarriest in thine house, and when
thou walk
                              •
                           st by the way, and when thou lyest
downe, and when thou risest vp: and thou shalt
bind them for a signe vpon thine hand, and
they shall be as frontlets betweene thine eyes,
also thou shalt write them vpon the postes of
thine house, and vpon thy gates. And againe:
Therefore shall ye lay vp these my wordes in
your heart,
                        Deut. 11. 18 21. 
                        and in your soules, that your dayes
may be multiplied, and the dayes of your children,
in the land which the Lord sware vnto
your fathers to giue them, as long as the heauens
are aboue the earth. O Iosuah, (no
Church-ruler but a ciuill man) how art
thou directed by the Lord thy God?
art thou not thus counselled, and charged
by him.Iosua. 8. 1. 
                        Let not the booke of the Law
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein

both day and night, that thou mayest obserue
and do according to all that is written therein:
for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous,
and then shalt thou haue good successe. Yea,
tels not the Psalmist me, ô my soule, that
I cannot be possibly one of those whom
God hath blessed, vnlesse I be acquainted
with his Law, thinking vpon it continually;
for be not these his words. Blessed is
the man whose delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and who doth meditate in his Law
both day and night.
                        The Iesuite is a Iebusite. Be ashamed ô Iesuite
of thy proud blasphemous lying title, and
be content hereafter to call thy selfe a Iebusite,
for whilst thou banishest men and
women from Scripture, thou hearest blessed
Iesus, sending men and women to
Scripture, yea, commanding them to
search Scripture, for be not these his
words:Iohn. 5. 35. 
                        Search the Scriptures, for in them
you thinke to haue eternall life, and they are
they which testifie of me. Heare I not Iesus
faithfull seruant charging the Colossians
thus: Let the word of God dwell in you plentiously.
Where the Spirit of God will haue
the whole elect of God, men, women,
old, and yong, learned, and vnlearned, to
be as it were as so many buildings; & this

blessed word of God contained in Scripture
to be as a guest not lodging for one
night but dwelling alwayes to the end in
them. That famous Bishop Chrysostome
handling this text at Constantinople,
tooke occasion thereupon to deale with
his people, to prouide themselues of Bibles,
at the least of the new Testament, to
the end that the husband with the wife,
and the parents with the children might
conferre at home vpon the misteries of
their saluation, praying them not to lay
the whole burthen therof vpon his shoulders.
For Chrysostome had not learned to
blindfold the babes of God so, that they
could thinke themselues sufficient certified
of life eternall, if they could beleeue
as the Church beleeued, albeit in the
meane time they knew not what the
Church beleeued.Theod lib. 5. de cor. grec. affec. 
                        Theodoretus hath a
worthy place to this purpose. Ye may
cōmonly see that our doctrine is knowne
not onely of them that are doctors of the
Church, and ministers of the people, but
also euen of the Taylors, and Smithes,
and Weauers, and of women, and that
not onely of learned, but of vnlearned,
and labouring women, and sempsters and

seruants, and hand-maids, neither onely
the citizenes, but also the countrie folkes
do verie well vnderstand the same. Ye
may find euen the verie diggers, and the
neat-heards, and the gardeners, disputing
of the holy Trinitie, and of the creation
of all things. Were these holy Fathers,
(who sometimes sed the babes of God
with the holy truth of God) liuing now?
I thinke they would condemne these hellish
foxes, who by their cruell hands slay
the bodies of the babes of God, and
by their lying lippes murther their
soules.Hieron. ad dem. I heare Hierom saying, ô my soule,
Ignoratio Scripturarum, ignoratio Christi
est; ama Scripturas sanctas, & amabit te sapientra:
vt magis est voluntatem Domini facere
quam 
                              •
                           osse,
                        The hurt cometh by the ignorance of Scripture. 
                        ita prius est nosse quam facere.
The ignorance of the Scripture, is the ignorance
of Christ; loue holy Scriptures, and
wisdome shall loue thee: as it is a greater thing
to do the will of God, then to know it, so it
must be first knowne before it be done. I
wonder how the Iesuite taketh that
speech of Augustine. Si Scripturas diuinas
aut non legimus ipsi, aut legentes alios libenter
non audimus, ipsa nobis medicamenta conuertantur
in vulnera, & inde habemus iudicium

vnde potuimus habere remedium. If either
we our selues reade not holy Scripture, or
gladly heare not others reading them vnto vs,
our verie medicine shall be turned vnto
woundes vnto vs: and of that we shall reape
condemnation, of the which we might haue
found health and saluation.
                        Obiection. I am not ignorant,
ô my soule, that the Popish seminarie
keeping vp holy Scripture from the
common people,That alledged benefit of ignorance & hurt, of reading Scripture remoued. and thereby detaining
them within the darke schoole of ignorance,
alledgeth most clearely (euen against
his conscience, albeit with a brasen
countenance) that he doth this for the
singular spirituall benefite of the common
people: for is not ignorance (if we may
tell the Seminarie) the mother of Deuotion?
and doth not the reading of Scripture
bring simple people vnder fearefull
heresies? Hearken neuer, ô my soule, vnto
the deceiuing and male-pert, lying Priest
making this allegation.
                           Answer. Iohn 4. Ignorance a fearefull mother of vile superstion & vncouth be resi
                              •
                           . For I assure
thee, being clearely taught of God, that
howbeit ignorance hath bene the onely
mother of abominable idolatrie, and superstitious
deuotion, making poore
soules with the deceiued Samaritans to
worship that which they know not, and

with the superstitious Athenians to set vp
an altar vnto an vnknowne God, yet ignorance
was neuer, neither euer shall be
the mother of that true religious deuotion
commanded by God, allowed of
God, and comfortable for the soule of
man. Ignorance hath bene, and euer shall
proue the mother of heresie, drawing
men from the true God, yea making
men (who professe themselues to know
the true God) to worship and to seeke
him falsly.Esay 8. 19. 20. O Isaiah was this doctrine vented
by thy cleane lips which were touched
with that coale which was taken of ye altar
of God, which now the vncleane lips
of the foule Seminarie toucheth, who hath
his conscience feared with a hot iron heat
in the fire of the bottomles pit. No, no, for
I heare Isaiah speaking thus to me: Should
not a people inquire at their God; from the liuing
to the dead, to the Law and the testimonie,
if they speake not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. And so
Isaiah here, ô my soule, maketh ignorance
to be the manifest and direct mother of
vile heresie. Doth blessed Iesus that true
teacher of the truth of God speake of ignorance
as the false Iesuite speaketh of

it? not I thinke: for heare I him not thus
speaking to the Saduces: You erre not
knowing the Scriptures and the power of God.
Teaching them therby that the ignorance
of the Scripture made them to denie that
rarest article of the beleefe, euen the resurrection
of our bodies; and consequently
that ignorance is the vile mother of vile
heresie. Yea hearest thou not, ô my soule,
that holy one thy Sauiour crying thus on
the Crosse:Mat. 22. 19. 
                        Father forgiue them, for they
know not what they are doing:
                        Lact. lib. 5. resoluing vs
hereby, that Ignorance is the fierce mother
of bloudie persecution. Lactantius
was not of the Papists opinion, albeit he
writ that with his penne which the Seminaries
conscience must subioyne vnto:
for giuing his reason wherefore so few of
the world did consent vnto the onely true
sauing truth of God, he saith; Multi ob
                              •
                           urant
se contra manifestam veritatem, non cogitant
quare sint nati; haec enim prauitatis est
causa, ignoratio sui: Manie do harden
their hearts against the manifest truth of
God: they consider not wherefore they were
borne. For this is the cause and ground of
wickednesse, and shreudnesse, when a
man knowes not himselfe, and how can

he know himselfe possibly, who out of
Scripture hath not learned to know God
and himselfe. Bernard w
                           •
                        o liued in a very
corrupt time was of another iudgement
then the Iesuites now be of: for he could
write thus touching ignorance. Pessimae
matris ignorantiae pessimae itidem filiae duae
sunt; falsitas, & dubitatio, illa miserior, haec
miserabilior, perniciosa illa, ista molestior.
Cum loquitur Spiritus 
                              •
                           adit vtraque, & non
est solum veritas,
                        What moued the Pope to be so carefull to haue the holy Scripture kept vp from the babes of God. 
                        sed & certa veritas. There
be two most mischieuous daughters of that
mischieuous mother, Ignorance; Falsitie, and
Doubting, that more miserable, this more to
be pitied, that pernitious, this troublesome.
When the spirit speaketh, they both do fall
to the ground, and then not onely is a truth,
but a certaine truth. Now in all their respects
may it not be asked (euen with admiration)
what should moue the Pope
with his followers to be so earnestly,
& carefully, to haue that sacred volume of
holy Scripture kept vp from the babes of
God. Hearken, hearken, ô my soule, well
know they what holy Scripture is, and
what is to be found in it: and therefore
therefore they cannot suffer, they will not
suffer the babes of God to haue it, lest

they (led by Scripture) should be made
to know that which they know, Scripture
cannot but leade them vnto. What thefe
approaching a house of purpose to breake
it, desires to heare the crow of the cocke,
or the barke of the dogge, to see any
candle, or to be brought before any gallous?
for well knowes he that the crow
of the cocke, or the barke of the dogge
may waken some one within, and so hinder
him of his intent: and he cannot be
ignorant that the candle will deceiue
him, & the gallous destroy him. Now no
lesse clearely knowes the Papist, Scripture
to be that to him (in case it were knowne
by the common people) which the crow
of the cocke, the barke of the dogge, the
light of the candle, aud sight of the gallous
is to these. This moued Chrysostome
long ago thus to write touching Heretickes.Chrysost op. imp. Hom. 44.
                        Heretici sacerdotes, claudunt ianuas
veritatis. Sciunt enim si manifesta esset
veritas quod ipsorum ecclesia esset relinquenda,
& ipsi de sacerdotali dignitate ad
humilitatem venirent popularem. Hereticall
Priests do close vp the gates of the truth of
God: for they know that if that truth were
made manifest, and cleare to the world; that

their Church would be forsaken, and that
they themselues would be cast downe from
their priestly dignitie vnto the meanest estate
of the basest people.
                        Hireom. in Esa. lib. 9. cap. 30. This moued Hierome also
thus to write touching Heretickes. Sagittant
in obscuro rectos corde, istitantam sibi
assumunt authoritatem, vt siue dextra doceant,
siue sinistra, id est siue bona, siue mal
                              •
                           ,
nolunt discipulos ratione discutere, sed se praeceptores
sequi; tunc hi qui prius decipiebant
nequaquam vltro ad eos volebant accedere,
postquam se senferint intellectos. They shoote
their darts in secret at the vpright in heart.
These men challenge so great authoritie to
themselues, that whither they teach right, or
wrong, that is, good or euill; they will no wayes
haue their disciples to trie, or examine that
they teach but to follow their maisters
blindnesse: then these who first deceiued the
people, would not afterwards come to them
knowing that they were vnderstood and taken
vp. I perswade my selfe, ô my soule, were
that worthy man Petrus Ferrariensis liuing
to day, he would (directing his
speech to the Princes of the world and
specially of Europe) crie out as he did of
old. O miseros imperatores & seculares
Principes! qui haec & alia sustinetis, & vos

seruos ecclesiae facitis, & mundum per eos infinit
is modis vsurpari videtis, nec de remedio
cogitatis, & quia prudētiae & sapientiae non attēditis.
O miserable Emperours and Princes of
the world! who suffer these & other things, &
make your selues seruants of the Church,
and see the world innumerable wayes abused
by them, and yet do thinke vpon no remedie,
because you hearken not vnto prudence and
wisedome. For sure it is if the Princes and
people (misled this day by the Papists)
knew what God offers to them by Scripture,
what God craues of them by Scripture,
and how their leaders should carrie
themselues towards him, they would not
be misled any longer by them. No, no,
Iehu was neuer more forward in destroying
the altars of Baal,
                        2. King. 10. then they would
be readie to pull downe all their idolatrous
monuments.Acts 16. Those men of Ephesus
were not more willing to burne their
costly curious bookes, after they hard
and beleeued, then the Kings, the Princes
and the men, the women; now blindnesse
followes the blind Papists, would be to
burne all those pamphlets and monuments
of poperie put in their hands by
thē. And to conclude this point, sure I am

were Augustine liuing this day,Aug. Epist. 167. he would
direct his speech, against the Popish Seminaries
as he directed it long ago against
the Donatists. Puto quod ipse diabolus, si authoritate
Iudicis quem ipse eligeret, toties
vinceretur, non esset tam impudens vt in ea
causa persisteret. In my iudgement if the diuell
himselfe were so often ouercome by the authoritie
of the Iudge whom he had chosen to
himselfe, he would not be so impudent as to
persist in that cause.
                        The Papist is bewitched by foure intising Dalilaes so that he cannot be reclaimed. But alas, but alas, ô
my soule, these sonnes of that sonne of
perdition, be so bewitched by these foure
entycing and perswading Dalilaes to the
which by fearefull oathes they haue married
themselues the onely builders and
vpholders of that their Babel, (Auaritia,
Superbia, Ignoratio Scripturae, falsorum
Prophetarum admiratio. Couetousnes, Pride,
Ignorance of the Scripture, admiration of
false teachers) that nothing can reclaime
them. For my owne part, I pray God for
the sonne of his loues sake,Lact. lib. 4. cap. 30. when it shall
please him to enlighten the eyes of the
Papist Seminaries to see that, and to open
their mouthes to confesse that euen before
the simplest of the babes of God
which Chrysostome confessed to be most

true touching holy Scripture.Chrysost, hom. 3. de Lazaro. 
                        Magna aduersus
peccatum munitio est Scripturarum
lectio, magnum praecipitium, profundum barathrum
scripturarum ignoratio: magna salutis
perditio de diuinis legibus nihil sc
                              •
                           re, eares
haereses peperit, ea vitam corruptaminuexit,
hoc sursum deorsum miscuit omnia. The
reading of holy Scripture is a great fortresse
against sinne. The ignorance of holy Scripture
is a verie fearefull downefall to the deepest and
most dangerous dungeon. It is a great losse of
saluation to know nothing of the Lawes of
God: this hath bred heresie; this hath brought
in corrupt life, and vile manners; yea, this hath
turned all things vp and downe.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE SECOND ROBBER
is the Popish Seminarie, without conscience,
and with ashameles countenance,
blotting cleane, perfect
written Scripture; with the foule
blot of imperfection and subtiltie, obtruding
to the babes of God 
                           •
                        ound
Traditions.
                     THat euill one Satan,Satan ha
                           
                              •
                           eth Scripture deadly being neuer able
to forget that sensible foyle he receiued

at the hands of yt great Sauiour of the
world Iesus (drawing that two edged
sword of holy Scripture,Mat. 4. ouer, and ouer,
against him, euen while Satan cunningly
peruerting Scripture, pressed by bringing
of it against him, to abuse it to his
ouerthrow) hath alwayes kept in his
heart, a deadly vnrecouerable hatred
against holy Scripture; and therefore he
hath not contented himselfe by the crafty
and cruell trauels of the Popish Seminarie
onely, to hide vp that cleare light
which shineth in holy Scripture, from
the eyes of Gods babes. But besides this
he hath not bene affraid (so shameles is
that great enemie the god of this world,
so forward are these his agents first blinded
and then sent forth by him) euen to
accuse holy Scripture of a most grosse
fault, and blast it with a monstrous blemish,
holding and affirming, that euen
Scripture (the verie inditement of truth)
onely louing, onely pitifull, onely towards
the babes of God; louing them
with a loue vnspeakable and glorious: pitying
them with incomparable compassion:
and well knowing what they stand
in neede of, for keeping of them from

Satan and sinnes snare, and for leading
them straightly towards their expected
home) is no perfect booke containing in
it all things necessarie for mans saluation,
but imperfect, which must be supplied (as
they alledge) by their traditions and vnwritten
verities (as they call them) which
they affirme to be worthy of no lesse reuerence,
and authoritie then the verie
written word of God deliuered by the
Prophets of blessed Iesus, and his Apostles:
as that shamelesse first decree pronounced
from the deceiued and deceiuing
hearts, by the foule and defyling lips
of those apostat fathers of yt Councell of
Trent in that 4. Session plainely speaketh.
Now (which thou canst not but iustly
admire) ô my soule, the Popish Seminarie
hath so farre preuailed in this point also,
with the Euahes of this time, with the
Sampsons of this time, that as they will
not looke, vpon any condition almost, vpon
a Bible translated in their mother
tongue, so they will euen with greedinesse
lend both their eares vnto the found traditions
of the Popish Seminaries, albeit
they be the corrupt birth of his owne
brutish braine. Pitie ô God the Euahes of

this our time, hearkening vnto the Serpent,
but not to the Sauiour. Pitie ô God
that Sampsons of this time, hearkening
vnto the agents of that trecherous great
Dalilah, but not vnto that true glorious
Messias. Oh, ô my soule, what a world of
auditors and followers, found those blind
leaders of the blind Scribes and Pharises,
while thy Lord and Maister teaching in
the world, was forsaken of all? and therefore
wonder not while he is not teaching
in his owne person, but by his base
seruants, lying flatterers be honoured and
maintained, and that the onely true fathers
of the Church be condemned, and
murthered.The Pope and his be possessed by a strange spirit. This must be a strang Spirit,
ô my soule, which possesseth the Pope,
which possesseth his agents, yea, which
possesseth those who do follow him and
them, that he with them hath taken vpon
them to perfect holy Scripture as if in it
selfe it were maimed, and not onely to
darken it as if it were not cleare, but besides
this that they haue found credit in
these points with the Euahes and Sampsons
of this world. The written word of
God my Father I may not reade, I may
not heare in my mother tongue. And yet

the vnwritten inuentions of man I my
reade, I must reade in any tongue I can
vnderstand. That Scripture which leades
men thus, ô my soule, cannot possibly be
the spirit of the Father, the spirit of the
Sonne who is from aboue, but must be
some spirit who is from beneath, drawing
men from the true Father and Sauiour
of their soules, to some bastard father and
Sauiour, who in the end will proue an vnnaturall
Saul, seeking the life of his owne
Ionathan, and a cruell Herod murthering
those infants he should haue maintained.
Scripture condemnes, and all ages since
that time sensible of God, haue abhorred
Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, for attempting
(contrarie to the will of God) to erect
an altar at Bethel, and another at Dan,
lest the people resorting to Ierusalem
(where God had appointed sacrifice onely
to be offered) should haue fallen away
from him to the house of Dauid: and shall
not God condemne, and should not all
men sensible of God abhorre these peart
Popish Seminaries who haue taken vpon
them to set vp in euery corner where they
can be heard, the calfes of their owne traditions,
drawing away men thereby from

the true oracles of Gods written word,
lest that they ceassing to dote after these
calfes, and hearkening to Gods oracles,
should giue themselues to seeke and serue
the liuing God, according to his commandement?
Now to the effect that the
Seminarie may make the calfes of his traditions
to shine the more brightly, and to
smile the more sweetly on such towards
whom they are drawne, they haue not
bene afraid to lay a most fearefull imputation
vpon our blessed God, and his sacred
truth; most lyingly (and yet most boldly)
affirming that all things requisite for
mans saluation be not contained in holy
Scripture. What, ô my soule, if the eyes of
men were enlightened with the eyes of
Dauid, to see the wonders of the Law of
God, and seeing these wonders to perceiue,
not that little drop, but that huge
quantitie of sweetest honie, the hungrie
child of God hath presented to his soule
by the Spirit, speaking vnto him by that 4.
verse of the 15. Chapter of that Epistle
written to the Romans, and by the 15. and
16. verses of the 3. Chapter of that second
Epistle written to Timothie? Beleeue me,
ô my soule, couldst thou weigh and consider

those two Scriptures aright, thou
shouldest find thy selfe euen by fiue words
(which I may iustly stile fiue bright
diamonds Almightie God will haue alwayes
to shine vpon the fiue fingers of his
owne, to direct their way wheresoeuer
they walke) shortly (yet most substantially)
acquainting thee so with the whole
vses of that blessed written word of God,
that thou shouldst be able to find that nothing
requisite to mans saluation is deficient
in it,Scripture containes all things requisite for mans saluation. that all things needfull to mans
saluation be fully & clearly contained in
it. Wilt thou not confesse, ô my soule, that
whatsomeeuer can concerne mans saluation
possibly, must either looke to doctrine
or to manners, or to comfort. If it
looke to doctrine, that doctrine is either
true which the child of God must seeke
after, and embrace, as he would seeke after
that meate which is onely able to feede
him, and after that medicine which is only
able to cure him; or false, which the
child of God must flie from, as he would
flie from poyson, slaying not his bodie
onely, but his soule also. If the doctrine be
true, that is abundantly and clearly taught
by holy Scripture, and therefore it is said

to be profitable to Teach. If the doctrine
be false, that holy Scripture discouers
clearly and ouerthrowes fully, and therefore
it is said to be profitable to Improue.
If it looke to manners, these manners be
either good, commanded and commended
of God: or euill, forbidden and condemned
by him. If they be good manners,
Scripture instructs them abundantly concerning
them: and therefore it is said to
be profitable to Instruct in righteousnesse.
If the manners be euill, this Scripture reproues
and condemnes, and therefore it
is said to be profitable to Correct. And
lastly, if thou, ô my soule, shalt finde thy
selfe cast downe at any time, or weakened
by the force of any tentation or crosse lying
on thee, or approaching neare thee,
shalt thou not find holy Scripture sufficiently
able to furnish thee with Patience,Rom. 25. 4.
with Comfort, and with Hope, as Paul
tels thee? ô my soule, when shall the blind
Papist begin to lend his eare vnto holy
Scripture, which is that onely old and
true antiquitie, which hath God that
glorious Ancient of dayes for the author
of it, to the end that he may first see that
there is no suspition of imperfection of

insufficiencie in holy Scripture, and therefore
be moued to confesse, that all things,
and euerie thing requisite for mans saluation
is onely to be sought out of it, is onely
to be found in it. Shall thy God, ô my
soule, be so carefull about the building of
that outward tabernacle, which he appointed
onely to stand for a while, that euen
after he had called and fitted Bezaliel
& Aholiah for the building of it, he will
haue it, and euerie thing belonging to it,
to be made after that fashion which was
shewed by his Maiestie vnto Moses in the
mount? And canst thou, ô my soule, or
any other soule with thee, be possibly
built (by these men called of God for the
worke of the Ministerie) vpon that onely
true foundation, and pretious corner stone
Iesus, otherwayes then Almightie God
hath taught these men to build them vppon
him, in and by that his mountaine of
holy Scripture? Are we not thus resolued
by that disciple whom Iesus loued, ô my
soule:Ioh. 20. 29. 30. 
                        Many other things also did Iesus in
the presence of his disciples, which are not
written in this Booke; but these things are
written that we might beleeue that Iesus is
that Christ the Sonne of God, and that in beleeuing

ye might haue life through his name.
Heare I not Paul crying with a loude
voice to the hearing of Angels and men?
Though that we or an Angell from heauen
preach vnto you otherwise then that which we
haue preached vnto you,
                        Gal. 1. 8. 
                        let him be accursed.
If any man teach otherwayes, and consenteth
not vnto the wholsome words of the Lord Iesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godlinesse, he is puft vp and knoweth
nothing,
                        1. Tim. 6. 3. 4. 5. 
                        but doteth about questions, and
strife of words, whereof cometh enuie, strife,
raylings, euill surmisings, vaine disputations
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
truth, which thinke that gaine is godlinesse,
from such separate thy selfe. Thinkest thou
that it was without cause, ô my soule,
that our God directed the Iewes thus by
the mouth of Moses, to whom the Law
was giuen?Deut. 4. 
                              •
                           . & 12. 32. 
                        Ye shall put nothing to the word
which I command you, neither shall ye take
ought therefrom that ye may keepe the commandements
of the Lord your God which I
command you. Was it without cause that
blessed Iesus by whom grace came to vs,
would speake thus to vs by the mouth of
his dearest seruant Iohn? For I protest vnto
euery man that heareth the words of the prophecie

of this booke: If any man shall adde vnto
these things, God shall adde vnto him the
plagues that are written in the booke.
                        Reuel. 22. 18. 19. 
                        And if
any man shall diminish of the words of this
prophecie, God shall take away his part out of
the booke of life, and out of the holy Citie, and
from these things written in this Booke. Oh,
ô my soule, when shall the blind Papist
proudly (albeit not onely vainely but falsly)
bragging of Antiquitie, countenance
that Antiquitie penned by men, led of
God by Scripture, and in Gods name leading
men to Scripture, to the end that
they with these men may see the sufficiencie
and perfection of Scripture, and with
this, the vanitie, the weaknesse, the vilenesse
of humane traditions. Origen who
was no Papist, albeit he wrote long ago,
wrote thus:Origen in Ierem. 
                        Nobis necesse est Scripturas
sanctas in testimonium vocare; sensus quippe
nostri, & enarrationes sine his testibus non
habent fidem. We must necessarily call holy
Scripture to beare witnesse to vs, for without
them neither can our conceptions nor expositions
haue any faith. Chrysostome seeing no
imperfection in Scripture could say: Si
quid dicitur absque Scriptura,
                        Chrysost. 
                        auditorum cogitatio
claudicat. Whatsoeuer is deliuered or

spoken without the warrant of Scripture maketh
the mindes of the herers to halt. Damascene
agreeing herewith, can say: Cuncta
quae tradita sunt per legem,
                        Damas. 
                        per Prophetas,
per Apostolos, & Euangelistas suscipimus,
cognoscimus, veneramur, nihil vltro perquirentes.
We receiue and admit, we acknowledge
and reuerence whatsoeuer is deliuered
to vs by the Law, by the Prophets, and by the
Euangelists, searching out nothing beside.
Augustine subscribing hereto could say:
Quod è Scriptura authoritatem non habet,
                        August.
                        eadem facilitate contemnitur quae probatur.
Whatsoeuer hath not authoritie from Scripture,
is as easily contemned as it is allowed.
O would to God that those kings and
subiects, parents and children, husbands
and wiues, maisters and seruants, who superstitiously
dote after the Pope and his
traditions, could hearken to that of Cyprian,
deliuered to the inhabitants of Carthage
his auditors: Adulterum est,
                        Cypr. ep. 4. ad pleb. Carth. 
                        impium
est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore
instituitur, vt dispositio diuina violetur:
procul ab huiusmodi hominum contagione
discedite, & sermones eorum velut cancer &
pestem fugiendo vitate, praemonente Domino
& docente, coeci sunt & coecorum duces. Nemo

vos fratres à Domini vijs errare faciat;
nemo vos Christianes à Christi Euangelio rapiat;
nemo filios Ecclesiae de Ecclesia tollat;
pereant sibi qui perire voluerunt, qui mandatum
Dei reij
                              •
                           iunt, & traditionem suam statuere
conantur; fortiter à vobis & firmiter
respuantur; vitate linguam diaboli venenatam,
qui ab initio mundi fallax semper, &
mendax erat; mentitur vt fallat, blanditur vt
noceat, bona promittit vt malum tribuat, vitam
pollicetur vt perimat. Whatsoeuer is ordained
of the furie of man, to the end that the
ordinance of God may be ouerthrowne, that is
adulterous, impious, sacrilegious; take your
selues farre from the infection of such men, by
flying, eschewing their speeches as ye would
eschue the canker, and the pest; being forewarned
and taught by our Lord and Maister
saying vnto you, they be blind leaders of the
blind. O my brethren, suffer no man to make
you erre from the wayes of the Lord. Let no
man pull you Christians from the Gospell of
Christ? Let no man take the sonnes of the
Church out of the Church; let them perish to
themselues who will perish; let those be strongly
and constantly reiected and cast off by you,
who do cast off the commandements of God,
to establish their owne traditions; flie farre

from the diuell his poysoned tongue, who from
the beginning of the world hath euer bene a
deceiuer, and a lyer; he lies, to the end he may
deceiue; he flatters, to the end he may hurt;
he promises good things, to the end he may
giue thee euill things: yea, he binds himselfe
to giue life, to the end he may slay. O when
shall the blind Papist hearken to that of
Clemens Alexandrinus.
                        In or. ad gent. 
                        Quoniam ipsum
verbum ad nos venit de coelo, non est amplius
eundum, ad hominum doctrinam. Because the
very word of God is now come to vs from the
heauens, we must not hereafter take our selues
to the doctrine of men. This is that the Spirit
would cleare vnto vs, when he saith: At
sundrie times,
                        Heb. 1. 2. 
                        and in diuerse manners, God
spake in the old time to our fathers by the
Prophets, in the last dayes he hath spoken to
vs by his Sonne, by whom also he made the
world. O when shall that be heard and beleeued
by the Papist.Iustin. in tryph. 
                        Sola Christiana Philosophia
eiusmodi est, ex qua rerum diuinarum
haurienda est cognitio, cuius authores
fuerunt homines iusti, Dei amantes, Deo
chari, neminem metuentes, gloriae non cupidi,
tantum Spiritus Dei afflatu loquuti. Christian
wisedome contained in holy Scripture is
onely such, out of the which knowledge of heauenly

things is onely to be drawne, the authors
whereof were men iust, louing God, dearely beloued
of God, fearing no man, no waies desirous
of glorie and honour, aud who did speake by
the inspiration of the holy Ghost onely.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE THIRD ROBBER IS
the Popish Seminarie, malitiously
stealing from the child of God that
perfect satisfaction made by blessed
Iesus, his sole and full Sauiour, vnto
God his Father for all his sinnes, and
for all punishment due to him for his
sinnes; and cunningly obtruding vnto
him his owne satisfaction for the
temporarie punishment of his sinnes,
either here before death, or after
death in Purgatorie.
                     O What a terrifying monster hath
that cunning foxe the Pope made of
his more then subtilly inuented,The Papist hath made a fearefull monster of his effectlesse fire of Purgatorie. and yet
more thē shamefully vented, of the effectlesse
fire of Purgatorie? Beleeue me, ô my
foule, those huge giants the sons of Anak,
bred neuer such dashing astonishment vnto
the faithlesse and murmuring spies, and

people of Israel, as these flames of the
fire of Purgatorie (kindled by the Pope
in the cold chimney of his fond imagination,
and without it to this day neuer
seene, neuer felt burning by any liuing, by
any dead) hath and doth procure to those
blind people, who turning their backes
vpon the word of God, (carried by Moses
and Aaron) haue lent their eares to his inuentions.
And yet the subtile Pope, to
make this his conceit the more plausible,
to that blind people led by him their blind
guide, can hold & maintaine most peartly,
(albeit more then lyingly) that howbeit
blessed Iesus hath by his death satisfied
God his Fathers wrath,The Popish forged ground of his forged Purgatory. for the guilt
of the sinnes of his chosen, and for the eternall
punishment due to them for those
their sinnes; yet he hath no wayes satisfied
for that temporarie punishment their sins
drawes after them, and so opening without
shame his shamelesse mouth, he dare
auow that all these who here do not sufficiently
satisfie by Penance (as he speaketh)
for their veniall and daily sinnes,
must remaine after death in Purgatorie,
and be there broyled, and sodden in the
flames thereof till they be haled out againe.

This fire the Pope hath taken vpon
him to make vp of coales and other matter,
neuer created by that great Creator
who made all things, but of a matter
knowne (I should haue said vnknowne
to himselfe.) And this strong fire he hath
kindled neither in the heauens, nor in the
aire, nor in the seas, nor in the earth, nor
in the hells; so that I must thinke, as the
Pope doth not know of what matter he
hath made vp that his fire of Purgatorie,The alledged extrem paines indured in the forged fire.
so he cannot know in what place it burneth.
And yet (if the Papist may be beleeued) ô what extreame intollerable
paines do poore soules sustaine there? Is
not this written by their Doctors for a
truth, ô my soule! There was a soule which
had bene thirtie yeares in Purgatorie, at
length there came an Angell asking his
soule whether it would tarrie yet one
short Winter day in Purgatorie,In the 160. sermon of the soules of the booke c
                              •
                           lled sermone
                                 •
                               discipuli de tempore & sanctis.
                         or if it
would returne to the world againe, and
do there a maruellous hard Penance; to
wit, for a long hundred yeares space go
barefooted, still treading vpon sharpe
iron nailes, eating nothing but browne
bread, drinking bitter gall mingled with
vineger, wearing a cloath made of camels

haire nearest his skin, and hauing a stone
vnder his head in place of a pillow. This
soule hearing this, chused rather to returne
to the earth to indure all this, then
to stay so much as one short Winter day
long in Purgatorie. But no wonder can it
be that the soule made her choyse thus, if
that fire be such a fire as the Papists make
it to be: for is it not written in their decrees,
that there is no earthly paine or
martyrdome to be compared to the
paines of Purgatorie? yea, is that great
schooleman Thomas ashamed to affirme?Cap. qui in aliud dist. 25.
that the fire of hell and the fire of Purgatorie
is all one, and that they differ nothing
at all, but that the one is temporall,
and the other is eternall. And yet is it not
a wonder, ô my soule, that the Papists can
write so resolutely touching this their
forged fire, and the extremitie of the
paines sustained in it, considering that our
blessed God (to whom all things are
knowne) to this day told vs neuer by
Scripture that there was such a fire, or
such paines sustained in it; yea, considering
that these very Papists by whom these
things be written, (as I thinke) will confesse
were neuer at Purgatorie, either to

see the flames of fire burning,What moued the Papists to write so freely about their forged fire of Purgatorie. or to heare
the cries of the soules tormented there,
or to be pained themselues therewith. But
ô my soule, it may be that I smell a farre
off (if I be not farre deceiued) that which
hath moued the Papists so freely thus to
speake, and to write about their Purgatorie.
The fire of Purgatorie they neuer
saw, the ho
                           •
                        e paining flames thereof
they neuer felt in their owne persons.
But yet they do daily see their owne
outward and naturall fire, and feele
the heate of it, to their great profit and
pleasure: And they know that this
their alledged forged fire of Purgatorie,
with the alledged fearefull, and forged
burning flames thereof, hath onely set vp
this their fire, and kept in this their fire;
that kings are onely in their hands who
are onely able to pull poore soules out
of these flames; yea that strongest fleshcrooke
is onely in their custodie, which
is able to hale them out of this boyling
caldron (for be they not the maisters of
all Masses, Pardons, and Indulgences, by
the which alone these poore soules (if the
Papists may be beleeued) are deliuered
from these flames? haue they not, non

sine commodo curiae, albeit cum damno conscientiae:
first forged that fire cunningly, and
to this day fostered it carefully, drawing
sharpe slaying swords, and kindling seene
deuouring flames of seene, felt fire, against
all such who hearing do not beleeue and
follow them. And, ô my soule, will
Scripture subscribe with the Papist? will
true Antiquitie founded on Scripture, and
not blinded by that filthie idoll Couetousnesse
foster him in this point?Scripture ouerthroweth Purgatorie & her pretended ground. No, no, ô my
soule, I assure thee; for if that blessed Spirit
of truth speaking by Scripture cleare
any point of sauing doctrine sensibly, for
the resolution and consolation of poore
sinners, against those euils which sinne
draweth vpon man, he cleares most sensibly
that which that cursed spirit of lyes
speaking by the Pope, and his suffraganes
obscures most grosly, yea controles and
denies most impudently: and yet most
heartily vnto the confusion and condemnation
of poore sinners. What hath the
Spirit of God cleared, ô my soule, if this
be not cleared by him? Blessed Iesus, that
Sonne of God and Sonne of man, is that sole
and onely Sauiour of man, is the full and perfect
Sauiour of man; who alone in his owne

person once hath satisfiedfully, and perfited
his fathers iustice, for all the sinnes of his elect
freeing them from all the guilt of their sinnes,
and from all their punishment due to them.
Cannot sweet Iesus (who neuer made any
foolish bragge, or vttered any apparent
vntruth, fastened to the Crosse, and there
suffering for thee,Christ alone in his owne person hath satisfied his Father for vs fully. ô my soule) crie out
with a loud voice. It is finished, it is finished?
by this one word, directing his speech to
God his Father who sent him to saue lost
men, and telling his Maiestie that he by
his death had payed the least farthing of
mans debt of sinne, and so satisfie his
iustice fully; directing his speech to man,
for whose sake he was sent, and telling
him that he was loosed from that band,
and hand writing, God the Father had
ouer his head because of sinne, he hauing
cancelled it, and rent it in peeces vpon the
tree, and so that he was freed from that
prison within the which he lay bound before
and set at libertie, henceforth to
serue God on earth, and to reigne with
him in heauen: & yet the couetous papists
alwayes crying (with Iudas) What will
you giue me and I will betray him to you? can
giue Christ the lie in his face, saying in

the hearing of his father to men, It is not
finished. That is, Christ hath not ransomed
man fully, and freed him from prison
wholely in respect he must go yet to
that prison of Purgatorie and by another
ransome (most vile indeed, yet
not so vile as the vile receiuer of it is) be
deliuered therefrom. Cannot Paul (subscribing
to the sweetest and most comfortable
words of his Maister) tell me that
Iefus is giuen me of my God to be my
Redeemer,1. Cor. 1. 30. albeit the Pope would send me
to Purgatorie, to the end he may be my
redeemer? Yea, that he gaue himselfe a
ransome for all men, albeit the Pope
would send me to Purgatorie,1. Tim. 2. 6. there to be
tormented by my selfe, by suffering of torments,
and by the liuing belonging to
me, by laying downe a ransome of gold,
for some masses to be sung for me. Isaiah
would make me beleeue (and I dare not
but beleeue him better then all the Popes
of the world) that I am healed by Christs
stripes,Esay 5. 
                              •
                           . and yet the Papist will haue me
yet to be whipped, for the healing of me,
with the burning scourges of the flames
of this Purgatorie. Yea, Isaiah in that
same place tels me that the chastisement

of my peace was vpon Christ alone, and
Paul would assure me that I being iustified
by faith haue peace with God through
Iesus Christ our Lord, albeit the fierce
Papist would send me backe to that
bloudie barres of his cruell Purgatorie,
there to vndergo a fearefull battell and
vndergo a bloudy warrefare: draw neare
me,A direct opposition betwixt that spirit which speaketh by Scripture and that spirit speaketh by the Pope. here, ô my soule, and consider I pray
thee, but that contradiction which is to
be found to be betwixt that spirit of truth
speaking to thee by Scripture about this
point, and that spirit of lies speaking to
thee by the Pope: Scripture tels me that
Christ hath fully satisfied his Father for
me: The Pope tels me that he hath satisfied
him onely in a part. Scripture tels me
that Christ satisfied once for me. The
Pope tels me that he must be satisfied
daily for me; Scripture tels me that he satisfied
his Father for me by himselfe in his
owne person, bearing our sinnes in his
flesh vpon the Crosse: the Pope tels me
that I must satisfie my God by suffering
in my owne person. Scripture tels me, that
he hath satisfied and doth satisfie his Father
in vs. No wonder that the Pope doth
this, for by this craft he liueth, and therefore

I must giue him leaue, ô my soule,
till God (being mercifull vnto him) open
his eyes to see that truth which shineth
in holy Scripture, to lie about this his
forged Purgatorie;Act. 20. as Demetrius the siluer
Smith at Ephesus lied about his dead
goddesse Diana.
                        True Antiquitie condemneth Purgatorie. But will true Antiquitie,
ô my soule, subscribe with the Papist about
this his Purgatorie? No, no, if it
could be hearkned vnto: for cannot old
Cyprian say.Cyprian. con. Deme. 
                        Quando istinc excessum fuerit,
nullus iam locus poenitentiae, nullus satisfactionis
effectus; hic vita, aut tenetur,
aut amittitur. So soone as we go hence
there remaineth no place of repentance any
more, no effect of satisfaction; life is either
lost or found here. Bernard could say, Tria
sunt loca: Coelum, Terra, Infernus; & habent
singula habitatores suos; coelum solos bonos,
terra mixtos, Infernus solos malos. There
be three places, the Heauens, the Earth, and
the Hels; and euerie one of them hath their
owne indwellers. The heauens keeping these
who be good onely: the earth possessing both
good and bad:
                        Bern. in sentent. fol. 117. 
                        the hels hauing the wicked
onely inclosed within them. And againe,
Tres sunt animae status, in corpore, posito corpore,
& recepto corpore; primus datus est ei

ad agendam poenitentiam, reliqui duo ad habendam
requiem vel poenam scilicet, prout
gessit in corpore, siue bonum, siue malum.
There be three conditions of the soule, one
while it is in the bodie; another when it layes
aside the bodie; the third when it takes vp the
bodie againe. The first estate is granted to her,
to the end she may repent, the other two, to
the end she may receiue rest or punishment, as
she hath behaued her selfe in her bodie, by doing
good or euill.
                        Aug. lib. 5. hypogr. 
                        Augustine long before
Bernard could write thus. Primum locum
fides catholica diuina authoritate regnum
credit esse coelorum, secundum gehennam, tertiam
ignoramus penitus, imo nec in scripturis
sanctis inueniemus: the faith of true Catholike
Christians leaning to the authoritie of
God, beleeues the first place after this life to
be the kingdome of heauen, the second to be
the hels, but the third we no wayes know,
neither shall find to be in holy Scripture. And
no wonder that Augustine writ so, for
he could not find that Purgatorie hath
that vse which the subtile greedie Papist
since his dayes hath fained it to haue; for
writes not Augustine thus againe:Aug de ver. Ser. 37. 
                        Christus
suscipiendo paenam, & non suscipiendo culpam,
& culpam & paenam deleuit. Christ by taking

on him the punishment due to vs for sinne, and
not the guilt of sinne, hath done away both
the guilt and the punishment. Yea, this moued
Bernard to bring in that saying, Oportuit
liberari in hoc saeculo vt liberos haberet
in futuro. It behoued the children of our
God to be freed and deliuered from all euill in
this life, to the end that God their Father
might haue free sonnes and daughters to
raigne with him in the world to come. Were
that ancient Doctor at Paris liuing now,Frater Michael. Menoti.
he would ioyne hands with vs against the
Papist in this point, for could he not write
thus: Peccator est mercator positus in hoc
mundo pro emendo regnum Paradisi, & tantum
durant nundinae quantum vita praesens. A
sinner is a merchant placed in this world to
buy the kingdome of Paradise, and the market
or faire in the which he must buy it, indures &
lasts as long as this present life shall indure.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE FOVRTH ROBBER
is the Popish Seminarie, malciously
stealing from the babes of God that
cleane bloudie and onely propitiatorie
sacrifice offered vnto God the Father
by that blessed hie Priest of our soules

Iesus; and subtiltie obtruding to
them that vncleane bloudie, and no
wayes purging, but alwayes defiling
sacrifice of the Masse, offered vp
(alas) not vnto God (as the Papist
alledgeth) but to the diuell (as he
should confesse) by his Masse-Priest.
                     SEing,Wherfore was this vile Masse forged by the Papist. ô my soule, that vile sacrifice of
the Masse was first inuented without
confidence, & then vented with a shamelesse
countenance, specially because of
this forged and fained fire of Purgatorie
to be a tongs or flesh-hooke, or rather
a theeuish Egyptian hand, to pull out money
of poore mens purses. Let vs trie if
Scripture will fauor the tonges, and flesh-hookes
of the Masse, more then it fauors
the fire of Purgatory. Sure I am, ô my soule
that the first inuenters of this vnbloudie
(albeit not vngreedie) sacrifice of that
mischeuous monstrous Masse, neuer dreamed
that holy Scripture should haue fauored
it, or furthered them in maintaining
of it, albeit the other venters of it,
(non efferentes verum sensum ex Scripturis
sed inferentes falsum sensum in Scriptur as: not

bringing forth a true interpretation and
meaning out of Scripture, but throwing forcible
a false interpretation, and meaning vpon
Scripture) haue (peruerting Scripture
to their owne condemnation,2. Epist. 3. cap. as Peter
speaketh) pressed to make Scripture sound
their, way. The name of the Masse the
Papist shall not find iu Scripture, and this
the most learned among them will not
deny, for I perswade my selfe that they are
long ago ashamed of that brutish conclusion,
gathered by the Doctros of Sarbon
at Paris, vpon the end of Pauls Epistles,
shewing whence they were written, and
sounding in the Latine tongue thus. Missa
est, and so forth; affirming that Paul did
thereby giue men to vnderstand that they
should go to heare Masse on Sunday. And
therefore I must pray thee, ô my soule, let
me here enquire of the Papist first, what
sacrifice this his sacrifice of the Masse is?
Secondly, what is that which he sacrificeth
when he offereth it vp? and these
two questions being answered by
him, I shall shew thee (God-willing)
what thy God speaketh to thee by his
owne mouth out of Scripture, and hath
deliuered for thy resolution and establishment

about this point. The Papist
will answer thee, ô my soule, that his sacrifice
of the Masse is an externall, reall,
vnbloudie, propitiatorie sacrifice, in the
which the true bodie and bloud of Iesus
Christ be offered vp to God his Father,
by the Masse priest, vnder the shape,
forme, and fashion of bread and wine, and
that for the sinnes of the liuing on earth
here, and for the dead in Purgatorie. I
know, ô my soule, that the Masse priest
knowes that he hath no conscience in extolling
and defending of this his sacrifice,
and yet I cannot but wonder how he
hath the face to offer it vp, and to
eate it when he hath done with it. Grants
he not, ô my soule, that it is an outward
sacrifice? now if it be an outward sacrifice,
it must necessarily be a visible sacrifice, all
outward things being visible? If it be a
visible sacrifice, then necessarily that
which is offered vp into it must be seene,
for how can an outward sacrifice be vnderstood,
vnlesse the sacrifice offered vp
into it be perceiued? Stoope forwards
here, ô my soule, and with courage demand
the Masse priest, what he offers vp
to God, and so what he vnderstands by

the sacrifice whilst he cals his Masse an
outward, reall sacrifice? Himselfe I thinke
he offers not vp, himselfe I thinke he vnderstands
not by that sacrifice which he
offers vp, nor his altar, nor the many ceremonies
vsed by him, nor those hundred
crosses ouer and ouer made by him. The
bodie of Christ, saith the priest, stands by
his sacrifice: that I heare, but is Christs
bodie in that sacrifice of the Masse outward
and visible? aduise with thy senses,
by the which outward things are perceiued,
ô Masse priest, most sensible of siluer,
but altogether senslesse of thy Sauiour,
and then if thou hast any conscience, answer
me as thou wilt be answerable to
God: seest thou the bodie of Christ in this
thy sacrifice of the Masse? smellest thou it?
tastest thou it? touchest thou it? But the
accidents of the bread are seene (alledgeth
the Masse priest) as the roundnesse of
it, the colour of it, yea the taste and smell
of it are also perceiued, and these be outward
and externall. That I grant to be
true. But alwayes, ô Masse priest, when all
this is done, either thou must offer these
accidents to God, and these must be thy
sacrifice, which thou deniest, or else thou

must offer vp to God an outward visible
sacrifice without an outward visible offering,
which cannot possibly be: or lastly,
that one and the same sacrifice must be
outward and inward, visible and inuisible.
But it may be, ô my soule, that the Masse
priest who hath learned his tongue so
grosly to contrarie God, can easily digest
these contrarieties. Forget not then, ô my
soule, that the Papist doth confesse that
Christs bodie is offered vp in the Masse,
and yet that it is inuisible in the Masse, and
therefore see that thou, throwing his
owne false doctrine in his owne soules
face, say to him, vpon his owne grounds,
that his Masse can be no visible sacrifice,
and if it be no visible, that it cannot be
outward as he affirmeth.No remission of sins without bloud. But will Scripture
agree with an vnbloudie sacrifice
promising remission of sinnes? I trow not,
ô my soule, for speakes not Scripture thus:Heb. 9. 22.
                        Without shedding of bloud there is no remission.
Will Scripture allow the offering vp
of Christ by a priest for the sinnes of any?
I trow not, ô my soule, 
                           •
                        or be not these
the speeches of the Spirit:Heb. 10. 10. 11. 12. 13. 
                        We are sanctified
by the offering vp of the bodie of Iesus Christ
once made. Euery Priest appeareth daily ministring,

and ofttimes offereth any manner of
offering, which can neuer take away sinnes.
But this man after he had offered one sacrifice
for sinnes, sitteth for euer at the right
hand of God, and from hence forth tarrieth
till his enemies be made his footstoole.
                        Heb. 9. 24, 25. 26. 27. 28. 
                        For
with one offering hath he consecrated for euer
them that are sanctified. Christ hath entered
into the verie heauen to appeare now in the
sight of God for vs, not that he should offer
himselfe often, as the high Priests entred into
the holy place euery yeare with other bloud,
(for then must he haue often suffered since
the foundation of the world) but now in the
end of the world, hath he appeared once to put
away sinne by the sacrificing of himselfe, and as
it is appointed to men that they shall once dye,
and after that commeth iudgement, so Christ
was once offered to take away the sinnes of
many, and vnto them that looke for him shall
he appeare the second time without sinne vnto
saluation. And in that fame place: Christ
being an hie Priest of good things to come,
                        Heb. 9. 11. 12. 
                        by
a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not
made with hands, that is not of this building,
neither by the bloud of goates, and calues, but
by his owne bloud, entred he in once into the
holy place, and obtained eternall redemption

for vs. And againe: For such an high Priest it
became vs to haue which is holy,
                        Heb. 7. 26. 27. 28. 
                        harmelesse,
and vndefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher then the heauens, which needeth not
daily as these high Priests to offer vp sacrifice,
first for his owne sinnes, and then for the peoples;
for that did he once when he offered vp
himself, for the Law maketh men high priests
which haue infirmitie, but the word of the
oath which was since the Law maketh the
Sonne who is consecrate for euermore. Consider
these Scriptures, ô my soule, and
then calling to minde the fond conceites
of the false greedie priest about his Masse,
iudge, I pray thee, how these grounds can
possibly stand together: Christs offering
once made, and Christs offering not once
made; Christs offering once offered, and
Christs offering daily offered, yea daily to
be offered while the world lasts; Christ
once offered, and Christ not once offered,
but often to be offered; Christ offered
once by himselfe, and to be offered often
by the priest. But all these contrarieties be
easily digested by that man, ô my soule,
who can treade the pathes of the old
Scribes and Pharises: for ô how iustly
may that be spoken of the Masse priest

this day sacrificing his vnbloudie sacrifice
of the Masse, that holding in his forged
fire of Purgatorie, he may thereby kindle
vp to himselfe, and alwayes keepe in his
closet, an hote fire to warme himselfe)
which was spoken long ago of the Pharises,
of whom Chrysostome writeth thus:
Magis cupiebant vt lege manente in vsu essent
sacrificia quibus ipsi ditabantur,
                        Chrys. on Mat. 23. hom. 44. 
                        non
Deus; quam lege cessante, sacrificium iustitiae
veniret in vsum, quo Deus delectatur & homines
iustificantur. They desired rather, that
the Law, these sacrifices standing, might remaine
in vse, by the which they were inriched,
and not God; then that the Law ceassing that
sacrifice of righteousnesse should haue place,
with the which alone God is well pleased, and
by the which sinfull man is made righteous.
Now I appeale to thy conscience, ô Masse
priest, whither thou wishest that thy vnbloudie
sacrifice of the Masse, whereby
thou art inriched, and God is grieued,
should stand in constant vigor, as it hath
done with thee, or that it should ceasse
and be reiected of all men, as it was neuer
ordained of God, to the end that all men
euerie where might haue recourse onely
to that onely bloudie propitiatorie sacrifice

once offered vp by Christ, and neuer
to be offered vp againe, albeit it be that
onely sacrifice wherein God delighteth,
and whereby euerlasting righteousnesse
is attained by man. But while the
Masse priest finds himselfe thus by Scripture
to be straited, with Satan his maister
tempting my Sauiour, he dare flie to Scripture,
and presse euen by it to make all he
hath alledged good (about the retention
of the temporarie punishment due to sin)
after the guilt thereof and eternall punishment
belonging to man,The Popish alledgances for the retention of the temporarie punishmēt after that remission of the guilt and eternal punishmēt. for it is remitted.
Reade we not (will the Masse
priest say) by Moses, in the 3. of Genesis,
that howbeit Adam after his fall
was certified by that sweet Euangelicke
Sermon sounded i
                           •
                         his eares, that by faith
in the seed of the woman promised, he
should be freed from the guilt of his sin,
and eternall death due thereunto: yet we
find that Adam beside this must endure
the first death, be cast out of the earthly
paradise, and haue his bodie afflicted with
many troubles and miseries. Surely reade
we not that notwithstanding Dauid had
his adulterie and murther remitted, yet he
was sharpely punished with temporarie

scourges, for as Scripture tels vs the child
which was borne dyed according to
Gods threatning: Ammon his sonne defiled
Tamar his daughter, Absolon his sonne
slue Ammon his brother, yea Absolon his
sonne put first his old father out of the
doores, & after defiled his concubines before
the Sun, whereof it is manifest (saith
the Masse priest) that after God hath remitted
the great and eternall punishment
of sinne to his owne, that they themselues
must suffer for the temporarie, either here
before death, or after death in Purgatory.
Lift vp thine eares, ô my soule, and heare
I pray thee, he whom heresie hath once
blinded, can very hardly be enlightened
by veritie: yea, he who with Iudas seekes
the bagge, cannot be kept backe from betraying
Iesus, for any thing Iesus can
speake to him, Iesus can do to him. If thou
hast any conscience, ô Masse priest, tell
me as thou wilt answer to God, if no other
thing moues our wise God, after he
hath freely and fully forgiuen his children
for the merits of his dearest child Iesus,
to correct and afflict them, but that
thereby they may satisfie his iustice for
the temporarie punishment due to them

for sinne? If thou shalt suffer Scripture
to leade thee, and not thy owne greedie
heart to miscarrie thee, thou shalt find
that no wayes, for that cause, but for
maine other good deeds doth our God so
behaue himselfe towards his owne. First,
that the bodie of sinne in them may by
peece and peece be crucified,Wherfore corrects our God those whō he remitteth. and mortified,
least otherwayes they falling forth in
new sins should proue dogges returning
to their vomite, & swine to their puddle.
The sense hereof moued, Dauid to say: It is
good for me that I haue bene afflicted,
                        Psal. 119. 71. 
                        that I
may learne thy statutes. Secondly, this is
done by our wise God, to the end that
these his corrections may supply ye roome
of as many speaking, wise Maisters, alwayes
sounding in the eares of Gods children
that notable iewell receiued by
them, euen the remission of their sinnes,
together with the dutie they should discharge
vnto God for the same. This moued
Dauid in the place alledged to say:
Before I was afflicted I went astray,
                        Psal. 119. 67. 
                        but now
I keepe thy word. Chrysostome
                        Chrysost. seeing this
which the Papist cannot see, could say.
Deus imponit paenam non exigens supplicia
pro peccatis, sed ad futura nos corrigens. God

layes correction vpon his owne, not exacting any
punishment for sinnes, but correcting vs for
the time to come. Yea, this moued Augustine
to say. Res prosphera donum est Dei consolantis,
res aduersa donum Dei admonentis.
Prosperitie is the gift of God comforting men;
aduersitie is the gift of God admonishing men.
Thirdly, this is done least sinne (which is
both freely and fully remitted of God
with all punishment due thereto) should
be extenuate and accounted light, either
by the committers, or by others looking
on them, and in the end not onely excused,
but defended by them to their condemnation.
This moued the Apostle to
say,1. Cor. 11. 32. 
                        When we are iudged we are chastened of
the Lord, because we should not be condemned
with the world. Fourthly, that sinners
being thus recōciled to God through the
remission of their sinnes, and yet out of his
wonderfull, wise loue corrected by him,
might alwayes carrie about with them
some tokens of that sinne which lodgeth
within them, and doth sometime fully
burst out of them, leading them alwayes
with the sound, to the sight of
their blacke feete, and making them to
walke more holily, and humbly before

God, crying alwayes with that great Apostle,Rom. 7. 24.
                        O wretched man that I am who shall
deliuer me from this bodie of death. Fiftly, to
the end that th
                           •
                        se corrections wisely
layed vpon them by their God, might
haue a solid matter of spirituall exercise
to them, not onely acquainting them
with the great weaknesse and imperfection
of their faith and repentance, but
stirring them vp to haue them from day
to day, more and more increased and
strengthened.August. 
                        Augustine seeing this, could
write most prudently about this point
thus: Posset aliquis dicere, si propter peccatum
dixit Deus homini, in sudore vultus tui
edes panem tuum & spinas, & tribulos proferit
tibi terra; cur fideles post remissionem
peccatorum, eosdem dolores patiuntur? Respondet,
ante remissionem esse supplicia peccatorum,
post remissionem, esse certamina exercitationesque
iustorum, Some man might say,
if God said vnto man for his sinne, in the sweat
of thy face shalt thou eate thy bread, and the
earth shall bring forth thrones and thistles to
thee: wherefore doth the faithfull after the
remission of their sins suffer the like troubles,
He answers: before remission of sinnes these
things be punishments sinnes, but after remission

they are trials and exercises of the
iustified children of God. O when shall the
lying Seminaries hearken to that of the
Apostle.Heb. 12. 6. 7. 
                        Whom the Lord loueth he chasteneth,
If you indure chastening, God offereth
himselfe vnto you as to sonnes.
                        Reuel. 3. 19. 
                        As manie as I
loue I rebuke and chasten. Now if these corrections
which be layed by our blessed
God vpon his children, do not onely
flow from that sweetest well of that loue,
wherewith his Maiestie doth loue them
in his blessed Sonne, but also by euident
and sure pledges of that loue; can these
corrections suffered by Gods children be
possibly satisfactions for his iustice for sin?
I charge thee therefore, ô my soule, that
remaining within my bodie, thou countenance
no sacrifice, besides that onely
bloudie sacrifice, offered once onely vp by
thy great hie Priest Iesus God,Esay 53. and man
vpon the crosse vnto his Father for thee,2. Cor. 5.
as thou desirest to be freed of the burthen
of my sinnes, and of all punishment due
to me for them. I charge thee that thou
neuer lend thy eare to the sound of anie
Purgatorie,Iohn 1. besides that cleane and cleansing
pure bloud of that blessed Lambe of
God who takes away the sinnes of the

world,1. Iohn 1. and whose bloud cleanseth thee
from all sinne,Aug. in Epist. 171. euer crying with Augustine,
Passio Domini pretium est orbis terrarum:
The suffering of the Lord Iesus is the redemption
of the world; and neuer forget to solace
and cherish thy selfe in the middest of
all extremities with that of Bernard:
                        Bern. 
                        Passio
tua Domine vltimum refugium est, singulare
remedium; deficiente sapientia, iustitia non
sufficiente, sanctitatis succumbentibus meritis:
Thy passion ô Lord Iesus is my last refuge, my
singular remedie, when my wisedome failes,
when my righteousnesse is not sufficient; and
when the merites of my holinesse do succumbe
and are brought to nought, thy onely passion
doth helpe me.
                     
                     Oh, ô my soule, when shall the blindfold
Papists (who partly avow that they
do see, and who in this respect cannot but
sinne grossely, and go on in sinne fearefully)
beginne to perswade that they be
blinde; to the end that through the tender
mercies of God they may be freed
from their sins? Could the Popish Seminaries
(the sowers of Satans poyson, and
people with the proud Pharisees, and who
with,Esay 60 6. 3. the counterfet old idolatrous Iewes
do offer swines bloud, and blesse an Idol)

begin to learne to discerne betwixt that
great and onely Maiesticke high sacrificing
Priest, Iesus, and their greedie and
only mercenarie, slauish, sacrificing priest;
would they beginne now at length (hauing
stumbled so long at that lanterne of
the blessed word of God,Marke the opposition which is betwixt Christ and his sacrifice and the Popish priest and his sacrifice and sinned against
the light of their owne consciences,)
to make a difference betwixt that
bloudie sacrifice offered vp by Iesus, and
these vnbloudie sacrifices now authorised
and offered vp by them and their leaders,
the Iesuites? O how farre would they
adore the one, and abhorre the other! O
with how swift feete would they runne
towards the one, and flee from the other!
Yea, ô how often would they present the
one before the Lord their God, as that
onely ransome which is onely able to satisfie
his iustice for their monstrous debt
of sinne, and repent before God and man
thar euer they presented themselues before
the other, which is nothing else but
that odde abomination, wherby that debt
of sinne is not onely kept ouer the head
of man, but also fearefully augmented and
increased, swearing solemnely neuer to
countenance that Idoll. The heart of the

sacrificer Iesus, ô my soule, as Scripture
witnesseth was the heart of a Lambe beyond
all measure, gentle and pitifull,
which neuer deuised any crueltie, which
neuer consented to any crueltie. The
mouth of that sacrificer Iesus was the truest
mouth, the sweetest mouth that euer
man spake with, neuer vttering any falsehood,
neuer colouring, or couering anie
crueltie to the preiudice or hurt of anie.
The hand of that sacrificer Iesus, was the
cleanest hand that euer man carried, the
most liberall hand that euer man had,
helping thousands, but neuer hurting one;
sauing, and healing thousands, but neuer
slaying or harming so much as one; albeit
that sacrifice offred vp by this gentle, pitifull,
true, sweet, liberall, and euer helping
and sauing, but neuer harming or
slaying sacrifice, was bloudie, yea was as it
had bene nothing but all bloudie, his
head, his side, his hands, his feete, being
all couered therewith, so that not without
cause some of the ancients could apply
that of Isaiah to this blessed Sacrificer Iesus.
                        Esay 61. 1. 2. 3.
                        Who is this that cometh from Edom,
with red garments from Bozrah? he is glorious
in his apparell, and walketh in his great

strength, I speake in righteousnesse, and am
mightie to saue? wherefore is thine apparell
red, and thy garments like him that treadeth
in the wine presse? I haue tread the wine presse
alone, aud of all the people there was none
with me. But, ô my soule, will not the Papist
confesse (considering long and fearefull
experience will testifie against him)
that the heart of his sacrificing Priest is
the heart of a lion, beyond measure fierce
and false, deuising crueltie, approuing crueltie;
that the mouth of his sacrificing
Priest is the mouth of a diuell, hauing alwayes
deceite & falsehood vnder his lips,
and neuer so readily as when he bakes his
false speeches with fearefull oathes. That
the hand of his sacrificing Priest, is ye hand
of one Bontcher and Burrio, delighting in
nothing so much, as in the shedding of
the bloud of Kings, Princes, and people,
without any respect of sexe or age, albeit
his sacrifice in the meane time (as he
styles it) be vnbloudie. And here I would
pray thee, ô my soule, (if thou be any way
acquainted with the holy and iust God)
to tell me ot thy God can possibly take
vpon, or accept of that vnbloudie sacrifice
which is offered vp by him who

hath a bloudie false heart, deuising crueltie
and falshood? a bloudie tongue
councelling and concealing, as he hath
to do with God and his Saints, crueltie
and falshood? yea, an hand executing
crueltie and falshood? yea I must yet enquire
of thee another thing, ô my soule,
could that bloudie sacrifice offered vp by
Iesus to God his Father for thee, haue
possibly bene accepted of God, if his
heart, his mouth, and hands, had bene such
an heart, a mouth, and hands as the heart,
mouth, and hands of the Papish priests be?
No, no, ô my soule, had Christ heart bene
such an heart, had Christs mouth bene
such a mouth, had Christs hands bene such
hands, as the heart, mouth, and hands of
these Papish priests be, euen Christs sacrifice
should haue bene reiected by God
his Father. And therefore I heare Peter
(fully abused by the Pope and his followers)
telling me that I am not onely redeemed
by the bloud of that Lambe Iesus,1. Pet. 1. 19.
but of that Lambe Iesus; vndefiled,
and without spot, cleane hearted, cleane
tongued, cleane handed, and alwayes
cleane. When I begin to thinke vpon this
seriously, ô my soule, I cannot but wonder

who he is that hath conquired such a
great cracke to the Papist priests in this
our last age of the world, that an vnbloudie
sacrifice comming from his bloudie,
heart, mouth, and hands should be accepted
of God, at whose hāds the old Iewes,
Gods first borne, could finde no such fauour:
for whe
                           ••
                         reade that first of Isaiah,
I heare out God reiecting both the bloudie
and vnbloudie sacrifices of the Iewes,
to wit, their prayers and incest, and all because
their hands were defiled with
bloud, for speakes not our God by Isaiah
thus:Isa. 1. 15. 
                        When you shall stretch out your hands
I will hide my eyes from you, and though you
make many prayers, I will not heare you, for
your hands are full of bloud. Shall crueltie in
the heart and in the hand of the counterfeit
Iew, make that holy iust God of heauen
refuse to accept from the hands of the
Iewes these sacrifices, his Maiestie by his
Law hath commanded? and shall this holy
iust God accept of that sacrifice offered
vp by that cruell heart, and bloudie hand
of the Masse priest, which he neuer commanded,
but which hath bene, is, and shall
be, in despite of diuels and men, abhomination
before his Maiestie, albeit he dare

dreame that his vnbloudie sacrifice smelled
neuer so sweetly before God as when
he hath come from the deuising or approuing
of the slaughter of some few or
moe, who do worship the true God of
heauen, truly according to his will, and
not as men would teach them? But it may
be, ô my soule, that the priest his great
God (the Pope I meane) who is clothed
with a threefold diademe, as he who hath
all power in heauen, and in earth, and in
the hels, hath made him conceit that he
hath procured this credit vnto him. Alwayes
I am not ignorant, ô my soule, that
the Papist Seminarie being challenged
of crueltie, and taught cunningly by their
leaders the Iebusites, will alledge and auow
that they giue no counsell against
the life of any, but of those who be the
enemies of Christ, and that they neither
giue counsell to slay any,The lesuits allegation to excuse their crueltie. neither do allow
the slaughter of any, neither do slay any,
but out of that loue which they carrie to
Christ, and so to the end that by cutting
off the enemies of Christ,This allegation is remoued and 
                              •
                           roued they may build
a glorious Church to his Maiestie. What
if these allegations (plausibly to the Papist
and his followers,Act, 
                              •
                           0. 28. but more then pernicious

in themselues) were examined by
holy Scripture? Scripture tels me, that
God by his owne bloud hath purchased
a Church to himselfe: but Scripture told
me neuer, that God would conquire a
Church vnto himselfe by shedding the
bloud of men and women, of Princes and
subiects, old and yong. I heare our Maister
indeed saying in the Gospell to his
disciples:Ioh. 16. 2, 
                        The time shall come that whosoeuer
killeth you, shall thinke he doth God good
seruice: But I neuer heard him speake
thus. The time shall come that whosoeuer
killeth you shall do God good seruice:
and knowest thou not, ô my soule,
that there be great ods betwixt thought
and deed, betwixt that which appeares to
be, and that which is? Yea, knowest thou
not that the Iewes thought that they
were doing well, when they cryed out against
our Maister, and stirred vp Pilat against
him:Ioh. 18. 30. for can they not say: If he were
not an euill doer we would not haue deliuered
him vnto thee: I suspect not (but on speciall
cause) that the blind Iesuite either
hath neuer read, or neuer duely considered
that 7. Chapter of the 2. of Samuel:
was not Dauid a man according to the

heart of God? That bloud which he had
shed, was it not shed by him on the speciall
warrant of Gods command? (for as
yet he had not slaine Vriah) and yet because
he had dipped his hands in bloud, he
cannot find libertie so much as to build an
outward materiall temple to God; and
shall that bloudie Burrio the Iesuite alledge,
that he (hauing no warrant to shed
that bloud which he sheds from God, yea
hauing God and his conscience now and
then pricking him for the shedding of it)
can possibly erect a spirituall temple to
God, building it vpon the meeke and
strong rocke Iesus? I suspect that the Iesuite
hath not as yet weighed that remembred
by Matthew in his 26. Chap. there
Peter seeing his Maister apprehended,Mat. 26. 51. 52. out
of that loue he carries to him must draw
his sword, and will shed bloud, for smites
he not off the eare of the hie Priests seruant?
Alwayes I thinke that his Maister
said vnto him: Put vp thy sword in his place,
for he that taketh the sword shall perish with
the sword. O bloudie Iesuite, beside Matthew,
I heare Iesus commanding Peter to
put vp his sword in the place, but where
heardest thou blessed Iesus charging thee

to draw thy sword? O when shall that of
the Apostle be thought vpon by these
blind leading Papists, and blind led Papists?2. Thess. 2. 11. 12.
                        Because they receiued not the loue of
the truth that they might be saued, therefore
God shall send them strong delusions, that they
shall beleeue lies, tht all they might be damned
which beleeued not the truth, but had
pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. O when shall
the bloudie Caines of this time find grace
to haue themselues wakened by that ancient
watch-word: Coedi Christianorum
proprium est, coedere autem Christianos, Pilati,
& Caiaphae officia sunt. It is proper to
Christians to be slaine, but it is the office of
Caiaphas and Pilat to slay Christians. I
wonder, if Bernard were liuing now,
how he would take the bloud of the
Saints of God, shed daily by the Popes
command and allowance like water; who
tooke so hardly with one Thomas a Prior
at Paris, murthered in his time, for preaching
against the corruption of Churchmen?
for writes he not thus to the Pope
touching that matter:Bern. ep. 158. 
                        Fera pessima quae
deuorauit Ioseph, canum nostr
                              •
                           rum importunitatem
non ferens, ad vestrae defensionis auxilium
dicitur confugisse, in quantum misera

devenit amentiam; vt vaga, & profuga, &
tremens super terram illic potissimum fugam
inierit, vbi plus timere oportuit. Scelestissime,
tu summae aequitatis sedem, speluncāputas esse
latronum, aut cubile leonum? That beast
which deuoured Ioseph, who could not suffer
the vilenesse and wickednesse of our dogs, is
said to haue fled to the helpe of your maintenance.
O to what a madnesse hath that wretch
come, that wandering and driuen from his
owne countrey, and shaking vpon the earth
through feare, he should take his flight specially
to that place, where he should haue specially
feared in great measure. O thou most wicked
man, thinkest thou the chaire of greatest
equitie to be a denne of theeues, or a cage of
Lyons? Sure I am were Bernard liuing, he
would imploy the whole strength of his
penne against the Iesuites, drawing them
by reason of their vncouth falshood, and
more then barbarous crueltie within the
compasse of vile heretickes: for could he
not long ago, drawing his penne against
the heretickes of his time, write thus: Indixere
(vt dicitur) latebras sibi,
                        Ber. ser. 65. 
                        firmauerunt
sermonem nequam, iura periura; secretum
prodere noli; alias ne tenuiter quidem iurare
vllatenus acquiescunt, propter illud in Euangelio,

ne iuretis, ne
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            per coelum, neque per terram.
O stulti, & tardi corde, repleti pharisaico
spiritu, liquentes culicem, & camelum glutientes,
iurare licet & periurare licet. They
haue promised vnto themselues (as it is said)
starting holes, so that they shall not be seene;
they haue setled a wicked speech among themselues,
saying one to another; sweare, forsweare;
and so make one oath, breake one oath;
alwayes reueale not our secret: and yet otherwise
they will no wayes consent to sweare so
much as slenderly; because of that they reade
in the Gospell, Sweare not at all, neither by
the heauen nor by the earth. O fooles and slow
of heart, filled with a Pharisaicall spirit, straining
out a gnat and swallowing a camell. It is
not lothsome to me to sweare, and yet is lothsome
to me to sweare falsly, and so to forsweare
my selfe. O when shall the cruell hearted,
the lying tongued, and the bloudie handed
Iesuite leaue off to wearie that blessed
holy God of heauen, and to deceiue his
poore babes with that his vnbloudie sacrifice,
neuer knowne to God, neuer commanded
by his Sonne,The sacrifice all Ministers should offer to God. and begin to take
pleasure to sacrifice vnto God, that holy
sacrifice (that Apostle who communicated
not with flesh and bloud) but who

was taught of God what to do, to sacrifice
to his Maiestie? Hearest thou not, ô
my soule, that the Apostle saith to thee?
I haue somwhat boldly after a sort written
vnto you, as one that putteth you in rememberance
through the grace that is giuen me
of God,
                        Rom. 15. 15. 16. 
                        that I should be the Minister of
Iesus Christ towards the Gentiles, ministring
the Gospell of God, that the offering
vp of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost.
Chrysostome writing vpon these words
will haue the whole Apostolicke priesthood
to consist in preaching, saying in the
person of Paul, Ipsum enim mihi sacerdotitium
est praedicare & Euangelizare, hanc offero
hostiam. My priesthood is to preach
and to sound the euangell; this offering I offer;
And going on in the explication of the
seuerall parts of this metaphor for the
better vnderstanding of this sacrifice offered
vp by the Apostle he tells vs the
sword whereby he did slay the sacrifice
offered vp by him to God was the Euangell;
that the art of sacrificing, was the
preaching of the Euangell; that the fire
whereby the sacrifice was burnt, was the
faith of God; that the sacrifice sacrificed

by him, was the Gentiles; that the Priests
sacrificing this sacrifice, was the Apostles
sent of God to this effect. Had these monsters
sent from Rome these manie yeares
by gaine, bene exercised about the
sacrificing of such sacrifices, drawing of
the sword, and kindling of this fire here
remembred by Paul, ô what a world of
bloud of soules of men, of womē, of yong,
of old should haue bene spared, which
hath bene by their directions, & allowāce
spilt: yea, ô what a world of bloud of soules
of men, of women, of old, & yong; who perished
through their default withdrawne
by them from that bloudie propitiatorie
sacrifice offered vp by Iesus, and making
them to doate after their vnbloudie sacrifice
of the Masse, which can no wayes impaire
but alwayes augment their debt
and dutie. Here leauing their indured
monsters to their owne induring
maisters, and reuerincing the dispensation
of that wise God whose iudgemeuts are
vnsearchable, and his wayes past finding
out,Igna Epist. 6. ad Phil. we must remember that of Ignatius:
Quemadmodum pseudoprophetae & pseudoapostoli
vnum & eundem spiritum fallacem, &
populi seductorem acceperunt; sic prophetae &

Apostoli vnum & eundem spiritum, sanctum,
bonum, eximium, verum, & doctorem rectū
acceperunt à Deo per Iesum Christum. As
the false prophets and apostles receiued anie
euill spirit, to deceiue the people: So the
true Prophets and Apostles receiue from God
through Iesus Christ, and his holy spirit,
the good, excellent, true, teacher of righteousnesse.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE FIFTH ROBBER
is the Popish Seminarie, subtily stealing
from the babes of God that royall,
and sweet smelling garment of
Christ his righteousnesse put on by
faith; and obtruding to them that
rotten ragge of iustification by their
owne workes.
                     EVerie proud man is odious before
God, ô my soule, but specially the
proud hypocrite, who looking vnto man,
his brother, is not ashamed to crie out:
Stand apart,
                        Esay 66. 5. 
                        come not neere me, for I am holier
then thou: O God, I thanke thee that I am
not as other men,
                        Luke 11. 12. 
                        extortioners, vniust, adulterers,
or euen as this Publican; I fast twice in

the weeke, I will giue the tyth of all that euer
I possesse. For is not this testimonie giuen
to the one?Esay. 65. 5. 
                        These are as smokes in my wrath,
and a fire that burneth all day; and this to
the other by our God who knoweth all
Iustifiers of themselues, and abhorres
them:Luk. 18. 14. 
                        but this man went home vniustified.
Could these blinding Robbers, and proud
Pharisees the Papists of this our age see
this, ô my soule, would they not begin
to curse the first inuenters, and venters
of that hellish doctrine of Iustification by
workes and aduancing of mans merits?The inuē
                           ters of Iustification by workes are to be cursed. To
my iudgment, there is not a Papist liuing
this day, yea, that there was neuer a Papist,
who liued before these our dayes,
who is or was sanctified in a higher measure,
or made instruments of such good
workes, as Moses that faithfull seruant of
God was, louing his God with a zelous
loue, louing Gods people with a laborious
loue; yea, what Papist could euer haue
alledged, or can this day alledge, that he
was or is more crucified to the world; or
had, or hath the world more crucified
to him, then Moses had it? for cannot
Moses (through the grace of God)
renounce all the honours, riches, and

pleasures of the land of Egypt, and content
(esteeming the rebuke of Christ, his
onely riches, honour, and pleasure) to
affliction
                           •
                        , yea most sharpe long affliction,
with, and for Gods people. And yet when
this great God drawes neare this same
Moses, Moses must be content to heare
this said to him:Exod. 3. 5. 
                        Come not hither, put thy
shoes off thy feete, for the place where thou
standest is holy ground. What Papist can
with a conscience, or countenance aduance
himselfe aboue Ioshua, that faithfull
seruant of God? and yet when that mightie
holy God draweth neare to him, Ioshua
must heare that said to him which was
said to Moses before him:Iosua 5. 15. 
                        Lose thy shoes
off thy feete, for the place where thou standest
is holy. What if the Papist could compare
that which he may reade by Moses in
the 34. of Exodus, and by Paul in the
4. of the Romanes, with that (a alas) he
hath brought to his eares by the smooth
flattering tongues of his lying Seminaries
and to his eyes by the poysoning volums
of his deceiuing teachers? would he not
be ashamed before God to alledge anie
Iustification by workes, or to obtrude vnto
his Maiesties owne merites? When I

reade the 34. of Exodus, I first see Moses
comming downe from the mount Sinai
where he had stayed 40. dayes talking
with his God: Secondly, I see the skum
of Moses face shining so brightly after
that God had talked with him, that not
the children of Israel only, but Aaron also
is affrayed to come neare him; whereupon
Moses was compelled to couer his face
with a vaile when he spake to them, albeit
when Moses came before the Lord
to speake to his Maiestie,Exod. 34. 29. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. he tooke off the
couering from his face. When I reade the
4. to the Romanes, I heare Paul confessing
that Abraham looking vnto man
might haue maintained Iustification by
workes, but that he looking vnto God,
behoued to renounce all such Iustification,
fleeing by faith to the free mercie
of God onely, remitting him all his
sinnes to his euerlasting blessednesse in
his blessed Sonne: one man compared
with another man, and comparing before
him, may appeare to shine gloriously; but
if a man could bring himselfe before his
God, all his shining glorie should proue
obscure vanitie, yea blacke like the
tent of Kedar. What wonder that the

Papist hath not learned this, for will he
search Scripture? dare he attempt to
search Scripture, albeit that Scripture be
that onely true looking-glasse in the
which he may see his God, he may see
himselfe? And which is to be lamented, ô
my soule, can he ceasse to lend his eare,
yea wholely to sell himselfe ouer to lying
mans vaine traditions, which makes
white appeare to be blacke, and blacke
appeare to be white; which makes good
appeare to be euill, and euill appeare to
be good.1. Cor. 4. 4. Shall Paul say I know nothing
by my selfe,Iob 39. 37. 38. & 42. 5. 6. 
                        Yet I am not thereby iustified?
yea, shall Iob who could talke freely and
largely before his friends, lay his hand
vpon his mouth, repent in dust and ashes
when he is drawne before his God? And
dare the Papist comming before God
boast himselfe, or dreame that he shineth
in Gods eyes to the Iustification of himselfe?
Bernard reprouing the dead blindnesse
of his time could say: Nec talia sunt
hominum merita, vt propter ea vita aeterna
debeatur ex iure, vt Deus aliquam iniuriam
faceret nisi eam donaret. Nam vt taceā quod
merita omnia dona Dei sunt, & it a homo
propter ipsa Deo debitor est, magis quā Deus

homini. Quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam
gloriam? denique quis melior est Propheta, cui
Dominus ipse tam insigne testimoniū perhibet
dicens, virum inueni secundum cor meum?
Veruntamen ipse Propheta necesse habuit dicere
ne intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo Domine.
The merites of men be not such that by
anie law euerlasting life can be due vnto them
or as if God should do any wrong vnlesse he recompensed
them with eternall life: for besides
this which I will passe with silence, that all
merites of man are the gifts of God, so that a
man for them is rather a debtor to God, then
God a debtor to him; what proportion possibly
can there be betwixt mans merits and that
great weight of glorie which is layed vp in
heauen? And to conclude, what is man better
then that Prophet, to whō God gaue so notable
a testimonie saying: I haue found a man according
to my owne heart,
                        Psal 143. 12 
                        & yet this same Prophet
behoued to say: O Lord enter not into
iudgement with thy seruant, for in thy sight
shall none that liueth be iustified.
                        No works can iustifie. Must thou
not know, ô my soule, y• all workes which
be done by man here, be either euill
workes repugnant to Gods Law, and forbidden
of God; or good workes agreeable
to his Law and commandement, yea,

commanded by him. Euery man of himselfe
can easily do euill workes, which be
condemned and forbidden of God: (for
Man drinketh iniquitie like water;
                        Iob 15. 16. 
                        yea euen
the iust man falleth seuen times a day) and do
grosly infect and defile man.Pro. 64. 12. Good works
againe commanded and commended by
God can no man of himselfe possibly do;
for hearest thou not, ô my soule, the Spirit
speaking thus to thee: We are dead in
sinnes and trespasses:
                        Ephes. 2. 1. 
                        Of our selues we are not
sufficient to thinke any thing as of our selues,
                        2. Cor. 3. 5.
                        but our sufficiencie is of God. Hearest thou
not thy Sauiour (who can deceiue none)
saying to thee:Ioh. 15. 5. 
                        Without me ye can do nothing.
Yea speakes not Paul thus: We are
Gods workmanship created in Christ Iesus
vnto good workes,
                        Ephes. 2. 10 
                        which God hath ordained
that we should walke in them. And will he
not resolue the Philippians thus? It is God
which worketh in you both the will and the
deed of his good pleasure.
                        Phil. 2. 13. Now I must tell
thee, ô my soule, that all men, euen the
dearest Saints and seruants of God, are so
defiled with sinne, that whensoeuer our
God by his Spirit worketh any good
worke in them, and by them, they cannot
but (by that sea of filth which alwayes remaines

in them) defile that good worke
of God, and make it abhominable in his
eyes, if in iustice he would looke vpon it.
And therfore euen the Saints and seruants
of God knowing this, when they are
made instruments of good workes, can
crie out:Iob 14. 4. 
                        Who can bring a cleane thing out
of vncleannesse? there is not one. Yea treading
the pathes of that Euangelicall royall
Prophet Isaiah, they will not be ashamed
thus to blesse themselues, to the end
they may honour their God:Isa 64. 6. 
                        We haue all
bene as an vncleane thing, and all our righteousnesse
as filthie clouts. This moued Augustine
to say:Aug. ep. 106 
                        Opera ex gratia, non ex operibus
gratia; quoniam fides quae per dilectionem
operatur, nihil operatur, nisi ipsa dilectio Dei
diffundatur in cordibus nostris per spiritum
sanctum, qui datus est nobis; nec ipsa fides esset
in nobis, nisi Deus vnicuique partiretur mensuram
fidei. Good workes are of grace, and not
grace of good workes; because faith which
worketh by charitie, could worke nothing vnlesse
the loue of God were shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost which is giuen to vs;
yea faith could not be wrought in vs, vnlesse
our God imparted to euery one of vs a measure
of faith. Yea, this moued him to say:

                        Cum malus sum, nihil aliud est confiteri tibi
quam displiceri mihi; cum vero pius, nihil
aliud est confiteritibi quam hoc non tribuere
mihi quoniam tu Domine benedicis iustum,
sed prius cum iustificas impium. When I am
wicked, offending thee, I cannot otherwayes
confesse my selfe to thee, but being displeased
with my selfe for grieuing of thee: when I am
vpright, doing good, I cannot better confesse
my selfe to thee, then by not challenging the
doing of that good to my selfe, because thou, O
Lord, doest blesse the iust man, and yet before
that, thou iustifiest him being vniust and without
God. This moued him also to hold this
for a firme ground: Cum Deus remunerat
opera nostra, coronat in nobis dona sua. While
our God rewards our workes, he crownes in
vs his owne gifts. For as Bernard, who liued
in a corrupt time long after Augustine,
saith, Gratia non solum peccata lauat, sed
etiam merita donat. The grace of God not
onely washeth vs from sinne, but gifteth vs
also with merit.
                        Iustifiers of themselues are no sons to God but mercenary slaues. Alwayes here led by Scripture
I must say more to thee, ô my soule,
whosoeuer dare attempt to thinke or alledge,
that he should onely refraine his
hands from euill, walking before God
and among men holily, to the end that

thereby he may merit eternall life at the
hands of God, cannot possibly carrie the
honest heart of a louing sonne, nor the
cleane hand of an vpright seruant, but
doth prooue himselfe to be a very mercenarie
slaue worthie to be put out of Gods
doores; for as God loued vs freely, so he
will be freely loued of vs. This moued our
wisest Maister, whose words neuer sauored
Popish doctrine, thus to direct his disciples:Luk. 17. 10.
                        When ye haue done all these things
which are commanded you, say we are vnprofitable
seruants, we haue done that which was
our dutie to do. The sense hereof moued
Augustine sweetly to say: Hoc affectu & desiderio
colendus est Deus, vt sui cultus ipse sit
merces.
                        August. ep. 120. 
                        Nam qui Deum ideo colit, vt aliud
magis quam ipsum promereatur, non Deum
colit, sed illud quod assequi concupscit. Our
God is with this affection and earnest desire of
heart to be worshipped by vs, that he himselfe
may be the reward of that worship wherewith
we worship him: For whosoeuer worships God,
to the effect that thereby he may merit to
himselfe some other thing beside God, worships
not God, but that other thing which he desires
to obtaine at his hands. The sense whereof
moued him, toning his sweete song with

a loud voice, to crie out: Tunc enim recte,
tunc iuste, tunc pie fit; cum opus bonum in eius
laudem fit, cuius gratia donatur vt fiat. Then
a good worke is done rightly, iustly, and holily;
when it is done for the glorie and praise of his
name, whose fauour and grace made the doer
of it able to do it.
                        In Ioan. tract. 3. And againe. Si gratiam
ideo Deus tibi dedit quia gratis dedit, gratis
ama; noli ad praemium diligere Deum, ipse sit
praemium tibi. If God hath giuen grace to
thee because he hath giuen it freely, see that
thou loue thy God freely, loue not thy God for
any reward, let God himselfe be thy reward
to thee. It was holily and couragiously said
by the three children vnto Nebuchadnezzar,
ô my soule, We are not carefull to answer
thee in this matter;
                        Dan. 3. 16. 17. 18. 
                        behold our God
whom we serue is able to deliuer vs from the
hote fierie fornace, and he will deliuer vs out
of thy hands ô King. But if not (marke this
my soule, I pray thee) be it knowne to thee,
ô King, that we will not serue thy gods, nor
worship the golden image which thou hast set
vp. Resoluing hereby Nebuchadnezzar, albeit
they should be left by their blessed
onely true God to be deuoured by the
burning flames of his fornace, yet they
would not ceasse to worship God, or appeare

to regard his idoll. O when shall
the selfe iustifying Papist begin to take
some paines to know God, and his owne
heart? for could he know these two, he
would seeke for some secret place with
Peter, there to weepe bitterly that euer he
inuented or vented, or professed and
maintained, that damnable poysoning
leauen of iustification by workes, considering
that great and onely true teacher of
our soules hath said:Luk. 16. 15. 
                        Ye are they which iustifie
your selues before men, but God knoweth
your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed
among men is an abhomination in the sight of
God.
                        Ignorance the mother of the vile doctrine of humane merit. Ignorance then, ô my soule, yea,
most grosse ignorance (as thou mayest
see) hath rikled vp that sandie bray of the
Romane synagogue, now running speedily
by its owne force to a decay; and
fearefull vncouth ignorance hath made
the blind Papist to inuent, and vent that
mischieuous doctrine of mans merits.He who would merit must do 3. things. For
must not euen the simplest man confesse,
that whosoeuer would merit any thing
by his working at the hands of God must
do three things: for first, that which he 
doeth, he must do it of himselfe, and by
himselfe; for if he do it by the grace and

strength of another, that other merits and
not he.Ioh. 15. Now if Christ be true, no man can
do any thing which is good but him. And
if Paul be not deceiued, no man doing
any thing by the grace of God can but
with shame boast himselfe of y• which h
                           •
                        
doeth.1. Cor. 4. Secondly, that which the meriting
 man doth, must be done of meere good
will, and not of dutie; for if it be done by
the force of any obligation binding him
thereunto, the doer cannot possibly merit
any thing by the doing of it: and yet I
hope the Papist (if he haue not both cauterised
his conscience, and seared his face
with a brasen countenance) will blush to
alledge that he is not bound to do all, and
more then possibly he can do, and when
he hath done it, that he cannot merit
thereby, if he could heare the voice of
God and beleeue it, as the voice of him
who would be his Father and shepheard:
Ishow mercie vnto thousands of them that
loue me,
                        Ezod. 26. 
                        and keepe my Commandements.
                         Thirdly, that worke which is done by a
man to the end that he may merit by it,
must be proportionable, and answerable
to that reward a man expects for the doing
of it. Now what man liuing here can

possibly do or suffer that which can be answerable
to the worth and excellent valew
of that eternall life layed vp in heauen?
Paul saw that it was a greater gift to
suffer for Christ, then to beleeue in Christ:
and therefore could speake touching the
Philippians thus:Phil. 1. 29. 
                        Vnto you it is giuen for
Christ, that not onely ye should beleeue in him,
but also suffer for his sake. And yet that
same Paul writing to the Romanes can
say:Rom. 8. 18. 
                        I account that the afflictions of this present
time are not worthie of the glorie that
shall be shewed vnto vs. And so from my
heart I pray God make the hautie Papist
at length subscribe from his heart and
with his hand vnto that heauenly poesie:

                           Datua, sed quae non debes, proportio constet,
                           Haud aliter meritum dixeris esse tuum.
                        
Giue those things which be thine owne,
but which thou art no wayes bound to
giue; let there be a proportion betwixt the
gift and the reward, otherwise alledge
not that thou hast any merit. Conclude
then, ô my soule, if thou wouldst appeare
iust before that onely iust Iudge, as I saiah
concludeth: We haue all bene as an vncleane
thing,
                        Isa. 64. 6. 
                        and all our righteousnesse as filthie
clouts; as Paul concludeth: I know nothing

by my selfe,
                        1. Cor. 4. 1. 
                        yet I am not thereby iustified. As
Bernard concludeth, taught by the Spirit,
and led by the Scripture long ago. Sufficit
mihi ad omnem iustitiam,
                        Ber. serm. Cant. 23. 
                        solum habere propitium
eum, cui soli peccaus; non peccare Dei
iustitia est, hominis iustitia Dei indulgentia.
It suffices me for my whole and perfect righteousnesse,
to haue him mercifull vnto me, against
whom I haue sinned. Gods righteousnesse
is not to sinne, mans righteousnesse is Gods
indulgence and free pardon. And therefore
ô how neatly, how truly, how pretily was
it said: Dare non dignis res mage digna Deo
est. It is a thing most worthie of our God,
who is goodnesse, mercie, liberalitie it
selfe, to giue euer grace and glorie vnto
those who being vnworthy of themselues
merit confusion and eternall death.
                  
                  
                     THE SIXTH ROBBER IS
the Popish Seminarie, with a shamelesse
face and bloudie hand, stealing
from the child of God the mediation
and intercession of that sole Mediator
God and man, euen the Man
Christ Iesus, & putting in his hands
the intercession of Saints.
                     
                        
TRue sauing prayer,Sauing prayer is a royall wise ambassadour. ô my soule, may
iustly be styled, that royall ambassadour,
prudent and couragious, who lodging
alwayes in a cleane cabinate, is directed
from that greatest king, towards that
greatest monarch, and who can no wayes
vpon anie condition be moued to stay
from iourneying forwards till he come
before him, to whom he was sent; discharging
that commission which he carrieth
in his bosome: and besides him neither
to minion, nor courtiour, nor anie of
his subiects whatsoeuer. Tell me, ô my
soule, can anie in heauen, anie vnder heauen,
teach thee to pray for thy saluation,
besides that great King, euen the spirit of
the Father, and of his dearest Sonne? and
therefore that great teacher of the Gentiles,Rom. 8. 26.
can resolue thee thus: The spirit helpeth
our infirmities, for we know not what to
pray as we ought, but the spirit it selfe makes
requests for vs with sighes that cannot be expressed.
This ambassadour of prayer comming
from the spirit, cannot lodge but in
the quickned soule, and reneued heart of
Gods child. Reprobates I confesse may
possesse manie delicates, but this delicate
of sauing prayer they cannot haue, and

therefore the said great teacher of the
Gentiles, can marrie, as it were, Prayer
& Saluation, after an inseperable manner,
together saying:Rom. 10. 13. 
                        Whosoeuer calleth vpon
the name of the Lord (to wit, being led by
the spirit of adoption, the onely author
of heauenly supplication) shall be saued.
Sauing prayer besides this is so prudent,
and couragious that being sent by the spirit,
from the honest heart of Gods renued
child, towards that onely superexcellent
monarch God his Father, it will not giue
so much as a looke, let by a God-speed
(as it were) to anie Angel, to anie Saint
in heauen, vnto anie man in earth, (being
so directed by that spirit by whom it was
sent) till it come before that great Maiestie
of the God of heauen, with whom
onely it hath bene, & there in his bosome
poured forth it selfe. O my soule, art thou
not thus charged by God the Father,
Call vpon me in the day of thy trouble.
                        Psal. 50 15. Art
thou not thus charged by God thy Sauiour?Mat. 6. 9.
                        when ye pray pray thus. Our father
which art in heauen? art thou not thus
charged by God thy comforter, and keeper.Iames 1. 5.
                        If anie aske wisedome, let him aske it of
God. Search, search, ô my soule, the whole

old Testament, the whole new Testament
and trie if thou there mayest gather,
either with a precept directing thee to
pray to any in heauen, or vnder heauen,
besides thy God? or with anie, promise
that if thou prayest vnto anie beside his
Maiestie, thou shalt speed? or lastly,
with any practise, shewing thee that euer
any of Gods children euer sent vp their
prayers to any, beside that blessed God in
whom they beleeued.Popish superstitious bablings be no prayers. Vnderstand, vnderstand,
ô my soule, that the ignorant profane
bablings of the blind superstious Papists,
can be no prayers indited by the
blessed Spirit of God; but windie, foolish,
effectlesse words, comming from their
owne deceiued braines and fond imaginations;
for if they come from Gods Spirit,
they would be directed vnto God
onely.The Papist police in aduancing his lying doctrine of inuocation of Saints. But since they be drawne vp vnto
creatures, they cannot come from the
true Spirit of that creator blessed for euermore,
but from the lying spirit of base
cursed creatures. The blind bloudie restlesse
Seminarie compassing the earth to
and fro with Satan, shewing alwayes
where he commeth (any occasion being
offered to him) he is poysoned, and poysoning

people, either to impede the receiuing,
or to hinder the grouth of the
good wheate of Gods word; to the end
that he may perswade men and women of
all rankes, euen with greedinesse, to embrace
his lying doctrine, touching the inuocation
of Saints: hath verie highly heretofore,
and doth still, verie farre aduance
that foolish comparison taken from the
courts of earthly Princes; and this comparison
he hath hatched, to the end he may
the more subtily aduance the grandour
& wealth of that vile court of Rome and
with this draw away, not onely poore
simple people from being truly courteours,
with that King of glorie blessed for
euer; but also to stirre them vp (albeit he
abhorreth to confesse this) to make themselues
grosse and auowed traitors against
his Maiestie.While the Papist cō
                           pares Gods kingdome vnto a court, they trauell to m
                              •
                           ke vs traitors to the king of that court. O shamelesse Papist is not
this thy fond allegance! As subiects (considering
the grandor of their Princes, and
their owne basenesse) are accustomed to
go to their kings by courteours and noble
men. So the children of God, considering
the excellencie of that Maiestie wherewith
their God is clothed, being sensible
in the meane time of their owne vilenesse

by reason of these sinnes wherewith they
are clogged, should not attempt to go to
their God, but by these Saints which are
in heauen. Hadst thou, ô effronted Papist,
hearkened vnto yt answer, (now neare by
twelfe hundred yeares ago) giuen to this
purpose,Ambr. on Rom. 8. by that famous Bishop of worthie
memorie, Ambrose: thou wouldest
haue bene affrayed from receiuing gredily
without any shew or reason, that effectlesse
comparison; and from keeping it so
pertenatiously, euen to this day, without
any kind of shame? for this cause men and
women are moued to go to kings, by noble
men and courteours; because kings be
but men, and know not to whom they
should commit the gouernment of their
countrey: but while a man hath to do
with his God, from whom nothing can
be hidde (for all men are knowne by him)
we haue neede of no such mediator, but
of a deuout humble holy heart: for whensoeuer
such an heart shall speake, God
shall louingly answer it. But deceiued, and
deceiuing Seminarie! to what purpose
will this thy comparison serue thee in that
countrey where the king with whom
thou hast to do, hath by a speciall Edict,

vnder his great seale and publicke proclamation
raised thereupon, authorised his
eldest Sonne, to be the onely mediator,
by whom his subiects great and small,
any wayes offending him, or standing in
neede of any thing at his hands, should
haue recourse vnto him; discharging
them herewith vnder the highest paine, to
make any suite by the mediation of any
other whatsoeuer? Secondly, if the Prince
the Kings eldest sonne, being thus authorised
by his father, haue by his publicke
proclamation (hauing receiued from his
father speciall warrant so to do) certified
all his fathers subiects, that none of them
possibly can come to him but by him?
Thlrdly, if the Lords of the Kings secret
counsell, being certified of the truth hereof,
would beside this (being commanded
by the King and his sonne) charge all
the subiects to come to the Kings sonne,
yea, to his sonne onely, whensoeuer they
haue to do with the King his father.
Now, ô blind bold Seminarie, I appeale
thy conscience, vnlesse thou hast layed aside
all conscience, and made that whore
of Babell thy God, if thou be acquainted
with that voyce which was sounded from

the heauens, that day in the which that
blessed sole Sauiour of the world was
baptized?Mat. 3. 17. 
                        This is my welbeloued Sonne in
whom I am well pleased. Yea, hearest thou
not this voyce sounded ouer againe with
an addition, that day in the which that
holy one was transfigured:Mat. 17. 6. 
                        This is my welbeloued
Sonne in whom I am well pleased
heare him. O Seminarie, wilt thou not
heare the sonne saying to thee?Iohn 14. 6. 
                        I am the
way, the verity, & the life, no man comes to the
Father, but by me. Hearest thou him not
thus secretly inuiting thee to come directly
to him?Mat. 11. 28. 
                        Come vnto me all ye which are
wearie and laden, and I will ease you. Yea, ô
Seminarie possessed with a deafe diuell,
when God speaketh to thee by his word:
wilt thou not heare that great Apostle
Paul, who was well acquainted with the
whole counsell of God saving vnto thee?
There is one God and one Mediator betwixt
God and man, euen the man Christ Iesus.
Bernard from his heart, subioyning with
his hand vnto this sounded by Saint Paul,
could say:1. Tim. 2. 5 Ber. ser. in cant. 48. 
                        Vnus est vitae dator, vnus mediator
Dei & hominum, homo Christus Iesus,
qui dicit sponsae suae: Salus tua ego sum. There
is one giuer of life, and one mediator betwixt

God and man, the man Christ Iesus: who
saith vnto his spouse, I am thy saluation. Sure
I am, were old Christome aliue, he would
as farre condemne the auowed profane
mad folly of the superstitious Papist in
this point, as he commanded the holy
wisedome of that sincere woman, whose
daughter was possessed with a diuell: for
speakes he not thus touching her? Behold
the wisedome of the woman,
                        Chrysost de Cana. 
                        saith he, she prayeth
not to Iames, she maketh not her supplication
to Iohn, she goeth not to Peter, neither
respecteth she the companie of the Apostles,
requiring helpe of any of them, but in stead of
them all, (taking happily vnfained repentance
for her companion,) she goeth directly
forward to blessed Iesus, that onely well
which was able to yeeld out that sweet water
which she thristed for.
                        Amb. in lib. Isak. 
                        Ambrose saw this
while he could say: Christus est os nostrum,
per quod patri loquimur; oculus noster, per
quem patrem videmus; dextra nostra, per
quam patri nos offerimus; quo nisi intercedente,
nec nobis nec sanctis omnibus quicquam
cum Deo est. Christ is our mouth by the
which we speake to the father; our eyes by
the which we see the father; our right hand,
by the which we offer our selues to the father:

without whose intercession, neither we, nor any
of the Saints haue any interesse in, or accesse
to, God. And therefore what wonder that
Irenaeus before Ambrose writeth thus:Iren. lib. 2. cap. 57. 
                        Non
rationibus angelicis fiat aliquid, nec aliqua
praua curiositate; sed mundae & purae orationes
dirigantur ad Dominum, quia omnia fecit,
& nomen Domini nostri Iesu Christi, cuius
nomen omnia praestat, & curat, non autem
alterius cuiusquam. Let nothing be done by
the counsels of Angels, or through any wicked
curiositie; but let our cleane and pure prayers
be directed to that God who made all things,
and to the name of our Lord Iesus Christ,
whose name helpes and cures all things, and
not to the name of any other whatsoeuer. But
will the restlesse Seminarie rest, ô my
soule, when these things are brought from
the very mouth of God vnto his eares?
no, no, for the tricking Seminarie who
can cunningly catch simple soules by his
entrapping subtilties, will confesse, that
blessed Iesus that onely Son of that great
King, is the onely Mediator of reconciliation
betwixt God and man; but with this
he will maintaine, that there be other Mediatours
of intercession besides him, who
may make and do make request vnto God

for vs. Spare not, spare not, ô my soule,
to say vnto the shamelesse pert Seminarie
when he speaketh thus, Auoide Satan:
as one sent ou
                           •
                         by that craftie foxe, and
cruell dragon, first by his subtiltie to snare
thee, and then by his crueltie to slay thee;
demanding him euen from a strong heart
and with a good countenance thus: O Seminarie,
out of what booke, out of whose
mouth, learnedst thou to put a difference
betwixt the Mediatour of reconciliation
and intercession?None can be the Mediatour of intercessiō but who is the Mediatour of reconciliatiō. for out of Gods Booke,
out of Gods mouth, speaking to thee by
Scripture, thou learnedst it neuer; albeit no
booke besides Gods booke, no mouth
besides Gods mouth, must in this point
informe thee: for telleth not Gods booke
me, and so Gods mouth, first, that we haue
no mediatour who can possibly intercede
for vs at the hands of our God, but that
mediatour who hath reconciled vs to our
God, for be not these the words of Paul:
There is one God and one Mediatour betwixt
God and man, the man Christ Iesus. If Paul
had spoken thus, There is one mediatour
betwixt God and man, the man Christ Iesus;
he had spoken enough to conuince
the lying Seminarie, but he will say more,

euen this: There is one God and one Mediator
betwixt God and man, the man Christ
Iesus, to make the Seminarie ashamed (if
he could be) of his subtiltie; for hereby
he would tell thee, ô my soule, that as
there is one onely true God, and no waies
in any respect another, euen the Father,
Sonne, and holy Ghost; so there is onely
one true Mediator, and in no respect another.
Secondly, telleth not Gods booke,
and so Gods mouth me, that this Iesus
Christ could not possibly haue bene a Mediatour
of intercession for vs, praying to
God for vs, vnlesse he had bene a Mediatour
of reconciliation for vs, by his bloudie
sacrifice, satisfying his Fathers iustice
for our sinnes. O vile Seminarie, darest
thou giue that great disciple (whom Iesus
loued, and who lay in Iesus bosome) the
lye? for speakes he not thus. If anie
man sinne,
                        1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2 
                        we haue an Aduocate with the
Father, Iesus Christ the Iust, and he is the
reconciliation for our sinnes. Thus ioyntly
ioyning Christs intercession and reconciliation
together; and from his reconciliation
of vs, proouing that he hath
onely right to intercede for vs; for if he
had not reconciled vs, he could no wayes

haue any right to pray for vs, neither durst
we haue attempted to haue had any recourse
to him as to our Mediatour; yea,
which is more ô my soule, if he had not
bene our onely Reconciler, he could not
haue bene our Mediatour at all. Augustine
writing vpon this place out of the sense
hereof speaketh thus: Ioannes non dixit aduocatum
habetis sed habemus,
                        August. 
                        nec me habetis
(dixit) sed Christum posuit nonse, maluit se
ponere in numero peccatorum, vt haberet Aduocatum
Christum, quam ponere se pro
Christo aduocatum, & inueniri inter damnandos
superbos fratres. Iesum Christum ipsum
habemus aduocatum ad patrem, ipse est
propitiatio peccatorum nostrorum; hoc qui
tenuit, haeresin non facit. Inde enim facta sunt
schismata, cum dicunt homines nos iusti sumus,
nos sanctificamus immundos, nos iusti ficamus
impios, nos petimus, nos impetramus.
Iohn said not ye haue an Aduocate, but we;
neither said he, ye haue me, but putting Christ
for our aduocate not himself; for he had rather
haue put himselfe amongst the number of sinners,
to the end he might haue Christ for his
Aduocate, then to make himselfe aduocate in
Christs stead, and so in the end to be found among
those proud brethren who shall be damned.

We haue Iesus Christ the iust himselfe
for our Aduocate with the Father, he is a
propitiation for our sinnes, whosoeuer holds
this maintaines no heresie, makes no schisme;
for schismes proceed of this, when men say, we
are iust, we sanctifie the vncleane, we iustifie
the wicked, we pray, we obtaine. O when
shall the blind Popish Seminarie thinke
and write as honorably of that excellent
worke of mediation, as Tertullian thought
and wrote of it, for sees he it not to be so
excellent, that he can find neither Angell
nor man any wayes fit for it? yea, that he
must affirme that none can be mediatour
betwixt God and man but he who was
God. And therefore prouing Christ to be
God amongst other arguments he vseth
this:Tert. in lib. de Trin. 
                        Cur homo in orationibus inuocatur,
cum inuocatio hominis ad praestandam salutem
inefficax iudicetur? cur spes in illo ponitur
cum spes in homine maledicta referatur?
Wherefore is man called vpon in our prayers,
seeing the calling vpon man for the obtaining
of saluation must be thought altogether ineffectuall?
Wherefore do men trust in him, seeing
the confidence which is put in man is cursed?
Augustine after Tertullian saw this also,
when he said: Quem i
                              •
                           uenirem qui me

reconciliaret tibi?Aug lib. 10. conf. cap. 42. an eundem fuit mihi ad
Angelos, qua prece, quibus sacramentis? multi
conantes ad teredire, neque per seipsos valentes
sicut audio, tentauerunt hos, & inciderunt
in desiderium curiosarum visionum, &
digni habiti sunt illusionibus. Mediator autem
inter Deum & homines, oporteret vt
haberet aliquid simile Deo, aliqu
                              •
                           d simile hominibus;
ne in vtroque similis hominibus, longe
esset à Deo, aut in vtroque similis Deo, longe
esset ab hominibus. Whom could I finde who
was able to reconcile me to thee? should I haue
gone to the Angels, by what prayer, by what
allegation? many pressing to returne to thee,
and not being able by themselues, as I heare,
haue assayed to do this, and haue fallen headlong
in the loue of curious visions, and haue
bene thought worthie of mocking and scorning:
for it behoued that he who should be
Mediatour betwixt God and man, should
haue some thing like vnto God, and some
thing like vnto man; lest being in euery thing
like vnto man, he should haue bene farre from
God, or lest being in euery thing like vnto
God he should haue bene farre from man: and
so be no mediatour. I wonder if euer the
Papist Seminarie read that ancient Father
Epiphanius in his 74. heresie, where by

nine strong arguments he proues that the
Virgin Marie should haue no prayer
made to her, and so be vsed as a mediatrix
by any. O how sweetly brings Augustine
in the Christian soule, when death is
drawing neare it, speaking thus touching
the onely Mediatour Iesus, and to the
onely Mediatour Iesus:August. 
                        Tutius & incundius
loquor ad meū Iesum, quam ad aliquem
sanctorum spirituum Dei; plus debet mihi
Christus quam alicui caelestium spirituum:
Quod ego sum, fieri dignatus est Deus, non factus
est quod est Angelus; ad curiam Dei sui,
Dei tui, praecess
                              •
                            Deus tuus, homo tuus, tunica
tua polymitica indutus: illic assidue pro nobis
interpellat. Quem igitur habes intercessorem,
habes Mediatorem, constituet ibi propitium
adiutorem; & si Deus prote, quis contrate.
I speake more surely, more ioyfully vnto
my Iesus, then I can speake vnto any of the
holy spirits of God: Christ is all and more vnto
me then vnto any of those heauenly spirits. God
dained himselfe to be that which I am: he was
not made that which the Angels is. Thy God,
thy man, clothed with thy particoloured coate
hath gone before thee into the court and hall
of this God, of thy God. There he doth alwayes
intercede and make request for thee;

and therefore make him to be thy gracious
helper, whom thou hast for thy Intercessour
and Mediatour: and if God be with thee who
can be against thee. When I consider this, ô
my soule, I shall neuer wonder that Bernard
knowing with Peter and Iohn, That
among men there is giuen no name vnder the
heauen whereby a man can be saued beside the
name of Iesus, spake thus of the name of
Iesus.Bernard. 
                        Nomen Iesus est mel in ore, melos in
aure, iubilis in corde; nomen quod instar olei
lucet praedicatum, pascit recogitatum, lenit
& vngit inuocatum. The name of Iesus is
honie in the mouth, pleasant melodie in the
eare, aiubile and exultation in the heart. The
name of Iesus is a name which being preached
shines like oyle, being meditate vpon feedes,
and which being called vpon comforts and annoints.
O when shall the Papist be moued
to see and confesse that to be true, which
Augustine confesseth both truly & chearfully?Aug. ep. 49.
                        Quanto magis pia est creatura, & subdita
Deo, tanto minus se tali honore dignatur,
quem scit non deberi nisi Deo: sancti Angeli
non appetunt sacrificium, nisi quod ex doctrina
vera sapientiae veraeque religionis offertur vns
vero Deo, cui sancta societate deser
                              •
                           iunt. Pro
                           
                              ••
                           de
sicut impia superbia, siue hominum siue

daemonum, sibi hos diuinos honores exhiberi,
vel iubet, vel cupit; ita pia humilitas, vel hominum
vel Angelorum sanctorum, haec sibi
oblata recusauit, & cui deberetur ostendit.
The more religious and subiect vnto God a
creature is, it accounts it selfe to be lesse worthie
of that honour which it knowes belongs
to God. These holy Angels allowes no sacrifice,
but that which according to the doctrine of
true wisedome and religion is offered vp to
that onely one true God. Therfore as the wicked
pride, either of men or of Angels, commands
or desires these honours to be giuen to
them which be due to God; so the religious
and holy humilitie either of men or of Angels,
haue forsaken these things, and haue shewed
men vnto whom they be due. And so holy Angels,
holy men, true worshippers of the
true God, do alwayes crie with that
Angell which was sent to
Iohn,
                        Reuel. 22. 
                              •
                           . 
                        Worship God.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THREE MOST
FEAREFVLL ROCKES
layed in the way of Gods
babes, iourneying towards heauen:
threatning their present ouerthrow, if
they be not escheued by the light of the
Spirit, their leader; and of the word their
lanterne; holden forth by the man
of God their watchman.
                  
                     
                        2. TIM. 2. 19.The foundation of God remaineth sure, and
hath this seale: The Lord knoweth who
are his, and let euerie one that calleth vpon
the name of the Lord depart frō iniquitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        PSAL. 130. 4.Mercie or forgiuenesse is with thee that thou
maiest be feared.
                  
                  
                     
                        ROM. 6. 15.Shall we sinne because we are not vnder the
Law but vnder grace? God forbid.
                  
                  
                     
                        MAT. 7. 22.Not euerie one that saith vnto me Lord, shall enter into
the kingdome of heauen, but he that doth the will of
my father which is in heauen.
                  
                  
                     
                        TIT. 1. 16.They professe that they know God, but by their workes
they denie him, and are abominable, and disobedient,
and to euerie good worke reprobate.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE VERY
SINCERELY RELIGIous,
and truly Noble Lord;
DAVID, Lord CARNEGY of Kinnard;
Lord of his Maiesties priuie
Counsell, and Senator of the honorable
Colledge of Iustice.
                  
                     IF anie thing could
come from my hands,
my verie religious,
Noble good Lord,
worthie your Lordships
fauorable countenance (vnlesse
I would be accused by that twilight
of nature, and condemned by that
cleare light of grace, my God hath
not altogether denied vnto me; blessed
be his name) I am most strictly
obliged, were I as swift of foote as

                     Hazael was, to runne with my whole
strength to present it; both heartily,
and humbly vnto your Lordship.
Was I not so farre honoured of God
being yet a babe? that from my infancie,
I had your Lordships sincerely
and truly religious father of
most rare worthy memorie, for my
louing, and kindest father? and since
his Lordships death to this day, haue
I not alwayes had your Lordship for
my constant patrone, and louing
fosterer? It hath pleased my good
God to bring to my hands a subiect,
not vnworthie your Lordships consideration;
and which hath refused to
go forth to the world vpon any condition,
till it was couered vnder your
Lordships nourishing, and protecting
winges.
                  I haue reincountered with these
cruell cunning Robbers, layed by
Satan that Dragon and foxe in the
way of the babes of God, to cut them
off, lest they should in the end attaine

vnto that home of heauen they
looke for: and discouered these
Robbers to the sight of a valorous
Dauid, who will proue readie, and
able to apprehend and ouerthrow
them.
                  I am now to meete (my worthy
good Lord) with those fearefull
Rockes, subtile Satan (abusing alas
the foolish minds and foule hearts of
manie professors) hath euen with
their owne consent and applause,
layed in their way to their wrack.
                  I am to come to that more then
glorious Inne, towards the which the
babes of God do iourney, and within
the which they are to rest for euer.
Yea, I am to intreate of the Guestes
for whom that endlesse rest, which is
to be found within the golden gates
of this Inne, is prepared. Now to
whom possibly could I haue presented
these Rockes, to be considered
and discouered vnto the babes of
God, to the end that they might

eschue them beside your Lordship?
who being taught of God, hath happily
learned to adore Gods holy oracles,
and to abhorre all hellish conclusions;
and who is a Pilot ledde by
the Spirit and lanterne of his word, is
not onely able to shew the babes of
God where these Rockes do lie, but
by your Lorships wholesome counsell,
and holy carriage, to stirre
them vp to take their course by
them.
                  Who so fit to allure men towards
that Inne of heauen, as your Lordship?
who liuing among men for
some yeares, hath alwayes bene walking
with God with Enoch, and before
God with Abraham; hauing
your conuersation in the heauens,
setting your affections on things
which are aboue, and not which are
on the earth; and so able out of a
sense of these things which God hath
prepared for those who loue him, to
exhort all men, casting away euerie

thing that presseth downe,
                     Heb. 12. 12. 
                     and the
sinne that hangeth so fast on, to runne
with patience the race which is set
before them, looking vnto Iesus, the
author and finisher of their faith. To
whom could I offer the consideration
of the condition of these guests,
for whom that Inne of heauen is prepared,
omitting your Lordship? who
being taught of God knowes, that
not all those who crie:Mat. 7. 21. 
                     Lord, Lord, shall
enter in the kingdome of heauen, but
those who do the will of that father
which is in heauen;
                     1. Ioh. 3. 2. 3 
                     that whosoeuer hath
this hope in him, that when Christ shall
appeare he shall be like him, seeing
him as he is; purgeth himselfe as he is
pure. Alwaies (in respect of these large
promises made vnto him by God)
cleansing himselfe from all filthinesse
of the flesh,
                     2. Cor. 71. 1 
                     and spirit; and growing vp
in full holinesse in the feare of God.
From my soule, beseeching my good
God for the sonne of his loues sake, so
to sanctifie, and to guard your Lordships,

with your Lordships present,
and future Noble posteritie that your
Lordship with them, happily declining
these fearefull Rockes, and pleasantly
iourneying towards that heauenly
Inne, may at length, as guests
fitted of God for it, be receiued to
lodge within it, possessing in Gods
presence, fulnesse of ioy, and at his
right hand, pleasures for euermore.
                  
                     Your Lordships most
humble deuoted:
D. L.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     THE FIRST ROCKE
is a grosse abuse of Gods holy Predestination,
and Election; which men of
corrupt mindes, vnchast eares, blasphemous
mouthes, and vile liues,
peruert as they do other Scriptures, to
their owne destruction.
                     
                        WOe is me, woe is me, ô my
soule, that that bold vncleane
spirit, should find (euen
vnder this great and
cleare light of the Gospell)
not a few men, not onely mocke that
comfortable doctrine of Gods eternall
Predestination and Election; but tred it vnder
foote, as the verie foundation of all
securitie, and debaucherie; opening their
foule mouthes, and spewing fotth like
most vncleane dogges these vil
                           •
                         speeches:
If I be appointed to heauen, let me wallow
euen with pleasure in all kind of filthinesse, yet
I shall be saued. Tremble, tremble, ô thou

blasphemer of the blessed word of the
most high God, and repenting thy selfe
of this thy wickednesse, pray God, that
if it be possible, this hellish thought of
thy diuellish heart and abhominable
speech of thy vncleane lips, may be forgiuen
thee: for beleeue me, the child of
God appointed and looking for saluation,
thought neuer thus, speakes neuer
thus. Well is Gods child acquainted with
the nature of Gods elect, and therefore
he abhorres some, and loathes himselfe,
onely for sinne; he smiles alwayes
vpon holinesse, and loues himselfe onely
in so farre as he finds himselfe endued
with grace to loue and practise holinesse.
True it is, ô my soule, that the elected
child of God knowes that God his father
did make choise of him in his Sonne Iesus
before the foundation of the world. But
with this he knowes that this was done
not to the end that he should thinke, that
he should speake, so loosely, so abhominably
as the vile blasphemer of God, and
the reprobate doth, but to the end, that he
should be holy, and without blame before
him in loue who did chuse him.Eph. 1. 4. Well
is Gods elect child acquainted with

that great seale engrauen on both sides,
and not on the one side alone, wherewith
our God sealeth those he hath appointed
to be heires of his euerlasting inheritance.
Hauing on the one side this heauenly
Motto: The foundation of God remaineth
sure; and The Lord knoweth who is his owne.
And here behold, ô my soule, beside this
Motto, as it were ye pleasant pourtraicture
of Gods free election drawne. And on
the other side, hauing this for an inscription:2. Tim. 2. 19.
                        Let euery one who calleth vpon the name
of the Lord depart from iniquitie. And here
behold, ô my soule, beside that inscription,
y• shining pourtraicture of true sanctification,
which Angels, which diuels, which
men shall not be able to separate from
Gods election. But which is more, ô my
soule, the wise, humble, and holy elect
child of God, well instructed out of the
word of God his Fathers booke, out of
the which he learnes all these lessons,
whereby to gouerne himselfe: while he
knowes that the election of God his Father
stands euer most sure and stable, in respect
of his God who changeth not; yet,
feeling himselfe to be subiect to a verie
world of tentations and crosses, he cannot

ceasse in the feare and reuerence of his
God, whiles he liues here, to make his election
more and more sure to h
                           •
                        mselfe, and
that by eschewing all euill; the loue and
practise whereof he knowes cannot stand
with the election of God; and by louing
and doing good, yea by ioyning goodnesse
vnto goodnesse vncessantly: for he
dare not attempt to thinke that his God
hath drawne him toward his Maiestie by
the soft and strong co
                           •
                        d of his eternall election,
while Satan is pulling him backe,
and he is willingly following after him,
ledde in that blacke and vile halter of
sinne. Thou must not wonder, ô my soule,
that the elected child of God carrieth
himselfe so, for are we not Gods children,
thus charged by the Spirit? Giue diligence
to make your calling and election sure,
                        1. Pet. 1. 5. 6 7. 8. 
                        ioyning
vertue with your faith; and with vertue,
knowledge; and with knowledge, temperance;
and with temperance, patience; and with patience,
godlinesse; and with godlinesse, brotherly
kindnesse; and with brotherly kindnesse, loue:
for if these things be amongst you, and abound,
they will make you that ye neither shall
be idle, nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our
Lord Iesus Christ.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     THE SECOND ROCKE
is a foule abuse of the grace of God,
which vncleane men turne into vncleane
wantonnesse; delighting, alas,
to commit sinne, because that good
God delighteth to forgiue sinne.
                     MAny wayes, alas, ô my soule, doth
miserable man wrong God his gracious
maker: yea, many men called Christians,
do grosly grieue that holy one Iesus,
who hath called them to that high
dignitie to be called the sonnes of God:
but in this specially, that they take occasion
to commit sinne, yea to continue in
sinne, with some pleasure and contentment,
because God the Father out of his
vndeserued loue, borne freely to man, hath
giuen his Sonne to dye for man, because
his blessed Sonne out of this same loue
hath humbled himselfe willingly, yea,
chearfully to the death for man; so that
blind nature, common ciuilitie, Gods
truth, their owne consciences, Angels,
and well informed, or any waies, reformed
men, cannot but condemne them, yea
pronounce them to be execrable. Woe is
me, ô my soule, that euer subtle and strong

Satan should haue preuailed so ouer man,
that man now can be content to abuse
that salue which is onely able to cure him,
yea that he doth runne headlong vpon
that sharpe slaying sword of sinne, because
he heareth that salue is prepared for the
curing of him. All men confesse, ô my
soule, that that second couenant of grace
made betwixt God and man in his blessed
Sonne Iesus, that second Adam (who neuer
fell nor can fall) is of greater moment,
and alwayes more glorious then that first
couenant of workes, which was made in
that first Adam who stood not long, but
fell fearefully. And canst thou deny but as
our God hath obliged himselfe more
strictly to man by this second couenant of
grace, then he was by that first of works:
so man is become nearer, yea sibber to
God by the last then he was by the first;
and in that respect obliged to worship and
attend his Maiestie, so much the more diligently,
faithfully, and constantly? findest
thou, ô my soule, when thou readest and
cōsiderest Scripture, but God thy maker,
perceiuing that first couenant of workes
made betwixt him and man, broken by
man, prooued iust; and so adiudged man

with all his posteritie vnto that death
threatned against him and them, in case
that couenant should be violated by
them? And shall not our God, hauing giuen
his owne Sonne for man, proue much
more iust in condemning all such who
dare attempt to despise that bloud shed
by him for sinne, by selling themselues ouer
to sinne, because his bloud was shed
for buying them from sinne? If a Iew hauing
the Law of God put in his hand by
Moses,
                        Leuit. 18. 5. hearing Moses sound this in his
eares:Deut. 27. 26. 
                        Do this and liue: Cursed be he that
confirmeth not all the words of this Law to do
them: could with Abraham see by faith
the day of the blessed Messias a farre off,
and reioyce in it, he were easily freed from
that curse: for blessed Iesus (who was
made a curse for vs) blesseth all those
whom Moses curseth, prouiding they can
repent and beleeue in him. But ô Gentile,
liuing now not vnder the Law, but vnder
the Gospell, not hauing Moses, the seruant
of God for thy doctor, but Iesus, the Son
of God for thy Maister: what if thou shalt
take vpon thee not to abuse that Law giuen
by Moses, but that grace dearely cost
and louingly brought to thee by Iesus?

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
where shalt thou finde salue to cure thy
sore, and medicine to heale thy disease?
Let me anger Moses through breaking
of the Law: let Moses threaten me for
breaking of the Law: If I can but touch
with a liuely faith the hemme of Iesus
garment, I shall find peace with God, and
health with life to my selfe. But if I shall
anger Iesus, who shall pacifie him? where
shall I find a sacrificer, to satisfie him; hauing
despised that bloud shed by him for
me? Oh, ô my soule, when shall that sentence,
yea, that byting sentence be hearkened
vnto, by the monstrous, vile, loose
gospellers of this profane, licentious, leacherous
time, He that despised Moses, died
without mercie, vnder two or three witnesses.
Of how much sorer punishments suppose
ye, shall he be worthy which treadeth
vnder foote the Sonne of God, and
counteth the bloud of the Testament as
an vnholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified,
and doth despise the Spirit of grace.
That patient who among men doth despise
the kindest wisest,Heb. 10. 28. 29. the painefullest,
and best approued Physician, is thought
to be desperately diseased? And shall not
that man, ô my soule, who dare (taking

himselfe to sinne, Christs onely enemie)
neglect Iesus, renounce Iesus medicine,
die for euermore? for can Angels, can
Saints, triumphing in heauen, can Saints
fighting on earth, yea, can diuels euer
dying in hell cure him, whō Iesus will not
cure, who dare refuse to be cured by Iesus?
Yea, who is not affrayed to cast that cup
(euen the blessed word of God, and Sacraments
annexed thereto, in the which
the wholesome potions of saluation are
kept, and by the which they are conueyed
to the sicke soules of Gods children)
vnder his feete? Do not Peter and Iohn
triumphantly crie.Act. 4. 12. 
                        There is no name vnder
the heauen by the which a man can be saued,
but by the name of Iesus. Yea, doth not
Augustine,
                        August. who was no Papist, taught of
God and ledde by Scripture, maintaine
that which Peter and Iohn did proclaime:
for he doth see no Sauiour, but one; euen
sweet Iesus: Nemo liberat à vulneribus
illius trucidatores, nisi gratia saluatoris; nemo
liberat venundatos sub peccato, à vinculis
captiuitatis, nisi gratia redimentis. None freeeth
man from the wounds of that murtherer,
but the grace of that Sauiour: none deliuereth
those who be sold vnder sinne, from the bonds

of spirituall captiuitie and thraldome, but his
grace who redeemeth them. Sure I am, ô my
soule, were Iude, that blessed Apostle of
Iesus, liuing this day, he would change his
tune, if he were writing either to vs, or
of vs, (who liues now vnder such a dispised,
abused, great light) writing to those
of his time,Iude 4. he was content to say: There
are certaine men crept in, which were before
of old ordained to this condemnation; vngodly
men there are which turne the grace of our
God into wantonnesse, and denie God the onely
Lord, and our Lord Iesus Christ. But were
Iude liuing now among vs, he could not
but say, and write thus: There be manie
men, who do resort to the house of God, who
call vpon the name of God, who daily in
troopes runne on foote, ride on horsebacke,
keeping their solemne meetings in citie and
countrey, who turne the sauing grace of God
into damnable wantonnesse, denying (albeit
not with their foule mouthes, yet by their
vile deeds) that God and Lord who would
haue saued them. Oh, ô my soule, when
shall that golden sentence written by
Augustine be heard of vs,August. who liues now?
be honoured and embraced by vs as a
wholesome medicine able to cure vs? as a

precious Iewell able to honour vs? Quid
nobis gratia Dei vtilius confert in hoc praesenti seculo
maligno,
                        Aug. Epist. 47. 
                        nisi vt moriamur peccato?
ac per hoc ipsi gratiae inuenietur ingratus,
qui propter illam vult viuere peccato, per
quam morimur peccato.
                        Iude 4. 
                        What more profitable
thing doth the grace of God in this present
wicked world bring to vs, then that by it
we are made to do the same? so that, that man
must by this be found vnthankefull to the
grace of God, who because of it, will liue in
sinne, by the which we are made able to die to
sinne? Oh when shall the loose gospellers
hearken to Irenaeus saying to them? Vt
aucta est gratia sub nouo Testamento, ita &
poena eorum qui non credunt. As grace is
augmented now vnder the Gospell, so the
punishmēt of those, who beleeue not, is encreased
also. And no wonder that he write so,
considering that his Maister writ before
him touching Chorasin, Bethsaida, and
Capernaum: Wo be to thee Chorasin, wo be
to thee Bethsaida, for if the great workes,
which were done in you, had bene done in Tirus,
and Sidon, they had repented long ago in
sackcloath and ashes.
                        Mat. 11. 21. 23. 24. 
                        Therefore I say vnto you,
it shall be easier for Tirus, and Sidon, at the
day of Iudgement then for you. And thou

Capernaum which are lifted vp vnto the heauen,
shall be brought downe to hell, for if the
great workes which haue bene done in thee,
had bene done among them in Sodome, they
had remained to this day. But I say vnto you
it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom
at the day at Iudgement then for thee. Giue
no place to sinne, ô my soule, because
Christ died for sinne, and by his death
hath purchased remission of sins to thee,
not forgetting thee: which the Apostle
saith to thee.2. Cor. 15. 14. 17. 
                        If one be dead for all, then were
all dead: and be died for all, that they which
liue should not hence forth liue vnto themselues,
but vnto him which died for them, and
rose againe. Therefore if any man be in Christ
let him be a new creature.
                     
                  
                  
                     THE THIRD ROCRE IS
A foolish leaning (without anie
ground) to a naked profession of God,
with the mouth, without any practise
of godlinesse in thy life.
                     COmparing the protestation of our
professors, with their conuersation,
I haue for some bygone yeares lamented

(before my God in secret,) ô my soule,
the desperate estate of this our deaddest
age. Our professors do protest that they
do know and worship that God who
made not only the heauens and the earth,
but who made that booke which is onely
worthy the stile of a booke, to wit, the
Bible, and that they hold this booke, for
the booke of this God; indited by his
Spirit, and put in register by his pen-men,
ledde by this same spirit: yet our professors
so liue, as all who do looke on
them, and heare them (being truly sensible
of the true God, and truly instructed
by the Spirit of truth out of his word)
must euen solemnely sweare, that the effects
of a great manie of them, do either
denie this God who made the Bible, to
be that God whom they worship; or the
Bible to be Gods booke. Offend not
rashly, ô my soule, that I speake so to
thee: for after triall (alas) this will proue
to be most true. If our professors did hold
that God who made that booke which
we call the Bible for their God, would
they not striue to worship him, and to
liue with men, and among men, as God
by this his booke hath appointed them to

do? Againe, if our professors, ô my soule,
held the Bible for Gods booke, indited
by his Spirit who cannot lye, calling
nothing good but that which is good
before God, and which leadeth man toward
the narrow way of saluation, calling
nothing euill but that which is euill before
God, and which draweth man towards
the broad way of perdition, could
they be so easily induced to transgresse
those lessons our God by this booke teacheth
them, and vnder no lesse paine then
of remedilesse, endlesse, condemnation
commands them to obey? yea, durst they
for ten thousand worlds attempt to do
this? I wonder, ô my soule, if our gallants
(whom nothing can tame) do hold that
speech for the speech of God (who cannot
lye of faine)?Eccles. 11. 9 
                        Reioyce ô yong man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheare thee in the
dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but
know that for all these things God will bring
thee to iudgement.
                        Eccl. 12. 14. 
                        God will bring euery worke
vnto iudgement with euery secret thing whether
it be good or euill. I wonder if our mad
whoremaisters and whoores, if our abhominable
blasphemers, if our brutish drunkards,

if our filthie speakers, do hold these
speeches for the speeches of the great
God, before whom they must one day appeare,
and giue an account of their whole
carriage here, publicke in the streets and
priuate in chamber, by night and by day?
Men do not despise a thiefe when he stealeth
to satisfie his soule,
                        Prou. 6. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 
                        because he is hungrie; but
if he be found he shall restore to seuen fold, or
he shall giue all his substance of his house: but
he that committeth adulterie with a woman
is destitute of vnderstanding he that doth it,
destroyeth his owne soule, he shall find a wound
and dishonour, and his reproach shall neuer be
taken away. For iealousie is as the rage of
man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance, he cannot heare the sight of anie
ransome, neither will be consent though thou
augment the price.
                        1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. 
                        Know ye not that the vnrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdome of
God? Be not deceiued, neither fornicators,
nor idolaters,
                        Ephes. 5. 3. 4. 5. 6. 
                        nor adulterers, nor wantons,
nor buggerers, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor
drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdome of God. But fornication
and all vncleanenesse, or couetousnesse, let it
not be once named among you, as it becometh
Saints; neither filthinesse, neither foolish talking,

neither iesting, which are things not
comely, but rather giuing of thankes. For
this ye know, that no whooremonger, neither
vncleane person, nor couetous person, which is
an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdome
of Christ and of God. Let no man deceiue
you with vaine words; for, for such
things commeth the wrath of God vpon the
children of disobedience: be not therefore
companions with them.
                        Reu. 21. 8. 
                        But the fearefull and
vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable, and murtherers,
and whooremongers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and all lyers, shall haue their
part in the lake, which burneth with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. Yea, I
wonder, ô my soule, if the Kings and Princes,
and mightie men of this world do
hold that speech for the speech of God:
And the kings of the earth, and the great men,
and the rich men,
                        Reu. 6. 15. 16. 17. 
                        and the chiefe captaines, the
mightie men, and euery bondman, and euery
free man hid themselues in dennes, and among
the rockes of the mountaines, and said to the
mountaines and rockes fall on vs, and hide vs
from the presence of him that sitteth vpon
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe;
for the great day of his wrath is come, and
who can stand? Our professors then, ô my

soule, for the most part can neither hold
that God who made the Bible for their
God, neither the Bible for his booke, considering
that sensible, hard, and seene exposition,
may easily be found to be betwixt
their liues and Gods lessons taught
in this Bible. And therefore without
doubt, they haue madly (miscarried by
that vncleane spirit) set vp to themselues
their owne hearts lustes, to be both their
God, whom they will serue, and that onely
booke which they will learne and follow.
I know one Scripture, ô my soule,
which shall condemne thousands, who
heare and reade Scripture (alledging
they hold it for Gods word) vnlesse
they repent speedily.Iam. 2. 12. 
                        Thou beleeuest that
there is a God, thou doest well. The diuels also
beleeue and trembleth. Oh, ô my soule,
when shall a great many amongst vs, and
professing with vs, learne to do that
which the diuell doth; well knowes he,
that the onely true God who made the
heauen, and the earth, made the Bible also;
and that this Bible is the booke of that
God, who is the onely true God, yea, that
all things contained in it be most true: albeit,
alas, many men neglect and contemne

that which they heare out of the
Bible, that which they reade in the Bible,
while the diuel knowing these things can
tremble, assured that he is adiudged by
that most great and most iust Iudge of the
world vnto eternall condemnation, as the
Bible speaketh. Shall Satan who doth beleeue
Gods word to be true, and who can
tremble at the sound of it be condemned?
and shall he escape the feare 
                           •
                        ullest damnation
which shall be found in hell, who is
so far from trembling at the iudgements
of God, brought to his eares out of Gods
word, that he makes but a mocke of
them? It were good they were thinking
vpon that, spoken by our God touching
the old foolish vncleane Iewes: Will ye
steale,
                        Ier. 7. 9. 10. 
                        and murther, and commit adulterie,
and sweare falsly, and burne incense vnto
Baal, and walke after other gods whom ye
know not, and come and stand before me in this
house whereupon my name is called, and say
we are deliuered, though we haue done all
these abhominations? Were Paul liuing, sure
I am, no sooner would he lend his eares
vnto a great many of our professours, but
he would say ouer againe: They professe
that they know God,
                        Tit. 1. 16. 
                        but by their workes they

denie him, and are abhominable and disobedient,
and to euery good worke reprobate.
And no wonder, for the voice of our blind
sensuall professours is this, ô my soule: I
loue God, and cursed be he who loues not God.
But, ô blind foole, when shalt thou begin
from an heart sensible of God, and with a
cleane mouth honouring God, to say, I
loue godlinesse, and cursed shall he proue at
length who loues not godlinesse. The voice of
our blind sensuall professors is this, I hate
the diuell, I defie the diuell, and all his works.
But when shall they begin from an honest
heart, and with true lips to say, I hate sin,
and cursed shall he proue at length who hates
not sinne. O when shall that of Augustine
be taken to heart by our vncleane professours?Ep. 171.
                        Christianos vos dicitis & Christo contradicitis.
Ye call your selues Christians, and
you contradict Christ alwayes. Open our
professours eyes ô Lord by thy Spirit, to
the end that they may once happily see
that which Bernard brought to the eares
of the loose professours of his time: Vnde
tibi gloria putide puluis? de vitae sanctitate,
quid tibi prodest pium Saluatoris nomen lectitare
in libris: nec habere pietatem in moribus.
Whence commeth glorie and honour
                        
vnto thee, ô stinking dust, from the holinesse
of thy life I thinke it commeth onely? for what
can it profit thee to reade the holy name of thy
Sauiour in bookes, while that thou hast not
holinesse in thy manners. And againe. Is
Scripturas recte legit, qui verba vertit in
opera. That man readeth holy Scripture
aright, who turneth words
into workes; doth that in his
life which he reades in
the Scripture.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THAT ONELY
GLORIOVS INNE,
AND BRIGHTLY SHIning
palace, filled with all pleasures
and ioyes, towards the which the
Babes of God do iourney in time laboriously:
and in the which they
shall liue eternally, with the nature
and condition of those
babes who shall possesse it.
                  IOH. 14. 2.
                  In my Fathers house are many dwelling
places, if it were not so, I would haue told you:
I go to prepare a place for you.
                  IOH. 17. 24.
                  Father, I will that these whom thou hast
giuen me be with me where I am; that they
may behold the glorie which thou hast giuen
me, for thou louest me before the foundation
of the world.
                  REVEL. 20. 6.
                  Blessed and holy is he, who hath part in the
first resurrection, for on such the second death
hath no power: but they shall be the Priests
of God, and of Christ, and shall reigne with
him a thousand yeare.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE INNE WITHIN
THE WHICH THE BABES
of God carried in this heauenly Chariot,
lookes to lodge and alwayes to rest;
is that new Ierusalem which is aboue,
where there is fulnesse of ioy to be found
in Gods presence, and pleasures
lasting for euermore at his
right hand.
                  
                     THat Inne towards the
which this heauenly golden
Chariot drawne by
these heauenly white horfes,
carries these babes of
God, (happily ledde and directed by the
Spirit, and enlightned by the lanterne of
the word, held in the hand of the Preachers
thereof) free of the foresaid Robbers,
and Rockes; is that new Ierusalem
which is aboue, made vp of pure gold,
like cleare glasse; whose wall, ô my soule,
is of lasper, founded vpon twelue precious

stones: euen vpon a Iasper, a Saphire, a
Chalcedome, an Emeraud, a Sardonix, a
Sardin, a Chrysolite, a Berill, a Topaz, a
Chrysophrasus, a Iacinth, a Amathist: whose
twelue gates, are twelue pearles also,
whose streetes are pure gold shining like
glasse, whose temple the Lord God almightie
and the Lambe is, which hath
neither Sunne, nor Moone, beside the glorie
of God, and of the Lambe. In the
light whereof the people that are saued
do walke, and to the which the kings of
the earth shall bring their glorie, and honour;
whose gates are neuer shut, which
is inriched with a pure riuer of water of
life, cleare as cristall, springing out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lambe; hauing
in the midst of the streete of it, and
on the other side of the riuer that tree of
life which beareth twelue manner of
fruites, and giueth fruite euerie moneth,
the leaues whereof do heale the nations,
where Gods seruants being free from all
curse, (for no curse can possibly enter
there) shall serue him, seeing alwayes his
face, and hauing his name written in their
foreheads, reigning with him for euer.
But canst thou tell me, ô my soule, what

shall be the estate and condition of those
who shall be admitted to be citizens
within this new Ierusalem, and Inne of
heauen, they being once happily possessed
of it? To handle this matter to the full,
and so to lay open to thee, ô my soule,
the nature of this Inne as it deserueth, and
as it is in it selfe; it is not in the power of
Angels, or of men: for heare I note first
that royall,Esay 64. 4. Euangelicke, Prophet Isaiah,
and then that great Apostle Paul crying
out:1. Cor. 2. 9. 
                     The eye hath not seene, the eare hath
not heard, neither came it to mans heart, to
thinke of these things which God prepareth
for them that loue him?
                     2. Cor. 12. 4 Yea, Paul who
had a greater proofe of the beautie, glory,
aand superabundant riches of the things
which are to be found in this Inne, being
rauished vp towards it, confesseth that he
saw things there not to be vttered. Hearken,
hearken therefore, ô my soule, I pray
thee, for heare I must tell thee that the
skilfulnesse of Arithmeticke can not number
out these good things which are to
be found there. That the deepenesse of
Geometrie, cannot measure the length,
and breadth, the higth, and the depth of
those good things which be layed vp

there: Yea, that the swiftest and sweetest
tongue of the most rarely eloquent Orator,
is not sufficient to expresse the worthie,
and excellencie of them: for when
this Citie, and Inne is looked vpon by him
whose eyes be enlightened from aboue
by the Lord of it. The Arithmetician, the
Geomerticiā the Orator must stand amazed
and crie out. Neuer saw I an Inne before,
ye pleasures, the plenishing, the beautie
whereof I was not able to reckon, to
measure, and to declare. But behold here
an Inne, filling my eares so, my eyes so, my
smelling so, my tasting so, my touching
so, yea, my heart aboue all things so; that
I am like (through the superabundance of
passing excellent things, may delight my
hearing my seeing, my tasting, my touching,
and if I were not sustained by a
stronger, euen by that blessed, yea, onely
Lord and Ma
                        •
                     ster of this Inne) to
loose my hearing by hearing, my sight by
beholding, my smelling by smelling, my
tasting by tasting, my touching by touching;
those things which be there to be
heard, seene, smelled, tasted, and touched.
Yea, I would loose my verie heart and life.
And no wonder, ô my soule, yt it be so, for

in that Inne of heauen, thy God shall be
a bright shining looking glasse to thy
sight, a sweetly sounding Fluit, & Cimball
to thy hearing, a delicious honie combe
to thy tast, odoriferous balme to thy
smelling, and a passing wonderfull soft
pleasant rose to thy touching: What man
of sharpest sight can behold this outward
Sunne which God himselfe hath appointed
to enlighten this world, which is the
common Inne of the elect, and reprobate,
in his full brightnesse and glorie, and not
haue his eyes hurt thereby? And shalt
thou, ô my soule, behold that supreamest
Maiestie of the Father, and of the Lambe,
that onely Sonne which doth enlighten
this Inne, (within the which no reprobate
can enter) vnlesse thou be fortified by one
stronger then thy selfe, and blessed with
a more strong, quicke sight then thou
canst here beneath attaine vnto? what
mans eares are not transported, when he
heares a number of sweete voyces, singing
artificiall musicke in diuerse parts formerly
and melodiously. And shalt thou not
find thy selfe wonderfully transported, ô
my soule, when thou shalt be brought
within thy Inne, to be a hearer, not onely

of the sweetest musicke of the glorified
Saints; but of these celestiall Spirits the
Angels, there inioying the pleasures of the
spring, the glorie of the Summer, the
plentie of the haruest, and the sweet rest
of the Winter? But no wayes hearing, or
seeing, or feeling any hurt which euer
came to man by any of these. This moued
Bernard meditating vpon the estate of
Gods glorified children in heauen,Ber. Ser. 33. in cant. to
burst forth in these words, not without a
speciall exclamation, and admiration: O
perenne Solstitium, quando iam non inclinabitur
dies! ô lumen meridianum! ô vernalis
temperies! ô aestiua venustas! ô autumnalis
vbertas! ô quies & feriatio hiemalis! O euerduring
stay of the Sunne, (for that Sunne
which shineth in this Inne, neuer goeth
downe, but alwayes shineth in his hight)
when the day shall not incline to the end! (for
the day which riseth in this Inne shall last
for euer) O noone-tide light! ô the sweetest
temperance of the spring! ô the pleasantnesse of
the Summer! ô the plentie and abundance of
the haruest! ô the rest and refreshing vacants
of the Winter! If this low house of the
world, be so richly furnished with a verie
world of diuerse pleasant, profitable, and

glorious things, (being the lodging not
onely of the children of God, but of the
children of wrath) ô how rich must that
house of God be furnished with pleasure,
profit, and glorie; within the which none
can dwell, beside that blessed great Gods
elect Angels, and dearest sonnes, and
daughters! Augustine finding himselfe ouercome
by the consideration of the glorie
of this Inne of heauen, could say: Si
id quod ex parte est non valuit eloqui ne
                           •
                         expertus,
quid de perfectione inexpertus balbutire
conatur. Oculus non viditò Deus absque
te, quae praeparasti diligentibus; pax super
pacem, indeficiens exultatio, torrens voluptatis
diuinae, flumen laetitiae, gaudium plenum;
cogita quicquid vis, quicquid potes exopta,
excedit cogitationem omnem, desiderium
omne exuperat illa felicitas, aeternitas illa,
beatitudo illa. If that which is but in a part
could not be expressed by him who had proofe
thereof, wherefore should he who is inexpert,
attempt to babble about it. The eye sees not ô
God without thee the things which thou hast
prepared for those that loue thee: peace aboue
peace, triumphant indeficient ioy, a peale
of heauenly pleasure, a floud of gladnesse, full
ioy: thinke vpon any thing thou pleasest, wish

after what thou may; that happinesse, that
eternitie, that blessednesse, surmounteth all a
man can thinke, and sensibly ouercomes all a
man can desire. Augustine pressing to make
this his assertion cleere vnto vs, can crie
out.Aug. de doc. Chrsti. lib. 1. cap. 15. 
                     Quibus verbis dici, aut qua cogitatione
capi potest, praemiū quod Christus in vita futura
daturus est? quando ad consolationem
huius itineris tantum dedit de suo spiritu, vt
quod faciendum est, non solum sine murmure
sed etiam cum dilectione, & delectatione faceamus,
in aduersis etiam gaudentes, & fiduciam
in eum, quem non videmus, ponentes: By
what words can that reward be expressed, or
by what thought can that reward be apprehended,
which Christ shall giue to his owne in
the life to come? seeing for the consolation,
and sweetning of this their iourney, he
hath giuen them such a measure of his owne
Spirit, that we are made to do that which we
should do, not onely without murmuring, but
also out of loue, and with pleasure, reioycing
euen in tribulations, and putting our confidence
in him, whom as yet we see not. O what
happinesse, what honour, what glorie,
what peace, what charitie? yea, what incomparable
plentie of all things, shall the
glorified Saints inioy there? Shall not that

happinesse be wonderfull excellent there,
where no euill can be found, where no
good thing can be wanting? What a glorie
shall be there, where none who is praised
can be praised, either by the error, or
the flatterie of those who do praise them?
What honour shall be there, when honors
shall not be refused to any who is worthy
of honour, neither can be giuen to anie
who is vnworthie; yea, where none vnworthie
of honour shall presse for honour,
and where none can come but those
who be worthie of it? what peace shall be
there, where none can possibly suffer any
hurt or wrong, either from themselues or
from any other? O what loue shall be
there, where no inferiour shall enuie the
superiour, nor any superiour contemne the
inferiour! O how excellent shall the free-will
of man be there, ô my soule! When
God made Adam to his owne Image, he
beautified him with that free-will, whereby
he might haue not sinned. But in that
Inne of heauen this shall be mans happie
freewill, and mans happinesse, because of
this his free-will that he shall not be able
to sinne. O what plentie shall be there
possessed by man, when he shall haue nothing

which he would want, and when
he shall want nothing which he would
haue? Augustine saw this when he said: In
ciuitate superna,
                     Aug ep. 3. 
                     atque diuina, iam non est
molestè toleranda calamitas, nec laboriosè
fraenanda cupiditas, sed sola sine vlla difficultate,
& perfecta libertate retinenda, Dei &
proximi, charitas. In that heauenly Citie
which is aboue, there shall be no calamitie
with trouble to be suffered, neither any concupiscence
or lust with paine to be bridled: but
there the onely loue of our God and of our
neighbour to be retained and kept without
any difficultie and paine, and with perfect libertie
and freedome. The sense hereof moued
Bernard to say:Bern. 
                     In coelis erit securitas
libera, & libertas secura, neque aduertendi
erunt de caetero oculi ne videant vanitatem;
quia purissimam videbunt venustatem, quae
est ista copia, vbi nihil quod nolis sit, vbi totum
sit quod velis. In the heauens there shall be
free securitie, and secure freedome, for there
the children of God shall not haue occasion
any more to aduert to their eyes, that they behold
not vanitie, because they shall alwayes
see most pure and pleasant comelinesse: ô what
abundance is this, where there is nothing
which thou wouldst not haue, and where all

that is which thou wouldst haue. And thus
thou mayst see, ô my soule, that the glorie
and happinesse of this Inne of heauen consisteth
in two things: to wit, in the absolute
necessarie presence of all good, and in
the absolute necessarie want of all euill
things: for in it there is such abundant
beautie of euerlasting righteousnesse,
such an inexpressible pleasant world of
shining, quickening, and refreshing light,
that howbeit it were not lawful for a man
to stay there, but for the space of a short
day; yet for a very short dayes abiding
there, he would heartily content himselfe
to despise and depriue himselfe of all the
pleasures, honour, and wealth can be
found here, and with ioy vndergo and vnderlye
all those euils he can suffer here,
to the end he might but liue there but for
the space of a short day. Had Dauid (out
of the sense of these comforts which were
to be found by the exercise of religion)
the outward tabernacle of God in such
account,Psal. 84. 1
                           •
                        
                      yt he could say: A day in thy courts
is better then a thousand other where: I had
rather be a doore keeper in the house of my
God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednesse.
And shalt thou not find in the end

of thy time, when thou shalt enter within
that Inne of glorie, that it were better to
stay there for one day if it were possible,
then to liue with Methusalah 969. yeares,
adorned with vncertaine, perishing pleasures▪
honours, and riches? Beside this, ô
my soule, knewest thou what a stole thou
shalt weare in this Inne of heauen? yea,
with what a stole this my bodie shall be
clothed there, ô with what earnestnesse
wouldst thou call for the comming of Iesus!
ô with what earnest desire wouldst
thou long for the comming of Iesus! yea,
ô what praises wouldst thou sing to God
thy Father, who hath promised this Inne
to thee, to God thy Sauiour, who hath
conquised this Inne to thee, and to God
the holy Ghost, who assures thee that
this Inne belongs to thee! Thou, ô my
soule, in that Inne of heauen, shalt be richly
and royally decked with a threefold
stole; in beautie, in worth, farre surpassing
all those ornaments and iewels, rich Salomon
was couered with, when he sat in his
royall throne: with the stole of the perfect
knowledge of the blessed and glorious
Trinitie; Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost;
and this perfect knowledge shall fill vp

the roome of that liuely iustifying faith
wherewith on earth here thou art blessed,
and by the which thou apprehendest the
promises of God made to thee in thy Sauiour:
for when thou shalt enter, ô my
soule, within the doores of this Inne of
heauen (all being giuen thee which was
promised to thee, and beleeued by thee)
thy faith shall ceasse, and this perfect
knowledge of God shall meete thee, and
keepe thee for euer. Secondly, thou shalt
be clothed with the stole of the perfect
fruition of inioying of the glorious Trinitie;
the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost.
And this fruition shall fill vp the roome
of that Hope which now thou hast; for so
soone as thou shalt come to the gates of
this heauenly Inne, in that day of iudgement
that Hope, whereby thou expectest
now those things, thy Father hath promised,
thy Sauiour hath conquised, and the
Spirit assures thee of, shall ceasse also. And
this fruition shall fill the roome of it, thou
being fully possessed with all thou expected.
Thirdly, with the stole of the perfect
loue of the blessed Trinitie, the Father,
Sonne, and holy Ghost; and of the
Saints his children, for then that loue

wherewith thou, ô my soule, now louest
thy Father, thy Sauiour, thy Sanctifier, and
his children shall not then end with thy
faith and hope, when thou shalt enter
within the gates of this Inne; but shall go
in with thee, and being there augmented,
and perfected by a thousand thousand
degrees, shall possesse thee for euermore.
This moued that Apostle who was well
acquainted with these things which be in
heauen to say:1. Cor. 13. 13. 
                     Now abideth faith, hope, and
loue, euen these three; but the chiefest of these
is loue. And therefore Irenaeus taught by
the Spirit, and by Paul, subscribing hereunto
could write thus: Charitas pretiosior
est cognitione, gloriosior prophetia, & omnibus
charismatibus supereminet. Loue is more
pretious then knowledge, more gracious then
prophecie, yea, it surmounts all gifts man
hath. This my bodie againe in that heauenly
Inne, ô my soule, shall be clothed
and adorned with a fourefold stole: first,
with the stole of rare beautie and holinesse,
so that the Sunne in his full brightnesse
did neuer shine so gloriously as my bodie
shall shine in that Inne. Tels not Daniel
me that in the Inne of heauen: The wise
shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament,
                     Dan. 12. 3.
                     
                     and they that turne many to righteousnesse as
the starres for euer and euer. Yea, are not
these the words of thy Sauiour who cannot
lye:Mat 8. 43. 
                     Then shall the iust men shine as the
Sunne in the kingdome of their Father. Now
thou must not wonder, ô my soule, that
euen the blackest & palest coloured bodie
of the glorified child of God shall thus
shine: for art thou not thus resolued by
the Spirit? We looke from the heauens for the
Sauiour euen the Lord Iesus Christ,
                     Phil. 3 20. 21. 
                     who shall
change our vile bodies that it may be fashioned
like vnto his glorious bodie. Now if Christ
giuing his disciples Peter, Iames, and Iohn,
before Moses and Elias, a little view of
that glorie which is due to him, had his
face shining as the Sunne, and his clothes
white as the light, while he was onely
transfigurate vpon mount Tabur? ô with
what a glorie is he now clothed, in that
mountaine of glorie with his Father! and
and how shall our bodies shine,1. Ioh. 3. 2. who in
heauen shall be like him,1. Cor. 5. 49. bearing there
the image of that heauenly Adam, as here
we beare the image of the earthly? Secondly,
with that singular stole of impossibilitie,
so that howbeit the bodies of the
Saints of God be subiect to a thousand alterations,

and hazards which do manie
wayes trouble and annoy them, yet then
they shall be free of all suspition of alteration,Reuel. 21. 4.
or hazard, all these first things which
here do trouble men being ended. Thirdly,
with that excellent stole of wonderfull
Agilitie, for then our lumpish bodies shall
be freed of that heauinesse which now
doth clogge them, and make vs, that without
great difficultie and paine, we cannot
go from place to place: yea, that without
some outward helpe we cannot vpon a
sudden transport our selues, where we
would fainest be. For now the spirit cannot
go but where the bodie goeth (the
bodie being a burthen to it) but then the
spirit being made the full maister of the
bodie, shall command it to go without
any trouble wheresoeuer it would haue it
to go. And therefore Augustine could say:
Tanta erit tunc corporis agilitas, vt vbi volet
spiritus ibi protinus erit & corpus. Then the
child of God being in heauen, the agilitie and
nimblenesse of the bodie shall be so great, that
where euer the spirit would be, there the bodie
shall be also incontinent. Now thou must
no wayes doubt of this, ô my soule, considering
as thou hast heard that our bodies

in heauen shall be conforme to the
bodie of our blessed Sauiour, and so as
Christs bodie after his resurrection was
adorned with such agilitie, that in a most
short space it could be seene in diuerse
places, now at Ierusalem, now out of Ierusalem,
comming to his disciples vnawares,
& vpon a suddaine departing from
them,Ioh. 20. 19. 26. as Iohn witnesseth: our glorified
bodies shall euen in this be like vnto his.
Yea, what shall I say, shall the bodie of the
Prophet Elias,
                     Luk. 24. 31. and of Philip the Deacon,
soiourning beneath here, be transported
vpon a suddaine from place to place by
the Lord our God:1 King. 18. 12. 46. and shall we doubt
that our bodies being glorified, and made
like to the bodie of Christ shall be inferiour
to them in this point?Acts 8. 9. And ô how
farre shall this augment the ioy of the
glorified Saints, while we liue here: ô
how often do we desire to be with those
who be dearest to vs, and of whom we
are specially loued? yea, is it not a matter
of speciall griefe euen to the dearest
Saints of God, that knowing themselues
to haue deere brethren and sisters, some in
that same kingdome with them, others in
diuerse kingdomes farre remoued from

them, lying vnder sharpe crosses and diuerse
afflictions whom they are not able,
notwithstanding of this, to visite, for imparting
the sweet honie of consolation to
them, being hindered through distance of
place from them. But in heauen, ô how
soone shall we find our selues, not onely
in minde but in bodie also present with
such we do loue, and who do loue vs.
Then Dauid shall haue no cause to crie
from a wounded heart, and with a mourning
tune and countenance:Psal. 42. 1. 2 
                     As the Hart
brayeth for the riuers of water, so panteth my
soule for thee ô God. My soule thirsteth
for God, euen for the liuing God, when shall
I come and appeare before the presence of
God? my teares haue bene my meate day and
night, while they say daily where is thy God?
There Paul shall haue no neede to crie
out:Rom. 7. 14. 24. 
                     What I would that do I not, but what I
hate that do I. O wretched man that I am
who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this
death? If the expectation of these wayes, ô
my soule,Iob. 19. 25. 26. 27. which be in heauen, made Iob
(inuironed with an inward and outward
sea of tentations and crosses) not onely to
digest them, but digesting them to reioyce
in the midst of them: ô what ioy

shall the full fruition of them procure
him? Fourthly, in this Inne of heauen
thou shalt be cloathed, ô my soule, with
the stole of perfect health, and strength;
so that where now the bodie of Gods
child is not onely subiect to great weakenesse,
but to innumerable grieuous, and
most painfull diseases, there it shall be
fully, and finally deliuered from all▪ weaknesse,
or from all feare of any paine or disease
whatsoeuer. This is that whereof
the Spirit would assure thee, when he
saith:Reuel. 21. 4. 5. 6. 
                     Behold the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them: and they
shall be his people, and God himselfe shall be
their God with them, and God shall wipe away
all teares from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, neither crying,
neither shall there be any more paine, for the
first things are passed, and he that sate vpon
the throne said: Behold I make all things
new, and he said vnto me, write, for these
words are faithfull and true. Yea, in this
Inne of heauen, one shall be knowne by
euerie one, euerie one by all, embracing
one another, as now the members of one
bodie embrace one another; so that thou
ô my soule, shalt then loue all the children

of God as thou shalt loue thy selfe, and
shalt be loued by him, as thou shalt loue
them: for whosoeuer shall be there, and
all those who shall be there, shall be one
bodie, shall be one Church, shall be one
spouse to blessed Iesus; and therefore the
will of one shall be the will of all: yea,
which is more, ô my soule, there the will
of God shall not differ from thy will, nor
thy will from Gods will; albeit (alas)
while thou shalt soiourne beneath here,
there shall alwayes remaine most grosse,
and fearefull contrarieties, betwixt the
good will of thy good God, and thy peruerse
euill will. Did Adam in his innocencie
know Euah whom he had neuer
seene before, and giue her a fit name so
soone as she was presented before him?
and shalt thou being aduanced to a higher
dignitie in a farre more excellent pallace,
not know all who shall be there? Shall
Peter when our Maister was transfigurate
vpon mount Tabur, know Moses, and
Elias, whom he had neuer seene before?
and shall I not know them when I shall
be glorified by him, and with them in the
mountaine of glorie? I will not denie, ô
my soule, but in this Inne of heauen; there

shall be degrees of glorie,
                     1. Cor. 15. 40. 41. 
                     euen as there is another
glorie of the Sunne, and another glorie of
the Moone, and another glorie of the starres,
for one starre differeth from another in glorie.
This is that the Spirit would cleere vnto
vs,Dan. 12. 3. when he saith: They that be wise shall
shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and
they that turne manie to righteousnesse shall
shine as the starres for euermore. And we
know that there is difference betwixt the
brightnesse of the firmament, and the
brightnesse of the starres. But I must
tell thee, ô my soule, that this is the priuiledge
of this Inne of heauen, that none
inioying greatest glorie is enuied by him
who inioyes lesse, that none possessing
lesse glorie is condemned by him who
inioyes lesse, that none possessing lesse
glorie is condemned by him who possesseth
more; and therefore out of this
sense I heare Augustine saying:August. 
                     Quòd ibi
futuri sint gradus hominum, nullatenus ambigendum
est, verum beata illa ciuitas magnum
in se bonum videbit; quod nulli superiori
nullus inferior videbitur, tam nollet vnusquisqueesse
quod non accepit. Sic itaque habebit
donum alius alio minus vt hoc quoque donum
habeat quod non volet amplius. That in heauē
                        
there shall be degrees of men we must no wayes
doubt. That blessed Citie shall see that great
good in her, that no inferior shall appeare inferior
to any superiour; so farre shall euerie one
not desire to be that which he hath not receiued
& so one shall haue a gift lesse then another so,
that he shall haue this gift also, that he wisheth
to haue no more then he hath. Now, ô
what ioy shalt thou then, ô my soule, and
enioying be able to expresse when thou
shalt be brought towards this Inne! shall
not thy ioy there breake forth in most
heauenly inexpressible mirth and musicke,
making thee to say to the father! Holy, holy,
is the Lord of Hoastes,
                     
                        
                           •
                        say 6 3. 
                     the whole world is full
of his glorie; stirring thee vpto crie to the
Sonne. Thou art worthie ô Lord to receiue,
glorie, and honour, and power; for thou hast
created all things, and for thy wills sake they
are and haue bene created. This ioy is
compared to the ioy of a marriage,
yea, with the marriage of Kings. Our
minds be now narrower then they can
comprehend this; albeit when the heauens
shall receiue vs, we shall be capable
of it so farre as a glorified creature may
be. Lift vp thy selfe, ô my soule, and proue
holy, wise, when thou hearest these things

if thou wouldst not be condemned in that
great day by one who neuer saw that,
who neuer heard that, which thou seest
and hearest daily. Shall the Queene of the
South hearing the fame of Salomon, and of
the glorie of his court, and kingdome,
long to see that which she heard, yea, vndertake
and vndergo a long wearie iourney,
to the end that she may see? and
shouldst thou not, ô my soule, eate vp they
selfe (as it were) within me, through longing
and earnest desire; sparing neither
for paines, nor expenses, till thou come to
the chamber of that thy bridegroome;
and to that Citie and Inne which is aboue
founded, builded, garnished, and inriched
as thou hast heard? for I assure thee, ô my
soule, as the Queene of Sheba being come
to Ierusalem, and there heard the wisedome,
and seene the glorie of Salomon,
was moued to say:1. King. 10. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 
                     It was a true word that
I heard in my owne land of thy sayings, and of
thy wisedome; howbeit I beleeued not this report,
till I came and had seene with my eyes.
But loe the one halfe was not told me, for thou
hast more wisedome and prosperitie then, I
haue heard by report. So thou, ô my soule,
happily by Gods grace being by a liuely

faith ingraft in his Sonne, and without
delay repenting thee of thy sinnes, and
being by death transported to this his
Inne of glorie, to see that with thy eyes,
that which I heare onely with my eares,
shall not onely find all these things to be
there which thy God by his report, speaking
to thee by his written word, shewes
thee to be there; but thou shalt see, and
seeing shalt possesse for euermore, ten
thousand thousand degrees of more glorie,
more ioy, more pleasures, then euer
here thou hardst was there, or sawst here
whilst thou liuest here, to be there. Shall
Peter seeing but a glimps of Christs glory
vpon mount Tabur crie out, (neglecting,
yea, despising all he eue
                        •
                      heard or saw in
Ierusalem, yea in the verie Temple of
God at Ierusalem) Maister it is good to be
here. And shalt thou not, ô my soule,
thinke in a manner euill to be here on
earth, till thou be where thy Iesus is cloathed
with that glorie for euermore, farre
surmounting that transitorie glimpse
which Peter saw beneath here. For wert
thou there, ô my soule, be sure thou
shouldst say, and sing continually, O my
blessed Maister! ô my sole sweetest Redeemer!

It is good to be here, it is onely good to be
here, would to God I had bene here sooner;
for there the Father is, the Sonne is, the
holy Ghost is, his elect Angels, his chosen
sonnes and daughters do liue onely,
free of all feare of euill, possessed with a
very sea of all good. And no wonder it be
so, ô my soule, for here by the word of
God we are onely acquainted (to speake
so with his Maiestie) with the backe parts
of God. But when we shall be transported
to that heauenly Inne, farre remoued from
all euill, and fully possessed with euerie
good thing, as hath bene shewed thee,
We shall see him as he is. The taste of this before
hand moued Bernard to say:Bern. 
                     Infelicit
as media in hoc seculo est pro qua gemimus,
extrema in inferno quam merito formidamus:
felicitas media in paradise vnde
cecidimus, felicitas summa in coelis ad quam
suspiramus. The midde degree of miserie is in
this life, for the which we do sigh; the extremitie
of miserie is in hell, which not without
cause we do feare. The midde degree of happinesse
was in Paradise, from the which we
haue fallen; the onely great and extreame degree
of all true happinesse is in heauen, after
the which with sighing and sobbing we do

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
long and hasten vnto. And to conclude this
point: this shall not a little augment the
happinesse of the more then happie estate
of the babes of God, being admitted
within this Inne of glorie, & there admitted
in soule, in bodie, as hath bene said,
that being once possessed with these
things, they shall neuer be depriued of
them againe; but shall vndoubtedly enioy
them for euer and euer. The things of this
world thou knowest, ô my soule, be subiect
to fading, for that shall neuer stand
sure:1. Ioh. 2. 17. 
                     The world passeth away, and the lustes
thereof. But as for these ioyes of heauen,
they do resemble him by whom they be
promised, by whom they be conquised,
and who doth assure vs of them, and so be
no wayes subiect to decay, but do last for
euermore. And therefore Paul doth tell
me that the elect of God in that day of
iudgement (being caught vp in the clouds
to meete our blessed Lord and Sauiour in
the aire) shall after that,1. Thes. 4. 17. euer be with that
our Lord. Wherefore ceasse not, ô my
soule, while I breathe here to crie aloud,
and to sing sweetly with the Psalmist:
Sing ye loud vnto the Lord all the earth,
                     Psal 100. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 
                     serue
the Lord with gladnesse, come before him with

ioyfulnesse: know ye that euen the Lord is
God, he hath made vs and not we our selues,
we are his people and the sheepe of his pasture:
enter into his gates with praises, and into his
courts with reioycing, praise him and blesse
his name; for the Lord is good, his mercie is
euerlasting, and his truth is from generation
to generation. Yea, to the end that thou
mayst prooue truly and holily wise, ô my
soule, see that while thou soiourne here,
that thou vse the world circumspectly, as
if thou vsed it not, knowing that the fashion
of this world goeth away;1. Cor. 7. 31 and that
thou rest vpon nothing but vpon that
which is to be found in this Inne of heauen,
euer remembring and neuer forgetting
that of Augustine:
                     August. 
                     Diuitiae si diliguntur
ibi seruentur vbi perire non possunt; honor si
diligatur, ibi habeatur, vbi nemo indignus
honoratur; salus si diligitur, ibi adipiscenda
desideretur, vbi adepta nihil timetur; Vita si
diligitur, ibi acquiratur vbi nulla morte finitur.
If riches be loued, let them be kept there
where they cannot perish; if honour be loued,
let it be had there where no vnworthie person
is honoured; if health be loued, let it be desired
to be found there where being once found
there can be no feare to loose it; if life be loued,

let it be procured and purchased there, where
it can be ended by no death.
                  
               
               
                  THE GHVESTS ADMITted
by our wise God (the sole Lord
of this heauenly Inne) to enter and
to lodge within it; be those alone
who being members of his dearest
Sonne Iesus Christ, be made in time
by him true Christians, and so Prophets,
Priests, and Kings vnto God
their Father.
                  THis Inne of heauen being the verie
paradise and pleasant garden of the
Lord our God, none can possibly be
transported towards it but the trees of
righteousnesse, who being the planting of
God do here on earth glorifie his Maiesty.Esay 61. 3.
This Inne is the sheepfold of that great
Shepheard Iesus, and therefore none can
enter into it but those who be the sheepe
of Iesus,Iohn 10. 7. 14. 27. 28. hearkening to his voice, knowing
his voice,Luk. 12. 32. following his voice, and refusing
to here the voice of a stranger. This
Inne is the wedding chamber of that glorious
Bridgrome Iesus, that eldest Sonne,

and heire of the great King of glorie. And
therefore none can be admitted to enter
within it,Mat. 25. but those who being wise virgins,
haue their lampes alwayes readie,
and their oyle in them, attending in faith,
and yet in feare, his comming. This Inne
is the house of Christs Father, and therefore
none can be suffered to enter within
it, (albeit there be many dwelling places
in it) but those who be the sonnes and
daughters of God the Father,Iohn 14▪ 2. and so the
brethren and sisters of Iesus, carefull to separate
themselues from the wicked, and
not attempting to touch any vncleane
thing. But who contrariwise do cleanse
themselues from all filthinesse of the flesh
and of the spirit,2. Cor. 6▪ 17 18. & 7. 1. growing vp into holinesse
in the feare of God, and alwayes
(out of that hope they haue at length to
lodge in this Inne) purging themselues
more and more,1. Iohn. 3. 3. as God their Father, and
Lord of this Inne is pure; for no vncleane
thing can possibly enter into it, but such
onely who hauing washed their long
robes, haue made their long robes white
in the bloud of the Lambe, and whose
names are written in the Lambes booke
of life.Reuel. 7. 14. 15. And so in a word, this Inne being

the royall palace of Christ that great Prophet,
that high Priest, and that soueraigne
King of Gods elect, none can possibly be
honoured with it: but these who through
this Christ are made Christians,Reuel. 1. 6. by the
vertue of his Spirit, & meanes of his word
and Sacraments: and consequently Prophets,
Priests, and Kings to God the Father.
Would I then, ô my soule, after my
wearie labours here, be possessed with
that worthie rest in heauen? I must studie
necessarily before death to become a Prophet
(for no ignorant shall come there)
acquainted with the knowledge of God
in his Sonne, and of my selfe in nature, and
in grace, and so euery one who lookes for
that Inne of heauen must know themselues
to be miserable because of sinne;
must know God to be mercifull, and readie
to forgiue sinne, in his Sonne Iesus
Christ; and must know that Christ dyed
for them, and that his death became meritorious,
deseruing and procuring remission
of sinnes, and life euerlasting to them
if they can beleeue in him, and repent.
The sense hereof moued Paul to crie out:
This is a true saying,
                     1. Tim. 1. 15 
                     and by all meanes worthy
to be receiued, that Christ came in the world

to saue sinners.
                     2. Cor. 5. 21 And againe: He hath made
him to be sinne for vs, which knew no sinne,
that we should be made the righteousnesse of
God in him. Yea, our Maister in a word
packing vp the whole matter of mans saluation
doth say:Ioh. 17. 3. 
                     This is life eternall, that
they know thee to be the very onely God, and
whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. Wouldst
thou, ô my soule, after death liue within
this Inne, before death I must be a priest
offering vp to God my Father, Redeemer,
and Sanctifier, not a dead, but a liuing, not
a reasonlesse, but a reasonable sacrifice; yea
not another beside my selfe, but my selfe
vnto his Maiestie, remembring and reuerencing
that holy charge sweetly giuen
to me by that chosen vessell of Christ:Rom. 12. 1. 2. 
                     I
beseech you brethren by the mercies of God,
that ye giue vp your bodies a liuing sacrifice,
holy, acceptable vnto God, which is your reasonable
seruing of God▪ And fashion not your
selues like vnto this world, but be ye changed
by the renewing of your minde, that ye may
proue what is the good will of God, aud acceptable
and perfect. Thirdly, wouldst thou
remouing from thy tent on earth be receiued
within that Inne of heauen, ô my
soule, which is the palace of this great

King, which carries this Motto vpon his
thigh, The King of kings, and Lord of Lords:
I must be a king, for this Inne is for no
men but those who be kings, is for no
women but those who be Queenes, and
so who be true Christians. But what sort
of Kings and Queenes be these, ô my
soule, who shall rest within this Inne?
men & women made kings and Queenes,
not by God the Creator of the world, but
by God that sole Redeemer of mankinde,
and so by Iesus Christ who hath loued
them, and washeth them from their sinnes
in his bloud, and made them kings and
Queenes vnto God,Reuel. 1. 5, 6. euen his Father. And
so I see, ô my soule, that there shall not so
much as one man, as one woman be admitted
within the doores of this Inne of
heauen, but he who is a Christian, but she
who is a Christian, and that not so much
as one true Christian shall be debarred
from it. Thou art a king, but not a Christian,
and therefore thou must stand without,
& haue thy portion in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone. Thou art
a Queene, but not a Christian, and therefore
thou must stay without also, to be
tormented with thy king. Thou art a

countrie clowne, and yet a Christian,
and therefore thou must not stay without,
because thou art a clowne but must
go in because thou art a true Christian.
But because in these our dayes there be
such a world of men and women called
Christians, and holding themselues for
good Christians; I would haue thee, ô my
soule, to trie who if these be Kings and
Queenes made by Christ, & so fit ghuests
for this Inne of heauen? Hearken vnto
me speaking with a warrant of Gods
word. None can be such Kings and
Queenes, but those who can be seruants,
and will be seruants; who cannot be seruants,
nor will be seruants; who can be
seruants, and will be seruants to him, who
being the Lord of all, was heartily content
to become a seruant for them; and
so to that blessed and sweete Lord Iesus:
who cannot, nor will not vpon any condition
be seruants to any besides his Maiestie.
Can the true Christian forget
that ransome wherewith he was redeemed,
and can he thinking on it be a
seruant either to diuels or to men? No
no, for he can neuer forget that of Paul.
Ye are bought with a price, be not the seruants

men.
                     1. Cor. 7. 23. 
                     Ye were once darknesse, but now are
light in the Lord,
                     Eph. 5. 8. 
                     walke as the children of
light. And thus the true Christian sees all
these whom he sees in Christ, and cannot
possibly see any out of him; he can honour
and serue his king, his parents, his
neighbours, alwayes in Christ, and for
Christ but no wayes against Christ. And
therefore he can mocke all honour, but
that wherewith Christ is honoured; all
pleasures, but those wherewith Christ is
pleased; and all wealth, whereby his spirituall
treasure is lessened, yea not augmented;
and all life, but that life whereby
his life Iesus Christ is conquised, and
conserued by him: yea, he doth not onely
misknow, but denie all friends and kindred,
but those who in Christ be neare
vnto him: in this resembling his blessed
Maister who did all that he did for him;
who suffered all that which he suffered
for him; holding none for his mother, his
brother,Mat. 22. 50. and sister, but those who do his
Fathers will which is in heauen: and accounting
all such who did this his will,
for his mother, brother, and sister. Could
this be considered, ô what a shame should
couer the face of ye Christians of this age!

ô what a feare should possesse the hearts
of the Christians of this age! O man thou
wilt be a Christian, but not a king ouerruling
the diuell? Thou wilt be a Christian,
yet not a king maistering this wicked
world, either alluring thee to euill by
faire offers, or drawing thee from God,
driuing thee to euill by threatnings, and
punishments, but maistered by it? and that
most willingly not eschuing sinne which
thy Sauiour came to slay, but delighting
in sinne which put thy Sauiour to death.
Were that Marty Blandina
                     Blandina. liuing to this
day, sure I am she would say, albeit there
be many men in the world now, yet there
be wonderous few Christians in the
world now. For in the midst of her torments
she did crie out to the hearing of
her Torturers.Clem. Alex. in orati ad gentes. 
                     Christiana sum, & nihil mali
apud nos geritur: I am a Christian, and
there is no euill thing done against vs. Sure I
am, were Clemens Alexandrinus liuing, he
would subscribe with her: for describeth
he not a Christian thus? Is solus, qui pius
est, ac religiosus, Christianus est: That man
alone who is holy and religious, is a Christian.
Oh, ô my soule, shall not these Christians
who liued in the dayes of Eusebius arise in

iudgement against these of this our time.
These in their liues were so religious,Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 8.
holy, chast, temperate, modest, that the
verie fame of their liues, being brought to
the eares of men, moued all sorts of people,
casting off their natiue superstition, &
forme of liuing, to turne to Christ; yea, the
verie sauage Barbarions, by the report
made vnto them touching the Christians,
layed aside their barbaritie, and fiercenes,
and embracing Iesus Christ, learned of
him to be meeke and lowly in heart. Yea,
what shall I say, ô my soule, if the Christians,
in this our age find not grace in
time to looke about them; the verie ambitious,
curious, auatitious men among
whom they liue, and whose carriage is
knowne to them, shall accuse and condemne
them. What ambitious man can
content himselfe with the honour he hath
gotten, and ceasse to aspire vnto a greater?
what curious man can satisfie his eye with
seeing, or his eare with hearing? Yea,
what couetous man is heard saying, I haue
enough, I will haue no more? And yet alas,
ô how many blind senslesse Christians,
deceiued by Satan and their owne lusts,
and willingly deceiuing thēselues dreame

that they be alreadie sufficiently furnished
with that future Inne, prepared for Gods
children, albeit they haue neither oyle in
their Lamps, nor a Lampe in their hands.
Historie telleth me that Marcus Marcellus
a Romane dedicated a Temple to the
goddesse of Honour, but with all Historie
tels me, that the way to that Temple
of Honour was by the Temple of Vertue;
and canst thou, ô man calling thy selfe a
Christian, looke to be receiued within
that onely honourable Temple, which is
the mansion of that onely Lord, to whom
all honour doth belong, & in whose presence
true honour is onely to be found,
vnlesse thou reserue (treading the way of
vertue and valour here) to fight against
the diuell, and to seeke and to serue thy
God?Hier. part. The sense hereof moued Hierom to
say.3. tract. 4. 
                     Portae duae sunt, porta Paradisi, & porta
Ecclesiae;
                     Epist. 20. 
                     per portam Ecclesiae intramus portam
Paradisi. There be two gates, the gate of
Paradise, and the gate of the Church; by the
gate of the Church we enter into the gate of
Paradise. Yea, this moued Bernard to say.
Non rectised peruersiest animi,
                     Bern. 
                     antea quaerere
gloriam, quam excercere virtutem, & velle
coronari qui legitime non certauerit; virtus

gradus est ad gloriam, verus mater est gloriae.
It is not the nature of an vpright, but of a
froward wicked mind, to seeke glorie before
vertue be exercised, and to heare him desiring
to be crowned, who hath not fought;
vertue is a degree to glorie, yea, vertue is the
mother of glorie.
                     Bern. in Cant. And againe: Quid mihi
cum victoria si non in praelio fui? impudētissimè
mihi arrogo, aut gloriam absque victoria, vel
victoriam sine pugna. What haue I to do with
victorie, if I haue neuer bene in the battell? O
how most impudently do I ascribe to my
selfe, either glorie without vertue, or vertue
without a fight. Learne therefore, ô my
soule, in time to know Christ, in time to
know what it is to be a true Christian, to
the end that I may be perswaded that one
day that onely glorious Inne of heauen
shall receiue me, and receiuing me shall
retaine me for euer; and so see that without
delay thou learne to desire, betwixt
the pretious and the more pretious, and
so betwixt things seene which be temporall,
and betwixt things vnseene which be
eternall. O how manie called Christians
shall be condemned of Iacob in that day
of iudgement, and shut for euer out of the
doores of this Inne of glorie! Iacob being

to receiue his brother Esau, when he
feared, sent first before him his sheepe,
oxen, and camels, after them he placed
both his maides and their children, after
them Leah and her children. But Rachel
and Ioseph (as his most pretious and estimable
treasure) he placed nearest himselfe,
in the safest place: testifying hereby
that he had rather loose all the rest,
before he had loosed them. But alas the
Christians of this our time, ô my soule,
expose the onely best things (that is these
heauenly graces which must leade them
towards that heauenly Inne) vnder danger,
and proue onely curious about the
keeping of the perishing things of this
world nearest them; testifying thereby
that they had rather want Christ, and part
with Christ, then any other thing beside
him. Yea not onely shall they haue Iacob
to condemne them who was the Lords
holy confederate, but the verie brutish
serpent, wanting soule, wanting reason;
for natural prudence teacheth him to hide
his head carefully when he is pursued,
and to yeeld the rest of his whole bodie
to the smiter, to the end that that being
lost which is of smallest weight, he

may happily keepe that which is of greatest
valour. But, alas, ô my soule, our
onely blessed, and glorious head Iesus, is
offered by vs at all times to danger, and
we do keepe these things which cannot
keepe vs, and which we shall not be able
for our verie hearts to keepe long. O
when shall men with Paul learne while
they are here to know none,1. Cor. 1. to know nothing
but Christ, and him crucified; to the
end that in the day of challenge they may
receiue this testimonie of Christ.Luke. 16. 
                     Thou
hast chosen the best part which shall not be
taken from thee.
                     Bern. When shall that of Bernard
written on these words: Behold we
haue forsaken all things and followed thee,
be considered by vs, Nec mutilis commutatio,
pro
                           •
                        eo qui supra omnia est, omnia reliquisse;
nam & simul cum eo donantur omnia,
& vbi apprehenderis eum, erit vnus ipse omnia
in omnibus, qui pro ipso omnia reliquerunt;
omnia sane dixerim, non solum possessionis,
sed etiam cupiditatis. Neither is it an
vnprofitable chance to forsake all things for
him, who is aboue all things, for with him
all things are giuen also, and so soone as thou
apprehendest him, he himselfe alone shall be all
things, to all those who for him hath left all

things; yea, euen all things I say truly, not
onely of possession which a man can haue, but
of desire which a man can wish. Thou seest
then, ô my soule, that thou must seeke thy
God in this wildernesse of thy pilgrimage,
if thou wouldst be found of him in
that wished Inne of his glorie; that thou
must serue him abroad as it were amongst
strangers, yea, amongst sworne enemies,
if thou wouldst reigne with him at home
with his owne onely deare children thy
friends. But here I will haue thee grauely
to consider two things. First how shouldst
thou serue thy God here? Secondly,
wherefore shouldst thou serue him thus?
Thou must serue him, ô my soule, frankly,
and with ioy: and so neither from a grudging
heart, nor with an auerse or froward
countenance. Thou hast, I thinke, long
ago acquainted thy selfe with the third
petition of the Lords Prayer, Thy will be
done in earth euen as it is in heauen: Hereby
first confessing that thy God should be
serued by thee here on earth, as he is by
those celestiall spirits in heauen. Secondly,
earnestly begging grace from his hands
that thou mayst serue him so. Now couldst
thou, ô my soule, learne to consider, and

considering to take to heart three things,
ô how carefull wouldst thou be that thy
God were alwayes serued by thee here on
earth, faithfully, freely, heartily, and diligently,
as he is by his Angels in heauen?
First, couldst thou remember how these
three sacred persons of that glorious
Godhead concurred to make man, saying:
Let vs make man to our owne Image? Secondly,
couldst thou remember how
heartily and gladly, that sweete meeke
Lambe of God Iesus, offered himselfe to
the death for thee, ô how heartily wouldst
thou seek thy God, ô how gladly wouldst
thou serue him? He is without Ierusalem,
and if it had pleased him he might haue
stayed without it: alwayes saith he not
vnto his disciples:Mat. 8. 21. 
                     I must go vnto Ierusalem
and suffer many things of the Elders, and of
the high Priests and Scribes, and be slaine.
And when Peter tooke him aside, and began
to rebuke him saying: Maister pitie thy selfe,
this shall not be vnto thee.
                     Vers 22. Turneth not blessed
Iesus backe this saying vnto Peter: Get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offence vnto
me, because thou vnder stands not the things
which are of God, but the things which are of
men. Telling vs by these two things: first,

that he knew very well what would befall
him at Ierusalem: Secondly, that he
went vp most willingly thither, to the
end that he might suffer these things
there. Hast thou not, ô my soule, considered
the 15. and 16. verses of the 22. of
Luke? Then he said vnto them, I haue earnestly
desired to eate this Passc
                           •
                        uer with you
before I suffer, for I say vnto you hence forth
I will not eate of it any more, vntill it be fulfilled
in the kingdome of God. Telling his
disciples hereby, that albeit he had eaten
some Passeouers before that time with
them, yet he neuer longed to eate any of
those as he longed to eate this immediatly
going before his suffering, so ready and
willing was he to suffer. Hast thou lent
thy eares to that prayer made by thy Maister
vnto his Father? Father saue me from
this houre,
                     Ioh. 12. 17. 
                     but therefore came I into this
houre. Yea, to close this point, pained it
thee euer to reade and to weigh that
conference (with those things fell out vpon
it) thy blessed Sauiour hath with those
who came to take him, registred by Iohn,
in the 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses of his 18.
Chapter? yea, canst thou with this thinke
vpon that speech spoken by this Iesus thy

sweetest Shepheard: I lay downe my life
that I might take it againe:
                     Ioh. 10. 17. 18. 
                     No man taketh
it from me, but I lay it downe of my selfe.
Shouldst thou not then seeke this Iesus,
serue, this Iesus, both of purpose and with
pleasure, who of purpose and with pleasure
came to seeke and to serue thee?
Thirdly, couldst thou consider, ô my
soule, how frankly and willingly wicked
men do serue the diuell, wouldst thou not
be ashamed, yea afraid, if thou finde not
thy selfe seruing thy blessed maker and
sweet Redeemer, as frankly and willingly,
as these do serue that euill one? Hath any
wicked man receiued that, from that euill
one, which thou, ô my soule, hast receiued
from thy good God? Hath that euill one
done or suffered that for any wicked man,
which thy God hath done and suffered
for thee? yea can any wicked man expect
that from the hands of that euill one,
which thou, ô my soule, mayst expect and
must expect from the hands of thy God?
The sense hereof moued Chrisostome to
say: Turpe est impios diabolo tam strenuò seruire;
                     Chrysost.
                     Christianos Christo, pro pretio redemptionis
nihil respondere, It is a shame that wicked
men should so diligently and carefully

serue the diuell, and that Christians should
recompence Christ with no good seruice, for
the price of their redemption. Fourthly,
couldst thou remember, ô my soule, how
willingly, how ioyfully, thou seruedst thy
owne lustes before thy conuersion, and so
before thy God called thee from that
damnable darknesse of ignorance, of infidelitie,
and of impietie (vnder the which
thou layest being in the first Adam) vnto
this marueilous light of knowledge, of
faith, and of begunne holinesse, wherewith
thou art now happily adorned, being
in that second Adam; wouldst thou not be
ashamed not to serue thy good holy God
after thy conuersion, as willingly and readily
as before thy cōuersion thou seruedst
thy wicked and vile flesh? O would to
God that euery man had that grace bestowed
vpon him, wherewith Paul was
happily inriched before his conuersion,
when he knew not Iesus, he ranne on foot
and horse in euery place where he came
like a furious lyon presenting those who
called vpon his name. But after his conuersion
I thinke he was as forward to
preach Iesus for the conuersion and sauing
of Christians; as he was furions before his

conuersion to persecute them for the profession
of his name. Bernard thinking vppon
this point, directs his speech thus to
thee ô my soule: Erubesce anima, conuersa
ad Dominum,
                     Bern. ep. 34. 
                     minori affectu sectari iustitiam,
quam iniquitatem antea sectata es: Causa
enim est valde dissimilis, pudeat proinde negligentius
in vitam, quam prius in mortem ire,
& minori studio salut is acquirere, quam perauionis
aug
                           •
                        mentum. Be ashamed, ô soule
conuerted to the Lord, to follow after righteousnesse
with lesse care and affection then before
thou followedst after wickednesse: for the
cause is verie vnlike, wherefore let it ashame
thee to runne more negligently after life, then
thou walkedst before after death, to seeke the
increase of saluation with lesse care then thou
soughtst before the augmentation of thy owne
perdition. Bernard againe out of the sense
of this doth crie sweetly and chearfully:
Curramus non passibus corporis; sed affectibus,
sed desiderij
                           •
                        ,
                     Bern. Med. 
                     sed suspirijs. Quoniam non
solum Angeli,
                     cap. 6. 
                     sed Angelorum Creator, nos
expectat; expectat nos Deus Pater, tanquam
filios, & haeredes, vt constituat nos super omnia
bona sua; expectat nos Deus tanquam fratres
& cohaeredes, vt fructum suae natiuit atis
& pretium sui sanguinis Deo Patri offerat:

expectat nos Spiritus sanctus, cuius templum
sumus. Let vs runne not vpon the feete of our
bodie, but vpon our affections, but vpon our
desires, but vpon our sighes and sobs, because
not onely the Angels, but the great maker of
the Angels expects and awaites for vs. God
the Father expects and waites for vs, as for
his sonnes and heires, to the end he may make
vs maisters of all his goods. The Sonne of God
awaites for vs, as for his brethren and heires
annexed with him, to the end that he may
offer and present vnto God his Father the
fruite of his natiuitie, and the price of his
bloud. The holy Spirit awaites for vs, as
for his temple in the which he dwelleth here.
O when shall the loose Christians of this
our time take that to heart which Bernard
wrote long ago for the wakening of sleeping
Christians, and for the punishing of
such toward that Inne of heauen, who
looking for it step neuer a foote forward
to the end that they may obtaine it? Qui
in schola Christi non profecit,
                     Bern. ep. 34. 
                     eius indignus est
magisterio; praesertim tamen cum simus ibi
vbi nihil in eodem statu permaneat, & non
proficere sine dubio deficere est. Nemo igitur
dicat satis est, sic volo manere; in via residet
qui eiusmodi est, in scala subsistit vbi neminem

Patriarcha vidit, non ascendentem, aut descendentem.
He who profits not in the schoole of
Christ, is vnworthie to haue him for his maister,
but specially seeing we are there, where
nothing remaineth in that same estate: and
where if men profit not by going forward,
they must receiue hurt by falling backward.
Let no man therefore say, it is enough I will
abide as I am; he who is such an one sits still in
the way, and stayes, without any motion on that
ladder, where that Patriarch saw none but
such, who was either going vp or going downe.
Let me be carefull therefore, ô my soule,
to walke with God with Enoch, to walke
before God with Abraham, while I liue
here; denying vngodlinesse and worldly
lusts, and liuing holily, righteously, and
soberly in this present world, not regarding
where I die; not regarding how I
die: for that is a taske almightie God
hath not committed to my consideration
but which he hath absolutely kept in his
owne hands, willing me to be alwayes
carefull to trie how I liue, but no wayes
to be curious where, or after what manner
I shall die. For I assure thee, ô my
soule,August. that that of Augustine shall euer
stand vndoubtedly true. Vndecunque mors

piae, bona est. W
                           •
                        ence so euer death cometh to
the godly soule, his death is good: & therefore
Augustine most wisely and louingly,August. doth
thus strengthen and incourage the honest
heart of the religious Christian walking
with God, before God, against all feare of
all death, and euerie sort of death. Noli
timere, non potest male mori qui bene vixerit.
Feare not ô good Christian he cannot possibly
die euill, who hath liued well.
                  
                  
                     THE CONCLVSION.
                     Let it not grieue thee then, ô my soule, y•
that same day is hid vp from thee; that in
some place vnknowne to thee, thou must
lay downe this dustie tabernacle, wherewith
thou hast for some yeares bene cloathed,
as with a garment. But see that thou
(being now happily ingrafted in Christ
and through his grace dying to sinne daily
for the which he died, and liuing to him
who died for thee and rose againe) euen
with an holy desire (submitting alwayes
thy will to the good will of God) long
for that day with that great Apostle, and
when that day shall draw neere. I charge
thee, ô my soule, that in that day thou
lift vp thy selfe, and reioyce. What wise
man being wearied all the day long with

laboures abroad, will grieue to draw
home at night; first to refresh himselfe
with some entertainement, and therefore
laying aside his garments to go to his
rest; knowing that (so pleasing God)
when the morning shall arise he will find
his garment againe. And darest thou, ô
my soule, be aggrieued when that night of
death shall approach, all thy wearie labours
sustained by thee here being finished,
to lay downe thy clay bodie, and to
haue thy selfe conueyed by those Angels
of God vnto that refreshing palace of
that Paradise which is aboue now, wide
open to receiue and to retaine thee, because
of the obedience of that same Adam
who died for thee? Yea, darest thou, ô
my soule, be grieued in that night of
death, to haue this clay bodie conueyed
to that resting bed of the graue, sweetly
now perfumed by the buriall of the sacred
bodie of thy gracious Sauiour Iesus? for
knowest thou not, when that glorious
bright shining morning of Iudgement
shall approach, in the which that mightie
God thy Sauiour, whom the heauens do
now containe, shall manifest himselfe in
glorie, accompanied with thousands of

his Angels, and of the sound of the last
Trumpet, that thou shalt not onely find
that wanted garment of thy bodie, but
take it vp againe, and put it on againe?
alwayes not as men take vp their garments
here in the morning, after their
rest in the night, but farre otherwise; more
comfortably, ioyfully, and profitably, by
a thousand thousand degrees; as men here
lay aside their garments at night going
to their rest, so they take them vp in the
morning, and taking them vp they go
forth againe, either to their wonted or to
some new labour. But I must tell thee, ô
my soule, to thy great comfort, that thou
shalt take vp this tabernacle of my bodie,
in that shining morning of Iudgement,
in a farre more excellent estate then it
was layed downe in the chamber of the
graue.1. Cor. 15. 42. 43. 44. It was layed downe in corruption,
it shall be taken vp in incorruption: It
was layed downe in dishonour, it shall be
taken vp in glorie: It was layed downe
in weakenesse, it shall be taken vp in
power: It was layed downe naturall, it
shall be taken vp spirituall. Could this be
well considered, ô my soule, would I
cease while I liue here, to employ all the

members of my bodie holily, and when
death should approach me, would I not
be heartily contented with ioy to lay
downe this earthly tabernacle? Againe I
will assure thee, ô my soule, (because so
hath my Lord, and Maister Iesus, by the
sweetest words of his owne sweetest lips
assured me) that thou hauing in that day
of Iudgement taken vp, and put on that
garment of this bodie, shalt neuer go
forth to any old, or new labours againe;
but shalt alwayes rest in endlesse rest for
euermore, free of all suspition of future
griefes, and filled with a verie sea of inexpressible
glorie; for in that day thou being
happily presented a chast virgine,
well decked and trimmed with the ornaments
of thy glorious husband Iesus, before
thy glorious husband Iesus, shalt
haue that marriage now contracted with
him, solemnized and perfectly consummated;
and then thy blessed husband hauing
wiped away all teares from thine
eyes, shall take thee into his most secret
cabinate of glorie,2. Cor 11. 2. there not onely to see
but to possesse for euer, that glorie which
he possessed before the world was made.
Could this be well weighed by thee, ô my

soule,Psal. 42. 1. wouldst thou not crie with Dauid?
As the Hart brayeth for the riuers of waters
so panteth my soule for thee ô God. My soule
thirsteth for God, euen for the liuing God;
when shall I come and appeare before the presence
of God? yea, wouldst thou not crie
with Paul.
                        Rom. 7. 24. 
                        O wretched man that I am who
shall deliuer me from this bodie of death, I
desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, which
is the best of all. Yea, wouldst thou not crie
with Augustine,
                        August. sol. 
                        Eia Domine, moriar vt te
videam,
                        cap. 1. 
                        videam te vt hic moriar; nolo viuere,
volo mori, dissolui cupio & esse cum Christo,
mori desidero vt videam Christum. Viuere
renuo vt viuam cum Christo. God my sweet
Lord, Let me die to the end I may see thee;
let me see thee, to the end I may die here. I
will not liue, I will die here, I desire to be desolued
and to be with Christ. I desire to die to
the end that I may see Christ, I refuse to liue,
to the end that I may liue with Christ. And
to conclude, ô my soule, (praying my
God to blesse thee with the longing and
earnest desire of Dauid, of Paul, & of Augustine)
wouldest thou not crie vncessantly
with the Church, Christs bride,
Come Lord Iesus: Euen so,
come quickly. Amen,
                     FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   